Car bomb explosions in Syria and Iraq passed off as Pulwama CCTV footage
In the wake of the Pulwama terror attack in which a car bomb killed over 40 CRPF personnel on February 14, two videos have surfaced on social media. These are CCTV videos, and are claimed to be of the Pulwama terror attack.

VIDEO 1

The first video is grainy, and shows a convoy of vehicles in the distance, before a huge explosion takes place.

CCTV Footage Of Pulwama Terror Attack | Jammu Kashmir Posted by ਕਮਾਊ ਪੁੱਤ ਮਾਪਿਆਂ ਦੇ Kamau putt maapya de on Friday, February 15, 2019

The above video, posted by a Facebook page with close to 300,000 followers, has been shared almost 600 times and viewed over 22,000 times. The same video has been shared by another Facebook page I Love Punjab, apart from a large number of individual users.

Old video from Iraq

Alt News broke the video into key frames, and reverse searched one of them on Google. The result suggested that this video is of an explosion which took place in Iraq.

Alt News found that the earliest instance of this video on YouTube is of March 5, 2008 when it was uploaded with the title ‘Truck Bomb’. All the descriptions of the video that we found online referred to this incident having taken place in Iraq. The video is more than 10 years old and is obviously in no way related to Pulwama.

VIDEO 2

Another video which has been shared as CCTV footage of the Pulwama attack shows movement of vehicles on a road, followed by a huge explosion.

The video has been shared on Twitter as well as Facebook.

Video is from Syria

A Google reverse image search of a frame from the video suggested that it is from Syria.

Alt News found a video uploaded on YouTube by the Russian international news channel Russia Today. The attack had occurred at the Turkey-Syria border. According to reports, at least three people were injured after a car bomb hit a border gate between Syria and Turkey on February 12, 2019. The Chinese news agency Xinhua states, “According to broadcast A Haber news channel, the explosion happened on Syrian side of the Cobanbey border gate, which located between the northern Syria and the Turkish southeastern province Kilis.”

In conclusion, videos of car bomb explosions from Iraq and Syria have been passed off as CCTV footage of the Pulwama attack.

Donate to Alt News!

Independent journalism that speaks truth to power and is free of corporate and political control is possible only when people start contributing towards the same. Please consider donating towards this endeavour to fight fake news and misinformation.



Donate Now To make an instant donation, click on the "Donate Now" button above. For information regarding donation via Bank Transfer/Cheque/DD, click here.

You could follow Alt News posts either via our Facebook page or by following us on Twitter or by subscribing to our E-mail updates.