Varanasi | India
Varanasi , also called Benares, Banaras , or Kashi , city, southeastern Uttar Pradesh state, northern India . It is located on the left bank of the Ganges (Ganga) River and is one of the seven sacred cities of Hinduism . Pop. (2001) city, 1,091,918; urban agglom., 1,203,961; (2011) city, 1,198,491; urban agglom., 1,432,280.

In 1910 the British made Varanasi a new Indian state, with Ramnagar (on the opposite bank) as headquarters but with no jurisdiction over the city of Varanasi. In 1947, after Indian independence, the Varanasi state became part of the state of Uttar Pradesh.

Varanasi subsequently declined during three centuries of Muslim occupation , beginning in 1194. Many of the city’s Hindu temples were destroyed during the period of Muslim rule, and learned scholars fled to other parts of the country. The Mughal emperor Akbar in the 16th century brought some relief to the city’s religious and cultural activities. There was another setback during the reign of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb in the late 17th century, but later the Marathas sponsored a new revival. Varanasi became an independent kingdom in the 18th century, and under subsequent British rule it remained a commercial and religious centre.

Varanasi is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world. Its early history is that of the first Aryan settlement in the middle Ganges valley. By the 2nd millennium bce, Varanasi was a seat of Aryan religion and philosophy and was also a commercial and industrial centre famous for its muslin and silk fabrics, perfumes, ivory works, and sculpture. Varanasi was the capital of the kingdom of Kashi during the time of the Buddha (6th century bce), who gave his first sermon nearby at Sarnath . The city remained a centre of religious, educational, and artistic activities as attested by the celebrated Chinese Buddhist pilgrim Xuanzang , who visited it in about 635 ce and said that the city extended for about 3 miles (5 km) along the western bank of the Ganges.

The contemporary city

Varanasi has the finest river frontage in India, with miles of ghats, or steps, for religious bathing; an array of shrines, temples, and palaces rises tier on tier from the water’s edge. The inner streets of the city are narrow, winding, and impassable for motor traffic; the newer outer suburbs are more spacious and are laid out more systematically. The sacred city is bounded by a road known as Panchakosi; devout Hindus hope to walk that road and visit the city once in a lifetime and, if possible, to die there in old age. The site receives more than a million pilgrims each year. In addition, thousands of domestic and foreign tourists flock to the city annually, and tourism-related activities constitute a significant component of the local economy.

Varanasi, India: ghat Ghats along the Ganges River in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India. Andrzej Wrotek (CC-BY-2.0)

Ganges River: ritual bathing Ritual bathing in the Ganges River at Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India. Andrzej Wrotek (CC-BY-2.0)

Among the city’s numerous temples, the most venerated are those of Vishvanatha, dedicated to Shiva; that of Sankatmochana, dedicated to the monkey-god Hanuman; and that of Durga. The Durga Temple is famous for the swarms of monkeys that inhabit the large trees near it. The Great Mosque of Aurangzeb is another prominent religious building. Two of the more important modern temples are those of Tulasi Manas and the Vishvanatha on the campus of the Banaras Hindu University. The city has hundreds of other temples. At Sarnath, a few miles north of Varanasi, there are ruins of ancient Buddhist monasteries and temples as well as temples built by the Maha Bodhi Society and by the Chinese, Burmese, and Tibetan Buddhists.

Varanasi, India: Manikarnika Ghat Manikarnika Ghat, a Hindu cremation site along the Ganges River in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India. Dennis Jarvis (CC-BY-2.0)

Varanasi has been a city of Hindu learning through the ages. There are innumerable schools and countless Brahman pandits (learned scholars), who are responsible for the continuation of traditional learning. There are three universities, including the large and important Banaras Hindu University (1915), and more than a dozen colleges and high schools.

The city is a centre of arts and crafts and of music and dance. Varanasi is famous for its production of silks and brocades with gold and silver threadwork. A renowned carpet-weaving centre is at Bhadoi. Wooden toys, bangles made of glass, ivory work, and brass ware are also produced in Varanasi.

The city is host to numerous religious festivals. Mahashivaratri, the great night of the god Shiva, is celebrated by a procession from the Mahamrityunjaya Temple to the Kashi Vishvanath Temple. The Ganga festival in November or December is dedicated to the goddess of the Ganges River, considered sacred by all Hindus. Thousands of lamps are placed on the ghats and set afloat on the river. The festival of Bharat Milap in October or November commemorates the reunion of Lord Rama with his younger brother Bharat after 14 years of exile. A five-day festival of dhrupad (classical Indian vocal style) in March attracts renowned artists from all over India to the city’s Tulsi Ghat along the river.

Varanasi, India: Ganga Aarti Ganga Aarti, Hindu ritual performed every evening along the Ganges (Ganga) River, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India. Yusuke Kawasaki

Varanasi is a major regional transportation hub. It is an important railway junction and is connected by highways to other cities in Uttar Pradesh and surrounding states. Lal Bahadur Shastri International Airport lies about 12 miles (20 km) from the city centre.