Manila | History, Geography, Map, & Points of Interest
Manila has been the principal city of the Philippines for four centuries and is the centre of its industrial development as well as the international port of entry. It is situated on one of the finest sheltered harbours of the Pacific region, about 700 miles (1,100 km) southeast of Hong Kong . The city has undergone rapid economic development since its destruction in World War II and its subsequent rebuilding; it is now plagued with the familiar urban problems of pollution , traffic congestion, and overpopulation . Measures have been taken, however, to ameliorate those problems. Area city, 15 square miles (38 square km); National Capital Region, 244 square miles (633 square km). Pop. (2000) city, 1,581,082; National Capital Region, 9,932,560; (2010) city, 1,652,171; National Capital Region, 11,855,975.

Manila , capital and chief city of the Philippines . The city is the centre of the country’s economic, political, social, and cultural activity. It is located on the island of Luzon and spreads along the eastern shore of Manila Bay at the mouth of the Pasig River . The city’s name, originally Maynilad, is derived from that of the nilad plant, a flowering shrub adapted to marshy conditions, which once grew profusely along the banks of the river; the name was shortened first to Maynila and then to its present form. In 1975, by presidential decree, Manila and its contiguous cities and municipalities were integrated to function as a single administrative region, known as Metropolitan Manila (also called the National Capital Region); the Manila city proper encompasses only a small proportion of that area.

Architectural styles reflect American, Spanish, Chinese, and Malay influences. Rizal Park and a number of government buildings were designed by U.S. architect and city planner Daniel H. Burnham . Modern buildings—including multistoried commercial houses and public and private buildings—are commonly made of reinforced concrete and hollow cement blocks. Houses of modern design—especially low, sprawling ranch houses with spacious lawns—are common in the districts of Ermita and Malate. Spanish-style houses, with tiled roofs, barred windows, and thick walls, were common before World War II and have remained popular. The churches of the city are American, Spanish, or European in character. The Manila cathedral was rebuilt in the 1950s and is an important landmark. It succeeds five earlier cathedrals—the first dating from the mid-16th century—that were destroyed either by earthquakes or during wartime.

Residential buildings include the single-family dwelling; the duplex for two independent households; the accessoria, whose dwelling units have individual entrances from the outside; the apartment building with common entrance; and the barong-barong, a makeshift shack built of salvaged materials (flattened tin cans, scrap lumber, cartons, or billboards) that is common in the poor areas.

The city has a chronic housing shortage, and tenement housing projects have been constructed by the government to help house the poor. A landmark—if ultimately unsuccessful—project undertaken from the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s was the Bagong Lipunan Improvement of Sites and Services (BLISS), initiated by the governor of Metropolitan Manila. To provide homes for squatters, the government also developed resettlement projects in and around Manila that are easily accessible by land motor transportation.

Metropolitan Manila includes the cities of Manila, Caloocan City to the north, Quezon City to the northeast, and Pasay City (located near the shore of Manila Bay) to the south and 13 municipalities. The municipalities include Makati , Mandaluyong, San Juan, Las Piñas, Malabon, Navotas , Pasig, Pateros, Parañaque , Marikina, Muntinlupa, Taguig, and Valenzuela. Metropolitan Manila was created in order to provide integrated services such as water supply , police and fire protection, and transport and to permit central planning for simultaneous and unified development.

Although business areas are widespread, the districts to the north of the river—especially along the bay and in the city’s west-central region— constitute the chief centres of trade and commerce. The district of San Miguel is the site of Malacañang Palace, the presidential residence; and several universities are located in Sampaloc, on the northeastern edge of the city. Adjacent to the heavily populated districts on the northern shore is Manila North Harbor; Manila South Harbor, the main international port, is on the southern shore. Intramuros is renowned for its 16th-century San Agustin church as well as for the ruins of its old walls and of Fort Santiago. On the south shore, Ermita and Malate are choice residential districts and the sites of hotels and embassies. The districts to the southeast are generally middle-income residential areas.

The city is bisected by the Pasig River. It is divided into six administrative divisions that comprise 17 districts. Most of the districts developed from the original fortress city of Intramuros (“Within Walls”) and the 13 villages located outside its walls. About two-thirds of the districts lie to the north of the river and the remaining third lies to the south. The two sections of the city are connected by several bridges.

The city is dotted with palms, banyans, acacias, and other tropical trees, and bamboo grows in many public parks. Domestic mammals—such as water buffalo , horses, dogs, pigs, and goats—are common, while wild birdlife includes shrikes, doves, and pigeons. Manila Bay abounds with sardines , anchovies , mackerel , tuna , snappers , and barracuda . The city’s natural beauty is marred, however, by air and water pollution caused by the expansion of industry and the growing number of motor vehicles.

The city is protected from extreme weather conditions by the hills of the Sierra Madre and the mountains of the Bataan Peninsula. The tropical climate is characterized by a wet season that lasts from June to November and by a dry season lasting from December to May . The wettest months are July , August , and September , when thunderstorms are especially common. The average annual rainfall totals about 80 inches (about 2,000 mm). There is little monthly variation from the mean annual temperature, which is in the low 80s F (about 27 °C).

Manila occupies the low, narrow deltaic plain of the Pasig River , which flows northwestward to Manila Bay . The swampy delta of the southward-flowing Pampanga River lies to the north of the city. Immediately to the northeast and east of the urban region lies a stretch of lowlands, beyond which rise the peaks of the southern range of the Sierra Madre . Laguna de Bay , the large lake from which the Pasig River flows, flanks Metropolitan Manila to the southeast. Enclosing Manila Bay to the west is the mountainous Bataan Peninsula . Although the city’s area is constricted, it is an excellent port site because of its sheltered harbour, its access to inland agricultural areas by way of the river, and its relative proximity to the Asian mainland.

Almost all the residents of Manila are Filipinos. The largest single foreign community , representing less than one-tenth of the population, is made up of Chinese. The population of the city is predominantly Roman Catholic , although there are some Protestants , Muslims , and Buddhists . The two national churches—the Iglesia ni Kristo and the Philippine Independent, or Aglipayan, Church—have small congregations.

Metropolitan Manila is densely populated and contains a significant proportion of the population of the country. This concentration of people has been brought about by a constant rural-urban migration. The strain on municipal services has had an adverse effect on the quality of life in the urban area. Consequently, various government policies and resettlement projects have been implemented in an effort to address the problem of population density.

Interisland and international transportation is provided by domestic and foreign airlines and by shipping. Manila South Harbor, with its enclosed customhouse, warehouses, and sheds, is sheltered by a low breakwater. There are no railway lines within the port area, and cargo is transported from the piers by trucks or barges. The piers and warehouses of Manila North Harbor are busy with heavy traffic from all ports in the Philippines. In the 1980s additional port facilities for international shipping were built, partially on reclaimed land, in the area between the two harbours.

Railroad services operated by the Philippine National Railways also connect the city with northern and southeastern Luzon. An elevated rail line, linking Caloocan City and the city of Baclaran (to the south of Pasay City), was completed in 1984. It was the first phase of a transit system, called the Light Rail Transit, that by the early 21st century had lines extending throughout much of the metropolitan area.

Within the area of Metropolitan Manila, public transportation is provided principally by buses, jeepneys (small buses built on the chassis of jeeps), and taxis. Traffic congestion is serious, especially at the bridges during the morning and evening rush hours. Adjacent towns serve as dormitory suburbs, and many people commute to the city, adding to the traffic problem. Bus services operate routes to northern and southern Luzon.

Manila is the centre of trade and finance in the Philippines. Trade flourishes within the metropolitan area and between the city and the provinces and other countries. Most of the Philippines’ imports and exports pass through the port of Manila. Financial institutions headquartered in Manila include such establishments as the Development Bank of the Philippines, the Philippine National Bank, the Philippine Veterans Bank, the Government Service Insurance System, the Social Security System, and many private commercial and developmental banks. Private insurance companies and the Philippine Stock Exchange also contribute to the mobilization of savings for investment.

The diverse manufacturing activities of Manila include textile production, publishing and printing, food and tobacco processing, and chemical processing. Manila also produces lumber and wood items, rope and cordage, soap, and other goods. Factories generally are small and are located mostly in the congested districts of Tondo (which also has the railroad and truck terminals), Binondo, and Santa Cruz. Heavy industries are located in the districts of Paco, Pandacan, and Santa Ana.

As the education centre of the Philippines, Metropolitan Manila houses many of the major institutions of higher education of the country, including the University of the Philippines (with its main campus in Quezon City), the Philippine Normal College, and the Technological University of the Philippines. There are several universities sponsored by religious bodies, including the University of Santo Tomas (founded in 1611) and the Ateneo de Manila, as well as nonsectarian institutions such as the University of the East and the Far Eastern University.

Nearly all citizens over age 10 are literate. More than 100 free public schools are maintained, in addition to the night vocational and secondary schools and the Manila branch of the University of the Philippines. Educational opportunities are also provided for children with disabilities, orphans of school age, and adults.

Police and fire services are well organized and well supplied, and personnel are comparatively well trained and well paid. The Police Community Relations Group helps to combat local crime, as do barangay brigades and barangay tanods (guards) throughout Metropolitan Manila. Members of those groups are volunteers and selected leaders of the barangays who aim to maintain peace and order in their communities .

Health facilities in Manila are among the best in the region. The city government maintains numerous health centres as well as San Lazaro Hospital, where patients are treated free of charge, and subsidizes a number of government hospitals. There are also many missionary and private hospitals in the city.

Potable water comes from a supply network managed by the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System. Satisfactory sanitation conditions are maintained by constant surveillance of markets, restaurants, movie theatres, recreation halls, and slaughterhouses. Insecticides are sprayed regularly on open sewers, uncollected garbage, and standing water; garbage is collected by a fleet of trucks that operate night and day. Moreover, workers maintain cleanliness in the metropolitan area and are also responsible for the beautification of the city as directed by the governor of Metropolitan Manila.

Metropolitan Manila is administered by the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA). Within the MMDA is an administrative council consisting of the mayors of each of the constituent cities and municipalities as well as a number of other officials. The Sangguniang Bayan (Municipal Assembly) of each city or municipality helps in administration and legislation. It is composed of the mayor, vice mayor, councillors, captains of barangays (neighbourhoods), and representatives from other sectors who are appointed by the president upon recommendation of the local unit.

The foremost outdoor recreational area is Rizal Park, with a Japanese garden , a Chinese garden, an open-air theatre, a playground, a grandstand, and a long promenade adjacent to Manila Bay. Other areas include the Manila Zoological and Botanical Gardens, the Mehan Garden, and Paco Park. Athletic facilities include the Rizal Memorial Stadium and the Jai-Alai Fronton, both located in Manila, and the Araneta Coliseum in Quezon City. Annual festivals and carnivals are held in the sunken garden fronting the City Hall of Manila.

The centre of the performing arts in the country is the Philippine Cultural Center. There is also the Folk Arts Theater, facing Manila Bay, the renovated historic Metropolitan Theatre, and an open-air theatre in Rizal Park. The many libraries and museums include the National Library and the National Museum, known for its anthropological and archaeological exhibits; the National Institute of Science and Technology, with a scientific reference library and large collections of plants and animals; the geological museum of the Bureau of Mines and Geosciences; the Planetarium; Fort Santiago, which houses original works of the Philippine patriot José Rizal; and the Kamaynilaan (Manila City) Library and Museum, which contains valuable carvings, paintings, and archives.

History

In the late 16th century Manila was a walled Muslim settlement whose ruler levied customs duties on all commerce passing up the Pasig River. Spanish conquistadors under the leadership of Miguel López de Legazpi—first Spanish governor-general of the Philippines—entered the mouth of the river in 1571. They destroyed the settlement and founded the fortress city of Intramuros in its place. Manila became the capital of the new colony. Outside the city walls stood some scattered villages, each ruled by a local chieftain and each centred on a marketplace. As Spanish colonial rule became established, churches were built near the marketplaces, where the concentration of population was greatest. Manila spread beyond its walls, expanding north, east, and south, linking together the market–church complexes as it did so.

The propagation of Roman Catholicism began with the Augustinian friar Andrés de Urdaneta, who accompanied the expedition of 1571. He was followed by Franciscan, Dominican, Jesuit, and other Augustinian priests, who founded churches, convents, and schools. In 1574 Manila was baptized under the authorization of Spain and the Vatican as the “Distinguished and Ever Loyal City” and became the centre of Catholicism as well as of the Philippines.

At various periods Manila was seriously threatened, and sometimes occupied, by foreign powers. It was invaded by the Chinese in 1574 and raided by the Dutch in the mid-17th century. In 1762, during the Seven Years’ War, the city was captured and held by the British, but the Treaty of Paris (1763) resulted in its restoration to Spain. It was opened to foreign trade in 1832, and commerce was further stimulated by the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869.

The Manila area became the centre of anti-Spanish sentiment in the 1890s, and the execution of Filipino patriot José Rizal in the city in December 1896 sparked a year-long insurrection. During the Spanish-American War the Spanish fleet was defeated at Manila Bay on May 1, 1898, and on August 13 the city surrendered to U.S. forces. It subsequently became the headquarters for the U.S. administration of the Philippines.

The U.S. period was one of general social and economic improvement for the city. U.S. policy encouraged gradual Filipino political autonomy, and to help achieve this goal public schools were established in Manila and throughout the archipelago. The University of the Philippines, founded in 1908, became the apex of the educational system. The city developed into a major trading and tourist centre.

Upon the outbreak of World War II, Manila was declared an open city and was occupied by the Japanese in January 1942. The city suffered little damage during the Japanese invasion but was leveled to the ground during the fight for its recapture by U.S. forces in 1945.

Manila was in shambles when in 1946 it became the capital of the newly independent Republic of the Philippines. The city was rapidly rebuilt, however, with U.S. aid. A significant change in its appearance was brought about by industrialization. In 1948 suburban Quezon City was chosen as the site of a new national capital, but in 1976 Manila again became the capital and the permanent seat of the national government.

Metropolitan Manila experienced rapid growth in the late 20th century, which helped establish it as a major economic centre in the Pacific region. The expansion, however, also brought pollution, traffic congestion, and overcrowding. The government took numerous measures to alleviate the problems, but they persisted into the 21st century. Another mounting concern was the rise in terrorism. Once largely confined to outlying regions, terrorist activities perpetrated primarily by militant Islamist and communist groups also have increased.