Thimerosal: Updated Statement
Preamble

The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) provides the Public Health Agency of Canada with ongoing and timely medical, scientific and public health advice relating to immunization. The Public Health Agency of Canada acknowledges that the advice and recommendations set out in this statement are based upon the best current available scientific knowledge and is disseminating this document for information purposes. People administering the vaccine should also be aware of the contents of the relevant product monograph(s). Recommendations for use and other information set out herein may differ from that set out in the product monograph(s) of the Canadian manufacturer(s) of the vaccine(s). Manufacturer(s) have sought approval of the vaccine(s) and provided evidence as to its safety and efficacy only when it is used in accordance with the product monographs. NACI members and liaison members conduct themselves within the context of the Public Health Agency of Canada's Policy on Conflict of Interest, including yearly declaration of potential conflict of interest.

Introduction

In 2003 the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) published recommendations on the use of vaccines approved for use in Canada that contained the mercury-based preservative thimerosal, so that practitioners would have the necessary information to make sound recommendations for vaccine administration to patients and vaccine manufacturers would have guidance on the future development of vaccines for the Canadian market(1). The statement also made recommendations on the management of patients who needed vaccine(s) containing thimerosal but who had reported previous hypersensitivity to this constituent.

With the availability of additional evidence on the safety of thimerosal as a preservative in vaccines, NACI published a brief statement updating its recommendations in December 2005(2) in conjunction with the annual influenza vaccine campaign, promising to follow up with a completely revised statement. This document should be considered a replacement of both the 2003 and 2005 statements, with new evidence added as appropriate and content from both that is still considered current retained.

Background

Chemical characteristics of thimerosal

Thimerosal is an organic mercury compound that is an effective preservative. It is used in some vaccines and in pharmaceutical and other consumer products, such as cosmetics. First introduced in the 1930s, it prevents bacterial and fungal contamination of these products. It may be used during the manufacture of vaccine to inactivate organisms or added as a preservative to prevent contamination of the product after manufacture, particularly in multi-dose vials.

Thimerosal is metabolized to ethylmercury (CH 3 CH 2 Hg+2) and thiosalicylate. It contains 49.6% mercury by weight. In the final preparation of vaccines, the concentration of thimerosal is small, measured in micrograms (µg), one millionth of a gram. When a person is immunized with a vaccine that contains thimerosal, the resultant concentration of metabolized ethylmercury is reduced even further as it is diluted in the body.

Health effects of mercury

Mercury in large concentrations or with sustained exposure is a known neurotoxin, primarily in its organic form, methylmercury, and a nephrotoxin in its inorganic form, consisting of salts containing mercury combined with chlorine, sulfur or oxygen(3). Almost all research into mercury toxicity has been conducted on methylmercury because it has been a major environmental contaminant, especially in the pulp and paper industry. The main concern in Canada has been methylmercury exposure from the ingestion of fish containing high levels of the neurotoxin, especially in northern communities near pulp and paper mills. In such communities, fish as a food source has been a concern because of the large amounts of mercury that may be consumed if contaminated fish is a staple in the diet.

By contrast, little is actually known about ethylmercury metabolism in humans, including whether it has the same potency as a neurotoxin, whether the blood concentration is ever significant and even whether it crosses the blood-brain barrier. It is presumed that the majority of ethylmercury metabolized from thimerosal is rapidly excreted in the stool. The risk, at best, can be described as theoretical. Although the numbers were small, one study(4) suggested that the serum half-life of ethylmercury in infants given thimerosal-containing vaccines was shorter than that suggested by work with methylmercury and did not seem to raise the blood concentrations of mercury above acceptable values. A more recent study(5) used infant monkeys to compare, in a limited way, the pharmacokinetic profiles of ethylmercury following exposure to thimerosal-containing vaccines and methylmercury following administration by nasogastric feeding tube. There were 17 animals in each group, and exposures were repeated at 0, 7, 14 and 21 days of age. The absorption and initial distribution of the two mercury compounds were similar. However, in comparison to methylmercury, ethylmercury was eliminated faster (half-life of 8.6 days versus 21.5 days for methylmercury), did not accumulate between doses, unlike methylmercury, and resulted in lower total brain mercury levels. The firmest conclusion to be drawn from these pharmacokinetic studies is that methylmercury and ethylmercury are handled very differently in the body and that safety limits regarding methylmercury cannot simply be extrapolated to ethylmercury.

The detrimental health effects of high-dose exposure to mercury have been well studied. In addition, acute accidental poisoning episodes with very high doses of thimerosal and improperly prepared medicines containing thimerosal have been documented. However, the amount of thimerosal in vaccines is small, and no studies have documented any associated adverse effects beyond the hypersensitivity reactions noted in the next section.

Removing thimerosal from vaccines available in single-dose vials is a relatively easy measure to reduce exposure to mercury, however small, as compared with reducing dietary and environmental exposures. NACI continues to endorse the long-term goal of removing thimerosal from vaccines when there are safe alternatives to establish sterility in multi-dose vials, since this is one achievable way to reduce total environmental exposure to mercury.

Hypersensitivity reactions

Low-dose exposure to thimerosal has been associated with hypersensitivity reactions(6). Thimerosal was previously present in various eye preparations and contact lens solutions and has been proven to cause delayed hypersensitivity reactions resulting in conjunctivitis and eyelid dermatitis. Thimerosal is also used as a preservative in vaccines, antitoxins, parenteral medications and preparation of antigens for allergy tests. Most reports of adverse immunologic reactions to thimerosal in vaccines involve small numbers of patients. Both delayed hypersensitivity (allergic contact) and immediate hypersensitivity (IgE-mediated) reactions have been reported. The former mechanism is the more common of the two.

Delayed hypersensitivity to thimerosal is usually diagnosed with patch testing. Up to 16% to 18% of patients undergoing routine patch testing are identified as being reactive to thimerosal. However, the significance of this positivity is unknown in the absence of clinical reactivity. Positive patch tests are generally poor predictors of the likelihood of reaction to thimerosal-containing vaccines. Most individuals with demonstrable delayed hypersensitivity to thimerosal tolerate thimerosal-containing vaccines with no untoward reaction, although some individuals may experience either a large local reaction, a delayed generalized dermatitis reaction that can be long lasting or exacerbation of an existing skin disease, such as atopic dermatitis.

Immediate hypersensitivity, including anaphylaxis and immune-complex-mediated disorders, has been reported with some products that contain thimerosal, but it is uncertain whether thimerosal was the responsible agent. Anaphylaxis has not been proven to occur as a result of thimerosal in vaccines and thus remains a theoretical risk.

If an individual is suspected of being hypersensitive to thimerosal, the nature of the hypersensitivity reaction must be characterized before a vaccine containing thimerosal is administered. If there is no proven history of hypersensitivity, vaccination can proceed without particular precaution. If there is a definite history of anaphylaxis to thimerosal, vaccines containing this component should not be given. Although such reactions have never been reported, prior history of erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis from thimerosal exposure would be an absolute contraindication to future exposure. In cases of proven delayed hypersensitivity to thimerosal, vaccination can proceed but the patient should be advised that long-lasting local or systemic cutaneous reactions can occur.

Thimerosal as a preservative

Vaccines, like other injectable products, should be free of inadvertent microbial contamination. During the manufacturing process, great care is taken to ensure that vaccines are sterile. Single-dose vials of vaccines need not contain preservative if sterilization is effective. However, multiple entries into multi-dose vials to retrieve vaccine can result in bacterial or fungal contamination if proper technique is not strictly followed. Before the routine addition of preservative to multi-dose vials used for immunization purposes, microbial contamination was shown to result in a variety of conditions, from local abscesses to septicemia. In 1928, during a diphtheria immunization campaign, staphylococcal contamination of a multidose vial led to the septic deaths of 12 of 42 immunized children(7). Tragic events such as this led to the introduction of preservatives in general, and thimerosal specifically, to prevent microbial infection, thereby enhancing the safety profile of vaccines.

Millions of vaccines containing preservatives such as thimerosal have been administered since the 1930s, and there have been no common adverse effects observed. If a thimerosal preservative-free product is not available, it is clearly better to administer a vaccine containing thimerosal than to allow a susceptible person to suffer the disease that the vaccine will prevent.

Thimerosal Content of Vaccines Used in Canada

Vaccines approved for use in Canada may contain the following:

no thimerosal: these are single-dose preparations in which thimerosal has not been used in any part of the manufacturing process;

trace amounts of thimerosal (< 1.0 µg/dose) if the preservative has been used in the production process but not added to serve a preservative function in the final product;

thimerosal added as a preservative. Such vaccines are typically those supplied in multi-dose vials with thimerosal added in varying concentrations to prevent contamination with other serious infectious agents. The amount of mercury per dose varies from 2 to 50 µg per 0.5 mL dose.

Table 1 identifies vaccines currently approved for use in Canada in terms of thimerosal content. Most of the listed vaccines containing thimerosal as a preservative are not widely used, either because they have been replaced by newer vaccines or have very specialized use (e.g. DT adsorbed). Some, such as influenza vaccines, are used in provincial/territorial immunization programs. A more detailed table of vaccine contents is published in the 2006 Canadian Immunization Guide(8), and updates will be posted, as appropriate, at <www.naci.gc.ca>. These would include any changes to the preservative content of vaccines listed in Table 1 as well as changes in vaccines approved for use in Canada after this statement has been published.

Table 1. Thimerosal content of vaccines marketed in Canada as of May 1, 2007*