Long queues and high prices sees children shun school canteen for cheap junk food



Secondary school pupils are shunning the queues and expense of the school canteen in favour of cheap junk food from local shops, according to new research.

Pupils enjoy the healthy meals introduced by chef Jamie Oliver but are having to pay too much and wait too long to be served inside crowded canteens, they said.

The expense and poor facilities are undermining efforts to overhaul the diet of UK students, the report concluded.

Research shows children enjoy healthy school meals. But they are shunning the school canteen for junk food because of the high prices and long queues

The study of pupils found 80% bought food from local shops, 41% never went to the school canteen and just 6% ate the school's set hot lunch.

Researchers from the Nutrition Policy Unit of London Metropolitan University observed the food shopping habits of pupils at two large comprehensives - one in a deprived urban setting and another in an affluent suburban area.

The urban school let all pupils leave the premises at lunchtime, while the suburban school only allowed sixth formers the same privilege.

Of the pupils allowed out at lunchtime, 97% of the urban students and 100% of suburban students bought food from local shops.

In the school where pupils had to stay on site, fewer than half (44%) bought food from the school canteen, usually sandwiches or wraps rather than the full hot meal. Many bought food on the way to school.

In the urban school just 15% visited the canteen and fewer than half of those bought the set meals.

The food bought by pupils outside school provided at least 23% of their daily energy requirement and was often high in fat or sugar.

The top 10 foods bought in local shops included fizzy drinks, chocolate, sweets, crisps, cakes, biscuits and chips.

Takeaways made up 30% of food bought outside school, and were generally hot food like chips, chicken and chips or pizza with an average fat content of 42g.

The average fat content of a £1 portion of chicken and chips was 53.2g, well over half the amount of fat a child should be eating in a whole day.

A total of 70% of purchases were from supermarkets and newsagents. Sugar was the main problem, with each buy containing an average 36g of sugar, the equivalent of nine teaspoons.

One of the most popular products, a 500ml bottle of Ribena, contains 60.5g of sugar, more than a teenage girl should have in a whole day.

The report recommends improved canteen facilities and lower prices followed by schools adopting a stay-on-site policy.

Sarah Sinclair, lead researcher on the project, said: "School meals have been substantially improved over the past few years, so why is it that only 6% of our study sample actually chose the full hot meal option in the canteen?

"It certainly wasn't that they didn't like the Jamie Oliver menus or were rejecting healthy eating. Our discussion groups with pupils and parents showed the main reason was that the canteen is too small to accommodate all the pupils it needs to, and long queues mean that pupils have no time left in their lunch break for any other activity such as sport or play.

"Instead, they choose to buy food on their way to school to eat later, or, if they are allowed out at lunchtime, they make a quick trip to a local shop."

Jack Winkler, professor of nutrition policy at London Metropolitan University and the report's co-author, said: "Our research found that local takeaways in the school fringe were undercutting the school canteen by offering child-sized portions for £1.

"This meant that for the equivalent price of a school meal, pupils could buy chicken and chips or a whole pizza and still have money left over for a drink or sweets.

"Shops had special offers targeted at the children - price reductions and two-for-one savings, which meant that pupils could pool their money and buy more food to share between them.

"The local takeaways were also well-staffed and could serve a large number of children very quickly, to ensure that they did not have to spend time queuing. One takeaway we observed served 63 pupils with chips, burgers and sausages within half an hour."