Tarkanian: Join me in Defending our Gun Rights – Nevada News and Views
(Danny Tarkanian) – I’m a Life member of the National Rifle Association (NRA) running for Congress in Nevada’s 3rd district to succeed Joe Heck. I am running for Congress to Restore the American Dream, and that means defending the freedoms that have made our country the greatest nation in the history of mankind.

Yet already here in Nevada, law abiding citizens are facing threats to our Constitutional rights with the Michael Bloomberg-backed Question 1 on the November ballot. We can also expect Second Amendment rights to be a major issue in both houses of the next Congress.

The passing of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, author of the Heller decision, means our Second Amendment rights hang in the balance as his replacement is debated in the U.S. Senate.

The Senate needs to confirm a justice who understands, as did the late Justice Scalia, that our right to armed self-defense is a natural right, bestowed by our Creator, that goes hand in hand with the natural right to life, liberty and happiness. Our rights don’t derive from government – something liberal gun grabbers don’t understand.

While confirmation of a Supreme Court Justice is within the purview of the U.S. Senate, I support House resolution 656 calling for the confirmation of a Justice who will defend our Second Amendment freedoms.

In the House of Representatives there are many Second Amendment issues on which I will be focused.

I will fight against all efforts to renew the unconstitutional and ineffective assault weapons ban. Recently, anti-freedom Congress members have put forth HR 4269, the Assault Weapons Ban of 2015. These bills attempt to leverage real tragedies to restrict our freedoms, but the real tragedy is that they erode our rights while failing to make the public safer in the process.

I will also join the push for right to carry reciprocity legislation in the House, currently represented by bills such as HR 923, HR 402 and HR 986. No law abiding citizens should fear that their natural right to self-defense is in jeopardy when they leave their home state.

As your Congressman, I will vigorously oppose all efforts to register firearms or restrict the rights of law abiding citizens to own and possess firearms. These efforts aren’t always obvious, but I will be vigilant in recognizing the true intent of bills that are Trojan Horses for eventual firearms registration and/or confiscation.

These aren’t new priorities for me. You might be interested to read my 2010 article on the Heller decision. Click here to read it. As I wrote then:

Our military provides for the “Common Defence” against threats outside our borders, but as a part of the Bill of Rights, the right to bear arms isn’t just about guns – it is part and parcel of the Framers’ unyielding defense of the right of each individual to protect their life and liberty within their community and in their home.

Truth is one of the first casualties of political campaigns.

One of my opponents is trying to distort my position on these issues, even though he was one of only four Senators to refuse to cosponsor a critical bill recognizing full Second Amendment rights for conceal-carry permit holders. He has already been twice cited by independent organizations for making false campaign statements, and now he is under state investigation for potential campaign finance violations.

My commitment to the Second Amendment is full. In my last campaign, I received an A from the Nevada Firearms Coalition, headed by one of freedom’s fiercest friends Bob Turner. And I want to thank my good friend Bob Irwin for his strong statement in recognition of my own efforts to fight for our God-given freedoms:

“I am a Benefactor NRA member and NRA law enforcement instructor. I am also the proprietor of The Gun Store in Las Vegas for the past 35 years. There are few political figures in Nevada I trust more to defend citizens’ rights under the Second Amendment than Danny Tarkanian. We have been friends for years and he is a staunch conservative who I believe will make a great Congressman. No candidate will work harder for the future of all Nevadans!”

The challenges and threats ahead are many. Let’s continue the fight together in defense of our freedoms.