Vigilantes raid brothel and attack prostitutes in Cajamarca, Peru
A graphic video (see below) showing unprovoked violence against alleged sex workers in Cajamarca by a group of citizen vigilantes has caused controversy in Peru and is now circulating in the international press.

The video in question shows the purported prostitutes being beaten and chased by vigilantes as they run from the Cajamarca nightclub Alondra. The attackers use thick whips and sticks to “punish” their victims, most of whom are scantily clad. The women scream as the whips hit their bare skin.

One young woman in the clip runs away from her attackers, apparently trying to dress herself as she flees. She is barefoot. Male nightclub employees are shown being forced to do pushups, some receiving lashes from the vigilantes’ whips at the same time.

El Comercio reports that the group initially entered the nightclub after receiving information indicating that several thieves were hiding in the establishment. However, no thieves were detained and the group apparently left after having been satisfied with beating the club’s employees.

A second video surfaced the following day showing a similar raid on the Ula Ula nightclub in Cajamarca. The group apparently broke into the club and attacked the women working there, who scream and beg the attackers not to beat them. The group then pulled out the club’s furniture, lights, and sound system, and set it all ablaze.

RPP Noticias reports that the vigilante group is known as the “Comité Descentralizado de Rondas Urbanas de Cajamarca,” which translates loosely as the “Cajamarca Committee for Urban Patrols.”

The Telegraph reported today that the controversial video, which aired on the Peruvian news program America Noticias, was distributed to press by the committee itself.

Apparent group leader Fernando Chuquilín told media that the committee’s goal is to eradicate prostitution through raids like these. America Noticias reports that the group intends to continue with raids like these until prostitution no longer exists in Cajamarca.

*NOTE: This video contains images that may disturb some viewers.*

Group of local “ronderos” say their violent treatment of sex workers is meant to discourage prostitution in the city.

Comments

comments