Giardini della Biennale
CENTRAL PAVILION



It was in 1894 that the first Palace of Exhibitions at Giardini was commissioned by the Venetian Municipal Council, to host the first Biennale the following year. The building - then called "Pro Arte" - was built on a project by Enrico Trevisanato and with a liberty facade designed by Marius De Maria and Bartolomeo Bezzi. Until 1905 La Biennale is all concentrated in this palace, where artists from each country exhibit together, without any division. In the wake of the success achieved in the first editions, La Biennale encourages foreign countries to build their own Pavilion at Giardini to expose their artists (the first is Belgium in 1907). Over the course of decades, the Central Palace underwent numerous additions and transformations, hosting works by Ernesto Basile (entrance 1905), Galileo Chini (decorations 1907-1909), Guido Cirilli (facade 1914), Gio Ponti (Rotonda 1928) , Becoming in 1932 the Italian Pavilion, with the design of the (still current) façade of Duilio Torres. In 1948 (and until 1972) bagan Carlo Scarpa's direct collaboration with La Biennale, which generated over the years a long series of remarkable projects and achievements. In 1968 Carlo Scarpa projects a loft in the central hall of the Pavilion, doubling the exhibition surface. Scarpa also signed the project of the Garden of Sculptures realized in 1952. In 1977 was inaugurated the Auditorium by Valeriano Pastor, destined for the Municipality, now transformed into a Library.

As part of the exhibition reorganization of La Biennale venues, in 2009 the historic Central Pavillion at Giardini became a multifunctional and versatile structure of 3,500 square meters, the center of permanent activity and landmark for the other Gardens Pavilions. It houses interior spaces designed by internationally renowned artists such as Massimo Bartolini (Educational Area "Sala F"), Rirkrit Tiravanija (Bookstore) and Tobias Rehberger (Cafeteria).

The transformation of the Central Pavilion into the Multifunctional Gardens was completed in 2011 with the reorganization of the exhibition spaces and entrance hall. From then on, the Central Pavilion can enjoy optimal space and microclimatic conditions for each of the different and numerous destinations, including educational activities, workshops and special projects. An important part of the recovery project consisted in the completion of the restoration of the Ottagonale Hall, initiated by the Venice City Council in 2006, with the restoration of the paintings inside the Galileo Chini dome in 1909 and the restoration of decorative wall and floor systems In the Venetian terrace. The Hall, equipped with all the services for the reception of the public, thus becomes a fulcrum of the Pavilion in the form of a monumental atrium from which all the new functional areas can be reached.