Progressive Wage Model for the cleaning sector

Cleaning companies have to meet the Progressive Wage Model wage and training requirements for cleaners who are Singapore citizens or permanent residents.

What is it

The Progressive Wage Model (PWM) for the cleaning sector was developed by the Tripartite Cluster for Cleaners (TCC).

The PWM comes under the Cleaning Business Licence scheme administered by National Environmental Agency (NEA). Cleaning companies must meet the PWM requirements to obtain or renew their licences.

Who it covers

The PWM requirements:

Are mandatory .

. Cover all Singapore citizens and permanent residents employed in outsourced cleaning jobs.

Employers are encouraged to adopt the PWM’s principles for their foreign and in-house cleaners, upgrade their skills and implement productivity-based wage progression pathways.

The progressive wage structure comprises 3 wage ladders for 3 broad categories of cleaning jobs:

Group Description Group 1 Office and commercial buildings – e.g. offices, schools, hospitals and polyclinics. Group 2 Food and beverage (F&B) establishments – e.g. hawker centres and food courts. Group 3 Conservancy sector – e.g. Town Councils and public cleansing.

These categories account for the most common types of cleaning jobs. They are based on NEA’s classification of cleaning sub-sectors under the Enhanced Clean Mark Accreditation Scheme.

Wage requirements

The TCC reviewed the PWM wages in December 2016. The revised wages recommended in the TCC’s report took effect from 1 July 2018 for all cleaning contracts.

A PWM Bonus of at least 2 weeks of basic monthly wages will be payable to eligible employees in a given year from 2020.

Team leaders are recommended to be paid additional wage allowance starting from $100 as they handle more job responsibilities.

Wages and PWM bonus for part-time workers will be pro-rated.

Wages shown below are for basic salary

From 1 July 2018 Show From 1 July 2018 Starting from 1 July 2018, outsourced resident cleaners must be paid the following wages. From 1 July 2019 Show From 1 July 2019 Starting from 1 July 2019, outsourced resident cleaners must be paid the following wages. From 1 July 2020 Show From 1 July 2020 Starting from 1 July 2020, outsourced resident cleaners must be paid the following wages. From 1 July 2021 Show From 1 July 2021 Starting from 1 July 2021, outsourced resident cleaners must be paid the following wages.

Training requirements

Your cleaning company must ensure that its Singapore citizen and PR cleaners meet the PWM’s training requirements.

Refer to SSG’s training framework for the cleaning sector.

As an employer, you will benefit from your workers’ increased productivity and ability to provide better quality cleaning services to buyers.

Find out more

For more information: