Palm Beach divorce to end 67-year marriage shakes up Worth Ave. empire
Beginning with a dream, a typewriter, a Brownie camera and rubber cement, Burt and Lucille Handelsman built a real estate empire that encompasses some of the toniest shops on Worth Avenue in Palm Beach, restaurants in Delray Beach, bars in Key West and retail complexes in upstate New York.

Then, last year, after 67 years marriage, Lucille, known as "Lovey," filed for divorce.

With an estimated $750 million in far-flung real estate holdings at stake, the 88-year-old Lovey knew she had made a seismic decision and prepared for the worst.

The Handelsmans’ Palm Beach County properties

Here are the locations of Burt and Lucille ‘Lovey’ Handelsman’s holdings in Palm Beach County, according to the Property Appraiser’s Jan. 1, 2017 valuation. They are valued at $160 million. (Zoom out to see the Handelsmans’ other properties in Lantana, West Palm Beach and Delray Beach.)

Weissman has appealed Suskauer’s ruling to the 4th District Court of Appeal. The reason Lovey wants a divorce now isn’t just emotional, it’s financial, Weissman argued.

Under Florida law, Lovey gets 50 percent of the empire she helped Burt build if the couple divorces. But if she dies before she is granted a divorce, she — and ultimately her children and their children — could receive less than 30 percent, her lawyer said.

Weissman and Fisher also said in court documents they suspect Burt created an estate plan and trusts with the help of his longtime lawyer, Rankin. Worried that the documents could limit the amount Lovey would get in the divorce, the attorneys asked Suskauer to force Burt to turn over the documents.

Attorney Richard Segal, who represents Burt along with Kluger, objected. "Someone’s will and estate plan are sacrosanct documents," Segal said during a recent hearing. "They have no right to find out how he wants to distribute his assets."

Suskauer seemed to agree. "What business is it of yours?" he asked Weissman.

Accountants and appraisers would determine how the empire is divided, the judge said.

"I’d hate this case to be sidetracked on the issue of Rankin," Suskauer said. "The focus should be with the accountants — having them address what the appraisers say the values are."

But, Weissman and Fisher insisted, the documents and Rankin’s involvement with them are important to help determine the value of the Handelsman holdings. In hearings, Rankin has declined to answer questions about the documents, claiming she can’t divulge private talks between her and Burt, her client. In court documents, Fisher said that in 2014 Burt told U.S. Trust that Rankin was the executor of his estate.

While Suskauer said he may ultimately decide to review Burt’s will and estate documents privately, he urged both sides to work toward a settlement or be prepared for trial early next year.

For his part, Burt said he never expected to be involved in a divorce. Like Lovey, he said he planned to turn his empire over to his family. "I envisioned having a generational company," he told Suskauer. "I wanted all my grandchildren to come in."

He wanted to build a legacy. "I was hoping one day that, even though I wouldn’t be here to see it, I’d see my name on a hospital, a library, a museum," he said.

But, he insisted, he doesn’t plan to ever stop working. "I enjoy what I do immensely," he said.