(PDF) Yarsagumba [Cordyceps sinensis (Berk.) Sacc.]; Traditional Utilization in Dolpa District, Western Nepal
Anciently fungi used by the indigenous people from the various parts of world mainly in China, Japan and Indian subcontinent for various purposes. They use fungi for food, medicine, coloring of cloths, folk tradition etc. But that time people were unable to identify the exact composition of the chemicals present in fungi fruiting body or which chemical responsible for a particular activity or disease curing ability. Identification of beneficial properties and extraction of active ingredient started with the discovery of antibiotic penicillin by Alexander Fleming in the beginning of 20th century. Since that era, many additional antibiotics have been discovered and the potential of fungi to synthesize biologically active molecules useful in a wide range of clinical therapies has been extensively exploited. Pharmacological research has now isolated antifungal, antiviral, and antiprotozoan agents from The fungus with probably the ancient record of medicinal use, Ganoderma lucidum, is known in Chinese as líng zhi (Rishi mushroom, spirit plant) and in Japanese as mannentake (10,000 year old mushroom). In ancient Japan, Grifola frondosa was worth its weight in silver, although no significant therapeutic benefits have been demonstrated in humans. Scientific studies have shown another species of Ganoderma genus, Ganoderma applanatum, contains compounds which have anti-tumor and anti-fibrotic properties. Inonotus obliquus was used in Russia in 16th century, and it featured in Alexandr Solzhenitsyn’s 1967 novel Cancer Ward. Lichens have also been used in many folk medicine traditions to treat a wide range of ailments. Research has demonstrated a range of therapeutically significant compounds in a range of lichen species but none are currently believed to be in use in mainstream medicine. Researcher investigated that fungi mainly mushroom possess various medicinal and pharmacological activity like analgesic, antiallergic, bronchitis-preventative effect, inducing regeneration of bronchial epithelium Anti-inflammatory Antibacterial, against staphylococci, streptococci and Bacillus pneumonia (perhaps due to increased immune system activity), antioxidant activity by eliminating hydroxyl free radicals, antitumor activity, antiviral effect-by inducing interferon production, lowers blood pressure, enhances bone marrow nucleated cell proliferation, cardio tonic action- lowering serum cholesterol levels with no effect on triglycerides, enhancing myocardial metabolism of hypoxic animals, and improving coronary artery hemodynamics, central depressant and peripheral anticholinergic actions on the autonomicnervous sytem reduce the effects of caffeine and relax muscles, enhanced natural killer cell (NK) activity in vitro in mice, expectorant and antitussive properties demonstrated in mice studies, general immunopotentiation, anti-HIV activity in vitro and in vivo, improved adrenocortical function, increased production of Interleukin-1 by murine peritoneal macrophages in vitro, increased production of Interleukin-2 by murine splenocytes in vitro etc. Traditional knowledge of fungi and confluences with the modern sciences and instrumentations (HPTLC, HPLC, GCMS, XRD, NMR, IR, FTIR, LCMS etc.) we know which chemical present in the fungi, we can isolate the compound, know the proper mechanism of action of compounds present in fungi etc. With this we can develop a new medicine era for the world with the help of confluences of traditional and modern sciences from the fungi which will help in mainstream medicine. Keywords: Fungi, Confluence, Traditional, Modern Science.