Transcript: O'Leary on his bid for Conservative leadership
The Star: You said this morning that the comments you made as a television personality “don’t matter,” and are not necessarily how you feel about policy. If people couldn’t trust what you said back then, over the past decade, why should they trust what you say now?

Businessman and reality television personality Kevin O’Leary announced he would seek the leadership of the Conservative Party of Canada on Wednesday.

This is different, this is the real deal. We’re trying to figure out how to save Canada, how to make it competitive, so we can bring jobs back here.

None of that was policy. We enjoyed some very vibrant debates around some very controversial ideas. But that is not policy. There’s probably 10,000 hours of tape, I’m sure we’ll see all of it come back chopped up. It’s all irrelevant.

Kevin O’Leary: It’s not about trust. Think about what I was doing for 10 years, and I learned that quite successfully. I was on the other side of a very intelligent woman in Amanda Lang (on CBC’s The Lang and O’Leary Exchange), and I didn’t agree with anything she said. And we enjoyed a long and successful career, I as a columnist, commentator, and she as a journalist.

KO: (Laughing) I remember that debate, and how exciting that was. Of course that’s not policy. You could never do that. You can’t make unions illegal, that’s not even a pragmatic policy. Can you make unions more efficient? Will I negotiate with them? Yes. There’s no chance I’m going to make them illegal, you can’t do that, that’s ridiculous.

The Star: Fair enough. So let me ask you a couple of specific questions, about what you said, and whether you agree with it now. You said that if you prime minister for 15 minutes, you would make unions illegal in Canada. Do you still want to do that?

KO: I explored thousands of ideas, some of them very controversial, some of them very interesting. Some of them we agreed on, some of them we didn’t, none of it’s policy. I wasn’t making policy, I wasn’t running as a candidate to govern the country. There’s a difference. People aren’t stupid in Canada, they get it.

The Star: But you made those claims on national television for a decade. Shouldn’t people hold you to account about those things that you said, as yourself, not as some kind of character on a reality show?

KO: No, not at all. As a matter of fact, within the bureaucracy of Canada – a lot of people don’t know this – we have the most highly educated bureaucracy in the world. More master’s degrees, more PhDs in the Canadian bureaucracy, we just haven’t set up a system that lets them flourish and provide tremendous value to us. We have to do that.

The Star: But are you against unions on principle, or …?

These are the most highly educated bureaucrats on Earth. That should be a huge asset, not a liability.

The Star: On another topic, income inequality, which is certainly an issue in the United States and Canada. You once said that the fact that 85 of the world’s richest people owning as much as 3.5 billion of the world’s poorest is a good thing because it inspires the poor to join the rich in this sort of gilded age. Do you still feel that way?

KO: Absurd policy, great television. Of course I don’t feel that way. I don’t celebrate poverty, that’s ridiculous. Everybody knows that what I’m all about is entrepreneurialism.

When I was in my 20s, Canada had a blue sky, the potential was limitless. I don’t feel that way anymore, and that is of grave concern to me because I’ve got two kids that our now in their 20s, and I’ve just been told by Justin Trudeau that they are going to inherit a $1.5-trillion deficit. Not a chance in hell I’m letting that happen.

The Star: Sorry, did you say a $1.5-billion deficit?

KO: A $1.5-trillion deficit.

The Star: So you’re actually referencing the Finance Canada report …

KO: Yeah, it’s $1.5 trillion, it’s 38 years of deficits. Is the government lying to me again? That number is ridiculous, and I will not let it happen, I will not do that to my children.

The Star: But it’s debt, it’s not deficit. That’s the national debt, that’s not a yearly deficit.

KO: The reason it becomes debt is because year after year there’s a deficit! Of course! Listen, I can read a balance sheet, my friend. I’m not going to let Trudeau do that. I’m telling every Canadian not a chance in hell is that going to happen. Zero probability.

I’ll tell you what’s going to happen here. Justin Trudeau is going to elect Kevin O’Leary. Just by doing what he does every day. Every day, people in Canada are starting to figure out he does not know what he’s doing. It’s that simple.

The Star:You would agree that, based on that report, the economy is expected to grow by so many billions of dollars over that time that the actual debt-to-GDP ratio will be better than it is today…

KO: I don’t agree with that at all. Trying to forecast out over 38 years, remember that Trudeau will be long gone. What I see now is the actions that he’s done in just a short period of time.

I’m going to be honest with you: I’m very surprised that he didn’t pivot when the surprise election of Donald Trump occurred. He had a perfect excuse to roll back his carbon policy, to roll back his increase in taxes, to roll back all the regulations against industries like manufacturing and pipelines and energy. And what did he do? He just marched right into oblivion, swam the wrong direction, without even finding out what the policies would be 100 days from now in the U.S.

Why would anybody build a car plant in Ontario when our taxes are going to be 30 per cent higher? We have a carbon tax they don’t have in Michigan, and we don’t have the same regulations! He’s absolutely buried the possibility of any growth or any jobs.

That’s just basic negotiations. He’s never done it. He’s basically misinterpreted his mandate, and Canadians are simply feeling the failure. That’s what’s happening. … That’s why he’s getting all this pushback from young Canadians he promised all those jobs to. You’ve seen what’s happening at these town halls.

Let me ask you another question, think about this: We spend $12 billion a year buying oil from Saudi Arabia, a country where they grow bamboo and beat the women with sticks. I’m not OK with that. I don’t want my money going into a culture like that. I don’t agree with that at all, I can’t find a Canadian who thinks that a good idea. Why? Because Justin Trudeau can’t move the oil from where we have it – Alberta – to where we need it – on the East Coast. That’s failure, that’s mismanagement, that’s poor governance.

The Star: OK, so is morality going to govern you as prime minister? Are you going to say no to Saudi Arabia oil, no to Saudi Arabia exports for weapons, which we’re currently doing? Are you going to say that the (media) in China is state-run so we shouldn’t trade with China? I’m just trying to understand what you’re criticizing here.

KO: I’m criticizing the fact that we are losing jobs every day, and we send $12 billion to a country that doesn’t respect our values, when we don’t have to.

The Star: Would you sell arms to them?

KO: Does it make sense to anybody in Canada, that we are rich in resources, that we could easily have energy independence in every province, and we don’t? Listen, that’s just stupid. That makes absolute …

The Star: Does that make much economic sense to you? To use the oilsands and refine it here to make every province energy independent? Or are you advancing a more free trade agenda than that?

KO: No, no, what I’m worried about right now is I want to take care of Canadians. Right now, I want to balance these tremendous imbalances. Why would we have only 0.7 per cent GDP growth, do I want to send $12 billion to Saudi Arabia? Listen, we have the ability to supply oil to our East Coast refineries ourselves. We simply need to get the pipelines to them. Now either Trudeau can deliver on that or he can’t, that’s very easy to measure.

We have provinces like Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, that are rich in natural gas. Why haven’t we developed it, why don’t we have those jobs, why aren’t we energy independent on that gas there? The question is why? What is the answer? I think Canadians deserve an answer to that.

When you actually have a mandate to turn a country around and get it growing again, you do everything in your power to make it work. So what I’m going to do is I’m going to try and shine the light of transparency on the Trudeau mandate for the remaining 24 months, to try and get him to do as little as possible. Remember, everything he does makes my job harder when I finally get there.

He should be accountable, and he should be ready to be scrutinized on that. There is no O’Leary Foundation. There is no island where I fly to, there’s nobody giving me money. I don’t owe anybody anything, I’ve never been a politician, I don’t owe any favour in Ottawa, none of that.

The Star: And this is just a logistical question, but you do continue to pay taxes in Canada, correct?

KO: I am a Canadian resident. I live in Toronto, Canada. I can barely afford to eat because I have to pay Kathleen Wynne such ridiculous taxes.

The Star: Oh, come now, Mr. O’Leary. You can afford to eat. Are you kidding me?

KO: Listen, her tax regime is ridiculously uncompetitive.

The Star: That may be, but your suggesting you can’t eat is a little bit, forgive me, rich.

KO: Apparently you have no sense of humour, is that what I’m …

The Star: I don’t know, my friends say I do, but …

KO: Listen, I’m not happy with the taxes. The point is I pay tax in Canada, I’m a Canadian citizen, I’m a Toronto resident. I have many homes around the world, but Toronto is my tax residency and my domicile.

The Star: And where do you see yourself running? In Toronto? In Montreal?

KO: Nowhere, not for the first year. The plan is to go back and retrieve all those people that left the party, the 18 to 35 year olds that voted for Trudeau. I have to get 62 per cent of them back, or I won’t get a majority mandate (in 2019). As soon as the leadership race is over I’m hitting the road, and I’m going after them. I will spend just a few days a week, if that, in Ottawa. It’s much more important to get those people back in the party.

I told the caucus privately, and I’ll tell you publicly now, if I don’t deliver a majority mandate in 2019? They can fire me.

The Star: But there’s no mechanism to do that in the party’s constitution, is there?

KO: Listen, I’m telling you if I don’t do the job that I’m promising, they don’t have to keep me. And I’m not going to stick around if I can’t deliver, that’s the whole point.

Listen, there’s a plan here. You cannot win a majority mandate as a Conservative party (leader) unless you get 60 per cent of the votes between 18 and 35 (years old). That is the entire task at hand for the next 24 months. Everywhere Trudeau goes, I’ll be there right behind him explaining his policies and why they won’t work for those young people he’s talking to.