Clout St: GOP Senate candidate Kirk overstated military award
“I found that an award listed in my official biography was misidentified as ‘Intelligence Officer of the Year,’ Kirk said on the blog posting.

In a posting on his campaign’s blog, Kirk said he recently reviewed his records and biography and made the change late this week, though he apparently made the changes amid questions from the press.

Republican U.S. Rep. Mark Kirk, who has highly publicized his position as a Naval Reserve intelligence officer in his bid for the U.S. Senate, has acknowledged he erroneously boasted he was named Intelligence Officer of the Year more than a decade ago.

UPDATED by John Chase and Todd Lighty at 9:05 p.m. with Kirk campaign statement; first posted at 8:30 p.m.

For years, Kirk has said he was named intelligence officer of the year for his role in the U.S. Navy’s actions during the war in Kosovo, known as Operation Allied Force. When he first ran for Congress, he submitted a resume to the Tribune stating among his military decorations that he had earned the honor of intelligence officer of the year.

Commander Danny Hernandez, a Navy spokesman, said Thursday the individual 1999 Naval Reserve Intelligence Officer of the Year was given to another reservist and not to Kirk. He said, however, the intelligence community gives out unit awards at the local and regional levels.

Kirk now says that his unit – not just him – received a different citation from a professional organization called the National Military Intelligence Association. That citation – the Vice Admiral Rufus L. Taylor Award – was given to his unit while it was based in Italy.

“It was one of the honors of my life to lead the Intelligence Division Electronic Attack Wing Aviano, Italy – and I am very proud of this award,” Kirk stated on the blog. “My official biography will reflect this updated information.”

In a statement late Saturday, Kirk's campaign did not explain how the inaccuracy happened. The statement said Kirk "took charge" of the unit and said the unit was nominated by the Navy for the award.

The Washington Post first reported Kirk’s resume change and said it came after the paper began examining the issue following complaints from a representative of his Democratic opponent, Alexi Giannoulias.

The exaggeration could hurt Kirk in his tight race with Giannoulias, since he has used his military experience to highlight differences and experience.