Military Scours Ranks For Christian 'Haters'
PC Amok: A congressman asks why emails describe supporters of traditional marriage as members of hate groups while the Pentagon vets a religious tolerance guide with a group that compares Christian evangelism to "rape."

When Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel recently appeared before Congress, he was grilled by Rep. Randy Forbes, R-Va., about an email sent by an officer at Fort Campbell, Ky., to three dozen subordinates, warning them to be on the lookout for soldiers connected with "domestic hate groups."

Among the groups listed in the 14-page email by Lt. Col. Frank Rich, the Second Battalion, 506th Infantry Regiment Commander at Fort Campbell, were Christian organizations such as the American Family Association and Family Research Council (FRC), immigration reform groups such as the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR), and Atlas Shrugs, run by Pamela Geller and monitoring global jihadist activity.

Officers are advised to look for uniformed members of these groups, described as anti-gay, anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim.

The email listed the groups alongside actual extremist and hate groups such as neo-Nazis, the Ku Klux Klan and other supremacist gangs.

The list of "hate" groups in the email appears to be based on one compiled by the Southern Poverty Law Center.

Ironically, it was used by one Floyd Corkins, who, on Aug. 15, 2012, tried to go on a mass-shooting spree at FRC headquarters in Washington, D.C.

Geller, of Atlas Shrugs, told Fox News that the Army's email was a smear and intellectually dishonest. Her group, she says, is anti-jihad and anti-Shariah.

"I don't promote hate," she said. "I expose hate speech. The purpose of Atlas Shrugs is to report under-reported stories on daily acts of jihad across the world."

"It's very disturbing to see where the Obama administration is taking the military and using it as a laboratory for social experimentation — and also as an instrument to fundamentally change the culture," said FRC President Tony Perkins. "The message is very clear — if you are a Christian who believes in the Bible, who believes in transcendent truth, there is no place for you in the military."

Agreeing with Lt. Col. Rich is Mikey Weinstein, founder of the Military Religious Freedom Foundation. He has been hired by the Pentagon as a consultant to help shape policy on — we are not making this up — religious tolerance.

Weinstein and others from his organization met privately with Pentagon officials on April 23. He said U.S. troops who proselytize are guilty of sedition and treason and should be punished — by the hundreds if necessary — to stave off what he called a "tidal wave of fundamentalists." Share your faith, and you should be court-martialed.