Harry Reid: The Desert Fox Of Corruption
"It’s not over,” Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said Tuesday, speaking about the tensions in his state between rancher Cliven Bundy... View Enlarged Image

Corruption: The standoff in the Nevada desert wasn't about a desert tortoise or a rancher's failure to pay grazing fees. It was about the state's senior senator again enriching himself and his family at public expense.

Sunlight is said to be the best disinfectant, and the end, at least temporarily, to the Bureau of Land Management's armed standoff with Cliven Bundy may be due in part to the exposure given to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid's role in the attempt to confiscate Bundy's cattle and shut down his ranch.

"A tortoise isn't the reason why BLM is harassing a 67-year-old rancher; they want his land," journalist and blogger Dana Loesch notes. "The tortoise wasn't of concern when Harry Reid worked with BLM to literally change the boundaries of the tortoise's habitat to accommodate the development of his top donor, Harvey Whittemore."

Last year, Whittemore, 59, who headed a billion-dollar real estate company, was found guilty by a federal jury on three counts tied to nearly $150,000 illegally funneled to Reid's re-election campaign in 2007. Unfortunately, Cliven Bundy was not a Reid donor.

The Bureau of Land Management is headed by former longtime Reid aide Neil Kornze, who was confirmed by the Senate as BLM director on April 8, just as federal authorities descended on the cattle ranch. Kornze, 35, worked as a senior policy adviser on land-use issues in Reid's office from 2003 to 2011 before joining the BLM.

In a March 14 press release, the BLM announced support for "the Western Solar Energy Plan, a two-year planning effort conducted on behalf of the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Energy to expand domestic energy production and spur development of solar energy on public lands in six western states."

Coincidentally, part of that solar energy expansion includes a plan by China's ENN Energy Group to build what would be America's largest solar energy complex. The site chosen with the guidance of Reid's son, Rory, is in Laughlin, Nev. Laughlin is in Clark County, where Bundy's ranch is, and where Rory Reid formerly chaired the county commission. Rory is currently a lawyer with the firm of Lionel Sawyer & Collins and is representing ENN.

Reid, who just weeks ago was forced to return campaign money funneled to his granddaughter, has been one of the project's most prominent advocates, helping recruit the company during a 2011 trip to China and using his political clout on behalf of the project in Nevada.