The Net Worth of Each Presidential Candidate
13. Scott Walker

> Net worth: -$243,992 — $69,998

Between Trump and some of the other wealthier candidates like Bush and Fiorina, the 2016 Republican race may have the highest combined net worth of any primary in history. On the other end of the spectrum, however, is Wisconsin Governor and presidential hopeful Scott Walker, who appears not only to have a relatively small net worth, but also most estimates point to Walker being tens of thousands of dollars in debt. According to one source, Walker is currently paying off his credit card debt at an interest rate of close to 30%. In addition, Walker has taken on enormous student debt for his children.

As Governor, he garnered national attention by implementing right-to-work legislation, which significantly limited the power of labor unions in the state. Walker appears to be roughly in the middle of the pack for financial support among Republican candidates, raising an estimated $26.2 million.

ALSO READ: The Next 11 States to Legalize Marijuana

12. Marco Rubio

> Net worth: $57,018 — $829,999

Marco Rubio was a member of the Florida House of Representatives from 2000 to 2008. He has represented Florida in the U.S. Senate since 2010. Rubio’s estimated net worth, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, of $443,509 is low compared to other U.S. congress members, and it is nearly the lowest compared to other GOP presidential candidates. However, the Florida senator’s modest net worth has been scrutinized due to his ties with Norman Braman, a billionaire auto dealer who, in addition to funding many of Rubio’s personal endeavors, is by far Rubio’s single largest campaign donor. Large individual donations make up 70% of Rubio’s current campaign funds, which so far total around $10 million.

11. Bernie Sanders

> Net worth: $194,026-$741,030

In 2013, Bernie Sanders had an average estimated net worth of $330,507, well below other prospective presidential nominees and among the lowest compared with other members of Congress. The Vermont senator, who is the longest-serving independent in U.S. history, is a self-identified socialist. He is seeking the Democratic nomination, however, and is the most popular Democratic candidate after Hillary Clinton. In keeping with Sanders’ stated intention of starting a grassroots movement, more than 90% of his campaign contributions have come from individual donors. Sanders’ campaign speeches have drawn record numbers of attendants. Most recently, 19,000 people watched Sanders speak at an NBA arena in Portland, Oregon, the largest political event compared with all other candidates so far this election season.

10. Rand Paul

> Net worth: $683,036 — $2.0 million

Rand Paul, a Kentucky senator and ophthalmologist, is widely regarded as the most libertarian-minded presidential candidate. He, like his father Ron Paul, has long advocated for states’ right to operate without federal influence. Unlike most of his GOP running mates, the bulk of Rand Paul’s campaign contributions come from small, individual donations, which totalled more than $3.4 million as of June. While Paul is wealthier than most members of Congress, he is by no means the wealthiest. Paul’s average net worth of $1.3 million pales in comparison with that of his fellow Kentucky senator, Mitch McConnell, for example, who has an estimated average net worth of over $30 million.