New Hampshire Republican State Committee
It is not often that Republicans agree with the supporters of a self-avowed socialist like Bernie Sanders. But we finally found an important issue where we have common ground.

For 100 years theFirst-in-the-Nation primary has played a critical role in the presidential nominating process. This year, Donald Trump won the Republican Primary fair and square. As a result, he earned more delegates than his competitors. That’s how democracy works.

But the Democrat Primary is a different story.

Bernie Sanders embarrassed establishment favorite Hillary Clinton by overwhelmingly defeating her 60%-38%. However, despite his commanding victory, Sanders leaves New Hampshire with the same number of delegates as Clinton.

How is this possible? Because Democrats have set up an undemocratic system that allows party elites called “super delegates” to single handedly cancel out the votes of thousands of grassroots activists.

The fact that the DNC and super delegates – including Governor Maggie Hassan, Senator Jeanne Shaheen, and Congresswoman Ann Kuster – will go against the Democrat grassroots and support Hillary Clinton displays a wide disconnect between leadership and their voting base.

Given the results of the primary, the vote of one New Hampshire super delegate is equal to the votes of about 10,000 grassroots activists . This means that Governor Hassan, Senator Shaheen, the senator’s husband William Shaheen and Congresswoman Kuster are going to cancel out the votes of 40,000 Granite State Democrats . This is an outrage and an obvious attempt to rig the nomination process for Hillary Clinton despite her dismal primary showing.

New Hampshire Republicans are committed to upholding the integrity of our elections. Even though we vehemently disagree with Senator Sanders on his radical socialist agenda, we stand with his supporters who want their voices to be heard.

Its time for Governor Hassan, Senator Shaheen and Congresswoman Kuster to listen to their constituents and pledge to cast their votes at the DNC Convention for New Hampshire’s primary winner – Bernie Sanders. Any attempt to cancel out the voters of tens of thousands of grassroots activists of either party threatens the integrity of the nominating process and creates the perception of dirty politics and favoritism .

Please sign our petition urging Governor Hassan, Senator Shaheen and Congresswoman Kuster to do the right thing and switch their super delegate votes to Bernie Sanders.