NHGOP FILES RIGHT TO KNOW REQUEST FOR HASSAN'S OUT OF STATE TRAVEL RECORDS
Concord - The New Hampshire Republican State Committee today filed the following Right to Know request regarding Governor Maggie Hassan's out-of-state travel records for January 2015. The State Committee will file similar requests each month so that Granite Staters can track how many days their absentee governor is spending out of state as she prepares to run for United States Senate.

The Honorable Maggie Hassan

Governor of New Hampshire

State House

107 North Main Street Concord, New Hampshire 03301

Governor Hassan:

This is a request under the New Hampshire Right To Know Law (RSA 91-A).

I formally request that you provide me with all records regarding your out-of-state travel for the month of January 2015. This request includes, but is not limited to, any information regarding the purpose and duration of travel, in addition to any costs incurred by New Hampshire taxpayers during your trips.

Despite your dishonest denials, it is clear that you are using the corner office as a political stepping stone and actively exploring a campaign for United States Senate in 2016. A campaign for United States Senate will require significant out-of-state travel in order to raise the millions of dollars needed for this race.

According to the New Hampshire Constitution, the powers of the governor are temporarily transferred to the state Senate president "in the event of the death, resignation, removal from office, failure to qualify, physical or mental incapacity, absence from the state." This means that every time you leave the state to plot your political future or rub shoulders with millionaires at high-end fundraisers, you are unable to execute the duties of your office.

Additionally, the governor must inform the Senate president about his or her absence from the state. The Daily Caller reported that on September 11, 2001, then-Governor and United States Senate candidate Jeanne Shaheen, traveled to Washington, DC without informing the Senate president about her travel. Governor Shaheen's irresponsible behavior put New Hampshire at risk as officials scrambled to figure out who was in control of state government during their response to the terror attacks that took place on that fateful day.

Given this troubling incident, we would also like to specifically request any correspondence with the state Senate regarding your out-of-state travel to ensure that you are following proper protocol.

Should you decline to provide any requested information, please provide the specific provision under RSA 91-A that exempts such public records from the Right to Know Law. Granite Staters have a right to know how often their governor is shirking the responsibilities of her office in order to advance her career. They also deserve a full-time executive in the corner office, not an absentee governor who has been dishonest about her political intentions.

Sincerely,



Jennifer Horn

Chairman

New Hampshire Republican State Committee

###