Canidate for Congress in CD7 in New Jersey
Affordable Healthcare For All

I believe that affordable health care is a basic right of all Americans. Support adding a public option to the ACA, Defend the ACA mandate for contraceptive coverage and funding for women’s health.

Better Jobs And A Fair Deal For New Jersey

I will work to repeal the Republican tax bill and replace it with tax reform that simplifies and lowers rates for everyone, that cuts special interest loopholes rather than deductions that help the middle class. I will fight for funding for the roads, tunnels, and bridges…

Support Women’s Rights

I will fight for Planned Parenthood and the continuation of its crucial services in New Jersey and around the country, while vigorously opposing policies that restrict women’s access to contraceptives and abortive care. I will set a new, zero-tolerance standard in Congress…

Protecting the Environment

I will support policies that protect our air and water and incentivize the green technologies on which our future jobs depend. I will fight climate change rather than denying it and encourage the federal government to work with states to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement.

Defending American Values

I will protect the democratic institutions that keep us free and hold our leaders accountable, and defend the women and men who serve America as members of the armed forces, diplomats, and civil servants. I will continue to support LGBTQ rights…

Protecting Our National Security

I will insist we keep our commitments to NATO and maintain sanctions on Russia until it stops its aggression in Ukraine. I will support strict enforcement of the Iran nuclear deal and work with our allies to strengthen it as well as urge deterrence, sanctions, and diplomacy…

Safeguarding American Democracy

I will defend the independence of the Justice Department investigation looking at what happened in the 2016 election and support legislation to strengthen the security of our voting systems, and other critical infrastructure.

Getting Ready For The Future

I’ll promote the debate on data protection, social media responsibilities, opportunities and challenges of new technologies like Artificial Intelligence, drones and automation.