Starbucks & Green Mountain Coffee -- don't support the lawsuit against Vermont
Starbucks doesn't think you have the right to know what's in your coffee. So it's teamed up with Monsanto to sue the small U.S. state of Vermont to stop you from finding out.

Starbucks is part of a lawsuit that's aiming to block a landmark law that requires genetically-modified ingredients be labeled. Amazingly, they claim that the law is an assault on their corporate right to free speech. A local Vermont company, Green Mountain Coffee, has also joined in.

SumOfUs members have already chipped in to support Vermont's legal defense fund. The next part of our strategy is chipping away at the Grocery Manufacturers Association's base, which counts Monsanto, Starbucks, and Green Mountain Coffee as its members. Monsanto might not care what we think -- but as a public-facing company, Starbucks does. If we can generate enough attention, we can push Starbucks to withdraw its support for the lawsuit, and then pressure other companies to do the same.

Sign the petition to tell Starbucks and Green Mountain Coffee to withdraw their support for the lawsuit against Vermont, and stop fighting accurate food labeling.

Vermont is a small, entirely rural state with just 600,000 people. It’s a classic David and Goliath fight between Vermont and Monsanto. Considering that Starbucks has been progressive on LGBT and labor issues in the past, it's disappointing that it is working with biggest villain of them all, Monsanto.

There’s much more at stake here than just whether GMO foods will be labeled in a single U.S. state. Vermont is the very first state in the U.S. to require labeling. Dozens of other states have said that they will follow this path -- in order to encourage this, we need to ensure that Vermont's law stands strong.

That's why Monsanto and its new allies are fighting so hard to kill GMO labeling in Vermont. If we can win here, it’ll be a huge step towards the goal of GMO labeling worldwide, and making sure that consumers know what they are putting in their mouths.

SumOfUs is already fighting back -- we helped Vermont raise almost a quarter of a million dollars to defend themselves against Monsanto’s bullying! The next strategic step is to pressure and call out members of the Grocery Manufacturers Association, the shadowy body leading the lawsuit.

Add your voice now. Tell Starbucks and Green Mountain Coffee to stop supporting the lawsuit against Vermont.

**********

More information:

How Ben and Jerry's says goodbye to GMOs, Burlington Free Press, 16 June 2014

Food Companies Seek Federal GMO Label Standard, Challenge Washington's Campaign Finance Laws, Sustainable Brands, 15 January 2014