DIANNY RANTS: Black Lives Matter
I’m sure you’ve heard by now that an unarmed, white man was beaten to death by hammer-wielding black and Latino teenagers in St Louis.

His final act on this earth was protecting his wife from the animals who had set upon them while they drove home from a bar. [Hat tip Daily Mail]

We’ve been assured that this brutal murder was not racially motivated.

I don’t know about you, but I feel so much better knowing that.

I’m sure his wife is relieved to know that, though her husband was beaten to death, it wasn’t because of his skin color.

This weekend, I decided to pull out Ann Coulter’s superb book Mugged: Racial Demagoguery from the Seventies to Obama and give it a read. I’ve read the book four times already, but thought it might be beneficial to review it again in light of current events.

I’m telling you, it’s déjà vu all over again reading that book.

In one chapter, after Ann describes a number of racial hoaxes, including the now infamous Tawana Brawley incident, she chronicles the subsequent, very real, revenge attacks perpetrated by blacks as vengeance for the hoaxes.

And isn’t that exactly what happened in Ferguson?

The hoax in Ferguson was a “gentle giant” who was minding his own business was gunned down in the streets by a racist cop who executed him in the back while his hands were raised in surrender.

None of that was true.

But, the millions of dollars in damages done to businesses, the injuries and deaths that have happened in nation-wide “spontaneous demonstrations,” are very real. The lives and livelihoods destroyed in the name of “justice for Michael Brown” is the real tragedy.

Black lives matter?

Not the black lives destroyed in these riots.

Black lives matter?

Not to the thugs and criminals, not to the communists and anarchists who have co-opted the demonstrations as a way to overthrow our country.

And certainly not to the racial demagogues who amass great wealth on the backs of those people they claim to be “helping.”

When I read the headline on Drudge this morning that Obama will be holding meetings about Ferguson with his cabinet and “civil rights leaders,” I laughed out loud.

What a joke.

Barack Obama and his Attorney General helped stoke the flames in Ferguson. And, like I said in my column Hero Homicide Complex, Obama now pretends to be the one to come in and call for calm and “solutions.”

Honestly, do they think we are that deeply stupid?

You know who is Obama’s Advisor on Ferguson?

Al Sharpton.

Tells you all you need to know, doesn’t it?

I’m convinced the single reason the Secret Service had to relax their protocols around the White House is to enable this criminal to get through the front door.

Al Sharpton has blood on his hands dating back from Freddie’s Fashion Mart and the Crown Heights riots all the way to Ferguson. He helped create the mess out there. He continues to agitate and foment anger. And he profits off of every moment of it.

And yet the President of the United States is welcoming him to the White House today to “advise” him on Ferguson.

Sweet merciful Zeus! Al Sharpton owes over $4.5 million dollars in back taxes.

If he were a white minister, he’d be in prison right now.

Hell, if he were a naturalized Indian-American conservative filmmaker he’d be in jail even if he only donated too much money to a Senatorial candidate.

In a “just” world, Dinesh D’Souza would be living his life unmolested while Al Sharpton would find himself the girlfriend of an enormous inmate named Tiny in some Federal prison.

But we don’t live in a “just” world, do we?

We live in America in the Age of Obama.

Where criminals and tax cheats populate the Presidential Administration and housewives and small business owners who start a Tea Party group get a rectal exam from the IRS.

Where race mongers and riot-inciters are “Advisors” to the President, and a police officer who did his job is driven from his home and career, and has to live in hiding for fear of being murdered by the very thugs Obama, Holder and Sharpton unleashed on him.

I don’t think it is in any way idle conjecture to posit that Obama’s meetings on Ferguson will have little or nothing to do with solving the problem he helped to create.

Never let a crisis go to waste, n’est ce pas?

Just like the Newtown shooting of two years ago was used as an opportunity to advance Obama’s radical anti-gun agenda, Ferguson will be used as an opportunity to advance Obama’s racial vengeance agenda.

Let’s face it?

What other kind of objective could these meetings have when Eric Holder and Al Sharpton are going to be in attendance?

Yeah. Joe Biden will be there too. Which adds a level of insincerity and ignorance that every Obama agenda meeting needs to move forward.

Black lives matter?

This cast of cretins really don’t have a problem with the deaths of black Americans. The deaths of black Americans help to advance their agenda.

Well, scratch that. The deaths of some black Americans help to advance their agenda.

Chicago? Meh. Not so much.

If these guys gave a damn about the blacks murdered in Chicago, the National Action Network would have had to purchase a posh, seven-figure penthouse on the Mag Mile for Al Sharpton’s second home.

If the blacks in Chicago mattered, Obama and Holder wouldn’t remain, after six years, strangely silent about the hundreds upon hundreds of black men and women who have been gunned down in senseless violence on Chicago’s streets.

You see, I believe that black lives matter.

From the womb to the tomb.

I believe that all lives matter. All humans beings should have the opportunity to live their lives in liberty within a civil society that respects the rule of law and the rights of the individual.

I believe the greatest threat to blacks in America today — the ones who survive the womb anyway — is the complete destruction of the family.

But Barack Obama doesn’t give a damn about that. Does he?

I wrote in my book Liberals Gone WILD!!! The Not-So-Silent Conquering of America,

RANT: Politics & Snark in the Age of Obama:

On June 11, 2013, at an event commemorating the 50th anniversary of the “Equal Pay Act” of 1963, Barack Obama inadvertently declared victory in the fifty year war on the family (that we know by its Orwellian name The War on Poverty). Let’s set aside for a moment the fact that in Obama’s Administration, women are paid less than their male counterparts. We’ll deal with the Liberals’ dividing of the sexes later. Circled by his latest array of human props — this time, naturally, just women — Obama said the following: “Women are now the primary source of income for nearly 40% of American families. Forty percent — almost half. That’s not something to panic about or be afraid about. That’s a sign of the progress and the strides that we’ve made…” [Emphasis mine] You know why so many women are the breadwinners? In part because so many people have lost their jobs. But also because in the United States, let me repeat, 72% of all black children are born into homes without a father present. And this, according to Obama, is a “sign of the progress and strides we’ve made.” In 1960, the number of black children born into single parent homes was 22%. So, over the same 50 years that we’ve had this Equal Pay Act, the number of black children living in a home without a father has more than tripled. And, according to Barack Hussein Obama, that is “not something to panic about or be afraid about.” Why? Because, that was the goal. That was the intended victory sought when Liberals pushed on us the “The War on Poverty.” The war was not to defeat poverty, but to secure in the American culture a permanent, government-dependent underclass. To ensure that a large swath of the American electorate looked to Government as parent, husband, provider. And that is a “sign of the progress and strides we’ve made” according to Obama. Believe it or not. Obama was actually speaking the truth. For Liberals that is progress. For Liberals undermining the family is making great strides in the conquest of our nation. Liberalism needs to destroy its enemies. And a well-defined family unit is one of Liberalisms enemies. Because the family is at the heart of the civil society. This explains the War on Poverty. This explains the push to permit homosexuals to “marry” each other. This is explains the fight to make available over the counter an abortion pill to girls of any age — thereby removing parental consent. This explains the desire to see our children as “part of the collective” and getting away from the “notion that your children belong to you.” The family is a target.

You can bet Obama, Holder and Sharpton won’t be addressing the root of the problem today in their faux “meetings about Ferguson.”

Because black violence works for them.

Black lives matter?

Not to Obama.

Certainly not to Sharpton.

What matters to these charlatans is Fundamental Transformation by way of societal collapse.

This weekend, I read the most outstanding piece about Ferguson from Voddie Baucham — the pastor at Grace Family Baptist Church in Spring, Texas. I’d like to close by quoting from his article “Thoughts on Ferguson:”

As a father of seven black men, I tell them to be aware of the fact that there may be times when they may get a closer look, an unwelcome stop, or worse. However, I do not tell them that this means they need to live with a chip on their shoulder, or that the world is out to get them. I certainly don’t tell them that they need to go out and riot (especially when that involves destroying black-owned businesses). I tell them that there are people in the world who need to get to know black people as opposed to just knowing “about” us. I tell them that they will do far more good interacting with those people and shining the light of Christ than they will carrying picket signs. I tell them, “Never avenge yourselves, but leave it to the wrath of God, for it is written, ‘Vengeance is mine, I will repay’” (Rom. 12:19). And I tell them that there are worse things than suffering injustice. That is why we must heed Peter’s words: But in your hearts honor Christ the Lord as holy, always being prepared to make a defense to anyone who asks you for a reason for the hope that is in you; yet do it with gentleness and respect, having a good conscience, so that, when you are slandered, those who revile your good behavior in Christ may be put to shame. For it is better to suffer for doing good, if that should be God’s will, than for doing evil. (1 Pet. 3:15–17) In the end, the best lesson my children can learn from Ferguson is not that they need to be on the lookout for white cops. It is far more important that I use this teachable moment to remind them that “God is not mocked, for whatever one sows, that will he also reap” (Gal. 6:7). Moments before his death, Michael Brown had violently robbed a man in a store. A man doing the best he could to make a living. Minutes later, Brown reaped what he sowed, and was gunned down in the street. That is the sad truth. My sons have far more to fear from making bad choices than they have to fear from the police. The overwhelming majority of police officers are decent people just trying to make a living. They are much more likely to help you than to harm you. A life of thuggery, however, is NEVER your friend. In the end, it will cost you . . . sometimes, it costs you everything.

I encourage you to click the link and check it out. It is worth the few moments of your day it will take to read the entire piece.

Tell me.

Wouldn’t it make much more sense to tell Al Sharpton to go home to New York and pay his damn taxes while inviting Voddie Baucham to the White House?

At least then you will have a genuine pastor who really believes black lives matter meeting with the President instead of a tax cheat and crook responsible for tens of millions of dollars in property damage, hundreds of lives and businesses ruined, not to mention human lives snuffed out all in some perversion of “justice?”

—

Diann Russell is the author of

RANT 2.0: Even More Politics & Snark in the Age of Obama,

Liberals Gone WILD!!! The Not-So-Silent Conquering of America,

RANT: Politics & Snark in the Age of Obama,

and two novels: Sliding Home Feet First and Under the Cloud

REMINDER: All my political commentaries are on sale through Christmas Eve if you purchase them from smashwords.com

RANT 2.0: Even More Politics & Snark in the Age of Obama is only $2.99 using coupon code PH62S

Liberals Gone WILD!!! The Not-So-Silent Conquering of America is only $4.99 using coupon code CA35N

RANT: Politics & Snark in the Age of Obama is only $1.99 using coupon code FC24V

All Diann’s books are also available at Amazon Kindle Store, Apple iTunes, and Barnes & Noble Nook Store.

Diann is the owner of DiannyTees.com — a Conservative & Christian T-shirt Store, and is a social media content contributor for #RedNationRising.

She is a political dissident residing in The People’s Republic of New York.

Follow Diann on Facebook

Follow Diann on Twitter: @DiannyRants

Buy your Conservative & Christian T-shirts from DiannyTees.com