AUE: FAQ excerpt: "God rest you merry, gentlemen"
If you have any comments about the closure, please post them to the newsgroup.

See IMPORTANT NOTICE: This site is scheduled for closure in September 2016.If you have any comments about the closure, please post them to the newsgroup.See this page for information about the newsgroup and how to post to it. "God rest you merry, gentlemen" by Mark Israel [This is a fast-access FAQ excerpt.] Ruhe); the latter is from Old French rester from Latin restare from re-="back" + stare="stand". Some dictionaries connect "rest" as in "rest you merry" with "rest"="remainder" rather than "rest"="repose". So "God rest you merry" would mean "May God keep you (or make you and keep you) merry." Semantic leakage from "rest"="repose" would explain why we never see uses like "rest agitated" or "rest you sad." People sometimes wonder whether "rest you merry" should be "rest you merrily". Rest assuredly that it shouldn't. :-) The song is now widely misunderstood as being addressed to "merry gentlemen", first because this use of "rest" is now obsolete except in the phrases "rest assured" and "rest easy", and secondly because the familiar tune supports that stress pattern. A tune "once ubiquitous in the West Country" of England and that better supports the stress pattern of "God rest you merry, gentlemen" is given in The Oxford Book of Carols (by Percy Darmer et al., Oxford, 1928) and can be heard in The Carol Album, conducted by Andrew Parrott (EMI, 1990, 0777-7-49809-2-0). The other dispute about this phrase is whether the pronoun should be "you" or "ye". In the references to the song retrieved by AltaVista, "ye" outnumbers "you" by 5 to 1. Traditional grammarians would prefer "you", since the pronoun is the object of the verb "rest" and hence should be in the accusative. Although there was some historical use of "ye" in the accusative (e.g., Thomas Ford's madrigal "Since first I saw your face I resolved / To honour and renown ye"), in the prestigious English of the King James Version of the Bible, "ye" was always nominative and "you" was always accusative. (This is counter-mnemonic, since "thou" was nominative and "thee" was accusative.) The Oxford Book of Carols quotes the words from a broadsheet published circa 1800 as: "God rest you merry gentlemen". In A Christmas Carol (1843), Charles Dickens wrote: "The owner of one scant young nose [...] stooped down at Scrooge's keyhole to regale him with a Christmas carol: but at the first sound of 'God bless you, merry gentleman! May nothing you dismay!' Scrooge seized the ruler with such energy of action, that the singer fled in terror [...]".