AMVETS National Headquarters
About Us

AMVETS (American Veterans) is the nation’s most inclusive Congressionally-chartered veterans service organization, representing the interests of 20 million veterans. AMVETS is open to and fighting for all who honorably served in the United States military, including the Reserve and Guard. With more than 250,000 members nationwide, we are veterans serving veterans.

AMVETS Mission Statement: To enhance and safeguard the entitlements for all American Veterans who have served honorably and to improve the quality of life for them, their families, and the communities where they live through leadership, advocacy and services.

AMVETS Charities participates in the Combined Federal Campaign through the Military, Veterans and Patriotic Services Organizations of America federation. Our Combined Federal Campaign number is 10519.

As one of America’s leading veterans service organizations for more than 75 years, AMVETS has a proud history of assisting veterans and sponsoring numerous programs that serve our country and its citizens. Membership in AMVETS is open to anyone who honorably served, or currently serving, in the U.S. Armed Forces, including the National Guard and Reserves.

The helping hand that AMVETS extends takes many forms:

Veteran Services

One of the most visible is our network of trained national service officers (NSOs) accredited by the Department of Veterans Affairs. Funded by the AMVETS National Service Foundation, these dedicated men and women can be found in close to 50 states, providing sound advice and prompt action on compensation claims at no charge to the veteran. In one recent year alone, AMVETS national service officers processed more than 74,000 claims,

Our Programs – AMVETS in Action

Our programs, from the local to national levels, deliver our promise of preserving freedoms secured by America’s armed forces. This culminates in exciting and effective programs serving veterans and our Nation’s citizens, enhancing their quality of life.

At the national level, AMVETS annually awards Scholarships to deserving high school seniors, J/ROTC students, veterans, and service members pursuing a higher education. Scholarships are also offered at many of the AMVETS’ Posts and Departments.

We honor our veterans while they are with us through the Veterans Affairs Voluntary Service (VAVS), the largest volunteer organization in the federal government, and after they have passed on, through Military Funeral Honors.

When it comes to helping our veterans, our AMVETS’ members really step up to the plate. Each Post has their own personality and it shows in their veterans’ outreach efforts.

Through the White Clover Program, our members can connect with their local communities, collecting donations to support and assist local veterans in need.

At all levels, AMVETS has dedicated itself to shining a light on those veterans and service members who are at risk of ending their own lives. Together, our members form a passionate group to fight against and prevent veteran suicide through the Veterans’ Suicide Awareness Program.

To talk to someone NOW: Veterans Crisis Line, 1-800-273-8355 (press 1).

Check with a local Post for information on Post and Department activities.

Your Voice in DC

Over the years, AMVETS has been at the forefront of public policy related to national defense, services for homeless veterans, adequate funding for the Department of Veterans Affairs, concurrent receipt of retirement pay and disability compensation by disabled military retirees, veterans employment and training, POW/MIA accountability and flag protection.

Apart from these initiatives, the organization has monetarily supported national monuments such as the USS Arizona, the Statue of Liberty and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. It also sponsors its own carillon program to honor America’s deceased servicemen and women. Since 1949, when President Truman dedicated the first carillon at Arlington National Cemetery, this program has grown to encompass more than 60 sites in the United States and overseas.

Another tribute unique to AMVETS is the Silver Helmet Award, often referred to as the Veterans Oscar. A replica of the World War II GI helmet, this prestigious award is presented annually to recognize excellence and achievement in Americanism, defense, rehabilitation, congressional service and other fields.

AMVETS National Headquarters – Family

AMVETS National Headquarters is located in Lanham, Md., a suburb of Washington, D.C. AMVETS’ operations worldwide are administered through the Office of the National Commander and six departments: administrative, finance, human resources, legislative, membership, programs, communications and service. The bulk of the organization’s work with veterans and communities is focused in three of these—legislative, programs and service. We also have our posts and departments organized by state with websites and e-mail addresses listed for those that have them. Finally, listed below are our affiliate organizations. Not all of them have websites, but those that do, we invite you to visit.

AMVETS National Service Foundation

The National Service Foundation (oftentimes referred to as simply “the Foundation”) is the fund-raising arm of AMVETS. A corporate subsidiary of the parent organization, it funds a variety of programs benefiting America’s veterans and their communities. Among them is the National Service Officer Program, the Memorial Carillon Program, the Americanism Program, AMVETS scholarships, youth programs and hospital projects.

www.amvetsnsf.org

AMVETS Ladies Auxiliary

The Ladies Auxiliary is a subordinate national organization of AMVETS whose members (female veterans or relatives of AMVETS) provide a range of services and support to veterans, communities and other nonprofit organizations such as Paws With a Cause, the John Tracy Clinic and Freedoms Foundation.

www.amvetsaux.org

Sons of AMVETS

The Sons of AMVETS, as its name implies, is a nationwide organization comprised of the sons of American veterans who are members of AMVETS. The Sons play an active role in promoting AMVETS’ legislative agenda, providing services to hospitalized veterans and supporting charitable initiatives.

www.sonsofamvets.org

AMVETS Riders

The AMVETS RIDERS are a dedicated and patriotic group of motorcycle riders who hold true to an unwavering respect for our Nation, our Flag, and our Military… past, present and future. The Riders are committed to the freedom of this Nation, to provide community service and fellowship, and to preserve and support the aims and goals of the AMVETS National Organization.

www.amvetsridersnational.org

Junior AMVETS

Junior AMVETS are the sons and daughters (under age 18) of AMVETS members. As a nationwide organization, “the Juniors” (as they are sometimes called) undertake projects—such as visiting a homeless shelter—that benefit veterans and communities alike.

Sad Sacks

A fun-making and honor organization comprised of AMVETS members, the Sad Sacks (who derive their name from the famous cartoon character of World War II) provide, as their chief community service project, scholarships for nurses.

Sackettes

The Ladies Auxiliary counterpart to the Sad Sacks, the Sackettes also raise funds for nurses’ scholarships.