How eating just two hot cross buns could see you FAIL a breathalyser test
MOTORISTS could find themselves hot water after enjoying a couple of hot cross buns, according to a new video.

Just two of the Easter treats could give a false positive reading for alcohol in breath tests, even if the driver hasn't touched a drop.

3 An Aussie trucker has revealed how eating hot cross buns could give a false positive reading on a breathalyser

An Aussie trucker demonstrated how the baked good affects breath readings in an online video.

The woman first blew into a hand-held breathalyser and showed it produced a 0 blood alcohol level (BAL) reading as a control test.

She then took a bite of a hot cross bun and tried the test again on the same machine.

This time the screen showed a reading of 0.018 - meaning just two buns would probably produce a result of more than the UK legal limit of 0.08.

3 After taking just one bite of the tasty treat she went from blowing a 0 blood alcohol level to a reading of 0.018

Alamy 3 The yeast and fruit in the buns can cause breath to register a high alcohol level despite no drink having been taken

She told followers of the Facebook page for female truckers in Western Australia: “So, be really careful this Easter.”

Several other foods would also produce a reading like this, but return to zero a few moments later.

A false positive would be quickly registered at the follow-up test at a police station, but could be an ordeal for an unsuspecting motorist.

MOST READ IN WORLD NEWS Warning SAVED BY FACEBOOK Girl, 6, who saw dog eat dad's face rescued after she posts pics online ANGRY ANGRY HIPPO Raging hippo ambushes fisherman and savages him for ten minutes in Kenya TAKE HER AWAY Evil mum films herself slapping and smothering baby to hurt estranged husband 'ATTACK ON OUR FAITH' Belgium bans halal and kosher slaughter sparking furious backlash IN HIDING? Conspiracy theorist claim secret tape features The King admitting he faked death CYCLOPS CALF Deformed baby cow born with one eye and no nose sparks a frenzy in India READY TO SNATCH Chilling moment woman stalks hospital ward before snatching newborn my HELL I was kidnapped & forced to sleep with 20 men a night as Amsterdam teen sex slave SHEER LUNACY Conspiracy theorist claim super wolf blood moon is sign 'apocalypse is coming' PRISON JUSTICE Leader of global child abuse images ring battered to death in prison

The reading is given because the yeast used to make the buns turns into alcohol in the digestion process, and the fruit contains trace elements of alcohol.

One commenter recalled how she was hauled down to the cop shop after eating a piece of tiramisu minutes before encountering police.

She said: “I had literally just opened it and taken a mouthful before I came across the bus. It was still sitting on the seat.”