Senator Elizabeth Warren likens an abortion to getting your TONSILS YANKED, because population control freaks think human babies in the womb are just worthless tissue

Socialism is just Communism wrapped up in “free stuff” the government hands out in exchange for the majority of your income and the removal of your rights to free speech, free press, and gun ownership. Socialists also want to do away with the middle class in America, and that means making sure pregnant women see no value in the living being in their womb, so they will have it extinguished and removed like a rotten tooth or infected tonsils, and a future “burden on society.”

That’s exactly why the lying, cheating Senator from Massachusetts, Elizabeth Warren, who robbed the system by falsely claiming to be Native American, wants everyone to believe that a living, thinking, feeling human in the womb is really just a worthless empty vessel and a useless carcass that needs to get yanked out and thrown in a dumpster like biomedical waste.

That’s also why fake Native American “Liz” claims abortions are safer than having your tonsils removed , even though that’s a flat-out lie. It’s all just propaganda spread by worthless Democrats whose insidious agenda runs deep, including population control through abortions, mass forced vaccinations, and gun confiscation so nobody can defend what’s left of their families.

Every abortion is the execution and extermination of an innocent, unique human life, and that’s just what the Democrats are ordering

Many people who support abortion do so because hardly a woman who gets pregnant from rape or incest wants to have that baby, and that certainly makes sense. Planned Parenthood, on the other hand, is a great con, because it’s not about helping people plan a family, as the name implies, but rather it’s all about killing as many minority babies as possible before they ever exit the womb.

If you’re planning a family and searching for resources on healthy living and organic parenting advice, you should first turn to successful moms (and dads) who really care. There’s an amazing collection of over 100 blogs called Mamavation that will help you stay on a healthy, compassionate path.

Risks associated with abortion complications run HIGH, and it’s nothing at all like having your tonsils out or a tooth pulled

There are serious and dangerous short-term and long-term complication risks associated with abortion surgery, and Elizabeth Warren and other genocidal eugenicist freaks like her do NOT want anyone doing any research to find out. All complication risks increase with advancing gestational age of the baby, and though first trimester abortions are not quite as risky, make no mistake, they can still be deadly and kill the mother along with the baby.

Pelvic infection comes from bacteria from the cervix or vagina (or dirty surgical instruments ) entering the uterus during the abortion suction procedure. Some forms of this bacteria are immune to antibiotics, especially in unkempt U.S. hospitals that breed MRSA superbugs.

Incomplete abortions happen when fetal parts aren’t totally removed from the uterus, resulting in bleeding and deadly infection. The rate of this happening can be as high as 35 percent in America, where healthcare is often haphazard and most clinics’ hygiene resembles third world hospice conditions.

Blood clots can occur in the uterus, resulting in severe cramping and life-threatening conditions for the would-be mother. Heavy bleeding is also not uncommon following an abortion, including hemorrhaging. This could require an immediate secondary surgery and repeat suction curettage.

The opening of the mother’s uterus can get cut or torn while it’s being violently stretched with medical instruments. Some women also suffer from a perforation of the uterus wall, which can lead to a deadly infection and heavy bleeding. Surgery is then required to repair the uterine tissue, and a hysterectomy, at that point, may be required. Population control Democrats are well aware of this “side effect” by the way. After all, ending fertility is the ultimate goal of all abortion promoters.

Long-term complications from abortion surgery are very scary

The previous complications were all mostly short-term complications, be it serious ones at that. Now let’s review some long-term risks and complications commonly associated with human baby-in-the-womb exterminations.

Any abortion that becomes complicated by infection can make it more difficult for the mother to carry a future pregnancy to term. Having several abortions can eliminate the possibility of having children altogether.

Some women suffer chronic, long-lasting depression after an abortion, including feelings of emptiness and guilt from being conned into killing their babies. This is Big Pharma’s chance to jump in with chemical-based depression and anxiety drugs, like dangerous and experimental SSRIs (with side effects that include feelings of suicide and committing homicide).

Political huckster Elizabeth Warren is dead wrong about abortion safety. Abortion is NEVER a safe procedure and should not have been compared to a tonsillectomy. Many mothers still die from legal, supposedly “safe” abortions.

Tune into HealthFreedom.news for updates on more ways Democratic-Socialist-Communists want to kill babies in the womb or maim them with toxic vaccines the moment they’re born. There are safe ways to build immunity naturally and plan a wonderful family without listening to propaganda from population control freaks.

Sources for this article include: