Sean Spicer on Trump’s Trip to the UK: ‘He Appreciates Her Majesty’s Gracious Invitation’
"Rest of the World laughs."

Not really concerned about impressing you. There are some countries that are wising up - Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovenia. And there are some citizens in your own countries in France, England, Germany and Austria that are waking up. They didn't have enough votes this time,

"You beat your chests, shoot guns and boast about how alpha male you are...."

Have you been looking over my fence? But seriously, I am not a male. I have never beat my chest. I never claimed to be an alpha male. And it's been a while since I shot my gun, although I do keep it loaded and ready.

"Made up war stories."

I never faced war. And just who are you accusing of making things up? John Kerry? One day after D-Day, and you make this remark. Too bad the men who died at Normandy can't rise from their graves and eat your liver. I'm glad they can't see what Europe has turned into. Saved from the Nazis to simply lay down at the feet of Muslims. And you give up your freedoms to your own globalist masters.

"You're racist."

Some people in my country ARE. I'm not. I don't believe that white people are any better than any other race. As long as someone assimilates into American culture and obeys the laws and is self supporting, I don't mind other races at all. It's what a person values that makes them a poor candidate for immigration.

If you want to hang on to a 7th Century religion, and you march around with signs that read "Sharia for Britain", "Islam Will Conquer the World" and "Behead those who insult Islam", I think you ought to be packed off back to a nation that appreciates those sentiments - even if you think you can bring in an Islamic Republic "peacefully", by out breeding and out voting the indigenous population.

I also believe that America needs to stay unique, and not an imitation of Europe. We value independence, capitalism, freedom of speech, the right to bear arms, and the government staying out of our churches. Your European conformist nanny states are alien to our culture.