NASA Now Says Burning Fossil Fuels... COOLS the Planet?! » Louder Wit…
Charles December 24, 2015 at 7:42 am

Most of these comments demonstrate a clear misunderstanding of what the climate change theory actually is and the process of gathering the absolutely overwhelming evidence in favor of it. Pointing out the fact that over 95 percent of scientists, the people that actually take time to research ideas like this, agree climate change is happening at unprecedented rates and would not be happening without humans should be enough to make the deniers actually open their minds and look at the evidence themselves. Obviously that isn’t the case so let me break down a few things for you. Reading the source article from NASA, they are talking about local conditions instead of global. The article says that around areas of industrialization the emissions can have a “temporary cooling effect”. That’s not the same as burning more fossil fuels will make the whole planet cooler. Many of you have mentioned that we have only been recording temperatures since after the industrial revolution and can’t take into account the much much longer cycles of the earth. In reality, we can measure things like sea level and atmospheric co2 concentrations retroactively,using ice cores and deep sea samples. When we look at these things we can see that, while global co2 concentrations do naturally fluctuate, it has been a stunning 650,000 years since they were over 400ppm,which we are currently at. Since 1958 a Hawaiian observatory has measured co2 and shown a steady increase. Overall temperatures have been raised by nearly one degree Celsius since the industrial revolution, which brings me to my next point; most climate change deniers don’t realize how massive of a number that really is. The excess heat energy currently trapped in our atmosphere that equates to that one measly degree is 5exajoules (5,000,000,000,000,000,000) that’s four million times more than the annual energy consumption of the United States. As I wrap this rant up I would like to direct your thoughts historical evidence that humans can absolutely impact the global environment in a short time. Many years ago a man discovered that adding a certain chemical to gasoline would stop engine knocking. That chemical was tetraethyllead. For years the auto industry said it was safe, and that the tonnes of lead being pumped into the atmosphere was negligible. Using ice cores and deep sea water samples a scientist was able to show lead concentration had dramatically risen and was a public health hazard on the global scale. The industry producing tetraethyllead wanted to keep making profits and tried to bury his work. After lengthy legal processes, we now have unleaded gasoline but lead in the air won’t return to normal levels for several generations still. Some of you mentioned that global warming is a ploy for money, but I would argue it’s much more likely the people fighting to spread dissent are motivated by money, such as the fossil fuel and auto industries. For those of you that read this wall of text, I hope at the very least you will research this topic for yourself instead of relying on misconceptions and fill in the holes of your understanding. This is a problem that will impact future generations much more than ours. Thank you for reading and be ever vigilant in fact checking audacious claims.