Major NASCAR Sponsor Asks Fans Who Agree With Donald Trump To Shop Elsewhere Major NASCAR Sponsor Asks Fans Who Agree With Donald Trump To Shop Elsewhere 00:00 / 00:32 Advertisement Advertisement 00:52 Massachusetts Engine... Massachusetts Engineering Student Wins Job With Renault F1 Team In U.K. 00:47 It’s Official: Alex ... Hendrick Motorsports announced Thursday Alex Bowman will drive the No. 88 car when Dale Earnhardt Jr. rides off into the sunset. Here\'s NESN.com\'s Michaela V... 00:46 NASCAR Fantasy: Kevi... NASCAR Fantasy: Kevin Harvick A Must-Start For Overton\'s 301 00:47 Daytona Internation ... Daytona International Speedway traded in horsepower for pigskin as some NFL players took part in \"One on One Kicking\". This was the first time the speedway w... 00:45 Subaru Rally Team US... Subaru Rally Team USA Breaks Course Record In Mount Washington Hillclimb 00:42 Matt Lowinski-Loh Wi... Matt Lowinski-Loh Wins NWAAS Late Model In Thompson Speedway 00:46 Brent Gleason Wins N... Brent Gleason Wins NWAAS Limited Sportsman In Thompson Speedway 00:43 Wayne Burroughs Jr. ... Wayne Burroughs Jr. Wins NWAAS Mini Stock In Thompson Speedway 00:40 The Track Bar Shorts... The Track Bar Shorts Why Is \'Quaker State\' 400 In Kentucky 00:45 The Track Bar: Joey ... The Track Bar Joey Logano Too Good Not To Win Again This Season Paste this HTML code on your site to embed. COMING NEXT Major NASCAR Sponsor Asks Fans Who Agree With Donald Trump To Shop Elsewhere

Marcus Lemonis invites customers to take their RV and outdoor needs elsewhere.

Close followers of NASCAR know Lemonis, CEO of Camping World, is a major player in the sport. His brand is the title sponsor of the truck racing series, while its subsidiary Overton’s has sponsored multiple races and cars this season. With that in mind, NASCAR chairman Brian France — a vocal Donald Trump supporter — might want to watch his words.

Amid the flood of CEOs rushing to distance themselves from Trump after the U.S. president’s wishy-washy denunciation of white supremacy last weekend, Lemonis on Wednesday appeared on CNBC’s “Power Lunch,” where he seemed to suggest he wouldn’t be shattered if people who supported Trump’s comments decided to shop elsewhere.

“There’s no doubt that there is probably not many consumers in this country today that are in favor of what has been said in the last couple days — and if they are, frankly, don’t shop at my business,” Lemonis said, per CNBC.com.

He added that he was “horrified” by the things recently said and done by the White House.

Lemonis hasn’t been shy about criticizing Trump and France for their political views in the past, either. He ripped France for endorsing Trump at a rally during last year’s presidential election, and forced NASCAR to move its postseason truck series banquet from Trump National Doral Miami resort in 2015 after he threatened not to attend.

Thumbnail photo via Matthew O’Haren/USA TODAY Sports Images