KATIE HOPKINS on Swedish migrant gangs
Published: 01:07 BST, 3 March 2017 | Updated: 11:12 BST, 3 March 2017

There's been a complaint about my first report from Sweden.

A reader is very angry because I suggested the child raped by a 45-year-old migrant (posing as an unaccompanied minor) was 14.

In fact, he was 12.

This is the state of liberalism today. So determined to prove I am wrong, my observations erroneous, the stories I have on tape inaccurate, that it has lost all sight of the raped migrant child crumpled in the corner.

Similarly, the 'we know better brigade' are so puffed up with smug self-importance as they point out Trump got his dates confused over the troubles in Sweden, they can’t see past their own chest to the riots in Rinkeby.

Katie Hopkins meets with Mattias Karlsson, the group leader in parliament for the Swedish Democrats

Where cars were set alight, shops looted and shopkeepers beaten while youths went on the rampage.

I asked Mattias Karlsson, leader of the Swedish Democrats - currently leading in the polls - why other politicians refuse to acknowledge the problems right in front of their eyes.

He explained that to accept there is a problem would mean accepting nearly 80 years of liberal thinking was wrong. That multiculturalism doesn't work, that mass immigration does not lead to integration, that Sweden has made a big mistake.

A stranger came up to me in a coffee shop to say much the same thing. She had read my first report. She implored me to shout louder.

She said Sweden cannot go on pretending it is some kind of utopia. That it is on a path to fail, that her friends fear Sweden is being overwhelmed.

The fears are real. The areas migrants inhabit have become sink suburbs, riddled with no-go zones, even for the police, where hand-grenade attacks are the accepted norm, women stay indoors, and the ambulances and fire engines need police escorts. God help any good people forced to live here.

Katie meets with Group Commander Fredrik Liljegren, who heads up Kista Fire Station. His is the toughest fire station in Sweden, dealing with the highest incident rate in the country

I met with Group Commander Fredrik Liljegren who heads up Kista Fire Station. His is the toughest fire station in Sweden, dealing with the highest incident rate in the country.

Four members of his team work full time to help migrant children understand why it is important to let these crews do their work. Not to throw rocks at the vehicles. Or slash their tyres. Or cut the hoses.

These feel like lessons in humanity, sadly lacking in this place.

I asked Mattias whether he thought these suburbs would end up being walled off, like mini-Mexicos, in an effort to contain the problem.

He told me it was more likely that gated communities would spring up — walls of another sort, to keep the bad out and protect those within, but no less depressing and divisive.

Here at the fire station he is not wrong. A reinforced fence is being built all the way around the premises to try to prevent break-ins. Five cutting tools have been stolen from this station alone — whilst the vehicles were in the station.

This is what multiculturalism looks like in 21st-century Sweden. I am stunned the moral bar has never fallen so low.

Five cutting tools have been stolen from this station alone — whilst the vehicles were in the station

Four members of Fredrik's team work full time to help migrant children understand why it is important to let these crews do their work. Not to throw rocks at them or slash their tyres

Still no one dares address the sharp rise in violent crime — stabbings, grenade attacks, automatic-weapon fire, violent rapes, the sorts of crime which terrorise communities.

Except one, Peter Springare, a police officer with 42 years of policing Sweden under his belt.

I went to meet him at his police station in Örebro to ask why he spoke out, in a place where silent acceptance seems mandatory.

He posted on Facebook, 'here we go; this is what I've handled from Monday to Friday this week: rape, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, rape-assault and rape....violence against the police, threats to police, drug crime, felony, attempted murder, rape again.

'Suspected perpetrators; Ali Mohammed, Mahmod, Mohammed, Mohammed Ali, Muhammad, again, again, again. Countries representing all the crimes this week; Iraq, Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Syria, Afghanistan, Somalia, Somalia, Syria again, Somalia...

Peter Springare, a police officer with 42 years of policing Sweden under his belt, wants politicians to acknowledge there is a problem with immigrant criminals

Predictably, the left rushed in to call him a racist, calling him a Nazi, a xenophobe.

But if they listen, they'd hear he is surprisingly positive about the benefits of controlled migration. And does not believe in deporting criminal immigrants. He just wants politicians to acknowledge there is a problem with immigrant criminals.

He is clear about their intent to overload the police and overturn the Swedish justice system. He believes if this continues, Sweden will become a lawless country.

I think back to my 48 hours in Rinkeby. There, I wonder if the battle has already been lost. I watched American journalists flee under police escort from where I stood, frightened off by the masked gangs who control this turf.

I followed up on the riots last week. Not a single arrest was made.

After Peter's Facebook post, in which he drew attention to the volume of crimes allegedly perpetrated by migrants, he was branded a racist, a Nazi, a xenophobe

I spoke to residents who know burglaries will not be attended, rapes not prosecuted, car fires accepted with a shrug, pepper spray banned in case your rapist is hurt.

Gangs here have rewritten the relationship between crime and punishment. They have gained the upper hand. And they know it. For them, justice is delivered with guns or knives, dominance asserted by unbuttoning their fly.

But the only response the government know is to try to silence people like Peter. To pretend the problem away.

The establishment tried to make a case against him for 'inciting racial hatred'. But that fell apart. Now they are trying to make 'hacking police files and dereliction of duty' stick.

He will not be silenced. Nor will the stranger in the coffee shop who urged me to keep speaking out. Or the Swedish Democrats determined to force this debate into the centre ground. Or the victims of violent rape who don't care if you think the sexual assault graph is going up or down.

They share a single message; Sweden cannot begin to solve its problems until it starts talking about them.

I'd ask the politicians to step away from the pretty bits which look like the Sweden I imagined. And spend time with the men and women in the dirty places in between.

Places I spent time in pretending to be brave; where a white woman is a whore, first responders are under attack, and the streets are run by gangs who do not fear the law but laugh in its face.