New York City Will Recreate The Temple Of Baal In Times Square In April
Hello Skywatcher: Geoffrey DID state that during the Tribulation people are saved by works. In that respect carrierwave is not lying here.

First off let me say I’m not referring to every thing carrierwave is saying above. This is in reference to a post on another page posted below.

It’s quite amazing that someone would believe that a person would be saved by works at any time, even in the Tribulation. Just how do works convert a carnal sin nature ??? and impute the Righteousness of Jesus Christ ??? The 144,000 will be preaching the Gospel of the Grace of God in Jesus Christ during the Tribulation. Moses and Elijah, representing the Law and the prophets, will be testifying to “types” concerning Christ found in the Law with its animal sacrifices, and in prophecy concerning Him. The Tribulation is the “Time of Jacob’s Trouble,” the time of trouble for the Jews, and the two witness will be Jews connecting the Old Testament and the New with Jesus Christ.

In Romans 11 we have this about God’s mercy to the Jews at the end of the Tribulation of 7 years. Note God’s mercy upon all at all times Jew or Gentile.

26 And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob:

27 For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.

28 As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but as touching the election, they are beloved for the father’s sakes.

29 For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

30 For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief:

31 Even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.

32 For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

Here’s the post between Geoffrey Grider and carrierwave.” that led to their post here.

carrierwave:

I don’t know which is worse–Ted Cruz King of America, or NTEB false teaching that Tribulation Saints are saved by their “works”.

Revelation 7:14-15 ..”these are they that came out of great tribulation and have washed their robes and made them white in the BLOOD OF THE LAMB. Therefore are they before the throne of God..” This is not Salvation by works, Geoffrey. REPENT.

Revelation 12:11 …”and they overcame him (satan) by the BLOOD OF THE LAMB AND BY THE WORD OF THIER TESIMONY;” This is not Salvation by works, Geoffrey, REPENT.

Revelation 20:4 ..”And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the WITNESS OF JESUS AND FOR THE WORD OF GOD,…and THEY LIVED and reigned with Christ a thousand years.” This is not Salvation by works, Geoffrey, REPENT.

Geoffrey Grider20 March 2016 at 6:07 pmLeave a Reply

LOL, Guess you didn’t read Revelation 7 closely. It says that they made their own robes white, THAT’S works. Christians in the Age of Grace don’t wash their own robes. We receive the Righteousness of Jesus Christ at salvation, with white robes made white by HIS own blood and not by our works.

And I guess you didn’t read this one at all:

“And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them.” Revelation 14:12 (KJV)

carrierwave20 March 2016 at 10:24 pmLeave a Reply

Lies, lies, lies, Geoffery, Put on your glasses. “WASHED THEIR ROBES AND MADE THEM WHITE IN THE BLOOD OF THE LAMB“. Jesus made them WHITE!..just explain to us how you can literally “wash” sin stained robes in LAMB’S BLOOD and call it works that can merit eternal life!? Hmmm???

There has never been a man or woman alive, or who has ever lived, that is not a sinner that can be saved by their works.

“There is not a just man upon the earth that doeth good and sinneth not.” (Isaiah 64:6)

Revelation 14:12 (KJV)“And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them.”

I have read this verse many, many times–Show us where it is teaching here they were “saved” BECAUSE of their works?? IT JUST DOSEN’T!! It plainly says “THAT THEY MAY REST FROM THEIR LABORS, AND THEIR WORKS DO FOLLOW THEM. Good works ALWAYS FOLLOW SALVATION–THEY NEVER MERIT SALVATION, and this verse never once even hints their labors and works SAVED THEM! REPENT, Geoffery

David Kaus26 March 2016 at 10:40 pm

Leave a Reply

You are right on the money carriewave. No one will ever get to heaven except through the Blood of the Lamb. As you have correctly stated “WASHED THEIR ROBES AND MADE THEM WHITE IN THE BLOOD OF THE LAMB“

And in Revelation 14:12 the context speaks of “the dead which die in the Lord.”

None will boast before God that they got to heaven on their own works.

Ephesians 2:9

“Not of works, lest any man should boast.”

The righteousness of Christ must be put on and not our righteousness.

Geoffrey Grider21 March 2016 at 9:38 amLeave a Reply

Jesus said in Matthew 24 that that if you wanted to be saved during the Tribulation you wold have to “endure to the end”. Enduring to the end is ABSOLUTELY works, 100%. Christians in the age of grace have no such command to endure to the end because our “end” became firmly fixed the day we got saved.

“Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost;” Titus 3:5 (KJV)

Why are works connected with salvation in the time of Jacob’s trouble? Because the Church, already taken out in the Rapture, is not here. The age of grace ENDS with the Rapture.