Delaware High School 1973: What Actually Happened!
If you google searched "Shooting at Delaware High School in 1973" in an attempt to discover the background story of this picture (above), then Congratulations you have arrived at journey's end! So allow me to present to you the truth behind this image. But so that you believe me I am going to recount for you my research journey.

Once upon an FML...just kidding

It all started with this meme featured above with its vague refence to a "Delaware high school" and an idiotic suggestion that some would-be school shooter would actually call their armed classmates to tell them that he or she was going to kill them before school starts. Which a part from being really odd was just really stupid to suggest even by 1973 standards. Also for the record NO school shooter in history has ever called the school before the attack. So I went spelunking through the backwoods of Google.





My inquiries led me to this post by Reddit user Nantan Lupan. Now if like me you decided to message him and you waited for a response before giving up. Well I waited for about a week then I concluded that the user was either dead or no longer active. So using the vague details provided by the meme I began checking the history of nearly every high school in Delaware looking for a school shooting in the 1970's and coming up empty. I even asked the Library of Congress and even they didn't have anything on the above photo. So I then went back to this post and dug through the comment history.





As I started digging I discovered the following exchange between Nantan and some other reddit users. Lupan claimed this photo was from CR and that acryonym led me to Caesar Rodney High School in Camden, Delaware. Which led me to a yearbook from 1973. After an hour of searching through the yearbook I discovered the following photo (look at the center):





JACKPOT!

Attempts to contact the user who posted the yearbook failed with no response. So I made contact with the Caesar Rodney High School Alumni class of 1973 group on Facebook.



According to members of that same group these two gentlemen were seniors Kendall Cool (on the left) and Carl Willoughby (on the right). One day in the spring of 1973 they brought out their hunting rifles for a photo-op by one of the entrances to Caesar Rodney High for the school's newspaper. The article which featured this photo was a response to rumors of bomb threats that were intruding on final exams that year. Naturally this photo made its way into the yearbook that year as well.



So please Like, Share and Follow us on Facebook

https://www.facebook.com/SchoolViolenceExpose/

So now you know the truth!So please Like, Share and Follow us on Facebook