Smoking In Cars With Children Is Illegal Starting January 30, 2018

Saturday February 3 2018 by Michele

 Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Google+ #1 No More Smoking In Cars With Children The law, that becomes effective on January 30, 2018 is to protect children from secondhand smoking. Violations would result in a fine of up to $100.

 Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Google+ #2 Thousands Of Chemicals According to the Department of Health, when a child breathes in secondhand smoke, they breathe in thousands of chemicals, just like the smoker does. This puts them at risk of serious conditions including cancer, bronchitis, and pneumonia. And it can worsen asthma.

 Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Google+ #3 All Private Vehicles The law applies to any private vehicle that is enclosed wholly or partly by a roof. It still applies if people have the windows or sunroof open, have the air-conditioning on, or if they sit in a parked car with the door open.

 Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Google+ #4 All Out Ban? This comes as the federal agency Housing and Urban Development is rolling out its nationwide ban on smoking in public housing, and just a few years after many states have outlawed smoking in beaches and public parks. This trend raises the question: Are we getting closer to prohibiting tobacco smoking altogether? And would that be such a bad thing?

 Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Google+ “In America, it’s very difficult to be simply paternalistic,” Ronald Bayer, co-director of the Center for the History and Ethics of Public Health at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health, tells Yahoo Lifestyle. American values of privacy and freedom make it very difficult to prohibit anything as mainstream as tobacco, even if it’s to save the lives of smokers. That old “nanny state” argument rears its head every time. With millions of people still addicted to cigarettes, there is also the very real fear that a ban would spawn a black market similar to what exists with illegal drugs or what happened with alcohol during Prohibition.

 Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Google+ 5. What's Next? Bayer suggests that one way to help people quit would be by tackling the problem from the supply side. “I think we would do much better to think about reducing the nicotine content, so that the addictive quality of cigarettes wasn’t as severe, and make quitting easier.” The World Health Organization’s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control established a method called MPOWER in 2008 that aims to end the “global tobacco epidemic,” which kills over 7 million people each year. The way to do this is not by banning it all at once, but instead by monitoring use and prevention, protecting citizens from second-hand smoke, offering ways to help people quit, warning people of the dangers of smoking, enforcing bans on advertising, and raising taxes on tobacco products.

If you like this blog don't forget to share it.

You are currently reading about Smoking In Cars With Children Is Illegal Starting January 30, 2018. If you've found this helpful, please share Smoking In Cars With Children Is Illegal Starting January 30, 2018 on your favorite social media site, such as Facebook, Twitter, or Google+