A major embarassment | Business, News, The Philippine Star | philstar…
For US President Donald Trump, Sen. Antonio Trillanes is a small fry, someone not worth wasting his time, a nobody.

While onboard Air Force One, Trump was reportedly asked by a reporter about Trillanes’ visit to the US and this is what the President said: “The little narco met with Senator Marco (referring to US Senator Marco Rubio).”

The reporter asked Trump if it is true that Trillanes was trying to convince him to skip the East Asia Summit scheduled in Manila on Nov. 14.

Trump responded: “Senator who? Like I said senator who? The lil narco who met Marco? Who’d he get a visa? Isn’t he wanted, doesn’t he have an arrest warrant or something?”

It has been reported that Trillanes went to the US recently to campaign for President Trump not to attend the ASEAN meetings and ultimately snub President Duterte who is hosting and leading the event.

But of course, Trillanes is denying that was the purpose of his visit, especially after his major embarrassment.

Business ( Article MRec ), pagematch: 1, sectionmatch: 1

President Trump stressed he is definitely going to Manila to meet the main guy. “A leaders’ leader, man’s man Rody, we talk from time to time, He’s the head of ASEAN right now and when you do deal, you deal with the boss.”

ADVERTISING inRead invented by Teads

According to Ambassador Marciano Paynor Jr., director general for operations of the 2017 ASEAN National Organizing Council, Trump will visit Manila for the ASEAN Summit meeting from Nov. 12-13, but will skip the East Asia Summit on Nov. 14 due to conflict of schedule.

The East Asia Summit will be attended by leaders from Australia, China, India, Japan, New Zealand, Russia, South Korea and the US.

If I were Trillanes, I would bury my head in the sand, or better disappear into thin air. How many times has he embarrassed himself for Christ’s sake? Remember his controversial interview with BBC Hardtalk news anchor Stephen Sackur during which the latter observed that Trillanes’ views on the President and his policies were out of tune and inharmonious with public sentiment?

Just to cite one embarrassing moment for Trillanes during the said interview: Sackur asked Trillanes if he was a democrat. Trillanes did not understand the question, which of course referred to whether or not the senator was a believer of democracy and the democratic processes and ideals, and he answered that he is a member of the Nacionalista Party in the Philippines.

Sackur’s question obviously was a bait. If Trillanes were a democrat, he should not have orchestrated his failed coup d’ etat because the proper way to remove a duly-elected leader is through constitutionally recognized means – like the next election or impeachment, but never an uprising.

Maybe Trillanes was thinking he could just go the US and meet Trump anytime he wants. Somebody should teach him a thing or two about diplomatic protocols.

Whether we like it or not, the world sees President Duterte as a leader. For President Trump, Digong is the main man for the Philippines.

Time to let go

Philippine Competition Commission (PCC) chief Arsenio Balisacan should know when it is time to move on to other more important matters.

After all, when you are in government, with your limited resources, you should choose your battles and fight only those that are worth fighting.

The Court of Appeals recently told the PCC, in effect, to lay its hands off the P70-billion purchase deal between the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Co. (PLDT) and Globe Telecom on one hand and San Miguel Corp. (SMC), on the other.

It will be recalled that PCC has been insisting on reviewing the deal involving the purchase of SMC’s telco assets without any legal basis. In fact, based on PCC’s own interim rules, which were in effect at the time the deal was entered into (the implementing rules and regulations of the Philippine Competition Act have not been approved at the time), the purchase agreement was considered deemed approved and all the parties had to do was simply notify the PCC about it.

But lo and behold comes Balisacan who claims that even with such rules, PCC reserved the right to review the deal. What?

In a decision promulgated Oct. 18, the CA said the acquisition is considered deemed approved by operation of law and should be recognized by the PCC, which may no longer challenge it under the Philippine Competition Act.

The appeals court also said that even if a review was in order, which in this case was not, the period allowed by the law for PCC to review the deal under the law has already lapsed.

The law provides that the total period for review shall not exceed 90 days from the initial notification of the parties.

It will be recalled that PCC ordered the pre-acquisition review and investigation of the acquisition made by PLDT and Globe of all the issuing and outstanding shares and assets of Vega Telecom Inc., a subsidiary of SMC. But PLDT and Globe insisted that the review was no longer necessary since the deal is deemed approved.

Even the National Telecommunications Commission (NTC) approved the purchase when it gave the go-signal for a co-sharing agreement between PLDT and Globe involving the acquired radio frequencies.

Before the acquisition by PLDT and Globe of SMC’s radio frequencies, they had been idle especially when they were still owned by Liberty Telecom from which SMC acquired the telco business. Now, PLDT and Globe have been using these frequencies in the 700 megahertz band for high-speed Internet services and the public is definitely benefitting from the deal. Isn’t this what PCC should be fighting for, instead of insisting on a viable third player in the Philippine telecommunications industry that is more a dream than a reality? PCC would rather that NTC “warehouse” these frequencies instead of allowing Globe and PLDT to acquire and use them, while waiting for a white knight to come.