Virginia Gov Ralph Northam Defends Infanticide: "Infant Would be Resu…
Virginia Governor Ralph Northam not only has defended Virginia Governor Ralph Northam not only has defended a new bill in the state legislature that would legalize abortions up to birth – even if the mother is dilated — he defended infanticide during a radio show today.

Northam apparently thinks it’s okay to kill a baby once the infant is fully delivered.

“If a mother is in labor…the infant would be delivered. The infant would be kept comfortable. The infant would be resuscitated if that’s what the mother and the family desired, and then a discussion would ensue between the physicians and mother,” he said.

Keep up with the latest pro-life news and information on Twitter. Follow Follow @LifeNewsHQ

This shocking video follows another one shows a Democrat legislator in Virginia introducing her bill to allow abortions up to birth. During an exchange with another legislator, This shocking video follows another one shows a Democrat legislator in Virginia introducing her bill to allow abortions up to birth. During an exchange with another legislator, Virginia House of Delegates member Kathy Tran (D-Fairfax) admits the bill does indeed allow abortions up until the last second before a baby is born

During his campaign for governor, Northam raised nearly $11 million for his campaign, including During his campaign for governor, Northam raised nearly $11 million for his campaign, including huge contributions from the abortion industry . The abortion business Planned Parenthood said it planned to spend $3 million to back Northam and it now is apparently getting it’s kickback.

Northam’s position on abortion is extreme and out of touch with most voters, according to the National Right to Life Committee – which explains why Planned Parenthood, NARAL and other pro-abortion groups wanted him in the position.

“Northam’s position is so extreme he supports abortion on demand – that’s abortion for any reason anytime during the pregnancy – and he favors using your tax dollars to pay for abortion,” said Karen Cross, political director for NRLC, previously.

Virginia Planned Parenthood spokeswoman Jennifer Allen previously called Northam a “champion” for supporting abortion on demand.