Bush Family Rushes To Hillary Clinton Side After Top UN Official Set …
World's Largest English Language News Service with Over 500 Articles Updated Daily

"The News You Need Today…For The World You’ll Live In Tomorrow."

What You Aren’t Being Told About The World You Live In

How The “Conspiracy Theory” Label Was Conceived To Derail The Truth Movement

How Covert American Agents Infiltrate the Internet to Manipulate, Deceive, and Destroy Reputations

June 23, 2016

Bush Family Rushes To Hillary Clinton Side After Top UN Official Set To Testify Against Her Found Dead

By: Sorcha Faal, and as reported to her Western Subscribers

In what a new Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) report circulating in the Kremlin today calls a “master incestuous maneuver”, the Bush Crime Family has rushed to the side of Hillary Clinton after a top United Nations official set to testify against her in a US District Court yesterday was found dead by FBI agents who were set to deliver him before a Grand Jury. [Note: Some words and phrases appearing in this report are English language approximations of Russian words and phrases having no exact counterpart.]

According to this report, former UN President John Ashe was scheduled to testify against Hillary Clinton yesterday in a New York City US District Court, but when FBI agents arrived at his Dobbs Ferry, New York, mansion he was found dead of what current UN President Mogens Lykketoft said was a heart attack—but that SVR intelligence analysts say in this report is impossible to determine prior to an autopsy being performed and medical tests conducted.

UN President John Ashe (left), Hillary Clinton (right)

Prior to his death, this report continues, UN President Ashe had been indicted by the US government for the role he played in a massive bribery scheme headed by Chinese billionaire Ng Lap Seng who over the past few decades has funneled hundreds of millions of dollars into the pockets of both Hillary and Bill Clinton—and that began in the late 1990’s with the most serious scandal in American history (known as Chinagate) when the Clinton’s transferred nearly all of America’s most sensitive technology, including but not limited to nuclear missile and satellite technology, in exchange for millions of dollars in contributions to the 1996 Clinton-Gore re-election effort and the Democratic National Committee.

Chinese billionaire Ng Lap Seng (left), Bill Clinton (center), Hillary Clinton (right)

Along with UN President Ashe and Chinese billionaire Seng being indicted for being a part of this massive bribery scheme to enrich the Clinton’s and fuel Hillary’s presidential run, this report notes, Francis Lorenzo, the ambassador to the UN for the Dominican Republic, and the top two executives for the Global Sustainability Foundation (GSF), Sheri Yan and Heidi Hong Piao, were, also, charged, all of whom had reached plea deals in exchange for their testimony against the Clinton’s and Seng—has had, likewise, UN President Ashe done just prior to his death.

Grimly to note too, this report continues, is that a “powerful indictor” that UN President Ashe was being targeted for death revealed itself this past January (2016) when Chinese billionaire Seng (currently under house arrest in his New York City penthouse) suddenly dropped his bid for a speedy trial—and which SVR analysts in this report attribute to his being given “assurances/guarantees” by the Clinton’s that once Hillary gained the US presidency he would pardoned.

And in a “power move” perfected by both the Bush and Clinton Crime families, this report says, within 7 hours of UN President Ashe being reported dead, top Bush family warhawk Brent Scowcroft declared he was throwing his Republican Party allegiance behind Hillary Clinton, and not his own parties nominee Donald Trump.

Most important to be noted about these events, this report continues, are that they are occurring in a Western government atmosphere where the rulers are now openly rebelling against their own citizens—and as best exampled by German President Joachim Gauck actually stating this past week that “the elites are not the problem, the populations are the problem”.

Even worse in the United States, SVR analysts in this report say, President Putin’s warnings to the American people that “if it’s Hillary Clinton, it’s war” and that their election is in danger of being stolen from them are being kept from these people by their countries propaganda mainstream media organs.

So bad, and dangerous, in fact, has US media propaganda become, this report continues, that nearly all of the news warning the American people about how dangerous Hillary Clinton really is has been completely censored—including an article by the internationally esteemed Australian journalist John Pilger whose 20 March article titled “A World War has Begun: Break the Silence” was censored by TruthOut.org who removed these words from it:

“Trump is a media hate figure. That alone should arouse our scepticism. Trump’s views on migration are grotesque, but no more grotesque than David Cameron. It is not Trump who is the Great Deporter from the United States , but the Nobel Peace Prize winner Barack Obama … The danger to the rest of us is not Trump, but Hillary Clinton. She is no maverick. She embodies the resilience and violence of a system … As presidential election day draws near, Clinton will be hailed as the first female president, regardless of her crimes and lies– just as Barack Obama was lauded as the first black president and liberals swallowed his nonsense about “hope”.

In one of the only “rays/wings” of light penetrating from America’s Hillary Clinton supporting propaganda media failing to tell the American people of her crimes, however, this report concludes, came recently from the radical left-wing CounterPunch news service who wrote honestly about Donald Trump and stated:

“He is the first major political figure to call for “America First” meaning non-interventionism. He not only denounces the trillions of dollars spent in wars, deplores the dead and wounded American soldiers, but also speaks of the Iraqi victims of a war launched by a Republican President.

He does so to a Republican public and manages to win its support. He denounces the empire of US military bases, claiming to prefer to build schools here in the United States. He wants good relations with Russia. He observes that the militarist policies pursued for decades have caused the United States to be hated throughout the world.

He calls Sarkozy a criminal who should be judged for his role in Libya. Another advantage of Trump: he is detested by the neoconservatives, who are the main architects of the present disaster.”

To if the people of America are able to see the truth this report doesn’t say, but one can hope that they will before all is lost—not just for them, but the entire world too.

June 23, 2016 © EU and US all rights reserved. Permission to use this report in its entirety is granted under the condition it is linked back to its original source at WhatDoesItMean.Com. Freebase content licensed under CC-BY and GFDL.

[Note: Many governments and their intelligence services actively campaign against the information found in these reports so as not to alarm their citizens about the many catastrophic Earth changes and events to come, a stance that the Sisters of Sorcha Faal strongly disagree with in believing that it is every human beings right to know the truth. Due to our missions conflicts with that of those governments, the responses of their ‘agents’ has been a longstanding misinformation/misdirection campaign designed to discredit us, and others like us, that is exampled in numerous places, including HERE.]

Memorial Day In America Takes Last Gasp, Then Dies

They Are Going To Come For You…Why Are You Helping Them?

Return To Main Page