Part Of Montreal Is Under A Boil Water Advisory After Dangerous E.coli Bacteria Found In the Water
Montreal tests water on a regular basis to evaluate the quality of the water that the residents use to cook, clean, and drink. A routine test on Saturday in Anjou revealed the presence of E.coli in the water, on a regular basis to evaluate the quality of the water that the residents use to cook, clean, and drink. A routine test on Saturday in Anjou revealed the presence of E.coli in the water, according to La Presse Other sources merely state that the water had not "conformed to standards."

The city has issued a "preventative" boil-water advisory until further notice for 2,900 residences.

TL;DR The city of Montreal found E.coli in the water in Anjou. A boil-water advisory is currently in effect between the metropolitan highway, Roi-René Boulevard, and the eastern and western boundaries of the borough.

Update: the boil-water advisory was lifted as of Tuesday afternoon.

Advertisement

Inspectors made the discovery on Saturday following a routine test. E. coli can cause infections that result in nausea, vomiting, headache, mild fever, severe stomach cramps, and watery or bloody diarrhea.

Communiqué - Avis d’ébullition d’eau - dans l'arrondissement d'Anjou, dans le secteur délimité par l'autoroute Métropolitaine, le boulevard Roi-René, la limite d'Anjou du côté de Montréal-Est et par la limite d'Anjou, du côté de Montréal (Tétreaultville) https://t.co/xznhinArX7 March 31, 2019

Though many recover from E.coli infections on their own, some infections result in hospitalizations.

Advertisement

Since the discovery of this bacteria, the Anjou borough has been under a boil-water advisory.





Plus d’info : Avis d’ébullition d’eau - Au sud du boulevard Métropolitain et à l'est du boulevard Roi-René, arrondissement d'Anjou – émis le 30/03/2019 à 20h15Plus d’info : https://t.co/pZn6dZr8lI March 31, 2019

This boil-water advisory affects the square between the metropolitan highway, Roi-René Boulevard, the limits of Anjou to the east, and the limits of Anjou to the west. This advisory affects 2,900 households, or around 9,700 people, the square between the metropolitan highway, Roi-René Boulevard, the limits of Anjou to the east, and the limits of Anjou to the west. This advisory affects 2,900 households, or around 9,700 people, according to La Presse

Advertisement

The city tested the water again on Sunday and Monday. If results come back negative, the boil-water advisory could be lifted as of this afternoon.

Stay tuned for updates.