Pope Francis: God Intstructed Me to Rewrite Ten Commandments
Rick

Wow, did you see Stephen Mansfield’s recent blog on pope Francis, Stephen said he would be conservative on the issue with gays. Obviously Francis and the Catholic Church are showing their true colors, as Francis would not dare judge a sincere ‘gay clergy’ man. The problem we have ladies and gentlemen is not so much Obama, but people like Stephen Mansfield. Stephen Mansfield is a former pastor in the Bible belt, and now he is a self proclaimed sort of statesmen, who talks to world leaders and corporations and trains their leaders? What? Why would a former Bible belt pastor write a book that helped an anti God senator win the White House? And after all of the ‘fruit’ of Obama’s first term, anti God, pro homosexual, pro Islam, anti Israel etc., etc., Mansfield updated his book and continues to speak on TV, Fox News, radio, etc., and tell Americans that our President is a (I Quote) “Liberal Chrisitan”. Folks, do you think Liberal counts as LUKEWARM? Did Jesus ever mention ‘liberal Christian’? We need to REWRITE the parable of the sower, Jesus missed the ‘liberal ground’, we have seed by the wayside, the rocky places, and thorns, and then good soil, what about the ‘liberal ground’ soil Jesus. Wow, we need to spread this NEW GOSPEL right from our former Bible belt Pastor Stephen Mansfield and preach this gospel to get those LIBERAL SOULS in the door to AVOID HELL. No need to REPENT, you can be LIBERAL, in other words, you can be pro murder like the President, and pro homosexual, and go ahead and promote the Muslim Brotherhood who is against Israel, God does not say ANYTHING in the Bible about protecting Israel anyway right????

Folks, we have a LUKEWARM church!!!!!

Recently a Church Mansfield frequently is a guest speaker with were twitting and patting themselves on the back for the uprise in Egypt of the Christians who oppose the Muslim Brotherhood. This Church is patting themselves on the back, and they are the ones who helped promote Obama along with Mansfield. Obama is the one who put the Muslim Brotherhood in power. Do you see the contradiction, our leaders are blind leading the blind. When the Church put Obama in power, they did not repent then, they were celebrating! Now they think their prayers are being heard, and it is their prayers that are driving out the Muslim Brotherhood, all the while this group of the Church is still courting Obama and false teachers like Stephen Mansfield.

We need real statesmen. Jesus would definitely judge pope Francis statement about gays. Jesus had no problem calling men ‘FOOLS’, look at Matthew 23:17. We have issues in that we have supposed statesmen who say DON’T JUDGE, and be careful to not call anyone a FOOL. Jesus said Woe to you when all men speak well of you (Lk. 6:26). The problem is we have spiritual leaders who stick their finger in the wind. Proverbs states that ‘IN the multitude of people is the king’s honor: but in the want (lack of followers) of people is the destruction of the prince (pr. 14:28). Pastors are more concerned with church growth, and followers, vs. SPEAKING TRUTH. A PROPHET does not give a lick about followers. Did Jeremiah have followers? Did Elijah approach the prophets of Baal with a bunch of understudy Jr. Prophets when we faced 850 false prophets? What about Noah, he sure had a line of church attendees to get his CD’s! A PROPHET does not mince words.

Our Pastors are become BRUTISH! They teach Replacement Theology, they have the stupidity to call Obama a Christian, and our pastors and leaders and ‘false’ prophets are “strengthening the hands of evil doers” (Jer. 23:14). Come on folks, when you have BIBLE BELT pastors write a book that puts an anti God leader in the White house, you are STRENGTHENING THE HANDS OF EVIL DOERS!. We don’t want to offend anyone, Jeremiah was not a WIMP, Jeremiah said that the King ‘Jehoikim’ was going to have the ‘BURIAL OF AN ASS’. I believe some of our false teachers and false prophets and hirelings are going to have a RUDE AWAKENING in the days ahead. They have forsaken God, and have fallen away from their duty of teaching the sheep the difference between the HOLY & PROFANE, and the difference between the CLEAN & UNCLEAN. They are BEATING the sheep, vs. FEEDING the sheep.

Thank God for this ministry, and may God’s army of His true followers rise up and be statesmen for Him!