1 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION FISCAL YEAR 2020 BUDGET SUMMARY TABLE …
58

benefits to support 1,626 FTE, an increase of $1.2 million above the fiscal year 2019 level of

$260.2 million.

Salaries and Expenses non-personnel costs cover such items as travel, rent, mail, telephones, utilities,

printing, information technology (IT) services and security, contractual services, equipment, supplies, and

other services. The total request for non-personnel activities in fiscal year 2020 is $185.6 million, an

increase of $15.8 million from the fiscal year 2019 appropriation of $169.8 million. Approximately

71 percent of the total non-personnel request is to cover Program Administration’s share of the

Department’s centralized services. The centralized services request totals $136.2 million for fiscal year

2020, an increase of $9.6 million over the fiscal year 2019 appropriation.

The overall account increase of $15.8 million is primarily needed for: (1) building modernization and

renovation activities with a goal of reducing the Department’s future rent costs and; (2) continued

improvements to the Department’s IT security to ensure the integrity of Department of Education data as

well as to prevent potential IT security breaches. The request for non-personnel activities to support

Building Modernization in fiscal year 2020 is $13.5 million; no funds were provided in fiscal year 2019.

The Department requests that the Program Administration Salaries and Expenses account be allowed the

flexibility to use the authority of the IT Working Capital Funds authorized by the Modernizing

Government Technology (MGT) Act in 2018. The authority would enable ED to transfer one year

administrative funds to an account with a three year period of availability for use on IT modernization.

The anticipated transfer amount for fiscal year 2020 is $5 million.

S TUDENT A ID A DMINISTRATION

The Student Aid Administration account provides funds to administer the Federal student aid programs

authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act. These programs, which provide funds to help

students and families pay for the cost of education and training beyond high school, are the Nation’s

largest source of financial aid for postsecondary students. This account supports functions across the

student aid lifecycle including: educating students and families about the process for obtaining aid and

student loan repayment options; processing student financial aid applications; disbursing aid; servicing

loans; collecting on defaulted loans; and ensuring enforcement and oversight of the Title IV programs.

Ensuring the smooth operation of the complex financial transactions and assisting the many participants

involved in the student financial aid programs, while safeguarding the interests of both students and

Federal taxpayers, is one of the Department's greatest management challenges and highest administrative

priorities. Primary responsibility for administering the Federal student financial assistance programs rests

with Federal Student Aid (FSA), the Office of the Under Secretary, and the Office of Postsecondary

Education.

In fiscal year 2020, FSA will provide $131 billion in new Federal student aid grants and loans (excluding

Direct Consolidation Loans) to approximately 12 million postsecondary students and their families. These

students attend over 6,000 institutions of higher education.

SAFRA ended the origination of new loans under the Federal Family Education Loan (FFEL) program.

Since July 1, 2010, all new loans are originated and serviced through the Direct Loan (DL) program

administered by the Department of Education. Although all new lending is made through the DL

program, private lenders continue to service and collect outstanding non-defaulted loans from the FFEL

portfolio, while guaranty agencies and the Department continue to service and collect loans assigned to

the Federal Government. The Department currently contracts with nine servicers to service the

Department’s portfolio of over 42 million borrowers.

The Student Aid Administration (SAA) account represents 74 percent of the Department’s total