Holistic Doctor & Family Killed
good for you Pam. Find a naturopathic doctor (Find references before you choose which one!!!) that will help guide you and help set up a program that you can work with. I'm telling you this Pam because I care about you and respect you for your decision:; my princess, my precious daughter passed away due to cancer last year. At the time we got the news about her cancer I was ignorant about this disease. I thought that the doctor that she had found and that she liked would help her fight this disease in her body. I was wrong, and much later started realizing that he did not have any solution to her healing. I had wasted much time by trusting this doctor, and this special program at MD Anderson in Houston, Texas. She only got sicker, and the excruciating pain that seared through her body cut me to pieces!

I started doing research on cancer and soon found out that cancer is a one-way-trip if you put your life in the hands of MD's! I know it sounds harsh, but that is a reality that even NCI recognized in their "secret" documents that they did not want to share with the American public. And the more chemo and radiation, the harder it is for the body to fight the cancer. Every time they (the MD's) says they beat the cancer, the harder it is to combat it when it comes back. THEY do even acknowledge that fact!

I found a surefire way to beat cancer - was not free, but effective. However, by the time I was able to convince my daughter to try it (she was so set on these doctors!!!), and convince the hospital to let us bring her home (for this alternate treatment), we only had a few days left (5) to help her. She died within 5 days, but we know it had already started beating back the cancer (it was all over her body!), inasmuch as we did an autopsy. The conclusion that the MD came to that did the autopsy, was that cancer was all over her body - including in her bones - but where it started (in the colon) there was no trace of cancer!!! And the MD could not explain it, yet we could, we knew why, and had we only had another week or two, I am convinced she would be with us today!

So decide to live Pam - and not die! That is the first very important step, say to yourself (in spite of every neysayer out there, "I will not die I want to live! Then start doing your own research, diligently(!), and don't give up! Keep looking for answers, because I promise you they are out there.

Find people that have survived cancer and who live healthy lives, free from fear. That will be very encouraging to you. Find someone, your family to be your cheer leading person or squad, that will greatly help you. Start taking charge of your disease, opposed to being a victim. And then be filled with confidence that YOU WILL FIND THE SOLUTION TO THIS! Because you will. OK Pam? I'm with you in my mind and in my heart. Then when you start your journey in a program that will bring you back to health, let me know (email address human.genome@hotmail.com) That will encourage me, that another precious life has been saved from this evil disease! If we're gonna die, which we all will someday, then let us die for a good reason ;-)! Cancer is not a good enough reason!