Keanu Reeves: Hollywood Elites Use ‘Blood Of Babies’ To Get High
Hollywood elites use “the blood of babies to get high” according to Keanu Reeves, who warns that “these people believe the more innocent the child, and the more it suffered before it died, the better the high.“

“The revelations that are coming out of Hollywood now, I’m telling you, they are just the tip of the iceberg,” Keanu Reeves said in Milan, Italy, where he unveiled three motorbikes that he designed for a company that he co-founded in 2007.

Explaining that he is “building to a future” where he is “free from Hollywood’s shackles“, the John Wick star spoke with revulsion about “the place of the child in Hollywood“.

“Children are revered, they are put on pedestals, but they are also tortured, raped, murdered, and consumed in various ways. They are currency. And I’m sad to say this practice seems to be becoming more and more open in those circles in recent years.“

Keanu Reeves, whose younger sister suffered from leukemia, finds it “inconceivable” that anybody could “be so selfish as to destroy a young person’s life for your own personal pleasure.”

“But that is the sort of person running Hollywood,” said Reeves, who donated 70% of his earnings from the Matrix trilogy to hospitals treating children with cancer. “These people are sociopaths, pure and simple.”

“They see it as the ultimate high. They say it gives them life. The more the child suffered, the more fear and hormonal adrenaline it had in its system at the time of death, the stronger the effect on the people who consume that blood. They live for this stuff.“

Find Out More > 90,244

According to Reeves, the number of Hollywood elites who engage in the ritual abuse of children and the practice of drinking their blood is not insignificant.

“Some of these guys carry around bottles of blood. They call it ‘red wine.’ But they don’t hide it.“

“From what I understand there is a supply chain that delivers young children on the regular. I’ve heard them refer to times of famine, times of feast.“

“For a long time I thought it was a joke, or coded language. I didn’t think it could be what it seemed to be,” said Reeves, who explained “but then I got invited to a well-known mogul’s mansion and he had two dead babies in his fridge. A white one and a brown one. I freaked out, I broke this guy’s things, I broke his nose.

“I called the police and they said I sounded crazy.“

Despite being one of the most bankable Hollywood stars, Reeves has remained an outsider, often giving away huge amounts of money to charitable causes, or those less well-off. His best friend, River Phoenix, died young. His wife, Jennifer Symes, delivered a stillborn child in 1999 and then died 18 months later.

Keanu has seen enough death in his life. He doesn’t want to glory in the death of babies, or participate in the sick rituals practiced by Hollywood elite.

“I just hope with all the dirt coming out of Hollywood now, people will start to wake up and realize the extent of what is going on there. People can’t be expected to take it all in at once.”

“Until then, these people will keep getting away with it.“

Keanu remains the only Hollywood star who doesn’t own a mansion, and has dedicated the last few years to developing Arch, the custom motorbike business he co-founded, stating that he sees his future “away from Hollywood“, and “working with my hands.”

“Sometimes I dream about Hollywood burning to the ground,” said Reeves.

.