SuperStation95 - SHOTS FIRED AT CAMPERS/HIKERS IN APPLE VALLEY - HOT …
SHOTS FIRED AT CAMPERS/HIKERS IN APPLE VALLEY - HOT SPRINGS, CA; ARMED TERROR CELL NEAR LOS ANGELES? COPS RESPONDED --- THEN LET THEM ALL GO !!!!

8:28 PM EDT Sunday, 27 March -- A heavily armed group of men with Middle Eastern appearance was arrested two hours ago outside Los Angeles after opening fire upon Hikers and Campers in a large State Park in the area.

THIS STORY HAS BEEN UPDATED BELOW WITH AN OFFICIAL STATEMENT FROM THE SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT

Photos taken by one of the victims of the attack have been supplied to SuperStation95 as have screen shots of MMS messages sent/received during the incident. They appear below.

No word yet from authorities about the identities or affiliation of the men arrested. The Adelanto, CA Police Department effectuated the arrests.

According to the victim/witness, there were two groups of men, about 15 per group, armed with heavy weapons, who began shouting "Allah u Akbar" and started firing. The firing allegedly lasted upwards of TWO HOURS before police were able to find callers in the vast California parkland .

When police were responding, one group of 15 or so men took-off into the hills, while the other group was captured by police.

According to one of the victim/witnesses, his cellphone GPS map indicates below where the incident took place:

Police responded and quickly made several arrests as shown in the photos below (Click Image to Enlarge):

A call to the Adelanto, CA Police Department went to the San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department and a new "twist" developed." Kathy, from that department told SuperStation95 "I checked on this and the incident was unfounded." When told we had photos of almost ten police cars and fourteen men in handcuffs, Kathy responded "You'll have to contact the Public Information Officer" and gave us an e-mail address to do so!

You're looking at the pictures; does this look "unfounded" to you?

As shown below, these men are clearly NOT Mexican or South American "migrants."

An MMS Chat log has also been made available by the victim/witness to this crime. That log, edited by the victim, appears below:

OFFICIAL STATEMENT FROM THE SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT

( Editor's Note: the short version: the cops responded, THEN LET THEM ALL GO! ! ! ! )

Deputies respond to the report of shots fired in the Deep Creek Hot Springs area of Apple Valley

DATE/TIME: March 27, 2016 / 8:25am



INCIDENT: Incident



LOCATION: Deep Creek Hot Springs, Apple Valley



SUMMARY: On Sunday, March 27, 2016, at about 8:25 am, deputies from the Victor Valley Sheriff's Station responded to reports of shots fired in the Deep Creek Hot Springs area of Apple Valley. The reporting party told the 911 operator more than 100 shots were heard and 5 to 7 subjects wearing turbans were seen in the area shooting assault rifles, handguns, and shotguns.



Due to this being a very rural location, Sheriff's Aviation assisted to conduct an area check for the alleged shooters while patrol units from the Victor Valley Station responded. The sheriff's helicopter arrived and located a group of males, 17 total, walking away from the creek carrying back packs and other items. Deputies from Apple Valley, Hesperia, and Victorville Police Stations also responded to assist.



Shortly after deputies arrived to the area the subjects were detained and searched. Several handguns, a rifle, and a shotgun were found during a search of the backpacks and bedding the subjects had been carrying. The subjects were very cooperative and were interviewed. A local FBI agent responded to assist with interviews. A records check of the subjects, their weapons, and their vehicles was completed. The records check revealed none of the subjects had a criminal history or outstanding warrants, the weapons were registered with the Department of Justice except for the rifle, and the vehicles were also registered.



Several hikers were contacted, but none of them witnessed the guns being fired. There was no evidence found that a crime had been committed by any of the subjects who were detained and they were released.



Anyone with information regarding this investigation is urged to contact Deputy S. Scranton or Sergeant D. Rodriguez at (760)552-6800. Callers wishing to remain anonymous are urged to call the We-Tip Hotline at 1-800-78-CRIME (27463) or online at



Station: Victor Valley Station



Phone No. (760)552-6800



Case No. 071601094 DATE/TIME: March 27, 2016 / 8:25amINCIDENT: IncidentLOCATION: Deep Creek Hot Springs, Apple ValleySUMMARY: On Sunday, March 27, 2016, at about 8:25 am, deputies from the Victor Valley Sheriff's Station responded to reports of shots fired in the Deep Creek Hot Springs area of Apple Valley. The reporting party told the 911 operator more than 100 shots were heard and 5 to 7 subjects wearing turbans were seen in the area shooting assault rifles, handguns, and shotguns.Due to this being a very rural location, Sheriff's Aviation assisted to conduct an area check for the alleged shooters while patrol units from the Victor Valley Station responded. The sheriff's helicopter arrived and located a group of males, 17 total, walking away from the creek carrying back packs and other items. Deputies from Apple Valley, Hesperia, and Victorville Police Stations also responded to assist.Shortly after deputies arrived to the area the subjects were detained and searched. Several handguns, a rifle, and a shotgun were found during a search of the backpacks and bedding the subjects had been carrying. The subjects were very cooperative and were interviewed. A local FBI agent responded to assist with interviews. A records check of the subjects, their weapons, and their vehicles was completed. The records check revealed none of the subjects had a criminal history or outstanding warrants, the weapons were registered with the Department of Justice except for the rifle, and the vehicles were also registered.Several hikers were contacted, but none of them witnessed the guns being fired. There was no evidence found that a crime had been committed by any of the subjects who were detained and they were released.Anyone with information regarding this investigation is urged to contact Deputy S. Scranton or Sergeant D. Rodriguez at (760)552-6800. Callers wishing to remain anonymous are urged to call the We-Tip Hotline at 1-800-78-CRIME (27463) or online at www.wetip.com Station: Victor Valley StationPhone No. (760)552-6800Case No. 071601094

Address/Location

SBSD - Headquarters

655 E 3rd St

San Bernardino, CA 92415 655 E 3rd StSan Bernardino, CA 92415

Contact

Emergency: 9-1-1

Non-emergencies: 909-387-3700

#### ----- End of Official Statement ---- ####