CDC and Special Olympics: Inclusive Health
People with intellectual disabilities (ID)—difficulty with thinking, learning, remembering, and reasoning—experience poorer access to quality health care and have poorer health outcomes than people without ID. 1 Learn how the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working with Special Olympics to improve the health of people with ID.

Although progress has been made through federal policies, such as the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), that have provided people with disabilities better access to buildings, transportation, and employment, people with disabilities continue to have differences in health outcomes compared to those without disabilities. 2 For instance, people with intellectual disabilities (ID) are more likely to have difficulty receiving quality healthcare services, often receiving fewer preventive check-ups, such as cancer screenings. 1,2 People with ID, their caregivers, and health care providers may need to work together closely to make sure long-lasting conditions (e.g. diabetes, heart disease and epilepsy), common among this population are managed successfully.

CDC and CDC and Special Olympics External have joined forces to address these challenges, break down barriers to inclusive health services and programs, challenge misperceptions, eliminate stigma, and improve the health of people with ID. Together, CDC and Special Olympics are working toward a future in which all children and adults with ID have the ability to get healthcare services throughout their lives and are included in programs that promote long-term health.

Healthy Athletes

The The Healthy Athletes External program was created by Special Olympics to help meet the health needs of their athletes during local, state, regional, national, and international events. Officially launched in 1997, Healthy Athletes events are conducted in a welcoming, fun environment, and are designed to educate athletes on how to make healthy lifestyle choices and to identify health problems that may need additional follow-up. Currently, Healthy Athletes offers health testing in eight areas:

Fit Feet (podiatry);

Fit Feet (podiatry); FUNfitness (physical therapy);

FUNfitness (physical therapy); Health Promotion (better health and well-being);

Health Promotion (better health and well-being); Healthy Hearing (audiology);

Healthy Hearing (audiology); MedFest (sports physical exam);

MedFest (sports physical exam); Opening Eyes (vision);

Opening Eyes (vision); Special Smiles (dentistry); and

Special Smiles (dentistry); and Strong Minds (emotional well-being).

Since 2002, Special Olympics has partnered with CDC to conduct approximately 1 million Healthy Athlete tests in the United States at approximately 5,000 events

Through this testing, CDC has also been able to support specialized training for more than 100,000 U.S. healthcare professionals on how to provide care for people with ID in their practices.