First Dogs Sunny and Bo
The portrait of the sixteenth president of the United States, “Abraham Lincoln,” was removed from its location at the “White Mosque” in favor of an image of the Obama’s Portuguese Water Dogs “Sunny and Bo.”

The “decision” was made by the First Lady Michelle Obama who was not “shy” in saying why she had the “portrait” removed.

“It just always bothered me, every single time I walked by it. It looks like some creepy old malnourished white guy with sunken cheeks and bad posture. That’s nothing to be proud of, and honestly it sets a bad example. It’s not like the guy has done anything for us recently anyways. He’s been dead for like what? Three hundred years now? At least with Sunny and Bo up there it makes the room a little more warm and inviting instead of some dark picture of some dead white guy.”

The new location of the “Abraham Lincoln” portrait is still to be determined but for now it will go to “storage” until a new place can be determined.

“deemed” to be glorifying “obesity” instead “anorexia” as outlined in the comprehensive initiative “Let’s Move” launched by FLOTUS. Along with Lincoln, the portraits of Arthur, Cleveland, Harrison, and Taft will also be removed because they wereto be glorifyinginsteadas outlined in the comprehensive initiativelaunched by FLOTUS.

“Who wants pictures of fat old white guys in their home anyways, it’s disturbing and I shouldn’t have to look at it” Michelle quipped in reference to the other “presidential” portraits.

What will “replace” the other portraits is still to be determined but in the mean time the Obama’s were “hanging” dogs playing cards, until something more “appropriate” can be found.

Sunny and Little Bo looking for a signal to break loose.

For those dog lovers who are interested in learning how to “French” kiss Portuguese Water Dogs, Michelle Obama released the “School of French Kissing for Dogs” video from the White Mosque archives.

For those American who have “drooling” or “slobbering” dogs take “pride” in that you not only get a “kiss” but also a “drink” at the same time.

Bon Appétit & Cheers