BOMBSHELL: Trump and Putin Spotted at Swiss Resort Prior to Election …
(Die Böhmische Therme (known as the Volmer Institute) a high-class "wellness spa" located in the Swiss Alps)

Amidst controversy that President Trump had ties with the Russian government prior to the 2016 presidential election, a shocking, yet currently unsubstantiated report comes from sources within the Alpine region of Switzerland.

According to the multiple media outlets, reports from Nathan Sjögren, a 42-year-old employee of Die Böhmische Therme (known as the Volmer Institute to US travelers) a high-class “wellness spa” located in the Swiss Alps, the then 2016 republican presidential candidate Donald Trump and Russian president, Vladimir Putin were enjoying the resort’s amenities together on the afternoon of June 25, 2016. Trump was off the campaign trail during that time for a business trip to Scotland where he took place in the opening ceremony for his newest golf course.

According to the 42-year-old Volmer Institute employee, he had taken notice of the two men, however, as someone who doesn’t closely follow foreign politics, put little merit in the sighting. Until, of course, news of the controversial ‘ According to the 42-year-old Volmer Institute employee, he had taken notice of the two men, however, as someone who doesn’t closely follow foreign politics, put little merit in the sighting. Until, of course, news of the controversial ‘ Trump-Russia Dossier ’ was heavily covered in Switzerland’s press throughout January 2017.

The ‘Trump-Russia Dossier’ is a controversial, however, unconfirmed private intelligence dossier containing allegations of misconduct and ties between Donald Trump and the Russian government authored by a former British M16 intelligence agent, The ‘Trump-Russia Dossier’ is a controversial, however, unconfirmed private intelligence dossier containing allegations of misconduct and ties between Donald Trump and the Russian government authored by a former British M16 intelligence agent, Christopher Steele , who has since gone into hiding.

Sjögren told reporters that upon seeing the dossier, he immediately made the connection between the two Presidents and felt an immense sense of guilt regarding his knowledge of possible misconduct in the 2016 presidential election.

“I couldn’t, in good conscience, keep this information to myself.”, Sjögren told press. “This is bigger than me, this is bigger than my job, and while I know I am very likely putting myself, as well as my loved ones in danger by coming forward, I don’t know that I would have been able to live with myself had I kept quiet.”

He initially leaked the information along with security cam footage of Trump and Putin’s time at the spa to several news and media outlets at the beginning of February 2017. We, along with many other news organizations have made the decision to not publicly release the footage at this time as its authenticity has yet to be determined.

Experts within the intelligence community have told reporters that the information contained within this leak is very similar to the Trump-Russian dossier – while unsubstantiated it certainly warrants further investigation.

Sjögren has told news organizations that he is unclear what Trump and Putin discussed throughout their visit to the spa, and he can only confirm that he saw the two men together. According to Sjögren, both men arrived and departed via separate private aircraft. Trump was apparently escorted out of the spa from an employee Sjögren only knows as “Lockhart”

The Volmer Institute is a well-known ‘hotspot’ for wealthy politicians and businessmen and has a nearby landing zone which according to residents is used frequently. The spa’s website states, “There is a sickness inside us. Rising like the bile that leaves a bitter taste in the back of our throats. It’s there in every one of us. Only when we know what ails us can we hope to find the cure.” The spa offers “a process for purification away from the pressures of the modern world.”

“They were basically inseparable during their time spent at Die Böhmische Therme,” Sjögren claims. “They visited our amenities together, dined together, and could be seen speaking throughout their entire visit. The content of these discussions I can only speculate, but, in light of recent allegations claiming Russia influenced America’s voting process, I felt that my knowledge of their meeting needed to be made public.

According to a previously captured Facebook post from Nathan Sjögren, he fears for his family’s safety and has fled Switzerland. Similar to the author of the Trump-Russia Dossier, Sjögren has deleted all social media accounts and is believed to be in hiding.

Image Attribute – (Screenshot Courtesy of Nathan Sjögren’s Facebook account)

The English translation of the above Facebook posts reads – “Due to the increased pressure and scrutiny I’ve received for my decision to leak information regarding my knowledge of 2 world leaders conversing at the spa I was previously employed and the repeated threats to my life that I’ve received – I greatly fear for the safety of myself and more importantly – my family. Therefore, my family is in the process of relocating and starting over in an unspecified country that doesn’t have ties with the United States or Russian government. I want to thank the thousands of individuals that have demonstrated support for me and have come to my defense – please continue to seek a cure for wellness within our corrupt nations.”

The Volmer Institute has long been surrounded by controversy, and is a common topic of discussion among seasoned conspiracy theory experts. It’s said that the institute has yearly visits from members of the Rothschild family, US presidents and an assortment of powerful businessmen. Given the types who frequent this spa, in addition to its invite-only policy, lack of social media presence, or any form of advertising, it’s easy to see how ‘The Volmer Institute’ generates rumors of being a “Secret Society” meet-up.

The institute’s owner, who goes by the name “Volmer”, has yet to respond to any press inquiries regarding Trump and Putin’s alleged visit to his spa, leaving the public to only speculate. However, it seems the fear Nathan Sjögren is experiencing for his safety is quite real.