Irma, Hurricane Jose: Mother! star Jennifer Lawrence suggests storms are nature's 'wrath' against Donald Trump
Lawrence, who is currently promoting her new film Mother! alongside Javier Bardem , appeared on Channel 4 where she spoke about everything from the film to Trump to the gender pay gap.

"It’s scary," she said in response to the interviewer’s statement that there was "an end-of-days feeling" across the world.

“You know, it’s this new language that’s forming. I don’t even recognise it. It’s also scary to know that climate change is due to human activity, and we continue to ignore it, and the only voice that we really have is through voting.”

She then suggested the recent hurricanes devastating Texas and nearing Florida may have been prompted by Trump winning the presidency.

"You know, you’re watching these hurricanes now, and it’s really hard, especially while promoting this movie, not to feel Mother Nature’s rage and wrath," Lawrence said.

"I’ve heard things and seen things on TV in my own country that devastate me and make me sick, and it’s just really confusing."

Lawrence has been a vocal critic of Trump since he launched his presidential campaign in 2015, when she said a victory by him would "be the end of the world" during an Entertainment Weekly interview.

Barbuda, Hurricane Irma – in pictures







7 show all Barbuda, Hurricane Irma – in pictures











1/7 A roof-less house in Barbuda ABS TV

2/7 A mobile network tower snapped in two by the hurricane ABS TV

3/7 The hurricane left debris strewn across the island

4/7 Rubble in the aftermath of the hurricane ABS TV

5/7 The destruction in Barbuda, as seen from an ABS TV helicopter ABS TV

6/7 As well as destroying most houses, the hurricane also left plenty of flooding ABS TV

7/7 Barbudan residents survey the damage ABS TV

She also spoke about him on the Graham Norton show in 2016 where she said she wanted an opportunity to see him and say: "Hey Trump - f*** you."

For the latest updates on the storm you can follow our liveblog

Follow Independent Culture on Facebook for the latest news, video and features