JCT Bluebook Template
80

administered and enforced by the TTB, except the taxes on imported bottled distilled spirits,

wine, and beer are collected by the Customs and Border Protection Bureau (the “CBP”) of the

Department of Homeland Security (under delegation by the Secretary of the Treasury).

Liability for the excise tax on beer also come into existence when the alcohol is produced

but is not payable until the beer is removed from the brewery for consumption or sale.

Generally, beer may be transferred between commonly owned breweries without payment of tax;

however, tax liability follows these products. Imported bulk beer may be released from customs

custody without payment of tax and transferred in bond to a brewery. Beer may be exported

without payment of tax and may be withdrawn without payment of tax or free of tax from the

production facility for certain authorized uses, including industrial uses and non-beverage uses.

The rate of tax on beer is $18 per barrel (31 gallons). 215 Small brewers are subject to a

reduced tax rate of $7 per barrel on the first 60,000 barrels of beer domestically produced and

removed each year. 216 Small brewers are defined as brewers producing fewer than two million

barrels of beer during a calendar year. The credit reduces the effective per-gallon tax rate from

approximately 58 cents per gallon to approximately 22.6 cents per gallon for this beer.

In the case of a controlled group, the two million barrel limitation for small brewers is

applied to the controlled group, and the 60,000 barrels eligible for the reduced rate of tax, are

apportioned among the brewers who are component members of such group. The term

“controlled group” has the meaning assigned to it by sec. 1563(a), except that the phrase “more

than 50 percent” is substituted for the phrase “at least 80 percent” in each place it appears in sec.

1563(a).

Individuals may produce limited quantities of beer for personal or family use without

payment of tax during each calendar year. The limit is 200 gallons per calendar year for

households of two or more adults and 100 gallons per calendar year for single-adult households.

Description of Proposal

The proposal lowers the rate of tax on beer to $16 per barrel on the first six million

barrels brewed by the brewer or imported by the importer. In general, in the case of a controlled

group of brewers, the six million barrel limitation is applied and apportioned at the level of the

controlled group. Beer brewed or imported in excess of the six million barrel limit would

continue to be taxed at $18 per barrel. In the case of small brewers, such brewers would be

taxed at a rate of $3.50 per barrel on the first 60,000 barrels domestically produced, and $16 per

barrel on any further barrels produced. The same rules applicable to controlled groups under

present law apply with respect to this limitation.

For barrels of beer that have been brewed or produced outside of the United States and

imported into the United States, the reduced tax rate may be assigned by the brewer to any