Famous Autism researcher and Doctor, Jeff Bradstreet, MD, died of alleged “self inflicted gunshot wound” to chest and found in a river.
I heard he was on the verge of or already proved that the cord blood of these children was clean. That is until,the vaccines had contaminated it. And the key to recovering the children was in that cord blood. Remember all those autopsied brains, that were from autistic children who died by accident. They were telling, an inconvenient truth.

Harvard had found, that there was indeed mercury that was in those donated autopsied brains of the deceased children. And they said, this

I wrote this a while back, hope you understand that there is nothing that these subhumans will not do to protect their money. AKA Pharma heavily invested (Golden Retirement parachutes) You want to talk murders? One phone call from AS, and all the selflessly donated Autistic brains that were dispersed through the brain bank. Are all rounded up, and then put into one freezer. With 3 fail-safes. They all 3 failed . And all that autopsied brain matter,that was telling the truth of what they were finding in them. It was purposely, was silenced!

In-fact, it was a report from Harvard that said the autopsied brains were revealing that there was Mercury being found in them. They went on to explain, that the Mercury was causing oxidative stress and that was contributing to the behavior in the Autistic. A major one, was that it was effecting the speech! So just like the Hero Dr.Wakefield had to be silenced, Those autopsied brains, that was telling a very unpopular inconvenient truth. They now, had to be silenced also.

All 3 fail safes fail, problem solved! The people who run the brain bank say that they cannot rule out foul play. Putting that in terms you might understand, they cannot rule out that it was done on purpose!

Why would AS be involved in a cover up? Because GE, Bob Wrights parent Co.

of NBC has an vested interest in Thimerosal. Heavily invested Golden Retirement Parachutes, would turn into lead over night. If the Co's involved in this scandal, were ordered to have to pay for all the Thimerosal damage.

As it is, the NVICP has abandoned their Congressionally ordered responsibility. And has laid the vaccine damaged aftermath's life long care cost, at the door step of the US. Tax payers.

Thomas Insel head of the IACC said, "this is a real increase,how we prepare a Nation for 1 million who may need significant amounts of services" He said that,80% are under the age of 18. And they are working their way through the system,like a wave!" Tidal Wave! In ten short yr's, an Mit professor with an Autistic child said she has run the numbers and come to the conclusion 1 in 2 children will be Autistic!