Gunmen kill 15, security agents rescue six women in Zamfara | The Gua…
The Zamfara Police Command has confirmed the killing of 15 persons as well as abduction and freedom of six women from gunmen in Gusau council area of the state, the News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) reports. The Zamfara Police Command has confirmed the killing of 15 persons as well as abduction and freedom of six women from gunmen in Gusau council area of the state, the News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) reports.

The force’s Public Relations Officer (PPRO), SP Muhammad Shehu, made the confirmation in a statement in Gusau. He said on Monday, there were attacks in Wonaka, Ajja, Mada, Ruwan Baure, Doka, Takoka and Tudun-Maijatau villages of Mada district in the state capital.

Shehu revealed that a woman was among the casualties while a man kidnapped along with the women.His words: “Fortunately, with the efforts of police and sister security agencies, the abducted women have regained their freedom and have re-joined their families.

“Normalcy has been restored to the affected villages, with improved deployment of PMF, CTU, Special Forces and Military teams to the area to forestall further attack on neighbouring villages.The attack is presumably a reprisal to the one on some Fulani in a J5 vehicle on February 1, 2019 where seven of them and their animals were killed and burnt by the outlawed Yansakai.”

In another development, the PPRO said that the District Head of Gwashi in Bukkuyum Local Council reported to the police that armed bandits stormed Batauna village, killing 11 persons and setting homes ablaze.He, however, said that the details were still sketchy due to distance, difficult terrain and lack of telecommunications network in the locality.

“Units of PMF/CTU/Special Forces and military were mobilised to complement the effort of security personnel already on ground and also confirm the authenticity of the report.“The entire area and environs have been subjected to coordinated bush-combing for possible arrest of the perpetrators.

“The command urges the public to avoid taking laws into their hands and always report all complaints and grievances to constituted authority for legal redress.“Discreet investigation into this dastardly act has already commenced and all perpetrators will be fished out and made to face the full wrath of the law,” the spokesman added.