What Is Causing The Peanut Allergies? | Vaccination Information Netwo…
What Is Causing The Peanut Allergies?

An epidemic of Peanut allergies has erupted in the West, especially in America but no one knows the cause. Western doctors are doing their usual, treating the symptoms, by arming children and adults with the Epipen (Epinephrine Injector). But finally enough data and many research studies reveal that it is the peanut adjuvant containing vaccines that are driving this disaster.

Since the peanut oil is injected into the blood, the body produces antibodies to this antigen. And when peanuts are consumed we see an instant reaction, some are minor like itching and throwing up, but some are life threatening like anaphylactic shock. Again and again we can see vaccine manufacturers playing Russian roulette with our children’s lives for petty profit. Until the people boycott all vaccines, these allergies will keep rising with no end in sight.

Subscribe to the VINE Youtube Channel

The video transcript is below:

Peanut allergies are a modern phenomenon. If you look back through the medical journals and literature from the past centuries, you can’t find references to peanut allergies. It wasn’t until the 1990’s when it was first being seriously discussed in the medical journals, and the mid 90’s when newspapers first started publishing major articles to inform the public.

But each decade since then, the portion of the population allergic to peanuts has been steadily growing. There have been numerous studies published in the medical journals which show the rates of peanut allergies of US children skyrocketed by around 300% in the decade crossing the millennium, which matched with rates seen in other western countries, including the UK, Canada, and Australia.

Within the last decade, the peanut allergy rates in US schoolchildren have continued to rise at a similar level, with a recent study from last year in 2014, published in The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology , showed that 5% of children are now allergic to peanuts.

The situation is now so bad that peanut allergies are all of a sudden the No.1 cause of death from food reactions. We have peanuts being banned in schools throughout the western world, and a large portion of children have to carry life-saving devices such as the Epi-pen with them at all times.

How bad does it have to get before serious action is taken? I mean, if basically nobody had a peanut allergy 100 years ago, and now 5% of the population in the modern world suffers from this condition, isn’t it time somebody found out the cause? Well, it turns out they have. The problem is in the vaccines. Shhhhh, the government doesn’t want you to know this.

One of the components of a vaccine is an adjuvant, which is a substance added to the vaccine in order to enhance the bodys immune response. Although the reasoning is flawed and has been debunked, the vaccine manufacturers believe that if they stir up the immune system and kick it into action to protect the body against something else, then it will have more of effect against the disease they are trying to vaccinate against.

So apart from the actual vaccine, they deliberate inject you with something known to be harmful to the body, because they think that will make the vaccine work better. And the more harmful the substance is, the more the immune system reacts, and the more powerful the vaccine will be, so they believe.

Many different substances have been used as adjuvants over the last 100 years, and the scientists have been constantly on the lookout for more dangerous substances which produce extreme immune reactions in the human body, until one day they stumbled upon a substance that delivered the kind of deadly reaction they were looking for: Peanuts.

Peanuts were first used as an adjuvant in vaccines in the mid-60s. We know this because the startling admission was made in the New York Times on 18 Sep 1964 , where the author described how a newly patented ingredient including peanut oil was being added to the flu vaccine as an adjuvant in order to ‘enhance the vaccines strength’. Peanut oil became the model for subsequent vaccines, and by the 1980s it had become the preferred adjuvant for the manufacturers.

Today, peanut oil is a common trade secret ingredient used in vaccine adjuvants. They claim it as a trade secret so their competitors wont ‘steal their vaccine formulas’, but in reality they do it so they don’t have to list it as an ingredient, in the hope that the unaware public wont realise it is the cause. In fact, only about 40% of the ingredients are ever listed on the vaccine packaging, as the laws just don’t enforce it. We know it’s being used because it is sometimes mentioned in the medical journals who publish studies on the vaccines , and get access to a more complete list of ingredients.

Peanut oil is not used exclusively. Different manufacturers, different vaccines, different batches destined different countries, use different oils in adjuvants. Common ones are oils from other nuts, sesame seeds, soy beans, and seafood, which surprise surprise, we also see increasing rates of allergies to. By 6 months of age, children may be exposed to up to 16 different mixes of oils in the vaccines.

But it’s not just the adjuvant that uses peanut and other oils, they are also used in the culture medium. And since they are generally not added as a primary ingredient in either the culture medium or the adjuvant, the amount of oil contained in a single vaccine can vary widely from batch to batch, or even dose to dose, which is why not all children develop peanut allergies. It’s Russian roulette, and if your child lives in the west and you vaccinate them, they have a 5% chance of being “vaccinated” with a life threatening peanut allergy.

Now you might notice that I keep mentioning the west, and western countries. The reason for that is that I can’t mention most of the rest of the world, because the problem doesn’t really exist there. In areas where they either refuse vaccinations, and rightly so, or where uptake of vaccines is low, the rates of peanut allergies are also either low, or non-existent. And we see the exact opposite in the west, where the increase in the numbers of vaccines in the childhood vaccination schedules runs parallel with the increases in cases of peanut allergies.

So whether this is because other countries are using different oils as adjuvants, or avoiding getting vaccinated, it doesn’t really matter. The point is, they are not suffering from peanut allergies because they are not injecting peanut oil into their bodies. Humans are unable to handle intact proteins being injected straight into the body, and it causes a chain reaction of antibodies, histamine, inflammation, and finally a sensitivity which can be potentially fatal.

The knowledge that vaccines are causing the peanut allergy epidemic has been around for a while, and in that time we have heard some crazy excuses. One of them is that American children are now eating more peanuts, which must be right because I often see toddlers walking into bars, grabbing a beer, and eating peanuts at the counters. The fact is, that Americans have been eating peanuts in big quantities for over 200 years, but they never used to be allergic to them in the past.

In fact, a study published in PubMed , which acknowledges that the advice to eat less peanuts hasn’t stopped the rates increasing, compared the peanut allergy prevalence in the UK 1.85%, and Israel 0.17%, against the amount of peanuts they ate. It turns out that Israeli children ate massive quantities of peanuts, and British children almost none, so the eating peanuts theory was blown out of the water by not only this study, but by existing scientific literature which has concluded that you can not develop a peanut allergy from eating peanuts.

What the study didn’t mention however is that vaccines produced for Israeli children predominantly use sesame seed oil instead of peanut oil as an adjuvant, which is why the peanut allergy instances are far lower in Israel.

The pharmaceutical industry also tried to deny they were responsible, when adjuvant pioneer Maurice Hilleman claimed that all of the proteins in the peanut oil were removed through refining. Funnily enough, it was the corrupt FDA who told him no, he was lying. No matter how much you refine peanut oil adjuvants, there will always be intact proteins. In fact, this is the reason why they started advising doctors to inject vaccines into the muscles rather than the veins, since it somewhat reduced the violent reactions.

So if they know the peanut oil often causes violent reactions, and causes lifelong peanut allergies in millions upon millions of people, why are they using it instead of a safer adjuvant? Now, let’s get it straight that all adjuvants can cause problems, because it’s not just peanuts that the western world have skyrocketing allergic reactions to, but yes, there are safer adjuvants, so why not use the best one?

The simple answer is money. Vaccinations are a multi-billion dollar industry, and so is it’s spin-off, the allergy treatment industry. In fact, in the next few years, it is projected to pass the $50 billion dollar per year mark.

Now imagine this … you own a big company selling vaccines and you discover a substance which you can add to your vaccines to cause a lifelong allergy to in your customers. This gives you an opportunity to sell them protection products for their allergy , including anti-histamines, epinephrine injectors, and peanut patches for the REST OF THEIR LIVES.

Financially, it’s a no-brainer. The amount of profit on a single sale of a vaccine is minuscule compared to the profits you will get for selling products to a customer for the remainder of their lifetimes.

These big CEO’s of the pharmaceutical companies don’t care about you. They don’t care if you die or get injured. After all, that’s why they set up the vaccine courts, so the public can’t sue them when they are injured by vaccines. These sickos only care about money, and when their vaccines give children peanut allergies, they dont get sad, they jump for joy, because they have just created another lifelong customer who will pay them thousands of dollars just to stay alive.

Now I am expecting the comments under this video to get bombarded with lies and fake science from trolls paid by these pharmaceutical companies. After all, if you are making billions of dollars per year on this scam, you want to protect your profits. So my advice to you is to do your own research.

And please use your brains. We know that historically there were no peanut allergies, and we know that the rates in western countries are now passing 5% of the population. It didn’t happen by magic. The science tells us that vaccines are the cause, so don’t let them keep sweeping this under the carpet to save their billion dollar allergy protection industry. Save a child’s life instead.

RELATED:

Do You Want to Remain Inform﻿ed about the Latest Vaccine News?﻿﻿﻿﻿

I WANT TO BE INFORMED