BACKFIRE: Major NASCAR Sponsor Tells Trump Supporters To Shop Elsewhere — Racing Legend Vows To Cancel $150,000 Order
Marcus Lemonis, the CEO of Camping World, doesn't want anyone who supports Donald Trump to shop at any of his 120 stores across America.

Following the very fake news reports that President Trump had somehow supported white supremacists in Virginia, Lemonis said he had had enough.

"There’s no doubt that there is probably not many consumers in this country today that are in favor of what has been said in the last couple days — and if they are, frankly, don’t shop at my business," Lemonis said last week in an appearance on CNBC.

The camping gear outlet is massive — $3.5 billion in revenue last year. And Lemonis is a big player in NASCAR, reports The camping gear outlet is massive — $3.5 billion in revenue last year. And Lemonis is a big player in NASCAR, reports New England Sports Network

"His brand is the title sponsor of the truck racing series, while its subsidiary Overton’s has sponsored multiple races and cars this season. With that in mind, NASCAR chairman Brian France — who last year endorsed Donald Trump for president — might want to watch his words," NESN wrote.

But Mark Martin, a legend in the sport who was inducted into the NASCAR Hall of Fame this year, didn't watch his words at all.

wrote about the brouhaha. AltDriver wrote about the brouhaha.

Keep politics out of it. That’s the message NASCAR legend Mark Martin has for Camping World CEO Marcus Lemonis, after he criticized President Trump for his handling of the Charlottsville protest and told fans who side with the President to stay out of his businesses. Martin made his remarks on Twitter, and said he was cancelling a $150,000 order with Camping World.... Martin is one of the most popular drivers ever at NASCAR, a 40-time Monster Energy NASCAR Cup Series winner. Lemonis has joined that chorus of critics who paint Trump’s response to Charlottsville as weak, and said he’s “horrified” by what he’s seen coming out of the White House. He then went one step further: “There’s no doubt that there is probably not many consumers in this country today that are in favor of what has been said in the last couple days and if they are, quite frankly, don’t shop at my business,” Lemonis said on CNBC’s “The Profit.”

But Martin — who is now a driving coach — changed his mind after a phone call from the powerful Lemonis.

After a call from After a call from @marcuslemonis today regret my tweet yesterday. I believe many articles about his statement were misrepresented. August 21, 2017

Still, others were all too ready to pull their business.

Camping World CEO tells customers who agree with Trump not to shop there.



No problemo, el fascisti. — Larry Schweikart (@LarrySchweikart) August 18, 2017

Who the heck does he thinks shops there? Limousine liberals? Stupid move Lemonis. — Bernie Abrami (@BAbrami) August 20, 2017

And #BoycottCampingWorld began trending on Twitter.

And we gotta' say this one more time: Politics doesn't need to infiltrate every facet of life. Singers, just sing. Actors, just act. And guys who sell us camping equipment, just shut your yappers and put those nice sleeping bags on sale.