What Uber did after the London attack is making people furious
Ride-sharing company Uber took advantage of the London terrorist attack to make a hefty profit off of people evacuating affected areas.

One of the company’s most controversial features is “surge pricing,” in which the typical fare for a ride is doubled, or pushed even higher, during times when the service is in high demand. During the Saturday night attacks, Uber apparently raised prices on passengers by more than double, prompting one Twitter user fleeing the affected area to blast the company publicly. However, London’s black cab service was apparently evacuating people for free during the attacks.

To their credit, Uber’s United Kingdom support account responded relatively quickly, telling Twitter user Amber Clemente that it suspended surge pricing immediately following the news of the attacks.

Tom Elvidge, who is Uber’s general manager for London, told CNN that the company was responsive to complaints about surge pricing during the attacks.

“As soon as we heard about the incident we immediately suspended dynamic pricing all around the area of the attacks — and shortly afterward across the whole of central London — just as we did following the attacks in Manchester and Westminster,” Elvidge said, referencing the recent attack at the Ariana Grande concert in Manchester.

However, another Twitter user aptly noted that the time in between the attacks and the notice sent out by Uber’s UK office was roughly two hours, according to the user’s screenshot of the notice being sent out, meaning those in the London Bridge, Borough Market, and Vauxhall areas where attacks were reported were gouged via surge pricing during the most dangerous time of the night.

Tom Cahill is a senior editor for the Resistance Report based in the Pacific Northwest. He specializes in coverage of political, economic, and environmental news. You can contact him via email at tom.v.cahill@gmail.com, or follow him on Facebook by clicking here

.