TIME FOR BOYCOTT! Ford Just Gave $100 MILLION To THIS Radical Hate Group
You and 7.9K others like this.

Ford used to be one of the most highly-respected and longest-running companies in the United States. Now, the automaker is not only shipping a huge portion of its jobs overseas, it is giving away an enormous sum of money to a separatist and racist hate group.

Ford just donated $100 million dollars to Black Lives Matter.

The hate group, which also reportedly being bankrolled by Liberal billionaire, George Soros, will also now be cashing checks from the Ford Foundation and Borealis Philanthropy.

“The BLMF [Black Lives Matter Foundation] provides grants, movement building resources, and technical assistance to organizations working advance the leadership and vision of young, Black, queer, feminists and immigrant leaders who are shaping and leading a national conversation about criminalization, policing and race in America,” a statement from the Borealis Philanthrophy, said.

Black Lives Matter has already received in excess of $33 million from Soros’ Open Society Foundation and via the Center for American Progress, the Washington Times reports.

The Black Lives Matter “platform” is calling for the defunding of police departments, “race-based reparations, voting rights for illegal immigrants, fossil-fuel divestment, an end to private education and charter schools.”

In addition to those socialist ideals, the Black Lives Matter foundation is also reportedly focused upon creating a “universal basic income,” and a program to offer “free college” to black youth.

“In response to the sustained and increasingly visible violence against Black communities in the U.S. and globally, a collective of more than 50 organizations representing thousands of Black people from across the country have come together with renewed energy and purpose to articulate a common vision and agenda,” the BLMF platform also states.

Ford, showing its Liberal mindset, also reportedly accused Israel of being guilty of “genocide” and of being an “apartheid state.”

It is time to boycott Ford!