The Obamas Decorated the White House for Christmas – One Prominent Display Is Raising Eyebrows [VIDEO]
If I wasn’t already exhausted from all the Hillary drama, this would be the nail in the coffin. The Obama’s have decorated the White House, and it seems they can’t even do that without being annoying. They have basically just flipped Trump off, once more by hanging a portrait of Hillary Clinton prominently among numerous amounts of Christmas decorations right smack dab centered above the fireplace in the Cross Hall.

There are no pictures of Bill Clinton or Chelsea of course, but a portrait that looks a lot like a presidential portrait positioned strategically to make a very loud point.

The election was rigged and stolen from the rightful winner… The election was rigged and stolen from the rightful winner… President Hillary Clinton.

GAG me.

Newsflash, Mr. and Mrs. Obama… Hillary Clinton didn’t win, nor did Trump steal the election from her. Americans gave it to him. America has spoken and the longer the Obama’s keep acting like fools over it, the more they are hurting their own party.

It would have been far more appropriate to hang a portrait of the Trumps as the soon to be presidential family. That makes a lot more sense. As you will soon see via video, the White House is probably one of the most beautiful homes to live in during the Holidays. It honors many things, from the family pets to our Constitution and the heroes who have upheld it since our Founding Fathers.

Of course, Christmas time is also a time of giving and kindness…not a time or place to make a political statement out of spite and throw the incoming President under the bus while doing it.

Bad form Barack and Michelle…and classless.

“An official portrait of the former first lady and Democratic presidential nominee is hanging in the Cross Hall of the White House, displayed alongside an array of bells, baubles and other holiday décor,” The Hill reported.

’TIS THE SEASON: Take a tour of the holiday decorations now on full display at the White House. pic.twitter.com/Z6LkhKp4Sj ’TIS THE SEASON: Take a tour of the holiday decorations now on full display at the White House. https://t.co/ATdYvwEBYO — ABC News (@ABC) — ABC News (@ABC) November 29, 2016

“A tree adorned with gold stars represents ‘The Gift of Service,’ which pays homage to first lady Michelle Obama and Dr. Jill Biden’s Joining Forces initiative, aimed at supporting military service members and their families. Kiosks with touch screens can be used to pen a note to send to troops,” The Hill added.

The portrait of Hillary Clinton in her signature pantsuit look is standing right by a table with her book “It Takes A Village” by her side. Isn’t that something? Marxism all the way up until the end…disgusting.

The theme of the White House this Christmas is “The Gift of the Holidays” on that “reflects on not only the joy of giving and receiving, but also the true gifts of like, such as service, friend and family, education, and good health.”

Isn’t that interesting…?

Them and their followers are out there marching along the streets wreaking havoc with their political propaganda and speak of revolution, while the Obamas enjoy their last holiday season in the White House without a thought towards calming a nation in distress.

The only gift giving going on in government right now is the gift of Trump’s win, but even more so…the gift of Hillary NOT returning to the White House.

For that I am thankful.