Most Dangerous Zodiac Signs: According To The FBI
One of the most famous serial killers in history was known as the ‘Zodiac Killer.’ Although he was never apprehended, his legacy continues to terrify. The mystery surrounding the case has fascinated generations, even though the original crimes were committed in the late ’60s and early ’70s! Although the name of the Zodiac Killer might make you think about horoscopes, he actually got the name (and the logo he signed his letters with) from a watch brand.

Scary Zodiac Killer Sign

There have been many suspects in the Zodiac killings, but the real killer was never caught. Some of the leading suspects were Arthur Leigh Allen (Sagittarius) and Earl Van Best Jr. (Cancer).

According to the FBI, some astrological signs are more likely to commit crimes than others. So, we counted down through the dark side of the zodiac! Discover all the deadly traits of your astrological sign! Did you know you can find the horoscope (and criminal record) of almost anybody on Instant Checkmate ? Give it a spin. You might be horo-fied to see the results!

Zodiac Signs In Order

The least dangerous zodiac sign is the Gemini! If a Gemini is going to engage in crime, it’s probably centered around fraud or stealing. That said, prolific serial killer, Jeffrey Dahmer was a Gemini. Negative traits of a Gemini include anxiety, shallowness, and inconsistency. But overall they’re not that dangerous!

The Aquarian is fairly good natured until they’re a victim of wrongdoing. When it comes to revenge crimes, Aquarians lead the pack! The clever and charismatic Aquarius would make a good hustler or hacker. Manipulation is their dark horoscope trait!

Cup Half Empty: Gary Ridgway, Glenn Beck, Kim Jong Il

Watch out for the lion’s roar! Leos are notoriously passionate and feisty. Although this is mostly a positive trait, Leos can go awry if they have a psychotic temperament. The lion loves to be the center of attention, and as a fire sign they also have a vicious temper. Leos might get sucked into criminal activity for the fame!

Rogue Lions: Benito Mussolini, Grigori Rasputin, Elizabeth Báthory

Scorpio Dark Side Astrology

Scorpios can be jealous and aggressive. A terrible combination in the wrong circumstances! If a Scorpio goes to the dark side, they might find work as an assassin! Scorpios also are noted to be the most sadistic sign and an evil Scorpio has no issue with murder. Scorpios are very cunning. They might not commit the evil act themselves, but don’t be surprised to find them pulling all the strings out of sight!

Beware of the fish which swims in two directions! They might be concealing a hidden dark side. Pisces are most likely to be involved in crimes which hurt themselves – i.e. drug abuse. But the hot tempered Pisces can also become very dangerous if they happen to be crazy! Serial killers are often Pisceans.

The Libra is the sign for justice and values balance. A Libran doesn’t easily break the law. If they do, they are more inclined to get involved with a ponzi scheme or banking scandal. The evil Libran will likely hide behind a large organization to commit their crimes. If they go rogue, expect them to be on the run and heavily armed!

Virgos are clever but also have a criminal streak. A Virgo might be more inclined to get involved with hacking, burglary, or other types of stealing. Virgos treasure order and neatness, so don’t expect them to leave a messy trail if they commit a crime!

Not So Virginal: Ed Gein, Ivan The Terrible, Michael Jackson

Capricorns are the most likely to be all around crooks. From petty crimes to sadistic acts, the criminal Capricorn can be very dangerous! On the plus side, Capricorns aren’t very good at covering their tracks. This makes them the easiest sign to bust for wrongdoing.

The stubborn ram doesn’t like being told what to do. They might seek an illegal career to avoid the rat race. Ariens hate to have their authority challenged. If you try to boss the ram around, you might end up getting the horns! Although the evil Arien is most likely to become a hired gun, he could become power hungry which can lead them to spin a web of illegal activity!

A sinister Sagittarian can be volatile and unforgiving. If the wrath of the centaur is summoned, watch out! They can be extremely harsh. That said, in most cases Sagittarians are reluctant to hurt others and are more likely to be arrested for theft. If you can catch them! The slippery centaur is notoriously hard to pin down. Just ask serial killer Ted Bundy, who escaped from prison twice!

Broken Arrows: Ted Bundy, Joseph Stalin, Pablo Escobar

Taureans are very temperamental. The possessive and stubborn bull can fly into a rage easily, making them a very risky star sign. Clever but solitary, the terrible Taurus prefers money laundering or financial crimes to avoid having to engage with others. The Taurean is a natural leader, but if they go in the wrong direction they can easily end up as a ferocious dictator. A Taurean tyrant can be a blood-thirsty meglomaniac, hellbent on world domination. Hitler was born on the last day of Aries. Depending on the time he was born, he could have been a Taurus!

Raging Bulls: David Miscavige, Pol Pot, Saddam Hussein

According to the FBI, Cancerians are the most deadly horoscope in the zodiac! Out of all the star signs, they are arrested the most. Mental instability is a negative trait of the Cancer sign, and this can make them likely to offend repeatedly. Crimes of passion are frequent in the house of Cancer. If the creepy crab gets a taste for killing, they’re likely to strike again and leave distinguishing marks on their victims.

Earl Van Best Jr. looked almost identical to police sketches of the Zodiac Killer, and evidence outlined in the book The Most Dangerous Animal made a compelling case against him. His fingerprints and handwriting closely matched that of the mysterious killer. It turns out he was a Cancer! The most dangerous sign in the zodiac!

Many serial killers and all round psychopaths looked like totally normal people. Until it was too late. Look up almost anyone with an Instant Checkmate background search . You could find criminal records, arrest history, social media profiles, and much more. What will you find?

Do you think Earl Van Best was the Zodiac Killer? What do you think is the most dangerous star sign? Tell us about it in the comments!