2 More Doctors Go Missing, after 3 Found Dead in 2 Weeks | Health Nut…
“We haven’t been contacted by any other law-enforcement agency or by the FBI or anything like that,” he said.

McCarty said that information has been given to investigators to determine if there’s any correlation to the Whiteside case.

Just hours or days after authorities said this referencing the stories I broke to the world (as gently as possible) they found Dr. Whiteside’s body right in the *very* area he was last seen (so that’s another mystery) and there was a .22 caliber found discharged by his body , but no other details are being given.

In the past 2 weeks I’ve reported on 3 alternative doctors (2 MD’s and 1 DC, PhD) who were found dead in less than two weeks (Click through for stories and funds for families as well as numbers to report tips to authorities) It was with heavy heart, as I knew a few of the doctors and have many mutual friends with all three.

NBC and Fox have since picked up my stories and given me credit and links which I appreciate and only wish it were a happier subject, but I do believe this is important to find the doctors who are missing (alive, I hope) and get justice for those who were killed or mysteriously died. The only update on the third one, Dr. Teresa Sievers MD, is that they have absolutely no suspects in mind, and her husband and kids were out of state in Connecticut at a family reunion that she left early to get home to see patients. (update: Initially I said I would not post a link Dr. Sievers in this article and I didn’t. People started questioning me. So, as much as it pains, me, here is the most recent article from NBC . Click through at your own risk. I’m not posting the details here out of respect.

The local sheriff investigating the case of Dr. Sievers has said it was not random, not a home invasion and definitely “targeted” He’s gone so far as to say that when all the facts do emerge it will likely be the subject of a best selling book (or movie) I don’t even know what to make of that. Mind boggling.

Now, in just a few days, we have 2 more doctors missing. The first is Dr. Fitzpatrick MD of North Dakota who went missing in or around July 3rd. NBC is reporting on his disappearance. Little else is known at this time. Note: Initially it was reported he was a DO, but now we see that’s another Patrick Fitzpatrick in the area. This doctor specializes in Ophthalmology and is an MD. From all accounts it appears he practiced in North Dakota, but was found missing in neighboring Montana.

from the NBC article about Dr. gone missing:

The Gallatin County Sheriff’s Search and Rescue team is currently searching for a 74-year-old North Dakota Doctor. The vehicle and trailer of Bismark resident Dr. Patrick J. Fitzpatrick were found abandoned next a (sic) pea field Saturday south of Willow Creek, near Three Forks, sheriff’s officials said in a press release. Officials believe Fitzpatrick could have abandoned his vehicle as early as Friday. He is described as 6’0? tall and over of 220 lbs. He has white hair and a goatee, and speaks with an Irish accent. Anyone with information regarding Dr. Fitzpatrick is asked to call the Sheriff’s Office at 406-582-2100.

The second missing doctor’s story is just as mysterious. His name is Dr. Jeffrey Whiteside MD (Pulmonologist and sleep doctor) of Wisconsin and hasn’t been seen since June 29th when he was with his family on an outing and just walked away. The second missing doctor’s story is just as mysterious. His name is Dr. Jeffrey Whiteside MD (Pulmonologist and sleep doctor) of Wisconsin and hasn’t been seen since June 29th when he was with his family on an outing and just walked away. Here’s a TV video update that says he vanished without a trace.

Dr. Whiteside is a physician in the Fox Valley area and lives in Grand Chute, Wisconsin. He has a boat slip and vacation cabin in Ephraim. Dr. Whiteside was with family on 06-29-15 at the boat slip in Ephraim when he walked away. He is believed to be on foot and still in the northern Door Co. area to the best of our knowledge. His family and office have not heard from him and are very concerned about his well-being. The Door Co. Sheriff’s Department was notified that Dr. Whiteside was missing on 07-01-15 at 0906 hrs. The Door Co. Sheriff’s Dept. along with Ephraim Fire Department volunteers and others continue to look for Dr. Whiteside and search efforts are concentrated in the Ephraim area. The Door Co. Sheriff’s Department asks for the public’s assistance in finding Dr. Whiteside. If anyone has seen Dr. Whiteside, please call the Door Co. Sheriff’s Department at 920-746-2416.

I found out today this is where my parents went on their honeymoon years ago. It’s a safe beautiful little area with great weather this time of year. We cannot speculate as to how “alternative” these two doctors were, if at all. There have been people posting on social media that one of them were, but we cannot confirm that at this time. We hope they are found soon alive and well. Please call if you have any information as to the mysterious disappearance of either one.

Not to throw a monkey wrench in the mix, but the same day Dr. Bradstreet’s body was found in here in the South East US, Not to throw a monkey wrench in the mix, but the same day Dr. Bradstreet’s body was found in here in the South East US, three bodies of three doctors were found in Mexico. They were traveling to the state capital to do paperwork. Here’s a bit of info on those 3 doctors found (which are different than the three doctors found at the beginning of the article) If we count these three too, that would be 6 doctors found dead within 2 weeks and 2 more currently missing. That’s just in the US and Mexico.

From the article on the doctors found in Mexico:

Prosecutors say four bodies discovered June 19 in the southern Mexico state of Guerrero are those of three doctors and a lawyer who had been reported missing earlier in the month. Guerrero state prosecutors said Sunday that DNA tests had matched the bodies to relatives of the missing men. The men had vanished when they were on a trip to the state capital to do some paperwork. Their decomposed bodies were later found in the back of a pickup truck on a rural road outside of the state capital of Chilpancingo. The missing men’s families have said they don’t believe the bodies are those of their relatives. State prosecutors have said they also awaiting test results from federal labs to help rule out doubts.

I have no idea if these five missing doctors were “alternative” “holistic” at this time. I’ll keep reporting on all missing doctors, and again, our hearts go out the all the families of the doctors who were found dead. We hope they get to the bottom of it on each of those cases. I have been with probably the best known outspoken holistic physician for 6 years so of course, this worries me and I’m concerned for all involved. As for the missing doctors – we hope they are found alive and well very soon.

STAY safe, Erin Elizabeth July 5th

iv>