Press Release | Press Releases | Media | The House Committee on Natur…
01.29.19

Chair Raúl M. Grijalva Announces Natural Resources Committee Democratic Leadership Team

Washington D.C. – Chair Raúl M. Grijalva (D-Ariz.) today announced the Democratic leadership team and subcommittee memberships of the Natural Resources Committee for the 116 th Congress. Photo highlights of the recently concluded Democratic organizing meeting are available at http://bit.ly/2HLIPBE – Chair Raúl M. Grijalva (D-Ariz.) today announced the Democratic leadership team and subcommittee memberships of the Natural Resources Committee for the 116Congress. Photo highlights of the recently concluded Democratic organizing meeting are available at

“Protecting our environment, taking climate change seriously, and putting the public interest first are not optional on this Committee, and that’s what Democrats are going to do every day for the next two years,” Grijalva said. “The American people want clean air and water and public lands protected for the future. It’s our job to make sure they get them. Our entire team is excited to get started right away, and everyone should expect big things from this Committee.”

Grijalva has served on the Committee since the day he first came to Congress in 2003. He was ranking member from 2015 to 2018.

Issues connected to Puerto Rico will be handled at the Full Committee level and led by the Chair. Other jurisdiction changes will be announced following tomorrow’s full Committee organizing meeting.

Vice Chair of Full Committee – Rep. Deb Haaland (D-N.M.)

Vice Chair for Insular Affairs – Rep. Gregorio Kilili Sablan (D-CNMI)

Chair of National Parks, Forests, and Public Lands Subcommittee – Rep. Deb Haaland (D-N.M)

Chair of Water, Oceans, and Wildlife Subcommittee – Rep. Jared Huffman (D-Calif.)

Chair of Energy and Mineral Resources Subcommittee – Rep. Alan Lowenthal (D-Calif.)

Chair of Indigenous Peoples of the United States Subcommittee – Rep. Ruben Gallego (D-Ariz.)

Chair of Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee – Rep. TJ Cox (D-Calif.)



Press Contact

Media Contact: Adam Sarvana, Grijalva