25 Secrets Of The Magic Kingdom
(Page 3 of 3)

25 Secrets Of The Magic Kingdom

Why You Won't See Goofy In Tomorrowland--and Other Mouse-size Tidbits From Behind The Scenes

17. While Disney is renowned for keeping its theme parks immaculate, one place in the Magic Kingdom that shouldn't be is the interior of the Haunted Mansion. Again, show element. Special theatrical dust and cobwebs are purposely spread to help create the appropriate setting. But the efficient-as-ever ventilation system in the mansion keeps sucking up all the dust. So Disney trucks it in by the 5-pound bag to keep the mansion appropriately dirty. Legend has it that since the Magic Kingdom opened, enough dust has been hauled in to completely bury the mansion.

16. What is that abandoned, covered platform located on the moat around Cinderella Castle near the Tomorrowland bridge that just sits empty all the time? It used to be the home of an attraction called the Plaza Swan Boats. Guests could actually board individual, oversize swan boats and ride the moat around Cinderella Castle. The attraction opened in May 1973 and closed in August 1983.

18. Keep your eyes on the concrete walkway just before you exit the first iron gate of the Haunted Mansion. You'll spot a diamond engagement ring embedded in the walk. According to legend, that's the ring left behind by Master Gracey's fiance, who committed suicide on the eve of their wedding by hanging herself in the mansion's stretching portrait chamber. That's her in the attic dressed in her bridal gown, her heart pumping brightly. (By the way, Disney recently installed a new, updated bride in the mansion who floats in the air. Check it out--it's cool.)

19. The names you see engraved on the comical gravestones in the cemetery at the entrance of the Haunted Mansion are not imaginary monikers. They belong to actual Disney "imagineers," art directors and illusionists who contributed to the design and construction of the original mansion and are now eternally enshrined in the cemetery.

20. The voice of the President Clinton Audio-Animatronics figure in the finale of the Hall of Presidents was actually recorded by President Clinton. He is the only president depicted in the presentation to ever record his voice for use in the attraction.

21. The Presidential Seal etched into the carpeting inside the rotunda of the Hall of Presidents is one of only three such seals that exist in the United States, and it took an act of Congress for Walt Disney World to receive permission to install it. (The other two seals are located in the Oval Office of the White House and at the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia.)

22. Spend a day walking around the park and at times you'll detect the distinct scent of vanilla. No, it's not coming from some nearby bakery. The scent is manufactured by Disney chemists and pumped into the park at several locations. Seems a study showed the scent of vanilla is particularly pleasing to human olfactory glands.

23. The next time you detect that delicious Toll House chocolate chip cookie smell wafting from the Main Street Bakery, stop inside and see if they're actually baking the cookies. Chances are, they're not. The smell is artificial and, like the vanilla scent, is manufactured by Disney and pumped through a vent on the bakery's eaves.

24. The Magic Kingdom may be 25-plus years old, but the oldest attraction in the park doesn't date back to 1971. In fact, it dates back more than 80 years. No, it's not Cinderella's Golden Carousel, whose horses were carved in 1917. The oldest attraction is the Liberty Belle locomotive on the Walt Disney World Railroad, built in 1915.

25. Ever hear the legend that Cinderella Castle can be dismantled in the event of an approaching hurricane? That's not only a tale, it's a fairy tale. According to imagineers involved in its construction, Cinderella Castle was built to code to withstand hurricane-force winds and can in no way be disassembled.