How to Stop Serious Bleeding in 10 Seconds!
As a mother, with two children that like to fight, I always worry about serious cuts. I know from my experience as a lifeguard that applying pressure will slow bleeding, but, until recently, I had no clue how to stop it altogether.

Apparently, if a person applies cayenne pepper to an open wound, it will stop bleeding. This even works for deep cuts that are a serious cause for concern (and should be seen by a professional).

However, how does it work?

According to

“Long hailed as a miracle-working substance, cayenne pepper can stop bleeding in less than one minute under most circumstances. The reason it works is because cayenne pepper reacts with the body to equalize the blood pressure, meaning an extra gushing of pressure will not be concentrated in the wound area as it normally is. Blood will quickly clot when the pressure is equalized.” According to eHow “Long hailed as a miracle-working substance, cayenne pepper can stop bleeding in less than one minute under most circumstances. The reason it works is because cayenne pepper reacts with the body to equalize the blood pressure, meaning an extra gushing of pressure will not be concentrated in the wound area as it normally is. Blood will quickly clot when the pressure is equalized.”

Cayenne pepper returns blood pressure to normal so that clotting is easier. It can be used on any cut to stop bleeding and can be applied topically or taken orally. (However, serious cuts need to be treated by a professional. Cayenne pepper is just a way to prevent blood loss on your way to the doctor.)

Here is a guideline for oral consumption of cayenne pepper as described by Dr. John Christopher in his book S chool of Natural Healing :

“…take a teaspoonful of cayenne in a glass of extra-warm water, drink it down, and by the count of ten, the bleeding will stop. Instead of all the pressure being centralized, it is equalized, and the clotting becomes more rapid. Whether the bleeding is internal or external, a teaspoon of cayenne taken orally in a glass of hot water will stop the bleeding quickly.” ( Source ) “…take a teaspoonful of cayenne in a glass of extra-warm water, drink it down, and by the count of ten, the bleeding will stop. Instead of all the pressure being centralized, it is equalized, and the clotting becomes more rapid. Whether the bleeding is internal or external, a teaspoon of cayenne taken orally in a glass of hot water will stop the bleeding quickly.”

Cayenne pepper will also prevent infections that are common with minor cuts. This is because it has some antibacterial properties which are great for fighting bacteria that may enter the body through an injury. ( Cayenne pepper will also prevent infections that are common with minor cuts. This is because it has some antibacterial properties which are great for fighting bacteria that may enter the body through an injury. ( Source

There are many health benefits associated with cayenne pepper. It looks like I will have to get a separate container for my first aid kit. I never know when one of my kids will come inside with an open wound!

Take a look at the video below for more information!

This man used cayenne better on a serious cut he received at home!

Do you keep cayenne pepper around in case of an emergency?

Share your stories in the comments!