Trump Raises Money And Ire

His Contributions To The Florida Gop Have Fueled Attacks On Jeb Bush From Backers Of Lt. Gov. Buddy Mackay.

The donation by Trump Hotels and Casino Resorts was one of several sizable soft-money contributions that allowed the state GOP to take in $4 million between April and June.

TALLAHASSEE - A $50,000 donation by casino tycoon Donald Trump to the Republican Party of Florida is raising fresh questions about GOP governor candidate Jeb Bush's position on gambling.

But it was the only one pounced on by the campaign of Democrat Lt. Gov. Buddy MacKay, which charged that Bush and the Republicans have grown beholden to special interests.

``A guy whose only interest in Florida is casinos - there's got to be a motivation,'' said Robin Rorapaugh, MacKay's campaign manager.

The Bush campaign said it had nothing to do with the donation to the state party, and that Bush has been a consistent opponent of gambling - serving in 1994 as a director of a group opposing casinos.

``He couldn't have a clearer record,'' said Cory Tilley, a spokesman for the Bush campaign.

News about the donation came on the eve of a meeting today in Orlando between the staff of Gov. Lawton Chiles and the Seminole Tribe of Florida to discuss the tribe's latest plan to build casinos on its reservations. Trump is teaming up with the Seminoles and wants to manage their gambling operations.

MacKay and Chiles both oppose casino gambling, and Florida voters have rejected referendum questions to allow gambling three times in the past two decades.

Tilley said that if Trump is banking on a Gov. Bush being more supportive of the plan, Trump ``will be very surprised.''

``He will not support this scheme that they have,'' Tilley said.

The Trump donation came during a period when Bush was scaling back his fund-raising operations and the Republican Party was increasing its efforts. Other gambling-related donations to the party included $25,000 from the GTech Corp. of Rhode Island, makers of lottery and gambling machines.

While MacKay intends to accept public campaign financing dollars, Bush does not. So Bush is trying to avoid spending more than $5.7 million, the cap beyond which MacKay would get an additional public dollar for each dollar Bush spends.

Trump has been a particularly active participant in Florida's elections lately. Last year, he hosted a fund-raiser for Bush in his Manhattan penthouse, an event that raised a reported $500,000.

And according to some sources, Trump's largesse is even greater.

``My information is that Donald Trump has raised in the ballpark of $1 million for the Bush campaign and the Republican Party,'' said Sen. Steven Geller, D-Hallandale, president of the National Council of Legislators from Gaming States.