Oregon Elementary School Bans The Pledge Of Allegiance
Oregon parents of students attending Mountain Dell Elementary School received a letter Wednesday night informing them of the school principal, Kauata Jackson’s, decision to ban The Pledge of Allegiance throughout the 2017 school year.

Many parents were outraged upon finding Principal Jackson’s letter in their children’s backpacks and took to social media websites such as Facebook to voice their disagreement with Jackson’s decision.

Several parents wrote messages of their own to Principal Jackson on the letter and uploaded photos of their notes on Facebook prior to having their children deliver them back to their teachers. One such letter said, “RETURN TO SENDER: We do not agree with this decision and urge you to reconsider. We recommend that you keep a few things in mind prior to your reconsideration – #1) – Remember what country employs you. #2) – There are SEVERAL other elementary schools for me (and my neighbors) to send our children. Sincerely, Kathleen Hunter (An American Mom).”

Kathleen Hunter’s Facebook post quickly went viral Wednesday evening and gained the attention of several news and media outlets across the country. In attempt to verify the letter, an ABC affiliate reporter contacted Principal Kauata Jackson this morning and was able to confirm that she in fact had written and distributed the letter to the students of Mountain Dell Elementary School.

Principal Jackson told the reporter that her decision to discontinue The Pledge of Allegiance throughout the 2017 school year was made after several months of careful consideration and that she would not be reversing her decision.

Jackson told the reporter that she is proud of the diversity and sense of community within the children and parents of Mountain Dell Elementary and that with great diversity comes differing opinions and ideologies. According to Jackson, in the months leading up to her decision, she had received several well -thought- out and articulated complaints regarding the school’s daily recital of The Pledge of Allegiance from parents of varying cultural backgrounds. Jackson told reporters, “We’ve been very successful in achieving our mission to create a culturally diverse community within our school and now that we have an extremely diverse eco-system, we must be considerate to all opinions and ways of life.

Principal Jackson told the ABC reporter that she is hopeful several other schools within her district and across the country will follow her lead and ban the recital of The Pledge of Allegiance throughout their respective schools. According to Jackson, she will not reverse her decision, however will continue to listen to the feedback of all parents and will considering allowing students to begin reciting The Pledge of Allegiance again during the 2018 school year.

UPDATE: In Support Of Principal Jackson – Oregon Department Of Education Bans Pledge Of Allegiance In All Public Schools