TRUMP CRITICIZES PEQUOTS, CASINO
"Go up to Connecticut," Donald Trump told a House subcommittee and its overflow audience Tuesday, "and you look" at the Mashantucket Pequots.

"They don't look like Indians to me."

The Pequots operate the Foxwoods Casino and High Stakes Bingo in Ledyard. Trump's assertion in the Halls of Congress Tuesday -- which he broadened to include all Indians who run casinos -- was just one more grenade in an hourlong assault on Connecticut, Indians and their casinos that one committee chairman said was the most irresponsible testimony he had heard in nearly two decades in Congress.

By the time the casino magnate and New York real estate developer was done testifying before the House Native American Affairs Subcommittee, Trump had:

Called the state's experience with casinos "a disaster."

Charged that Gov. Lowell P. Weicker Jr. had been "bludgeoned" into accepting an agreement with the Pequots.

Claimed that the 300 Pequot tribe members carve up between $300 million and $500 million for themselves with all the glee of hungry children grabbing for pieces of a pizza.

Watch out, warned Trump. Organized crime figures are slithering into Indian casinos around the country.

"It will be the biggest scandal ever," Trump warned, "the biggest since Al Capone ... . An Indian chief is going to tell Joey Killer to please get off his reservation? It's unbelievable to me."

Much of Trump's testimony was unbelievable to the committee and other witnesses, including G. Michael Brown, president and chief executive officer of the Foxwoods casino, and Connecticut State Police Lt. Col. Robert Root.

Brown and Root vehemently denied there was a trace of organized crime at Foxwoods, and Brown called Trump's remarks "racist." And the idea that tribe members are pocketing such high profits, Brown said, is "totally false."

The subcommittee had originally called this hearing, which wound up lasting six hours, to learn more about how Indian casinos are policed and regulated.

The news seemed pretty good, as Laurence A. Urgenson, acting deputy assistant attorney general, said that allegations that mobsters are moving into the casinos "is not established by the data currently available." Asked if he saw potential for a major scandal, Root said no.

Still, Trump persisted.

The day seemed perfect for his anger. When he walked into the hearing room, he could not find a seat. For 2 1/2 hours, the lord of New York City's Trump Tower had to stand, his head usually cocked upward so his square jaw pointed sharply at the witness table.

When it was finally Trump's turn, he discarded the seven-page statement he was going to read.

"I had a long and boring speech," he told the panel, "It was politically correct and something that would have gotten me into no trouble whatsoever."

With that, he offered off-the-cuff remarks about some of the things bugging him lately, such as:

The mob. Forget the Justice Department's shrug. "Organized crime is rampant. People know it. People talk about it," Trump insisted. "I wonder what (former FBI director) J. Edgar Hoover would have said about this."

Look, he said, "nobody likes Indians as much as Donald Trump," but the Indians are being had by mobsters.

"There is no way Indians are going to protect themselves from the mob," he insisted. "This is gonna blow."

Profits. "You have a group of Indians in Connecticut," he said. "I've heard $300 [million] to $400 million [in profit]. They don't pay taxes. Why not distribute the money to other Indians?" he said.

Rep. Neil Abercrombie, D-Hawaii, challenged this, saying the profits often go to "expenditures on behalf of the Indians."

"I really don't believe you understand," Trump said. There's big money here, and organized crime wants it.

"I believe this tribe has 300, 400 members (It has 280). Do you think it's appropriate for 300 [members], who lucked out with a location between New York and Boston, shouldn't give some of the money out to others?"

Hey, said Abercrombie, at least they're not acting like financiers of the 1980s -- like Trump -- who profited with leveraged buyouts whose profits "were only given to 200 people in New York City."

Brown later explained that 75 percent to 80 percent of the Pequots' casino profits go for construction and development of other projects. He would not say how much profit the casino has earned since it opened in February 1992. The tribe plans to open a new hotel, two restaurants, a theater and other facilities in November.

The look. Trump, his thick blondish brown hair falling delicately over his ears and never drooping out of place, mused about what people who run Indian casinos look like.

"They don't look like Indians to me," he said. "They don't look like Indians to Indians."

House Natural Resources Committee Chairman George Miller, D-Calif., who has white hair, a mustache and glasses, seemed

incredulous.

He said he was reminded of people who comment that someone does not "look Jewish" or "look black."

"That was how people used to do business," he said mockingly, as people would be rejected for loans because they looked to be a certain race or ethnicity.

Well, said Trump, if looks do not matter, "why not approve everyone?"

After the hearing, he was asked to explain what an Indian looked like. "You know," he said. "You know."

Connecticut. Pity its poor governor. "Lowell Weicker, whom I have great respect for, fought and fought and fought and was bludgeoned into accepting this," he said of the pact that governs the state-Pequots relationship.

Not only is Weicker unhappy, Trump said, but "`Connecticut is a total disaster over Indian gaming."

The casino employs about 6,720 people, 80 percent of whom live in the state. The tribe agreed in January to pay Connecticut $100 million for the exclusive right to operate slot machines at Foxwoods, and then increased the amount to $113 million.

Trump got very little compassion from the hearing room crowd.