List of Swahili Words of Arabic Origin
Introduction

Swahili is a language that fuses African Bantu with Arabic. Arab sailors and traders have established links and ties with East Africa for centuries, their language strongly merged with the local language to produce a creole derivative.

The word Swahili itself is derived from Arabic Sawahili سواحلي which is plural for ساحل meaning [Language] of the Coast.

This article gives some examples of Arabic words still in today's Swahili.

Here are some words.

Swahili Arabic Meaning hatari خطر Danger. Also the title of a 1962 movie starring John Wayne, set in Africa. Safari سفر Travel. Also: trip mahali محل Place vitabu كتاب Book msumari مسمار Nail kata قطع Cut, chop habari خبر news huru حر free dhamiri ضمير conscience kamusi قاموس dictionary baridi بارد cold samahani سامحني forgive me, excuse me rafiki رفيق companion, friend tafadhali تفضل please furahi فرح happy

Time

The terms for time are strongly influenced by Arabic. Many of it taken by the prayer times of Islam.

Swahili Arabic Meaning asubuhi صبح morning dakika دقيقة minute saa ساعة hour wakati وقت time alasri العصر late afternoon magharibi المغرب sunset alfajiri الفجر dawn karne قرن century

The Swahili names for the first five days of the week all start with Juma, then the order of the day of the week, Saturday being the first day of the week. Jumaa is derived from the Arabic word جمعة which means Friday, as well as "week. Only two days of the week got the Arabic names:

Swahili Arabic Meaning alkhamisi الخميس Thursday ijumaa الجمعة Friday

Animal Names

Animal names are all native African Bantu (e.g. simba lion). However, there are a few exceptions.

Swahili Arabic Meaning Tausi طاوس Peacock, being non-native to Africa, it took the Arabic name, which in turn took it from Persian.





Numbers

The number system is also heavily Arabic, although not exclusively so.

Swahili Arabic Meaning nusu نص Half. The proper classical Arabic word is نصف nisf. In many present day dialects it is "nus", like in Swahili. robo ربع Quarter sita ستة 6 saba سبعة 7 tisa تسعة 9 ishrini عشرين 20 thalathini ثلاثين 30 arubaini أربعين 40 hamsini خمسين 50 sitini ستين 60 sabini سبعين 70 thamanini ثمانين 80 tisini تسعين 90 mia مئة 100. The middle letter in classical Arabic is Hamza, however, in present day dialects, like Swahili, it is a Y sound. elfu ألف 1000

Resources

Here are some useful links on Swahili.