More Part-Time Jobs With Obamacare
Most full-time workers get medical-insurance benefits in their pay package; most part-time workers don't.

But early next year, under the Affordable Care Act, part-timers will be eligible for medical benefits that rival those of full-timers. And as a direct result, predicts University of Chicago economics professor Casey Mulligan, the ACA will create a new set of incentives that will boost the share of workers employed part time, probably by quite a lot.

There is also a different set of ACA-induced incentives favoring part-time work. Under rules that have recently been delayed until 2015, Obamacare will require businesses with 50 employees or more to provide medical insurance for full-timers, but won't require it when employees work less than 30 hours a week. Whether or not employers are already creating part-time jobs in lieu of full-time to anticipate this rule, it is bound to have a noticeable influence once the rules do take effect in 2015.

The incentives analyzed by Prof. Mulligan will apply in 2014, operating initially on sellers of labor (employees) rather than on the buyers (employers).

Millions of people who might have seen advantages in working full time will seek part-time work instead. Businesses are likely to respond by accommodating that preference—especially when their own incentives to create part-time work become effective in 2015.

As Prof. Mulligan explains: "Moving from full-time employment to part-time employment will trigger generous assistance with health premiums and out-of-pocket expenses that can offset much of the income lost due to reduced work hours."

Since medical care is expensive, it isn't surprising that, according to Prof. Mulligan's estimates, the "generous" package suddenly bestowed on part-time workers could amount to nearly $15,000 a year as a midrange estimate.

True, most part-time workers might not realize that the medical benefits suddenly available are worth that much. But we are all used to categorizing paycheck jobs as "with benefits" or "without benefits"; when the benefits are clearly quite generous, part-time jobs are bound to look noticeably more attractive.

Then add the two key advantages of reduced hours: more leisure time, which most of us value, especially if we have children to spend that time with; and lower work-related costs, especially if we must cover the cost of child-care while at work.

In fact, Prof. Mulligan shows that, under certain plausible assumptions, some part-time workers at 29 hours might actually do better financially than their full-time counterparts at 40 hours.

There are now 28 million people working part time versus 116.2 million full-timers. Once all the incentives of the ACA kick in by 2015, those figures could switch by perhaps as much as 10 million, turning into 38 million part-timers versus 106.2 million full-timers—bringing a noticeable decrease in the total number of productive hours workers spend on the job.

—Gene Epstein is economics editor for Barron's. For more stories, see barrons.com.