Pope Francis Found Guilty Of Child Trafficking, Rape, Murder

Yesterday defendants Pope Francis Bergoglio, Catholic Jesuit Superior General Adolfo Pachon and Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby were found guilty of rape, torture, murder and trafficking of children. Five judges of the International Common Law Court of Justice in Brussels determined that the crimes occurred as recently as 2010. Since last March over 48 eyewitnesses have come forward to testify before this ICLCJ Court about the defendants’ activities as members of the Ninth Circle Satanic Child Sacrifice Cult.



The Ninth Circle Satanic Cult was said to do child sacrifices at Roman Catholic cathedrals in Montreal, New York, Rome, Scotland, London, Carnarvon Castle in Wales, an undisclosed French Chateau in Holland and at Canadian Catholic and Anglican Indian residential schools in Kamloops, British Columbia and Brantford, Ontario Canada. The Ninth Circle Satanic Child Sacrifice Cult was believed to use privately owned forest groves in the US, Canada, France and Holland for their “Human Hunting Parties” for global elites including members of European royal families. Teens were said to be obtained by the mafia, then stripped naked, raped, hunted down and killed. The Chief Prosecutor stated. “The Catholic Church is the world’s largest corporation and appears to be in collusion with the mafia, governments, police and courts worldwide.”



Two adolescent women told the ICLCJ Court that Pope Francis raped them while participating in child sacrifices. Eight other eyewitnesses confirmed their allegations of being witness to rape and child sacrifices. The Ninth Circle Satanic Cult were said to take place during the Springs of 2009 and 2010 in rural Holland and Belgium.



Pope Francis was also found to be a perpetrator in satanic child sacrifice rites while acting as an Argentine priest and Bishop according to a sealed document obtained from the Vatican archives. A second record dated Dec. 25 1967 called the Magisterial Privilege was said to show that every new Pope was required to participate in Ninth Circle Satanic Cult ritual sacrifices of newborn children, including drinking their blood. The documents were presented to the ICLCJ Court by a prominent Vatican official and a former Vatican Curia employee.



Last month an investigator for the Irish Garda Police Force testified before the five judges and 27 jury members that marks on the bones of nearly 796 children found in an Irish Roman Catholic Nun septic tank indicated they had been ritually killed. The witness testified that forensic experts had confirmed the decapitation and dismemberment of the babies in the mass grave resembled the usual signs of ritualistic murder or child sacrifice.



A BBC documentary exposed a fifty-year scandal of child trafficking by the Catholic church in Spain. Over 300,000 babies were stolen from their parents up to the 1990s. Mothers were told their babies died and were buried in mass graves. The Catholic Church was said to have made $20 billion dollars on the adoptions.



Another witness testified that they were present during Pope Francis’ meetings with the military Junta during Argentine’s 1970′s Dirty War. According to the witness, Pope Francis helped traffic 30,000 children of missing political prisoners into an international child exploitation ring run by an office at the Vatican.



An ABC News special hinted that the devil resided at the Vatican. “Documents from Vatican secret archives presented to court clearly indicate that for centuries the Jesuits had a premeditated plan to ritually murder kidnapped newborn babies and then consume their blood,” the ICLCJ Court Chief Prosecutor told the five international judges and 27 jury members. “The plan was born of a twisted notion to derive spiritual power from the lifeblood of the innocent, thereby assuring political stability of the Papacy in Rome. These acts are not only genocidal but systemic and institutionalized in nature. Since at least 1773, they appear to have been performed by the Roman Catholic Church, Jesuits and every Pope.”



An ongoing and permanent inquiry was organized to investigate and prosecute others involved in possible crimes uncovered at the ICLCJ Court. On September 1 2014 an inquiry was scheduled to begin entitled the Permanent Commission into Child Trafficking and Ritual Sacrifice. Further litigation was expected to follow.



The 48 eyewitnesses identified their perpetrators as Catholic Popes Francis Bergoglio, John Paul II and Joseph Ratzinger; Anglican, United Church of Canada and Catholic Church officials including Cardinals and Catholic Jesuit Superior General Adolfo Pachon; the UK’s Queen Elizabeth and Prince Phillip, Anglican Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby and High Court Justice Judge Fulford; in the Netherlands: Dutch and Belgian cardinals and royals including Dutch Crown Prince Alfrink Bernhard, King Hendrick, consort to Queen Wilhelmina of Holland, Queen Beatrix, her father and vice-Roy, Prince Johan Friso and his wife Mabel Wisse Smit, former ministers, the top man of the Dutch army force and the under secretary of the Raad van State; officials of the Canadian, Australian, UK and US military and governments including the USA’s CIA, plus prominent government ministers, judges, politicians and businessmen of the US, Belgium, Holland, Canada, Australia, France, Ireland and the UK.



Arrest warrants on People v. Bergoglio et all were issued on July 19 2014. Court records would remain sealed for now according to yesterday’s ITCCS press release. The first ICLCJ Court regarded 50,000 missing Canadian native children. The court ended in Feb. 2013 guilty verdicts for 40 global elites including Queen Elizabeth.

The 50,000 native children went missing from those Canadian and mainly Catholic-owned residential schools. Over 34 child mass grave sites have been identified at some of those 80 native residential schools across Canada. Since 2008 Queen Elizabeth and the Canadian Government have continuously refused ITCCS’s requests for excavation.

The possible reason was not surprising. Queen Elizabeth and Prince Phillip were convicted in the disappearance of ten native children from the Kamloops residential school in British Columbia on October 10 1964. Parents haven’t seen their children since. The litigation also appeared to result in Pope Ratzinger’s resignation. Evidence from those cases could be found in Kevin Annett’s “Hidden No Longer“.



The ICLCJ International Court has over 450 Common Law Peace Officers in 13 countries, with 51 local chartered groups operating. Organizing funds were available for common law groups wishing to apply. To contact the ITCCS, ICLCJ Court in Brussels, its local affiliates, or to volunteer, email or call: itccscentral@gmail.com, hiddenfromhistory1@gmail.com, 386-323-5774 (USA) or 250-591-4573 (Canada).



About the Author

Judy Byington, MSW, LCSW, retired, author of “Twenty Two Faces: Inside the Extraordinary Life of Jenny Hill and Her Twenty Two Multiple Personalities” (www.22faces.com) is a retired therapist, Public Speaker, Activist and investigative journalist whose articles on international child exploitation rings have been cited on hundreds of blogs and websites. The ex-Supervisor, Alberta Mental Health and Director Provo Family Counseling Center is the CEO of Child Abuse Recovery and Speakers Bureau (www.ChildAbuseRecovery.com). If you have news tips about child abuse issues please email Judy info@22faces.com. You are invited to sign our petition to Congress for an investigation of the CIA mind control of children by clicking here: http://www.change.org/petitions/us-congress-survivors-request-investigation-cia-mind-control-of-children

We encourage you to Share our Reports, Analyses, Breaking News and Videos. Simply Click your Favorite Social Media Button and Share.