WTF: New Single Moms Would Be Punished By Republicans
This is crazy. Everyone knows that it is really hard to be a single mother. Not only are you making decisions alone that will affect your child’s life forever, you can be 100 percent financially responsible for them. But Springfield, Ill. Republicans want to punish new single mothers by making their lives even harder.

Now, legislators have a bill that says, if there is no father to sign the birth certificate, the state will not issue that child a birth certificate.

That’s insane. A child without a birth certificate can be barred from public schools and universities, any hope of ever receiving financial assistance, getting a passport, and even getting a driver’s license. Since a birth certificate is the legal document that serves as proof of US citizenship, a child without one will never even be able to apply for a Social Security number.

Republican representatives John D Cavaletto and Keith Wheeler sponsored the bill that would amend the state’s Vital Records Act. Here is the bill’s draconian thrust:

‘…provides that if the unmarried mother cannot or refuses to name the child’s father, either a father must be conclusively established by DNA evidence or, within 30 days after birth, another family member who will financially provide for the child must be named, in court, on the birth certificate.’ ‘Provides that absent DNA evidence or a family member’s name, a birth certificate will not be issued and the mother will be ineligible for financial aid from the State for support of the child.’

Last year, state Rep. Jeanne Ives had this to say during the debate of a bill that the Democrat-heavy House killed last year:

‘You need to have verifiable need. You better know who the daddy is and whether or not he can afford that child and whether or not the taxpayers should be funding that or if there’s actual child support he can provide.’

Did these legislative wizards ever think this through? Obviously, they did not. They are so hot to punish a wicked woman for having a child out-of-wedlock, I’m surprised they aren’t recommending burning a red letter into the child’s forehead.

Ed Yohnka of the Illinois American Civil Liberties Union said:

‘This is a punitive and outrageous bill that would have a hugely negative impact on those most likely in need of safety net programs and support.’

Tell me, exactly how would that work when the woman is the victim of rape or incest?

Featured Image: Beth and Anth via Flickr, Creative Commons

H/T: Chicagoist.com