Satirical Study Claiming Naturals Have Lower Self Esteem Causes Uproar… But Was It a Good Joke?
A few weeks ago, I saw an article circulating about black women with natural hair having lower self esteem than those who wear their hair straight. I was this close to being mad, but then they referenced a “study” done by Creme of Nature about this. Now, I know that natural hair brands aren’t exactly perfect, but come on, Creme of Nature knows better than that (looks like Creme of Nature also wasn’t feeling it, because the article now says that the study is by “Bountiful Hair”).

Upon further research, I realized that the article was supposed to be satire (insert eye roll here). Some women found it funny, citing that we needed to have a better sense of humor. Everyone has a different sense of humor, so I’m not going to criticize anyone for thinking it was funny. Some didn’t realize it was satire because a screen shot was circulating that didn’t really make it clear and then a slew of outrage began. Blogs posted about the study and I saw several Facebook and Twitter posts in response.

While I knew the article was fake, I personally wasn’t laughing. Why? Because, in my opinion, the opinions and ideas presented in articles or jokes like this aren’t far removed or far fetched enough to be considered funny. When you make a joke about not wearing your natural hair because you won’t be able to find a man, it sounds ridiculous, but it’s also a real concern of some women. Just think of all of the “What does he think of my hair?” type posts and videos. Or when an article comes out that says women won’t wear their natural hair because it makes them feel ugly – that’s not far-fetched or a hyperbole. That’s true for some women.

Don’t get me wrong, I can take a joke. However, some of the current criticisms of natural hair make it clear that it’s a bit too soon to make “jokey jokes” like this. Call me when children are no longer being sent home from school for wearing their natural hair because it’s “too distracting,” or news anchors aren’t fired for taking their weave out. When wearing our natural hair is no longer seen as “brave” or “militant” and it’s just our awesome hair that we love, I promise, I’ll be in the front row laughing.

Do you think it’s too soon to make jokes about natural hair?