Yale College Calendar with Pertinent Deadlines < Yale University
This calendar includes a partial summary of deadlines given in the Academic Regulations and in the Yale College online publication Undergraduate Regulations. Unless otherwise specified, references are to sections in the Academic Regulations, and deadlines fall at 5 p.m.

Fall Term 2019

Aug. 21 W Residences open to upper-level students, 9 a.m.

Online Course Selection opens



Aug. 23 F Residences open to first-year students, 9 a.m.

Required registration meetings for first-year students, 8 p.m.



Aug. 27 T Required registration meetings for upper-level students (Class of 2022, 9 a.m.; Class of 2021, 9:45 a.m.; Class of 2020, 10:30 a.m.).

Preliminary course schedules due at 11:59 p.m.



Aug. 28 W Fall-term classes begin, 8:20 a.m.

Aug. 30 F Friday classes do not meet; Monday classes meet instead.

Deadline to complete applications for financial aid for the 2020 spring term, for students not enrolled in the 2019 fall term. See Undergraduate Regulations.



Sept. 2 M Labor Day; classes do not meet.

Sept. 9 M Final course schedules due for the Class of 2023.*

Sept. 10 T Final course schedules due for the Classes of 2021 and 2022.*

Sept. 11 W Final course schedules due for the Class of 2020.*

All students planning to complete degree requirements at the end of the fall term must file a petition by this date.

Final deadline to apply for a fall-term Leave of Absence. See Leave of Absence, Withdrawal, and Reinstatement.

Withdrawal from Yale College on or before this date entitles a student to a full rebate of fall-term tuition. See Undergraduate Regulations.



Sept. 19 TH Last day to withdraw from a course offered in the first half of the fall term without the course appearing on the transcript. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.

Last day to convert from a letter grade to the Credit/D/Fail option in a course offered in the first half of the fall term. See Grades.



Sept. 21 S Withdrawal from Yale College on or before this date entitles a student to a rebate of one-half of fall-term tuition. See Undergraduate Regulations.

Oct. 4 F Last day to withdraw from a course offered in the first half of the fall term. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.

Oct. 14 M Classes begin for courses offered in the second half of the fall term.

Oct. 15 T October recess begins, 11 p.m.

Deadline to apply for a spring 2020 Term Abroad. See Special Arrangements.



Oct. 21 M Classes resume, 8:20 a.m.

Oct. 25 F Midterm.

Last day to withdraw from a fall full-term course without the course appearing on the transcript. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.

Last day to convert from a letter grade to the Credit/D/Fail option in a fall full-term course.

Deadline to apply for double credit in a single-credit course. See Special Arrangements.

Withdrawal from Yale College on or before this date entitles a student to a rebate of one-quarter of the fall term’s tuition. See Undergraduate Regulations.



Nov. 7 TH Last day to withdraw from a course offered in the second half of the fall term without the course appearing on the transcript. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.

Last day to convert from a letter grade to the Credit/D/Fail option in a course offered in the second half of the fall term. See Grades.



Nov. 23 S November recess begins, 9 p.m.

Nov. 30 S Last day to relinquish on-campus housing for the spring term without charge. See Undergraduate Regulations.

Dec. 2 M Classes resume, 8:20 a.m.

Dec. 6 F Classes end, 5:30 p.m.; reading period begins.

Last day to withdraw from a fall full-term course or a course offered in the second half of the fall term. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.



Dec. 12 TH Reading period ends, 5 p.m.

Final examinations begin, 7 p.m.†

Deadline for all course assignments, other than term papers and term projects. This deadline can be extended only by a Temporary Incomplete authorized by the student’s residential college dean.



Dec. 13 F Application for 2020 Yale Summer Session Programs Abroad opens.

Dec. 18 W Examinations end, 5:30 p.m.; winter recess begins.

Deadline for all term papers and term projects. This deadline can be extended only by a Temporary Incomplete authorized by the student's residential college dean.



Dec. 19 TH Residences close, 12 noon.





Spring Term 2020

Jan. 8 W Residences open, 9 a.m.

Jan. 12 SU Required registration meetings for first-year students, 9 p.m.

Application for 2020 New Haven and online Summer Session courses opens. Rolling admissions for New Haven and online courses.



Jan. 13 M Spring-term classes begin, 8:20 a.m.

Upper-level students pick up registration materials by 5 p.m. in their residential college dean's office.



Jan. 17 F Friday classes do not meet; Monday classes meet instead.

Jan. 20 M Martin Luther King Jr. Day; classes do not meet.

Jan. 22 W Final course schedules due for the Class of 2023.*

Jan. 23 TH Final course schedules due for the Classes of 2021 and 2022.*

Jan. 24 F Final course schedules due for the Class of 2020.*

Last day for students in the Class of 2020 to petition for permission to complete the requirements of two majors.



Jan. 27 M Final deadline to apply for a spring-term Leave of Absence. See Leave of Absence, Withdrawal, and Reinstatement.

Withdrawal from Yale College on or before this date entitles a student to a full rebate of spring-term tuition. See Undergraduate Regulations.



Feb. 4 T Last day to withdraw from a course offered in the first half of the spring term without the course appearing on the transcript. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.

Last day to convert from a letter grade to the Credit/D/Fail option in a course offered in the first half of the spring term. See Grades.



Feb. 6 TH Withdrawal from Yale College on or before this date entitles a student to a rebate of one-half of spring-term tuition. See Undergraduate Regulations.

Feb. 13 TH Deadline for applications for Yale Summer Session Programs Abroad.

Feb. 19 W Last day to withdraw from a course offered in the first half of the spring term. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.

Feb. 27 TH Classes begin for courses offered in the second half of the spring term.

Feb. 28 F Deadline to apply for Non-Yale Summer Abroad.

Mar. 5 TH Deadline to apply for a fall 2020 Term Abroad or a 2020–2021 Year Abroad.

Mar. 6 F Midterm.

Spring recess begins, 5:30 p.m.

Last day to withdraw from a spring full-term course without the course appearing on the transcript. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.

Last day to convert from a letter grade to the Credit/D/Fail option in a spring full-term course.

Deadline to apply for double credit in a single-credit course. See Special Arrangements.

Withdrawal from Yale College on or before this date entitles a student to a rebate of one-quarter of the spring term’s tuition. See Undergraduate Regulations.



Mar. 23 M Classes resume, 8:20 a.m.

Apr. 2 TH Last day to withdraw from a course offered in the second half of the spring term without the course appearing on the transcript. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.

Last day to convert from a letter grade to the Credit/D/Fail option in a course offered in the second half of the spring term. See Grades.



Apr. 24 F Classes end, 5:30 p.m.; reading period begins.

Last day to withdraw from a spring full-term course or a course offered in the second half of the spring term. See Withdrawal from Courses and Grades.



Apr. 30 TH Reading period ends, 5 p.m.

Final examinations begin, 7 p.m.†

Deadline for all course assignments, other than term papers and term projects. This deadline can be extended only by a Temporary Incomplete authorized by the student’s residential college dean.



May 1 F Applications for fall-term Leaves of Absence due. See Leave of Absence, Withdrawal, and Reinstatement.

May 6 W Examinations end, 5:30 p.m.

Deadline for all term papers and term projects. This deadline can be extended only by a Temporary Incomplete authorized by the student's residential college dean.



May 7 TH Residences close for all students except seniors, 12 noon.

May 18 M University Commencement.