Providing biblical counsel to sexually confused youth soon illegal in Cincy…
If you would like to read one of the many 2-minute arguments made today in opposition to this law, mine is here. More thoughts and analysis of the meeting to come soon, Lord willing. (Spoiler: The new law was approved despite the broad opposition of almost every voter present, many of whom were pastors.)

[NOTE: The text of the law applies to “mental health professionals” while working with minors. It only applies to those pastors that are licensed. The text of my article has been slightly changed to account for that. I also changed the title of the post, because it was misleading people. That was my fault, and I apologize for it.]

At today’s meeting of the Cincinnati City Council law and public safety committee, Council Member Chris Seelbach “will propose an ordinance that would impose a $200-a-day fine on a therapist or counselor practicing the therapy that aims to “change” lesbians, gay men, bisexuals or transgender people from their sexual orientation or gender identity,” according to Cincinnati.com.

According to the article it will likely be a done deal on Wednesday of this week. Seelbach is confident that he has the necessary votes both to make it out of committee tonight and to pass it as law on Wednesday. Although a few states have passed similar laws, no major city has done so, and Cincinnati.com is exultant in claiming that Cincinnati is leading the way in such wickedness.

Why “wickedness”? Because this law is nothing less than a denial of the biblical doctrine of sanctification, threatening fines of $73,000 per year to a counselor that uses 1 Corinthians 6:9-11 to help those caught in sin: “Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor homosexuals, nor thieves, nor the covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers, will inherit the kingdom of God. Such were some of you; but you were washed, but you were sanctified, but you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and in the Spirit of our God.” (1 Corinthians 6:9-11).

In other words, those that refuse to bow the knee to the idol of sexual anarchy being promoted across our land will be forced to pay the price.

I’ve written before about this choice that churches are going to face. Here is how I summed it up:

Every church in the country will have to decide which side we are on and our decision and witness will be made public. After a time of hemming and hawing, we’ll find we have only two options: 1. Publicly opposing homosexual identity and relations by quoting Scripture.

2. Publicly promoting homosexual identity and relations by quoting Scripture.

It looks like pastors and churches in Cincinnati will face this choice sooner rather than later. Now is a great opportunity for churches to speak up for God’s holy law and the grace he offers to sinners. This is not a political question. It is a question of whether or not we are ashamed of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Do we believe in the new birth that Christ speaks of in John 3? Do we believe in the sanctification without which no man will see God? Or do we fear man?

No more hemming and hawing. It’s time to decide now. If your church is in Cincinnati, the choice has been set before you. The Cincinnati City Council will meet this Wednesday, December 9, 2015 at 2 p.m. in Council Chambers, Room 300, City Hall, 801 Plum St, Cincinnati, OH 45202. [Please note that the time for public comment is at 1:30pm. My understanding is that each person will be given 2 minutes to speak.]

Please come and speak against this anti-Christian persecution. Please ask your church leaders to be there for the sake of Christians and for the sake of those tempted by sexual perversion in our city.

[Edited to change “pastor” to “counselor” and “church” to “people” in one place.]

[Closing comments. I think we commented this one out, people. Thanks for your contributions.]