The Princeton union. (Princeton, Minn.) 1876-1976, October 03, 1907, Page 2, Image 2
Newspaper Page Text

I1- I i ,,ii ,..,..i...,. i, government toward benevolent assim ilation of foreigners who are admitted under the laws, and must be admitted no matter whether we want them or not, until the laws are altered. It is a highly important movement. Now for the first time the national government has opened its eyes to the fact.that a serious situation, not a scientific the ory, confronts us. This new creation in Secretary Straus' department, au thorized by an act of the last congress, Is a step toward controlling that seri ous situation. Heretofore all our immigrants have come into the country in a haphazard, blundering way, looking out for them selves altogether, preys of sharks and crooks, many of them practically help less and hopeless. With the United States admitting them through the El lis island gates, it has been a pitiable case of the blind leading the blind. Uncle Sam has been blind to the perils of the situation and blind to the op portunities presented him in properly handling his incoming wards. He has been a careless and. inefficient guard ian. Everybody who has made even a casual study of the immigration problem is aware of this fact, which is not creditable to the government. Without direction or advice other than that afforded by the steamship companies and the birds of prey who infest the lower end of Manhattan Is 3Glcl what becomes of the immigrants ,"iho.now' reach our shores to the num iber" of more than a million a year? SVell, most of them stay In three or four of the biggest cities. New York catches and..holds in the neighborhood a quarter of a. million a year. Chi .ac assimilates Into its slums a hun- jh-o/l thousand, or more. Philadelphia jtets many, Boston, moreIthan^the Back Hay district can stand fory.wItn' Distribution Immigrants HOW UNCLE SAM INTENDS TO PROPERLY HANDLE HIS INCOMING WARDS. The Department of Commerce and Labor's New Division of InformationAccomplishments of Terence V. Powderly, Official Head of the National Employment Bureau. Why Organized Labor Opposes It. ROBERTUS LOVE. THtiony E latest phase of the immigra problem seems to be stir ring up something of a hornets' nest In some parts of theBlack country the forces of organized labor are up in arms against the work of the new division of information in the de partment of commerce and labor. This division is apart of the bureau of im migration. The man in charge of it is Terence V. Powderly, than whom no individual in labor circles is better kiiown throughout the world. It seems somewhat anomalous that organized labor should oppose a move ment officially headed by the man who for fourteen years was grand master workman of the Knights of Labor, the biggest and most powerful organiza tion of workingmen ever formed on the globe. With more than a million members the Knights of Labor force for years wielded a remarkable influ ence upon American commerce and In dustry. Why, then, is this thus? Mr. Powderly, as chief of the divi sion of information, is really the man ager of Uncle Sam's big new free em ployment bureau. He is, in fact, much i more than that, but he is that, and for that reason certain labor leaders de cry the division of information. Over and beyond the fact that this new sec tion of the bureau of immigration is a free employment bureau of national scope floats ever in view the still more important fact that the primary object of the innovation in government serv ice ts to distribute the hordes of Immi grants who come to the United States to points where they will do the most good for themselves and for the coun try which has accepted them and must assimilate them. Highly Important Movement. Boiled right down to its bare bones, the division of information is an in telligent effort upon the part of this TERENCE V. POWDERLY AND SECRETARY OSCAR S. &T8ATJ& equa nimity, and smaller cities catch more -than their full quota. Only a compar atively small number of the incomers ^o out to the liberal farming countries, iaorth, south and southwest, and inherit 11t the part of the earth that is coming to themif they find it out. Thus we have in New York such flourishing cutthroat societies as theucation. Hand, with its branches in the other cities. We have great slum dis tricts almost exclusively settled by the pauper outcasts of Europe, who drop even lower in the social scale here than the pits into which they were born at home. They produce large and swarming hives of children, who grow up dirty, ignorant, depraved and utterly unfit for American citizenship. This Is speaking, of course, in a gener al way. Everybody knows that some of these city staying immigrants rise above their surroundings and make good citizens. But the tendency is the other way. Gasping For Settlers. And yet far from the madding crowd In these big cities virgin areas are sim ply gasping for settlers. In the south ern states, beginning with Maryland and Virginia and continuing through the Carollnas, Georgia and Alabama, there Is a constant cry for more peo ple, more farmers, more laborers, more mill hands. Labor skilled and unskill ed is wanted, and men are wanted to settle on the unimproved lands and make them blossom productively. A similar condition obtains In the southwestern states, though perhaps not to alike degree of urgency. South ern Missouri, Arkansas, Louisiana Texas, Oklahoma and Indian Territory present splendid opportunities for set tlers, particularly for those who come from the southern countries of Europe and therefore will be acclimated the moment they step off the train. It is a well known fact that some of ourtelligent northwestern statesMinnesota and Wisconsin, for instancehave been settled largely by immigrants from the Scandinavian countries, who fancy a little cold weather now and then be- cause it reminds them of home. These states have flourisned amazingly un der the Scandinavian farmer's tillage. Heretofore the average would be im migrant with a yearning toward Amer ica, the land of the free and the home of the brave, has heard of nothing more in this country than New York city and perhaps a small fringe of the Atlantic coast running northward therefrom. The rest of the United States to him is without form and void. Yet many thousands of these Immigrants are small farmers In Italy and other countries, pitifully cramped for land, who would be gloriously glad to know that they can obtain at a cheap price a few acres of good farm ing land in America. The new division of information fa thered by Secretary Straus and man aged by M*. Powderly simply pro poses to inform the immigrant as to his opportunities, to point out to himare that America is considerably larger than the city of New York and the en virons of Buzzards Bay. The work really began about a year ago. Mr. Powderly had been making a study of the matter of distributing Immigration. He quietly made trips through the south and a voyage to Europe in furtherance of his theories. Then Secretary Straus appointed him to his present position. "I appointed. Mr. Powderly," says the secretary, "because I know him to be one of the best informed and most enlightened men in the United States." Tribute Not to Bs Despised. This tribute from Oscar S. Straus, who is beyond question the most schol arly man in. the president's cabinet, is not to despised. I is a tribute not otily to Terence V. Powderly, but to Organized labor, with which Mr. Pow derly has been associated prominently from his boyhood. Mr. Powderly was,born of#Irish par cntr.ue In northern Pennsylvania fifty- eight years ago. He was bred to toll. He was a graduate machinist when he reached twenty-one and the head ot a local labor union. Then when the Knights of Labor began to flourish this young Pennsylvania workman was elected time and time again to the head of that vast body. He was elect ed three times mayor of Scranton, Pa., his home town. During McKinley's administration he was the commis sioner of immigration. In that post he had opportunity to study the immi gration problem in all its phases, and it appears that the matter of proper distribution appealed most strongly to him. Mr. Powderly Is also a lawyer and has practiced before the supreme court of the United States. As to ed ucationwell, the present writer not long ago heard him tell this little story: "When I was commissioner of im migration an important looking per son came into my office and made a remark to the effect that a man in my position ought to have a university ed I wheeled around in my chair and replied something like this: "*Yes, sir, he ought, and I have a university education. I matriculated very early in the university of hard knocks, of honest toil, of practical ex perience. I took all the regular courses and most of the elective combinations. I passed the examinations without cramming. I never flunked. I got my diploma, and then I was elected tc several professorships in the same uni versity. I now hold the chair of immi gration. How do you like me?' "Whereupon," concluded Mr. Pow derly, with that fine smile of his that won't wear off, "my supercilious vis itor folded his tents like the Arabs and as silently stole away." Mr. Powderly attended a country school for a few months, but had to qnlt when he was thirteen owing to defective eyesight He declares that fie never saw the stars and never beH. lieved in them except as a fairy tale for children until he was eighteen years old. Then he got a strong pair of spectacles and felt like Christopher Columbus discovering anew world, ex cept that Powderly discovered a mul tiplicity of worlds. Objects of the Bureau. The division of immigration Is inhall constant correspondence with the gov ernors of states and their immigration officials. The object is to ascertain where labor is wanted and where set tlers are desired. Then the informa tion division directs the Immigrants to the jobs and the settlements. In representatives are to mingle with the immigrants on shipboard and Inform them as to chances for employ ment and for acquiring farm land. Mr. Powderly states that his division now has jobs waiting for approximate ly a quarter of a million men, women and children throughout the country. There Is no lack of work, he says, for anybody who wants to work, either American or foreign import. If the foreigners must be imported they mus', be distributed. It is simply a matte of distribution and assimilation or con centration and stagnation. This division of information estab lished by Secretary Straus is not to merely aid in distributing immigrants. It will furnish American workingmen as well as immigrants not only infor mation where work may be obtained, but it will actually obtain for them a promise of employment before they leave one part of the country for an other. Organized labor in some quarters has. severely criticised Secretary Straus for the creation of this so called free em ployment agency. These critics hold that Mr. Straus is not a friend to union labor. They hold that the igno rant European immigrant will work more cheaply than the intelligent American and therefore that the new system of distribution will tend to cut down the general scale of wages. As to this point no doubt the divergence of opinion will be wide. A fierce fight against the new move ment is imminent In the forthcoming congress. Lined up alongside the ad ministration will be many state gov ernors and local immigration officials who are trying to get settlers to take their unoccupied lands. The railroads also will have a hand in the matter. They want to sell tickets and haul produce. Also in line with the admin istration will be the various charitable organizations in the great cities. On the other hand will be those earnest persons who hold that America is for Americans and the devil take the rank outsider. The problem has several distinct phases. It is ethical, social and indus trial. Are we our brothers' keepers or are we merely our brothers' support ers? Something must be done with the immigrants. They are here, and they coming by the million. From pres ent indications the proposition will be fought to some kind of finish on the floors of congress to the exclusion of the free seed problem and the tariff. Lobster Monstrosity. Charles A. Chase of Bath, Me., cap tured a freak in the lobster line the other afternoon while fishing ten miles east of Seguin, Me., says the Kennebec Journal. He hauled in a lobster which measured thirty-two inches and weigh ed thirteen pounds. The shell was cov ered with barnacles and was judged by old fishermen to be at least ten years old. It was the largest lobster caught in that vicinity for many years. Swimming Match For Cripples. The Paris Union of Cripples is ar ranging a swimming match, open to cripples only, to be held In the Seine. Prospects of Sir Thomas. When Liptonlcome*.to lift the cup. Though he's a gritty tar, Instead, of getting that same cup He'll get another Jar. V P. Pitzer "in New York Sun. MMMMMriMMil pmnnnnntmi^^ American Society of Equity Directory 2^' ?ckmidt No i 4 District, will meet the first and third Friday of every month at the Schmidt district school house No. 4. at 8 p. m. GEORGE SCHMIDT, Pres. H. F. HOLTHUS, Sec. No. 42T3. Bogus Brook, will meeet seconld and fourth Friday of eactht at Emil Jopp house. A. SCHMATZ, Sec. No. 374, BerryJ,District, will meet the first QFt7*?** Br rthe schoo hmonth mo?th a v?r house district 24, at 7:30 p. m. O. D. ORN'E, Pres. L. A. HATCH, Sec. No^ 4 I% Wopdard Brook, will meet the first and third Saturday of each month at the Woodard Brook school house at 8 ALBERT RIEBE, Pres. FRANK MAGNUSON, Sec. No. 4804, Blue Hill, will meet the first and third Saturday of every month at the Wheeler school house at 8 p.m. JAMES DUGAN. Pres. FRED STEHL. Sec. No. 4703, Greenbuah, will meet the second and fourth Saturday of each month at the Aug. Kines house, in school district 5, at 6 p.m. S. E. TILLEY, Pres. E C. STARK, Sec. No. 4991, Baldwin District, will meet the third Saturday in every month ati the Baldwin town hall, at 8 p. m. B. FISK, Pres. R. E. HIGGIKS, Sec. No. 4211, Oxlip, will meet the first and third Tuesday of each month at the Gates school house in Dist. No. 32, at 8 p. m. GEO. TOMMNSOK, Pres. E. RADEKE, Sec. No. 5057, West Branch, will meet thefirstand third Saturday of each month at the school houst, Dist. No. 4, at 8 p. m. ARCHIE TAYLOR, Pres, J. L. WETSEL, Sec No. 4117, Zimmerman, will meet the first and third Saturday of each month in Woodman at 1:30 p. m. H. B. PRATT, Pres. J. L. FREELAUD, Sec. iByers Has Bargains all the time And carries continu ally a large stock of the very best I General Merchandise I D. BYERS Bottom Price Cash Store. IF IT ISN'T A Victor IT ISN'T THE BEST. Prices of ($10, $17, $22, $30, Hachlnes $40, $50, $60, $100. Records 35c, 60c and $1.00. All Supplies and Latest Records. J. C. BORDEN, Only Authorized Agent for Princeton. T. J. KALIHER, Proprietor, Princeton, Minn. Single and Double Rigs at a noments' Notice. Commercial Travelers'Trade a Specialty. The Rural Telephone Co. THE PEOPLE'S FAVORITE. Lines to Dalbo, Cambridge, Santi ago. Freer and Qlendorado. Good Service in Princeton and to all adjoining points. We connect with the Northwestern Long Distance Telephone. Patronize a Home Concern. Service Day and Night. ^iUiituuttuitiituiUiUiituiiUiuuiaittiUiiUiUiuuiiutuiuuttutuiuuitutuutuiiutuiuiumS M. S. RUTHERFORD Siilid S&tiM<:tior 1 IN BIG CHUNKS awaits the carpenter and builder who gets his 3 lumber from the Princeton Lumber Company. 3 You see it's well seasoned, the best to be had for 3 the price, and therefore "works up" well. The 3 owner and tenant of a house built of material 3 procured here knOws that warping and shrinking 3 will not annoy him as the days go by. 3 GEO. A. COATES, Manager. 1 First National Bank of Princeton, Minnesota. Paid up Capital, $30,000 A General Banking Busi ness Transacted. Loans Made on Approved Security. Interest Paid on Time De posits. Foreign and Domestic Ex change. S. S. PETTERSON, President. T. H. CALEY, Vice Pres. J. F. PETTERSON, Cashier. Security State Bank of Princeton, Minnesota. Capital and Surplus, $33,000. Buys and Sells Foreign Exchange. Steamship Tickets to and from Europe, insurance and Real Estate Loans. Transacts a General Banking Business. JOHN GOULDING, President. G. A. EATON, Cashier. Dots a G*n*ral BANE OF PRINCETON. I J. J. SKAHEN, Cashier and Manager. j..|. ,|.fr,i,- MMM Banking Business Collecting and Farm and Insurance. Village Loans. ,|.,t.,t,.j, ,t,, ,i,*++++ tJ,,t,,j, ,v .j, W Make A Specialty Farm Loansof Princeton, Minn. ,t,tf,,t $ E. L. M. S. RUTHERFORD & CO. I Odd Fellows Building, *'&^*h*1&H*****^^ ,1, J, ,1, fl, ft, ,x, fl$ Ipeeeg&eeeeg eesseeeeeee^. To My Patrons And the Public Generally: I gives me pleasure to announce that I am now occupying my new store in the Townsend block, on First street, and that I am prepared to meet all demands for fine shoes. The stock is all new and comprises the best makes in Gentlemen's, Ladies' and Children's Shoes that can be obtained from American manufacturers. The variety is complete in every detail and the prices are the lowest possible. I respectfully solicit a continuance of the public patronage, and take this opportunity to thank my many patrons for the favors which I have received from them in the past. Everyone is cordially in vited to call at my new place of business and inspect my extensive stock. Very respectfully, Solomon Long V& J-*- "WW W W ,vMCMILLAN g.^, ,tllIl tJi tJi "ft