Mugshot and Criminal History
Updated July 02, 2015 .

Mugshots and arrests of Sean "Piddy" Combs, also known as P. Diddy, Puffy, Diddy, Puff Daddy, and Puff, is an actor, rapper, record producer, songwriter and an entrepreneur. Ranked as 15th in top earnings among musicians, Combs' net worth in 2015 was $735 million.

Arrested Following a Shooting at a NYC Nightclub

On December 27, 1999, Combs and then-girlfriend Jennifer Lopez were at the Club New York, celebrating a soon-to-be released album by Jamal “Shyne” Barrow, when allegedly Combs and another patron, Matthew Allen (a.k.a. Scar) got into a confrontation.

It was reported that as Combs and his group were leaving the club when he accidently knocked into Allen, causing him to drop his drink.

Allen responded by shoving Combs and the situation intensified.

Witnesses told police that Combs and Shyne pulled out semiautomatic pistols after one of Allen's friend threw a stack of money at Combs but that it was Shyne (not Combs) who fired his gun, injuring three people in the club.

Combs, Lopez, bodyguard Anthony Jones and driver, Wardel Fenderson fled the scene in Combs' Lincoln Navigator. Police stopped the vehicle after Fenderson ran a red light.

Police found a loaded 9 mm pistol, which had been reported as stolen, inside of the car and the four were arrested, questioned and released.

On January 4, 2000, Combs went before the grand jury investigating the nightclub shooting.

He was indicted on weapons charges and later for bribery after his driver Wardel Fenderson testified that Lopez and Jones offered him $50,000 and a diamond ring if he agreed to say he owned the gun found in the car.

Acquitted

On March 16, 2001, Combs, represented by attorney Johnnie Cochran Jr., was acquitted of the weapons possession and bribery charges.

The jury also acquitted Combs' bodyguard Anthony Jones of all charges.

Shyne was found guilty of assault, gun possession and reckless endangerment and received a ten year sentence. Shyne claimed that Combs snitched on him in order to avoid prison. He later referenced the incident within the lyrics of some of his rap songs accusing Combs of "snitching like a bitch."

Soon after the trial, Combs' changed his moniker from "Puffy" to "P. Diddy", claiming the trial had changed him.

"I've changed, I've matured," Combs' told Time. "This whole thing has made me deeper. It's not what it was about before ... I want to sit down and think about it and try and understand it on an intellectual level."

In 2012 Allen was shot to death in a New York nightclub.

Also in 2012 Combs and Shayne reportedly mended their relationship during Paris Fashion Week.

Other P. Diddy Arrests:

In April 1999 Combs and two accomplices were arrested for the assault of music executive Steve Stoute of Interscope Records.

Stoute was the manager for Nas, whose video for "Hate Me Now" featured Combs being crucified. Though Combs had willingly filmed the video scene earlier that year, he later demanded that the images be removed.

Stoute's refusal led to an argument and Combs' arrest for aggravated assault.

This was followed by more negative publicity as The Lox left Bad Boy Records, and a recording session with Lil' Kim and Lil' Cease (both of B.I.G.'s Junior M.A.F.I.A.)

Combs eventually paid Stoutes after a civil settlement of an undisclosed amount was later reached.

The P. Diddy Tupac Murder Hoax of 2014

In September 2014 an internet article went viral after reporting that Diddy had been arrested for the September 1996 gang-like murder of rap artist Tupac Shakur. It was later determined that the article was a hoax designed to drive traffic to the website where it was posted.

The murder of Tupac Shakur has never been solved.

Arrested for Assault With a Kettle Bell

On June 22, 2015, P. Diddy Combs was arrested for assault with a deadly weapon (a kettle bell) at the University of California.

According to TMZ, Combs was watching as his son Justin Combs was being yelled at by an assistant coach Sal Alosi during football practice. After practice Combs allegedly approached the coach in his office right before he was arrested.



It was later reported that Combs approached Alosi because he was being overly abusive to his son and publicly humiliated him several times in the past.

A spokesperson for Combs said the reports of the incident were "wholly inaccurate."

Combs was arrested and charged with three counts of assault with a deadly weapon, one count of making terrorist threats and one count of battery.