‘The Simpsons’ Renewed For Record-Breaking Seasons 29 & 30 On Fox
Amid strong-as-ever ratings, Fox has renewed The Simpsons for an unprecedented 29th and 30th seasons. The renewal takes the long-running hit animated series to 669 episodes, the largest number of episodes for any scripted television series ever, and breaks the record previously set by Gunsmoke (635 episodes).

The cast also has been locked in for both new seasons. Dan Castellaneta, Julie Kavner, Nancy Cartwright, Yeardley Smith, Hank Azaria and Harry Shearer are all confirmed to return.

Season-to-date, The Simpsons is averaging 7.2 million total multi-platform viewers. The series’ milestone 600th episode on October 16 registered its largest rating (3.6/11 Live + 7) and seven-day multi-platform audience (9.9 million viewers) since January, as well as 1.3 million viewers on Hulu and FoxNow, representing its largest seven-day average streaming audience in more than three years.

“This is yet another record-setting moment for what is truly a landmark series,” said Dana Walden and Gary Newman, Chairmen and CEOs, Fox Television Group. “The Simpsons has meant so much to the network, the studio and everyone at Fox, and its continued cultural impact around the globe is a testament to the combined brilliance of Matt, Jim and Al. Congratulations to everyone who works on this groundbreaking series – from the voice cast and producers to the writers and production team – you comprise one of the greatest collections of creative talent in the history of the medium. And to the millions of Simpsons fans around the world, thank you for watching all these years. We’re happy to tell you there’s lots more to come.”

Currently in production on its 28th season, The Simpsons has won 32 Emmy Awards, 34 Annie Awards, a 2016 People’s Choice Award and a 2016 Environmental Media Award. It was the first animated series to win a Peabody Award and was nominated for an Academy Award in 2012 for the theatrical short The Longest Daycare. The Simpsons Movie was a hit feature film, the mega-attraction The Simpsons Ride at Universal Studios has received historic expansion updates with the addition of “Springfield” and the show was honored with a Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2000. It has been named the “Best Show of the 20th Century” by Time magazine, and called the “Best TV Show Ever” by Vulture in 2016.

The Simpsons is a Gracie Films Production in association with 20th Century Fox Television. James L. Brooks, Matt Groening and Al Jean are the executive producers.