John Legend is our client, so it's an easy ask. It shouldn't interfere with any other ask if he's able to do it I know he is happy to help. And, of course, let me know if I can help with either of the other two asks.

John Oliver had just worked with on a Got Your 6 event and he was great, so we just went back to his same team (manager/agent). The ask was for him to do a short sketch/conversation to kick off program. They are supposed to get back to us shortly, fingers crossed.

If Kives can help with Kate M. that is awesome. We have been talking to Lauren Roseman (NBC PR) who said that Kate would be happy to film a video.

Sorry to add to any confusion and let me know if I can help streamline in any way.







capriciamarshall@gmail.com>

Sorry Craig - This is happening quickly to get a cool quotient in the event - as all other pursuits have failed miserably. We have hours to get someone else locked so this is not a yawner.

Legend came up in conversation with his wife who was interested in helping out on Droga and the event - but then was not going to be in town - but he may be.

On Oliver we have ask thru Greg Propper and JD

McKinnon - Katie is already into conversations with her people.

Of course any help you can provide would be incredibly appreciated. Assume Seth Myers is a no - ??

cminassian@clintonfoundation.org>











I can talk to John Oliver but what did we ask and who did we ask through?







Kate McKinnon is Kives







I wish someone had asked us about Legend - we have two to other CF asks into him















Sent from my iPhone





On Feb 20, 2015, at 2:46 PM, Capricia Marshall <







On Feb 20, 2015, at 2:46 PM, Capricia Marshall < capriciamarshall@gmail.com > wrote:







I think we are cool with all but Ashton -

Can we let those other rip Terri?/Bari?









<greg@propperdaley.com>













Ashton

Legend (already active)

John Oliver (already active)

Kate McKinnon (working with Katie on it)

Chenowith

Jordan Sparks

Idina Menzel

Neal Patrick Harris (after the Oscars this weekend)

Bradley Cooper

















<capriciamarshall@gmail.com>









We need to fill a few slots for the event -- and are seeking out interesting folks -- ANY HELP ASAP appreciated - Sarah/Tom can turn a letter around asap. Terri/Bari - let us know if any of these give you heartburn







WE NEED THE FOLLOWING CATEGORIES (some suggestions within):







Celebrity - they are issue oriented or can help with opening/closing of the show- and most live in NYC:

Brad and Matt

Jennifer Garner

Lupita - possible? Katie?

Ashton Kuchner

John Legend - Greg has ask out

John Oliver - Greg has ask out

Aziz Anzari - JD has ask out

Kate McKinnon (a Merkle bit) not in person but video?

Kristin Chenowith - broadway

Michael Strahan

Idina Menzel - broadway

Blake Lively - broadway

Bradley Cooper - broadway

Emma Stone - broadway

Neel Patrick Harris - broadway



Elizabeth Hassleback

Mary Matalin

Jordan Sparks















Other Men:

Josh Kushner with Oscar Healthcare - from CHMI

Shrivers

Luis Alberto Moreno - IDB



















On Fri, Feb 20, 2015 at 11:01 AM, Capricia Marshallwrote:



















--







GREG PROPPER



PARTNER



















OFFICE | 888-252-8841

CELL | 202-431-5066



WWW.PROPPERDALEY.COM













If you all are cool with them....we can help with:



On Fri, Feb 20, 2015 at 2:25 PM, Greg Propperwrote:















On Fri, Feb 20, 2015 at 2:52 PM, Craig Minassianwrote:



On Fri, Feb 20, 2015 at 11:59 AM, Capricia Marshallwrote:





--

GREG PROPPER PARTNER





OFFICE | 888-252-8841 CELL | 202-431-5066

WWW.PROPPERDALEY.COM

-- Yes!