Best of the Web Today: About That Other Debacle
If you're the kind of driver who can't help but gawk at the wreckage when you pass an accident--and honestly, who isn't?--you'll enjoy today's lengthy account in The Wall Street Journal of the runup to last week's Putin-Assad triumph.

Right off the bat we learn, which is to say our suspicion is confirmed, that this was a case of a willful president with atrocious political instincts. When Obama consulted his cabinet and top staffers about the idea of seeking congressional approval for a strike in Syria, "senior adviser Dan Pfeiffer pegged the chances of Congress balking at 40%. . . . Mr. Obama took the gamble anyway and set aside the impending strikes to try to build domestic and international support for such action."

In retrospect, it seems clear that while Pfeiffer was on the right track in warning that Congress might scuttle the plan, he underestimated the probability of that outcome. Given the political obstacles that stood in the way of the president's call for authorization to use force--Republican control of the House, Democratic misgivings about military intervention, and, most important, crosspartisan public misgivings--it seems absurd to suggest Obama was ever likelier than not to win a vote.

In fact, one could make a case that the probability of gaining congressional assent was already so low as to be indistinguishable from zero on Aug. 31, when the president announced his request. The best counterargument is that in the ensuing days, Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry did such an inept job making their case that they worsened the odds. That would imply they had at least a slim chance of success to begin with.

"Leadership as we experience it in life is usually more declarative," observes the Washington Post's David Ignatius with considerable understatement; "Leaders take action, and people follow. But Obama's style is different. As we've learned after nearly five years, he's more cautious and deliberative." We don't think we take any substantive liberties when we rephrase Ignatius's statement more bluntly: What he is saying is that Obama's manner of executing his official duties, in this instance for sure, is unrecognizable as leadership by any ordinary understanding of the term.

Enlarge Image Close Associated Press A minority view

Which brings us to the Affordable Care Act. Three and a half years after the springtime enactment of what was touted as Obama's signature legislative achievement, it's autumn for ObamaCare, with many of the law's provisions taking effect Oct. 1, two weeks from tomorrow.

ObamaCare was another case in which the president asked Congress to act. That time, lawmakers granted his request, although for a time the odds seemed very much against their doing so. Unlike in 2013, in 2009-10 Republicans did not control the House. Unlike the idea of military intervention in Syria, ObamaCare did not go against the Democrats' ideological grain.

But like the prospective Syria strike, ObamaCare lacked broad public support. It still does, as illustrated by a pair of polls out today, from The Wall Street Journal and USA Today.

The latter paper's coverage of the polls is eyebrow-raising to say the least. Here is how reporter Susan Page's story begins:

Republican lawmakers have failed in dozens of attempts to repeal the Affordable Care Act, but a new USA Today/Pew Research Center Poll shows just how difficult they have made it for President Obama's signature legislative achievement to succeed.

As the health care exchanges at the heart of the law open for enrollment in two weeks, the public's views of it are as negative as they have ever been, and disapproval of the president's handling of health care has hit a new high. Confusion and misinformation about the law haven't significantly abated, especially among the law's main targets.

The opening clause, noting that Republicans have failed to repeal the law, is true but trivial. Given the results of the 2010 and 2012 elections and the realities of bicameralism and the presidential veto, a repeal effort could have been successful by now only if it were broadly bipartisan--if it had the support of the president or a large number of Democratic lawmakers.

But where does Page get the idea that Republican lawmakers are the ones who have made it difficult for ObamaCare to succeed? That claim is not only unsupported but unsupportable. We'd go so far as to say it's preposterous on its face.

Related Video Best of the Web Today columnist James Taranto explains why ObamaCare remains deeply unpopular with the American public.

Do political leaders respond to public opinion, or is it the other way around? When you put the question that way, it's a chicken-and-egg conundrum: The influence goes both ways, and the mechanisms of causation are far more complicated than the oviparous reproductive cycle in which a particular chicken hatches from an egg and goes on to lay another one.

But in this case the overall direction of causation is clear, and it is the opposite of what Page suggests. ObamaCare has lacked broad public support from its inception in 2009, when there were not enough Republican lawmakers to stop it from being enacted. The Republican House majority is an effect of ObamaCare, not the other way around.

"When Obama signed the law more than three years ago, supporters predicted Americans would embrace it as some of the most popular provisions went into effect," Page observes farther down in the story. "But that turnaround in public opinion hasn't happened, at least not yet."

In the USA Today poll (which is of adults, not registered voters), only 26% strongly approve of ObamaCare; 41% strongly disapprove, just one point shy of the proportion who approve at all, even "not so strongly." Total disapproval is 53%.The same proportion disapprove of "the way Obama is handling health care policy," traditionally a Democratic strength.

Quite apart from the law's merits, what Page has described is an enormous political miscalculation. Unlike in the Syria case, Obama had the political strength to push this legislation through Congress (if barely). But while it's easy to imagine he was and remains disdainful of public opinion on the matter, it's almost certain that he expected it to turn around by now. In a White House address today, the president tried to rationalize away the political adversity noting to applause from supporters that in the 2012 presidential election, "the candidate who called for repeal lost."

Page's formulation of Republicans' making it difficult for the law to succeed by influencing public opinion is not only wrongheaded as an analytical matter but is a clear expression of partisan bias. GOP lawmakers are not some exogenous force but democratically elected members of a coequal branch of government. (The Journal's Louise Radnofsky, by contrast, presents the paper's findings neutrally: "New poll results show the depth of the Obama administration's challenge on the eve of the rollout of the federal health law's core provisions, as many Americans say they don't understand the law and don't think it will help them.")

Of course an implication of ObamaCare's delayed timetable for implementation is that it has not yet been put to an empirical test. Although Page seems to be betraying a partisan hope when she qualifies her observation about continued public opposition with "at least not yet," it is possible that expectations of failure will prove to be wrong--that the public will learn to stop worrying and love ObamaCare.

Is it likely? Warren Buffett doesn't think so, as MoneyMorning.com reports:

Healthcare costs in the United States are like a tapeworm eating at our economic body.

Those words come from famed investor Warren Buffett, who said he would scrap Obamacare and start all over. . . .

"What we have now is untenable over time," said Buffett, an early supporter of President Obama. "That kind of a cost compared to the rest of the world is really like a tapeworm eating, you know, at our economic body."

Buffett does not believe that providing insurance for everyone is the first step to take in correcting our nation's healthcare system.

"Attack the costs first, and then worry about expanding coverage," he said. "I would much rather see another plan that really attacks costs. And I think that's what the American public wants to see. I mean, the American public is not behind this bill."

To be sure, in citing Buffett we are making an appeal to authority, and an authority whose pronouncements we're generally apt to reject. But that's what makes it a fun appeal to authority.

Another reason to be skeptical that ObamaCare will prove skeptics wrong is that even experts who support it don't seem to grasp how it is supposed to work. Consider this quote, from a Los Angeles Daily News report about the Trader Joe's grocery chain's decision to stop providing health insurance to part-time employees:

Trader Joe's may remain a rarity in dropping benefits, as it's "relatively uncommon" for employers to offer coverage to part-time workers in the first place, said Larry Levitt, a senior vice-president at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a Menlo Park, California-based nonprofit group that studies health policy.

"I wouldn't be at all surprised that low-wage, part-time workers would generally be better off with the tax credits in exchanges," Levitt said in an e-mail. "These workers may be a young, healthy bunch who would help the risk pool. At least they seem to be at my local Trader Joe's."

"Help the risk pool" is actuarial jargon. What it means in the context of ObamaCare price controls is "overpay for insurance" (so that older and sicker policyholders in turn can underpay). In other words, if you "help the risk pool," that means you are worse off, not better off, under ObamaCare. The expectation that public opinion will turn around when people see the benefits of ObamaCare assumes that they will somehow fail to see the costs.

The Shield Bill: Not as Bad as We Thought?

On Friday we argued against the U.S. Senate's effort to define what is a "journalist" in an amendment to the so-called Free Flow of Information Act. The act would establish a "shield law" giving journalists protection from being compelled to reveal confidential sources in a law-enforcement investigation or judicial proceeding.

Kurt Wimmer and Jeff Kosseff, a pair of lawyers who represent "a 70-member coalition seeking passage of the FFIA," offer a counterargument:

Some blogs and new reports have erroneously stated that the FFIA would only cover "credentialed" or salaried journalists who work for mainstream media. The legislation, in fact, provides strong protection for new-media journalists, including bloggers.

The FFIA covers individuals who gather news and information for the public, regardless of their medium. The protection applies equally to new media, such as blogs, web sites, and news apps, and traditional media, such as newspapers, magazines, and broadcasters. The bill states that it covers journalists who distribute news "in print, electronic, or other format," and it explicitly mentions websites and mobile apps.

Similarly, the bill's protections are not limited to people who produce journalism for financial gain. Indeed, the FFIA does not contain any requirements regarding compensation. The bill covers a wide range of bloggers, student journalists, and others, as long as their primary intent is to gather news and information for the public.

The descriptions they criticize, including the one on which we relied, were indeed imprecise. The amendment offers multiple definitions of a "journalist," only one of which amounts to being affiliated with a "credentialed" media corporation. On the other hand, this clarification does not obviate our objection that offering protection to journalists who meet that definition will reduce their incentive to show solidarity with upstarts whose coverage by the protection would be in dispute.

It also turns out that the answer to our headline question--"Is Putin a Journalist?"--is clearly "no" under the amendment. Protection is expressly denied to anyone "who is or is likely to be . . . an agent of a foreign power." Which leads to other interesting questions. Would Al-Jazeera America be covered? How about the BBC?

Fox Butterfield, Is That You?

"These diminished medical networks are fueling growing concerns that many patients will still struggle to get care despite the nation's biggest healthcare expansion in half a century."-- Chad Terhune , Los Angeles Times, Sept. 15

"On Saturday, Russian and U.S. officials agreed on a plan to remove and destroy Syria's chemical weapons, but Putin still shows no interest in dropping his support for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad despite U.S. assertions that Assad is destroying his country."-- Kathy Lally and Will Englund , Washington Post, Sept. 15

"It would be great, of course, if all politicians were like Colorado Senate President John Morse, a former police chief, and state Sen. Angela Giron. Despite being recalled, both Democrats have been unrepentant about championing background checks and limiting gun magazines to 15 rounds."-- E.J. Dionne , Washington Post, Sept. 16

Out on a Limb

"If History Is Any Measure, the Clock Is Ticking"--headline, New York Times, Sept. 15

'Or Else I'll Huff, and I'll Puff . . .'

"Obama: Syria's Assad Must Show 'Concrete Actions' on Chemical Weapons"--headline, Voice of America website, Sept. 14

The Soft Bigotry of Low Expectations

"The United States-Russian agreement to dismantle Syria's chemical weapons arsenal is remarkably ambitious and offers a better chance of deterring this threat than the limited military strikes that President Obama was considering."--editorial, New York Times, Sept. 16

Longest Books Ever Written

"The Mechanics, Perils and Pitfalls of Destroying Assad's Chemical Weapons Arsenal"--headline, FoxNews.com, Sept. 14

No. Next Question.

"Was Obama's Syria Strategy Brilliant or Lucky?"--headline, Washington Post website, Sept. 14

'Mommy, Mommy, Why Do I Keep Pivoting to the Economy?'

"As Syria Cools, White House Again Looks to Pivot to Economy"--headline, Washington Times, Sept. 15

It's a Cookbook

"Harkin: Biden vs. Clinton Would Be Juicy"--headline, Politico.com, Sept. 14

Good for Debbie Wasserman Schultz!

"Long-Named US Woman Celebrates Government Climb-Down"--headline, BBC website, Sept. 15

Road to the White House

"I'm not interested in engaging with Taranto, because he's a cockroach."-- Katie J.M. Baker , Jezebel.com, June 18

"Bugged: Obama's Roach Problem; As in cockroaches. But vermin is nothing new in a building that is 213 years old--and roaches aren't the worst of it."--headline and subheadline, NationalJournal.com , Sept. 13

What if Everybody Did That?

"Russian Shot in Quarrel Over Kant's Philosophy"--headline, Associated Press, Sept. 16

But You Can Still Get Grape Leaves

"Back to Work: Greece Deletes Computer Leave"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, Sept. 14

Questions Nobody Is Asking

"Reid: 'I Like John Boehner' 'But I Feel Sorry for Him' 'I Said to Him: What Can I Do to Help' "--headline, CNSNews.com, Sept. 13

Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking

"Why Peter King Might Run for President"--headline, Politico.com, Sept. 13

Question and Answer--I

"Do Ordinary Syrians Want the U.S. to Intervene?"--headline, Puffington Host , Sept. 12

"Local Syrians Want Action, Military Suicides and Insurance, Plastic Bags May Get Tossed"--headline, KPBS-TV website (San Diego), Sept. 13

Question and Answer--II

"Chair Pitched as Answer to New Ways We Sit on Job"--headline, New York Times , Sept. 12

"Man Faces Assault Charges for Chair Attack at San Francisco Main Library"--headline, KPIX-TV website (San Francisco), Sept. 13

Too Much Information

"Viral Marriage Advice from Divorced Man: Experts Examine His Tips"--headline, LiveScience.com, Sept. 12

Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control

"Media Doesn't Hold Back on President Obama"--headline, Politico.com, Sept. 16

News of the Tautological

"Time Travel Is Possible but Only to the Future, English Physicist Says"--headline, Puffington Host, Sept. 13

Breaking News From 1099

"Crusaders Have Room to Improve After Victory"--headline, American-Republican (Waterbury, Conn.), Sept. 15

Why Can't a Mister Be a Sister?

"The Rev. Jesse Jackson Saturday compared the public outrage following accusations of racism in some University of Alabama sororities to the civil rights movement that swept through the state and nation 50 years ago," the Alabama Media Group reports from Tuscaloosa.

Oddly enough, the story never mentions Selma, but it does get interesting:

Speaking mostly to members of the university's student newspaper, the Crimson White, Jackson addressed allegations of advisers and alumnae in some sororities blocking black women from being recruited because of their race.

The CW broke the story of the alleged segregation Wednesday and has since drawn nationwide attention to Tuscaloosa as national media outlets including CNN and the New York Times report on the issue.

"Gender or racial segregation is abhorrent to an intelligent, civilized people," Jackson said. "You might take a sorority and start picketing there."

We wish Jackson success in his campaign to end "gender" segregation at Alabama sororities.

Follow @jamestaranto on Twitter.

Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.

Subscribe to the Best of the Web Today email with one click.

Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Monty Krieger, David Hallstrom, Thomas Szyszkiewicz, Bruce Goldman, Miguel Rakiewicz, Mordecai Bobrowsky, Andrew Terhune, R.J. Stead, David Krause, Charles Glasser, Sheila Olson, Brian Carlson, Merv Benson, Scott Yenor, Eric Jensen, Irene DeBlasio, Michele Schiesser, Robert Godwin, Tom Mayer, T.K. Smyth, James Benenson, Taylor Dinerman, Paul Dyck, Macrena Sailor, Dave Ceely, Evan Slatis, Jess Mandel, Clifford Crouch, Jonathan Beakley and Kris Tufts. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)