Karl Rove to Resign At the End of August
Karl Rove, President Bush's longtime political adviser, is resigning as White House deputy chief of staff effective Aug. 31, and returning to Texas, marking a turning point for the Bush presidency.

Mr. Rove's departure removes one of the White House's most polarizing figures, and perhaps signals the effective end of the lame duck administration's role in shaping major domestic policy decisions, where the former Texas political consultant was a driving force. Mr. Rove revealed his plans in an interview with Paul Gigot, editor of The Wall Street Journal's editorial page. (See related commentary.)

President Bush made a formal announcement Monday morning. "Karl Rove is moving on down the road," Mr. Bush said, appearing grim-faced on the White House's South Lawn with Mr. Rove at his side. "We've been friends for a long time and we're still going to be friends... I'll be on the road behind you here in a bit," he said.

"I'm grateful to have been a witness to history. It has been the joy and the honor of a lifetime," said Mr. Rove, his voice quivering at times. "But now is the time... At month's end," Mr. Rove said, "I will join those whom you meet in your travels, the ordinary Americans who tell you they are praying for you."

After a lengthy hug from Mr. Bush and then his wife, Laura, Mr. Rove joined them on the president's helicopter. Mr. Rove, his wife and their son were flying with Mr. Bush on Air Force One to Texas, where the president is vacationing.

Mr. Rove, who has held senior posts in the White House since Mr. Bush took office in January 2001, told Mr. Gigot he first floated the idea of leaving a year ago. But he delayed his departure as, first, Democrats took Congress, and then as the White House tackled debates on immigration and Iraq, he said. He said he decided to leave after White House Chief of Staff Joshua Bolten told senior aides that if they stayed past Labor Day they would be obliged to remain through the end of the president's term in January 2009.

"I just think it's time," Mr. Rove said in the interview. "There's always something that can keep you here, and as much as I'd like to be here, I've got to do this for the sake of my family." Mr. Rove and his wife have a home in Ingram, Texas, and a son who attends college in nearby San Antonio. (See text of an email Rove sent to friends.)

In the interview, Mr. Rove said he expects Democrats to give the 2008 presidential nomination to Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, whom he described as "a tough, tenacious, fatally flawed candidate." He also said Republicans have "a very good chance" to hold onto the White House in next year's elections.

Mr. Rove also said he expects the president's approval rating to rise again, and that conditions in Iraq will improve as the U.S. military surge continues. He said he expects Democrats to be divided this fall in the battle over warrantless wiretapping, while the budget battle -- and a series of presidential vetoes -- should help Republicans gain an edge on spending restraint and taxes.

Mr. Rove established himself as the political genius behind the rise of George W. Bush and the brief period of united Republican rule. But he did it largely through highly divisive policies and campaign tactics, such as the attacks on Democratic rival John Kerry the 2004 campaign. That strategy appears finally to have backfired, as seen in the Republican loss of Congress in 2006, and Mr. Bush's low poll numbers.

Mr. Rove has advised Mr. Bush for more than a decade, working with him closely since Mr. Bush first announced he was running for governor of Texas in 1993 and serving as chief strategist in his presidential campaign in 2000. Before joining the White House, he was president of Karl Rove & Co., the Austin, Texas-based public affairs firm he founded. Mr. Rove first became involved in Republican politics in the 1970s.

"Obviously it's a big loss to us," White House deputy press secretary Dana Perino said. "He's a great colleague, a good friend, and a brilliant mind. He will be greatly missed, but we know he wouldn't be going if he wasn't sure this was the right time to be giving more to his family, his wife Darby and their son. He will continue to be one of the president's greatest friends."

Mr. Rove, 56 years old, has been embroiled in many White House controversies in Mr. Bush's second term, and faced investigation -- but wasn't indicted -- in the White House leak case that ensnared I. Lewis "Scooter" Libby, a top aide to Vice President Dick Cheney. He also has become a target of intense scrutiny in Congress over the firings of a number of U.S. attorneys. Mr. Rove and his political operatives in the White House had some involvement with the decision, but the extent of their role isn't clear, because the White House has asserted executive privilege in refusing to comply with congressional demands for documents and interviews, including with Mr. Rove. Mr. Rove's departure is likely to lessen the intensity of that constitutional clash, if only slightly.

—The Associated Press contributed to this article.

ON THE MOVE Some notable changes within the Bush administration. Job Previous Now Deputy Chief of Staff Karl Rove TBA Deputy Chief of Staff for Policy* Karl Rove Joel Kaplan Chief of Staff Andrew Card Joshua Bolten Budget Director** Rob Portman TBA Treasury Secretary John Snow Henry Paulson Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld Robert Gates U.S. Trade Representative Rob Portman Susan Schwab White House Spokesman Scott McClellan Tony Snow Counselor to the President Dan Bartlett Ed Gillespie CIA Director Porter Goss Gen. Michael Hayden U.N. Ambassador John Bolton Zalmay Khalilzad Director of National Intelligence John Negroponte Vice Admiral Mike McConnell White House Counsel Harriet Miers Fred Fielding *Announced April 19

**Former Iowa Rep. Jim Nussle is awaiting Senate confirmation.

Write to John D. McKinnon at john.mckinnon@wsj.com