Wikipedia
BoPET (biaxially-oriented polyethylene terephthalate) is a polyester film made from stretched polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and is used for its high tensile strength, chemical and dimensional stability, transparency, reflectivity, gas and aroma barrier properties, and electrical insulation.

A variety of companies manufacture boPET and other polyester films under different brand names. In the UK and US, the most well-known trade names are Mylar, Melinex, and Hostaphan.[1]

History [ edit ]

BoPET film was developed in the mid-1950s, originally by DuPont, Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), and Hoechst.[2]

In 1955 Eastman Kodak used Mylar as a support for photographic film and called it "ESTAR Base".[3] The very thin and tough film allowed 6,000-foot (1,800 m) reels to be exposed on long-range U-2 reconnaissance flights.[4]

In 1964, NASA launched Echo II, a 40-metre (131 ft) diameter balloon constructed from a 9-micrometre (0.00035 in) thick mylar film sandwiched between two layers of 4.5-micrometre (0.00018 in) thick aluminum foil bonded together.[5]

Manufacture and properties [ edit ]

Chemical structure of polyethylene terephthalate

The manufacturing process begins with a film of molten polyethylene terephthalate (PET) being extruded onto a chill roll, which quenches it into the amorphous state.[6] It is then biaxially oriented by drawing. The most common way of doing this is the sequential process, in which the film is first drawn in the machine direction using heated rollers and subsequently drawn in the transverse direction, i.e. orthogonally to the direction of travel, in a heated oven. It is also possible to draw the film in both directions simultaneously, although the equipment required for this is somewhat more elaborate. Draw ratios are typically around 3 to 4 in each direction.

Once the drawing is completed, the film is "heat set" or crystallized under tension in the oven at temperatures typically above 200 °C (392 °F). The heat setting step prevents the film from shrinking back to its original unstretched shape and locks in the molecular orientation in the film plane. The orientation of the polymer chains is responsible for the high strength and stiffness of biaxially oriented PET film, which has a typical Young's modulus of about 4 GPa (0.58×10 ^ 6 psi). Another important consequence of the molecular orientation is that it induces the formation of many crystal nuclei. The crystallites that grow rapidly reach the boundary of the neighboring crystallite and remain smaller than the wavelength of visible light. As a result, biaxially oriented PET film has excellent clarity, despite its semicrystalline structure.

If it were produced without any additives, the surface of the film would be so smooth that layers would adhere strongly to one another when the film is wound up, similar to the sticking of clean glass plates when stacked. To make handling possible, microscopic inert inorganic particles are usually embedded in the PET to roughen the surface of the film such as silicon dioxide.[7]

Biaxially oriented PET film can be metallized by vapor deposition of a thin film of evaporated aluminium, gold, or other metal onto it. The result is much less permeable to gases (important in food packaging) and reflects up to 99% of light, including much of the infrared spectrum. For some applications like food packaging, the aluminized boPET film can be laminated with a layer of polyethylene, which provides sealability and improves puncture resistance. The polyethylene side of such a laminate appears dull and the PET side shiny.

Other coatings, such as conductive indium tin oxide (ITO), can be applied to boPET film by sputter deposition.

Applications [ edit ]

Uses for boPET polyester films include, but are not limited to:

Laminates containing metallized boPET foil (In technical language called printin or laminate web substrate) protect food against oxidation and aroma loss, achieving long shelf life. Examples are coffee "foil" packaging and pouches for convenience foods.

White boPET web substrate is used as lidding for dairy goods such as yogurt.

Clear boPET web substrate is used as lidding for fresh or frozen ready meals. Due to its excellent heat resistance, it can remain on the package during microwave or oven heating.

Roasting bags

Metallised films

Laminated sheet metal (aluminum or steel) used in the manufacture of cans (bisphenol A-free alternative to lacquers)

Covering over paper [ edit ]

Insulating material [ edit ]

An electrical insulating material

Insulation for houses and tents, reflecting thermal radiation

Five layers of metallized boPET film in NASA's spacesuits make them radiation resistant and help regulate temperature.

Metallized boPET film emergency blankets conserve a shock victim's body heat.

As a thin strip to form an airtight seal between the control surfaces and adjacent structure of aircraft, especially gliders.

Light insulation for indoor gardening.

Fire shelters, used by wildland firefighters.

Aluminized proximity suits used by fire fighters for protection from the high amount of heat release from fuel fires.

Used in sock and glove liners to lock in warmth

Solar, marine and aviation applications [ edit ]

Science [ edit ]

Amateur and professional visual and telescopic solar filters. BoPET films are often annealed to a glass element to improve thermal conductivity, and guarantee the necessary flat surface needed for even telescopic solar observation. Manufacturers will typically use films with thicknesses of 280–500 micrometres (0.011–0.020 in), in order to give the films better resilience. 250-micrometre (0.0098 in) thickness films with a heavy aluminium coating are generally preferred for naked-eye Solar observation during eclipses.

Films in annular ring mounts on gas-tight cells, will readily deform into spherical mirrors. Photomultiplier cosmic-ray observatories often make use of these mirrors for inexpensive large (1.0 m and above), lightweight mirror surfaces for sky-sector low and medium energy cosmic ray research.

As a light diaphragm material separating gases in hypersonic shock and expansion tube facilities.

As a beamsplitter in Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, typically with laser applications. Film thicknesses are often in the 500 micrometre range.

Coating around hematocrit tubes.

Insulating material for a cryocooler radiation shield.

As a window material to confine gas in detectors and targets in nuclear physics.

In CT scanners it acts as a physical barrier between the xray-tube, detector ring and the patient allowing negligible attenuation of the xray beam when active.

Spacecraft are insulated with a metallized BoPET film.

The material for solar sails of spacecraft.

Electronic and acoustic applications [ edit ]

Printing Mediums [ edit ]

Before the widespread adoption of CAD, engineering drawings or architectural drawings were plotted onto sheets of boPET film, known as drafting film. The boPET sheets become legal documents from which copies or blueprints are made. boPET sheets are more durable and can withstand more handling than bond paper. Although "blueprint" duplication has fallen out of use, mylar is still used for its archival properties, typically as a record set of plans for building departments to keep on file.

Overhead transparency film for photocopiers or laser printers (boPET film withstands the high heat).

Modern Lithography printing plates aka "Pronto Plates" (boPET resists oil)

Other [ edit ]

Balloons, metallic balloons.

Route information signs, called rollsigns or destination blinds, displayed by public transport vehicles

For materials in kites

Covering glass to decrease probability of shattering

In theatre effects as confetti.

As the adhesive strip to attach the string to a teabag

One of the many materials used as windsavers or valves for valved harmonicas

On farmland and domestic gardens, highly reflective aluminized PET film ribbons are used to keep birds away from plants.

Measuring tape

Protecting pinball machine playfields from wear

Used in dentistry when restoring teeth with composite.

In nail polish, as a coloured and finely shredded additive to create a glitter effect.

Numismatics - The product is used instead of PVC for safe coin storage. Chemical composition is more conducive to the metals coins are made of i.e Silver & Copper (Coins used to be stored in PVC sleeves which damage coins when exposed for longer periods due to chlorine being released.)