Obama Trumpets Stimulus on New Orleans Visit
NEW ORLEANS -- President Barack Obama made his first visit as president to this battered city to tout his stimulus and other government programs, but encountered questions both here and in Washington about the effectiveness of his administration's efforts.

During a town-hall meeting at the University of New Orleans, Gabriel Bordenave, 29 years old, cited continued delays in damage-reimbursement payments from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. "I expected as much from the Bush administration," he said. "But why are we still being nickled and dimed?"

"We are working as hard as we can as quickly as we can," Mr. Obama replied. "There are all sorts of complications....I wish I could just write a check."

A little more than 30,000 jobs were created or saved by contractors who received money from the federal stimulus money. But there are some question about what those number mean. WSJ's Louise Radnofsky reports.

Separately, the White House had to contend with new reports Thursday showing that 30,000 jobs have been directly created or saved by contractors who received money from the $787 billion stimulus package for infrastructure and social programs. The companies reported that they have been awarded about $16 billion, of which $2 billion has been paid out, according to a summary by the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board, which oversees how the stimulus plan is carried out.

The Obama administration has labored to explain how the job numbers reported by contractors square with a projection from the Council of Economic Advisers that the overall package kept one million jobs in the economy through August that would otherwise have been lost.

White House economic adviser Jared Bernstein said it was "too soon to draw any global conclusions from this partial and preliminary data" but that early indications were positive and supported the council's estimate.

Republicans used the latest report to renew their criticism of the stimulus. "As the American people consider the disappointing results announced today, they are asking, 'Where are the jobs?'" said Indiana Rep. Mike Pence, chairman of the House Republican Conference.

Mr. Obama emphasized the local impact of the stimulus program during his brief stop in New Orleans. About $15.9 billion has been channeled to the Gulf Coast states of Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and Texas since the stimulus act was signed in February. A total of $25.5 billion has been committed to those four states under the stimulus so far.

Enlarge Image Close Associated Press President Barack Obama on Thursday visits the first public school to be rebuilt in New Orleans's Lower Ninth Ward after Hurricane Katrina.

"Over the last nine months, we've sent more cabinet members to this region than almost anywhere in the country -- not just to make appearances, but to listen, learn and help you move forward," he told a crowd of 1,400. The administration, he said, has "freed up over $1.5 billion in recovery and rebuilding assistance that had been tangled up in red tape for years."

Four years after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita hit the region, scores of homes along Mr. Obama's route remained gutted.

Mr. Obama began his visit with a half-hour stop at Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Charter School, the first public school to be rebuilt in the city's Lower Ninth Ward, an area among the hardest-hit by Katrina. Education Secretary Arne Duncan appeared with him, as administration officials highlighted a total of $2.2 billion in education money committed to Louisiana and Mississippi under the stimulus program.

Mr. Obama made five trips to the Gulf region as a senator and presidential candidate, when he repeatedly slammed the administration of former President George W. Bush for its delayed response to the 2005 storms.

This time, Mr. Obama was in Louisiana for four hours, including travel time, prompting attacks from local pundits and politicians from across the political spectrum. "The whole Katrina zone suspects it has received the brush-off," columnist James Gill wrote in the Times-Picayune Wednesday.

Sen. Mary Landrieu (D., La.), who traveled with the president, said in an address distributed on the YouTube video-sharing site: "Although I'm disappointed, as many are, that the trip won't be longer, I'm encouraged that he's coming with members of his cabinet to visit very significant sites."

In the town-hall crowd Thursday, Reggie D. Winfield, 38, of New Orleans, said he welcomed the president's "renewed commitment to our area...we all wish he would stay longer because symbolism is important, but the money is flowing in a lot better."

Write to Elizabeth Williamson at elizabeth.williamson@wsj.com and Louise Radnofsky at louise.radnofsky@dowjones.com

Printed in The Wall Street Journal, page A5