Dan Snyder honors Native Americans, changes team mascot to Washington Redhawks
DISCLAIMER: This website is a parody and is not endorsed nor affiliated with ESPN. This website was created by Native advocates created to help us all imagine how easy and powerful changing the mascot could be. See our press release for more details.

LANDOVER, Md. – As 2017 was marked by cities across the U.S. taking down Confederate monuments, Washington D.C. is losing a symbol many have long declared racist, and, no, it is not made of bronze. This morning the Washington football team franchise announced it will be abandoning its controversial name, the “Redskins,” and changing it to the “Redhawks”.

According to the team’s newly branded website, “The WASHINGTON REDHAWKS is a team EVERYONE can cheer for. The franchise is proud to be a leader in bringing people together in the DMV and in our country during a time of growing divisions.”

Team owner Dan Snyder adds the Redhawks are “a symbol of everything we stand for: strength, courage, pride, and respect—the same values we know guide Native Americans and which are embedded throughout their rich history as the original Americans.’”

In addition to the brief statement, the team also released images of the new logo and new apparel. Washington football fans will recognize the iconic yellow and maroon colors, as well as the familiar yellow circle.

“We wanted fans to be able to recognize the brand. We want people to know this still is your team,” stated a team spokesperson.

For decades, Native advocates have called for the name change, arguing that the term Redskins is a “dictionary defined racial slur.” According to a 2013 report from the National Congress of American Indians, “The term originates from a time when Native people were actively hunted and killed for bounties, and their skins were used as proof of Indian kill. Bounties were issued by European companies, colonies, and some states, most notably California.”

Ad supporting the name change run by the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation during the 2014 NBA finals. Produced by National Congress of American Indians

Today’s announcement is a decisive departure from team owner Dan Snyder’s previous public position. The team’s statement doesn’t reveal the final catalyst for the change, but the public can assume that racist imagery is becoming less and less popular with the liberal fan base in the D.C. metro area given the current political climate.

So how are fans responding? On social media, the reactions are mixed, but trending towards positive. As season ticket holder Bob Elliott of Montgomery County told ESPN this morning, “I’ve been a diehard Washington Football fan my whole life, my whole family is, but God, it’s 2017. It’s really uncomfortable celebrating a mascot I know offends people. It’s about time the name changed.”

While the playoffs are out of reach for the team this year, the season is not yet over. The rebranded Washington Redhawks square off with the Arizona Cardinals on Sunday at FedEx Field. Kickoff is at 1pm.