The Sleep Of Reason
This is not a joke. I was at a first-night showing tonight, and my immediate thought was how disasterously unsafe this movie is for my photosensitive epilepic friends. @markingatlightspeed I’m tagging you with this specifically because I feel that this would be extremely dangerous for you to watch.



There are multiple scenes in this movie with full-screen, black-and-white flashing strobe effects. They all happen without warning, and last anywhere between a few seconds to more than two minutes. In a darkened movie theater, this means the likelihood of a seizure could be VERY HIGH if you are sensitive to these effects.



If you have photosensitive epilepsy or another disorder that is triggered by strobe lights, I would highly recommend you DO NOT SEE THE INCREDIBLES 2 IN THEATERS. Wait until the movie’s released on digital/Bluray, and you can watch it in a fully-lit room, with someone with you who will be able to help if the strobe effects do trigger a seizure.



Please stay safe.



UPDATE: After talking to some people who have loved ones with severe epilepsy, I would sadly have to recommend that you DO NOT SEE THIS MOVIE - PERIOD - IF YOU HAVE SEVERE SEIZURES WHEN EXPOSED TO STROBE EFFECTS. DO NOT PUT YOUR HEALTH AT RISK FOR A MOVIE. NO KIND OF MEDIA IS WORTH GAMBLING WITH YOUR LIFE.



The scenes in which the flashing happens are MAJOR plot points and CANNOT be skipped. The one workaround I can suggest would be to find a version of the movie (when it’s released) with Audio Descriptions for the visually impaired. Watch it on your PC - turn the monitor OFF, but keep the audio going.



If you have been disappointed by the creative decisions made by Disney-Pixar, please sign the petition created by @moviehealthcommunity for Disney to include a seizure warning for moviegoers and people who buy/rent the movie. It is unlikely they would edit these things out of the movie entirely - but there are nearly 20,000 notes on this post, and if 20,000 people asked them to consider people with epilepsy, it could mean they consider these things more carefully in the future.



Thank you.