No Receipt Returns in Stores Policy

Where to find Walmart.com Receipts

For all Walmart.com orders, you can print a Returns Receipt here.

You can take your Store Returns Receipt to the store with you when you return your item, or you can return your Walmart.com purchase by mail. If you can't print your Store Returns Receipt, you can return your purchase to a Walmart store.

You can take your Store Returns Receipt to the store with you when you return your item, or you can return your Walmart.com purchase by mail.

Walmart Store Return Policy

*This return policy only applies to returns made in store

Receipted Returns

Credit Card: If the item was purchased using a credit card, any refund is required to be issued to that same credit card. If the original credit card is not present and is not available through scanning the TC number on the receipt, the refund will be processed onto a shopping card/gift card.

Debit Card: If the item was purchased using a debit card and the receipt shows ‘debit tend’, the refund should be placed back on the debit card if available, or cash can be provided. If the receipt does not show ‘debit tend’ the refund is required to be issued to the same debit card. If the debit card is not present and is not available through scanning the TC number on the receipt, the refund will be processed onto a shopping card/gift card.

*The policy is to refund to original form or payment for receipted returns. Store management can override that on a case by case basis, i.e. if customer had closed the credit card or switched credit card companies since purchase and they want it returned to their new card.*

If you can't print your Store Returns Receipt, you can return your purchase to a Walmart store.

Non- Receipted Returns

Walmart will accept a non-receipted return or exchange provided it meets the following conditions:

The refund verification process accepts the return.

The government issued ID must not be altered and is accepted by Walmart.

To return or exchange items without a receipt, you are required to present a valid government issued photo ID. Information from the customer ID will be stored in a secured database of returns activity that Walmart uses to authorize returns.

If an item is returned without a receipt and the refund verification process accepts it, the following options are available:

If available, you may send the merchandise to the manufacturer for repair.

The merchandise may be exchanged for another item.

The merchandise may be returned and a cash refund provided if the refund value of the returned item is less than $25.

The merchandise will be returned and a shopping/gift card provided to the customer if the refund value of the returned merchandise is equal to or greater than $25 in value.