Russia frees Estonian officer in cold war-style spy swap
This article is over 3 years old

Eston Kohver, sentenced in August to 15 years in jail on espionage charges, exchanged for former Estonian official jailed for spying for Moscow

Russia has freed an Estonian officer jailed for spying last month, exchanging him for a Russian spy in a cold war-style bridge swap just days before President Vladimir Putin’s visit to the US.



Eston Kohver, who was sentenced in August to 15 years in a Russian prison on espionage and other charges, was exchanged for Aleksei Dressen, a former Estonian security official serving a 16-year sentence for spying for Moscow, Russia’s FSB security service said in a statement.

The swap took place on Saturday on a bridge over the Piusa river that separates Russia’s western Pskov region and Estonia’s Polva county, after which Kohver was taken to Tallinn to make a statement before taking a “vacation” to be reunited with his family.

Russia jails Estonian intelligence officer Tallinn says was abducted over border Read more

“I am happy to be home again,” said Kohver, looking well and even cracking jokes after speaking to his wife on the phone. “I would like to thank everyone who helped my family cope.”

Estonia had launched a high-profile campaign for Kohver’s release. The country’s president, Toomas Hendrik Ilves, has called on citizens to wear yellow ribbons and both the European Union and the US have urged Moscow to send him home.

Estonia’s top officials welcomed the release with an outpouring of praise and support. Ilves called Kohver a “tough and loyal” officer in a statement to the press, and Hanno Pevkur, the Estonian interior minister, said he was a “very strong man”.

Pevkur said the exchange had been made possible after Putin wrote a pardon for Kohver, while Ilves pardoned Dressen.

Dressen was convicted in 2012 together with his wife Victoria, who was given a suspended sentence. He was found guilty of treason for funnelling classified information to Russia for years after Estonia’s independence in 1991.

Kohver’s defence lawyer, Mark Feygin, said the swap was “organised on the political level” and was timed to boost Russia’s image before Putin’s speech at the United Nations on Monday. “It’s all happening before Putin’s visit to the UN tomorrow. There are no other reasons,” Feygin wrote on Twitter.

Putin is flying to New York to speak at the UN for the first time in a decade and to meet the US president, Barack Obama, for their first formal talk since 2013.

Kohver’s release was hailed by Estonia’s foreign minister, Marina Kaljurand, as “good news for Estonia and the whole of Europe”, as she thanked countries for pressing Moscow to agree to the exchange.

Kohver’s conviction on 19 August drew international condemnation after Tallinn said he had been kidnapped at gunpoint from Estonian territory, with Washington demanding that Moscow set him free immediately.

On Saturday, the US embassy in Tallinn said: “We welcome Estonian-Russian agreement to swap Eston Kohver back to Estonia.”

Brussels also welcomed Kohver’s release. “We are pleased that Eston Kohver returned home and was reunited with his family,” the EU’s diplomatic service said in a statement.

“A wrong has been made right,” tweeted the Swedish foreign minister, Margot Wallström.

The Kohver scandal was the latest in a series of spy cases involving Russia and the Baltic states, former Soviet republics turned Nato and EU members increasingly wary of Russia’s intentions after the annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014.

Russia’s relations with the west have hit their lowest point since the cold war over the conflict in Ukraine, leading to a spike in spying claims.

Russia is still holding several other suspected spies in custody, including Lithuanian nationals. A US court is hearing the case of businessman Alexander Fishenko, who could face up to 20 years in prison for smuggling sensitive technology to Russia.

Exchanges of captured agents were a regular tactic across the Iron Curtain in the cold war, sometimes on the Glienicke Bridge between East and West Germany.