Walker signs concealed-carry measure into law
Gov. Scott Walker holds up a copy of the concealed-carry bill after signing it Friday as supporters applaud at the Grand Lodge in Rothschild. Credit: Associated Press

SHARE

By of the

Wisconsin became the 49th state to allow its citizens to carry undercover guns, after Gov. Scott Walker signed the measure Friday.

The law to allow the concealed carry of firearms and other weapons such as Tasers passed the Legislature last month on bipartisan votes, ending more than a decade of debate on the issue.

In one stroke, the legislation takes Wisconsin from being one of the final pair of remaining holdouts on concealed carry to having one of the more permissive bills in the country.

The proposal, which takes effect Nov. 1, joins other long-sought measures that Republicans passed this year, including requiring photo IDs from voters and making health savings accounts tax-exempt.

Signing the bill in Rothschild, near Wausau, Walker noted the length of the fight over the legislation, which he had once also supported as a lawmaker.

"By signing concealed carry into law today we are making Wisconsin safer for all responsible, law abiding citizens," he said in a statement.

The measure includes provisions requiring training and permits, which were sought by both Walker and Democrats. Some Republicans unsuccessfully pushed "constitutional carry" bills that would have allowed people to carry concealed guns without permits.

But Rep. Kelda Helen Roys (D-Madison) and some other Democrats said that the training requirement wasn't enough to ensure that permit holders had an adequate background in gun safety or had even fired a gun.

"I still think that the law that we have is a radical departure from Wisconsin's history. It's not at all clear to me that the concerns of law enforcement and the adequacy of training have really been addressed," Roys said.

Sen. Pam Galloway (R-Wausau), a lead sponsor of the measure, called its passage a "victory for individual rights."

"Concealed carry is not a Republican or Democrat issue - it's about personal safety and providing our citizens an opportunity to protect themselves and their loved ones from harm," Galloway said.

Under the law, the state Department of Justice will issue permits to state residents 21 and over who got training and cleared background checks that showed they were not felons or otherwise prohibited from carrying guns. The training could be satisfied by classes in firearms safety or hunter safety.

Permits will cost a maximum of $50 and be valid for five years. Renewing a license will cost $25.

Guns will be banned from law enforcement offices, prisons, jails, courthouses, secure mental-health facilities, and the areas of airports beyond security checkpoints. Guns will be allowed in city and state parks, an issue that raised concerns among some opponents of the bill.

Permit holders will be able to carry guns in taverns and other places that sell alcohol, provided they are not drinking.

Private businesses could post signs to keep guns out of their buildings. Signs also could be posted in government buildings, such as city halls and the state Capitol. But guns could not be banned from government-owned grounds, meaning they could be carried on the Capitol lawn or the Milwaukee Public Zoo.

Illinois is the only remaining state that bans carrying concealed weapons. Advocates for years have pushed allowing concealed weapons in Wisconsin, but were thwarted by then-Gov. Jim Doyle and Democrats in the Legislature.

Police could check the database of permit holders only to confirm the validity of a permit that someone produced or to investigate whether someone lied in applying for a permit. Police could not routinely check the database when pulling someone over.

The names of those who hold permits will not be available under the state's public records law.

The bill also will allow people to carry loaded, uncased guns in their cars. Now, guns are allowed in vehicles only if they are unloaded and kept in cases.