Islam versus Europe: European Children Being Brainwashed into 'Respecting' Islam
Thanks to this visit, the school pupils will have an image of the place where Islam lives. A good way of arriving at a better understanding of their educational syllabus, which focuses on the beginnings of Islam.

The achievement of Muhammad (pbuh) - John, Alex and Laura



Over a number of lessons, the pupils had read and discussed texts about Muhammad's (pbuh) life, covering his family's reaction to his claims, as well as the reaction of people in Mecca and Medina. The pupils debated Muhammad's (pbuh) achievements in groups and as a class.



As homework the teacher asked the pupils to answer the following assessment questions: Discuss the main events in Muhammad's (pbuh) life that led others to believe he was a prophet from Allah (attainment target 1 beliefs, teachings and sources). What do you think Muhammad (pbuh) achieved in his life? (attainment target 2 meaning, purpose and truth).

"I think the main events in Muhammad's life which led others to believe he was a prophet were when he had a vision from Gabriel in a cave outside Mecca. Some may think that he could have made it up but I think he was telling the truth because he was so convinced and honest that it could well have happened. Also he has so much to back him up and he couldn't have just made it all up.



Another point is that when one person does something, they spread the news and quickly more and more people join realising what Muhammad was saying was right.



I believe that Muhammad achieved a great deal before his death because you don't just start a religion any old day, so he must have had help from God.



...Personally I think Muhammad was a great man and he had much strength and courage to do what he did and he has only God to thank for that."



John



Muhammad achieved an extremely big thing in his life. Creating a religion is very hard but creating a religion that is the second biggest in the world is even harder.



Alex



Muhammad left his country and moved to Medina. During his time there he saw how much hatred there was, so he took it upon himself to do something about it. He brought the Medinian and Meccan Muslims together, and got them working alongside each other.



...He preached to people who believed in many gods ad whose lives were full of sin and united religions and differences... I believe spreading the news of what you believe in, and totally changing a country from bad to good is a great achievement in anyone's life.



Laura



European children are being brainwashed into 'respecting' Islam with school-organised mosque visits and syllabuses that give undue prominence to a mythical Islamic 'Golden Age'. The picture above is from La Roche in France. The newspaper headline says "School pupils immerse themselves in Islam at La Roche mosque".(I somehow doubt Good Bye Mohammed or the researches of the Inarah group will be on the agenda.)And why are European school pupils being taught about the history of Islam anyway? Is there really nothing in the history of Europe that would be better for them to learn?Here's a photo from something similar in England. Note the evil-looking Muslim dressed in white. He seems to be enjoying himself as the little blonde white girls bow down in front of him.Source: Fdesouche.com Below is an excerpt from the British government website that provides information on the national curriculum. It describes a programme of lessons called "The Achievement of Muhammad (pbuh)" and discusses how to grade the childrens' essays, quoting a few examples:The way it constantly repeats the Peace Be Upon Him nonsense is shocking. No doubt the children are being taught that too.Here are some excerpts from the childrens' essays:British children being brainwashed into considering Muhammad a great man!See Part II of this post here