Islamabad, Pakistan - Embassy of the United States
Visit Of Secretary Of State Hillary Clinton To Pakistan

October 29, 2009

Islamabad - U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is leading an official visit to Pakistan. During her visit to Lahore today, the Secretary emphasized the desire of the U.S. government to broadly expand and deepen U.S. - Pakistan official and people-to-people relations, consistent with the democratic ideals of both nations.

Underscoring her respect for Pakistan's history and culture, the Secretary and her delegation began their day in Islamabad with a visit to the shrine of the Sufi saint Shah Abdul Latif Kazmi, the Bari Imam, where hundreds of thousands of people come each year to say their prayers. Upon arrival in Lahore, the delegation visited the memorial for Pakistan's national leader Allama Iqbal and the 17th century Badshahi Mosque, one of the largest in South Asia, constructed by Aurangzeb, the sixth Mughal Emperor.

At the historic Government College University Secretary Clinton met with a group of Lahore-based civil society leaders and addressed a student audience at the College's auditorium. In both meetings, the Secretary reiterated America's strong support for Pakistan's successful return to democratic governance last year and her vision of a broad relationship between Pakistan and the United States based on mutual respect and shared values.

At the University, the Secretary announced a $45 million American contribution to the Government of Pakistan's Higher Education Commission (HEC) that will expand university and technical education for displaced students and those students in other vulnerable areas.

The Secretary also unveiled Humari Awaz ("Our Voice"), the first Pakistani mobile phone-based social network, enabling Pakistanis -- who are active users of mobile phone text services -- to develop communities of shared interest for social engagement, economic activity and public debate on contemporary issues.

Secretary Clinton then met with Punjab Chief Minister Shabaz Sharif and former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, leaders of the political opposition, and spoke to Lahore's business community at an event hosted by Punjab Governor Salmaan Taseer.

Reflecting the growing importance of the bilateral relationship, the Secretary participated in a program in which she elevated the U.S. diplomatic presence in Lahore from Consulate to Consulate General status.