Handedness and Mortality: A Follow-Up Study of Danish Twins... : Epidemiology
Supported by U.S. National Institute on Aging research Grant NIA-PO1-AG08761 and the Danish Research Councils. The activities of the Danish Center for Demographic Research are funded by a grant from the Danish National Research Foundation. This study was partly supported by the Danish Medical Research Council (No. 12-1663-1). The activities of the Danish Epidemiology Science Centre are funded by a grant from the Danish National Research Foundation.

From the 1 The Danish Epidemiology Science Centre at the Department of Epidemiology and Social Medicine, Aarhus University, and 2 The Danish Twin Registry, Epidemiology, Institute of Public Health, and the Danish Center for Demographic Research, Odense University, Denmark.

The declining prevalence of left-handed individuals with increasing age has led to two main avenues of hypotheses; the association is due either (1) to a birth cohort effect and/or an age effect caused by a switch to right-handedness with advancing age or (2) to mortality selection that reduces survival in left-handed individuals, or both. It is uncertain whether a cohort or age effect can explain the decline in age-related prevalence, and conflicting evidence exists in favor of the mortality hypothesis. We compared mortality in a subgroup of 118 opposite-handed twin pairs by counting in how many instances the right-handed twin died first. There was no evidence of differential survival between right-handed and non-right-handed individuals in the entire 1900–1910 cohort. With respect to the number of right-handed twins who died first, there was no material disadvantage among those who were not right-handed. In 60% (95% confidence interval = 49.0–71.5%) of dizygotic pairs, the right-handed twins died first. In 50% of monozygotic pairs, right-handed twins died first. The prevalence of not being right-handed was higher among males (9.2%) than females (6.5%); there was a similar frequency of non-right-handedness in monozygotic (8.0%) and dizygotic (7.8%) twins. We did not find evidence of excess mortality among non-right-handed adult twins in this follow-up study.

The determinants of handedness are still largely unknown, but lateralization is probably determined during fetal life. The brain undergoes major development between the 16th and 22nd weeks of gestation, which may be the time when lateralization is determined. 1 Exposure of the developing brain to toxic agents or insults in this time window may interfere with this process, and handedness has been examined as a sensitive marker of neurotoxic exposures. 2 Newborns may be at higher risk of being left-handed as a result of hypoxia at birth. 3 Indicators of pregnancies at risk such as advanced age or parity of the mother have also been associated with left- handedness, 4,5 and left-handedness was more common among children who were born very premature or small. 6 Because twin pregnancies are often high risk, one might expect a higher prevalence of left-handedness among twins, as has been reported by some, 4,7,8 but not all, 9–11 researchers studying the issue.

It is well known that prevalence of left-handedness decreases with increasing age in cross-sectional samples, 12–15 a finding that may be explained in at least two different ways. It may be due to the diminishing social pressure against left-handedness during this century, which may produce a cohort effect, and it may be due to an age effect. Alternatively, it may be due to mortality selection; left-handed individuals may have a shorter life span compared with right-handed individuals, not only because they are more accident prone in a world constructed for right-handed individuals, but because of correlates of left-handedness, such as covert neuropathologic features or immune system dysfunction, which are associated with reduced life expectancy. 14,16,17 Some observations suggest that the first hypothesis fails to explain the decline of left-handedness in old age 12,13 and a shorter survival of left-handed individuals has been reported, 13,14 but the methodology of these studies was prone to bias, and the issue is not yet settled. Larger longitudinal studies tend to show that survival in left-handed individuals is comparable with that of those who are right-handed, 18–20 but these studies had short follow-up and few deaths.

In this investigation, we focused on survival of adult non-right-handed individuals compared with that of right-handed individuals in a sample of Danish twins born from 1900 to 1910. Because recording of handedness in twins in Denmark started in 1954, this dataset offers the opportunity of a virtually complete follow-up after the information on handedness was collected. The data also provided survival information on a group of opposite-handed pairs of twins. This design has the advantage of reducing confounding for environmental conditions in fetal life and early childhood.

Subjects and Methods

Data

The Danish Twin Registry was established in 1954. 21–23 The birth registers from all 2,200 parishes of the relevant calendar years were manually scrutinized to identify all twin births. Through regional population registers (operative since 1924) and other public sources, a search was made for the twins. As soon as a twin was traced, he or she received a questionnaire. If neither of the partners was alive, a questionnaire was sent to the closest relative. Specific questions about the degree of similarity between the partners of a pair were included in the questionnaire to assess zygosity in like-sexed twins. For twins who died or emigrated at an early age, it was impossible to obtain reliable data to be used in zygosity classification. Consequently, pairs were not followed up if one or both partners died or emigrated before age 6. Nearly all of the twins surviving past age 15 have been traced; untraced twins are almost entirely those who died or emigrated in childhood, although the date of death or emigration is unknown. The zygosity classification based on answers to mailed questionnaires has been evaluated, comparing it with blood group determinations, and the misclassification rate was found to be less than 5%. 22 The Danish Twin Registry includes twin pairs born in Denmark between 1870 and 1910 and same-sex pairs born between 1911 and 1930. However, information on handedness was only available for same-sex twins.

The information on handedness was obtained through questionnaires sent out in the period 1953–1963 to twins born before 1911 including the question “Are you left-handed?” The answering options included “yes,” “no,” and “using both hands.” In this analysis, we grouped left-handed individuals with those who reported using both hands.

To reduce selection related to survival, we only included in the analysis the cohort of twins born from 1900 to 1910. They were 53–64 years of age at the beginning of follow-up. Therefore, the analysis comprises twins who were alive on January 1, 1964. Follow-up started from that date and ended on December 31, 1998.

Analysis

1.

Survival

We analyzed survival using the entire cohort of same-sex twins born from 1900 to 1910 for whom information on handedness was present. Of the 3,849 twins born from 1900 to 1910 who survived to 1964 and who were registered in the Danish Twin Registry, 2,527 had provided information on handedness between 1953 and 1963. In 18 cases (0.7%), no zygosity information was available, so 2,504 subjects remained. In males there were 46 (9.6%) non-right-handed twins among the 477 monozygotic and 73 (8.9%) among the 816 dizygotic pairs. In females, 29 (6.4%) were non-right-handed twins out of 455 monozygotic and 50 (6.6%) among the 761 dizygotic pairs. Among the 198 non-right-handed individuals, 33 (16.7%) reported that they used both hands.

We estimated survival curves using the Kaplan-Meier method and stratified by gender and zygosity. We also analyzed survival among opposite-handed pairs of twins. In this subgroup we selected pairs in which both twins were alive as of January 1, 1964. The opposite-handed pairs were 15.2% of monozygotic and 16.2% of dizygotic twins in males and 9.6% and 9.0%, respectively, in females. There was a total of 121 pairs of eligible opposite-handed twins, but in three pairs, both twins were still alive at the end of follow-up and were thus excluded from this analysis as noninformative. We counted the pairs in which the right-handed twin died before the non-right-handed twin, and we compared this proportion with the expected fraction under the null hypothesis of no differential survival (50%). As the analysis was done within same-sex pairs, no adjustment for gender was needed.

2.

Cause of Death

We had information on cause of death until December 31, 1993. Causes of death were grouped in four categories: cancer, cardiovascular diseases, violent causes, and others. We compared the occurrence of these causes in right- and non-right-handed individuals.

Results

The prevalence of non-right-handed twins in the cohort born from 1900 to 1910 (N = 2,509) was 7.9%. There were more non-right-handed twins among males than females (9.2%vs 6.5%), but a similar fraction among monozygotic and dizygotic twins (8.0%vs 7.8%, respectively).

Table 1 and Figure 1 illustrate survival according to handedness for the 2,509 twins stratified by gender and zygosity. In dizygotic males, there was a median survival from January 1, 1964, of 21.2 years in non-right-handed twins compared with 18.6 years in right-handed twins. In females, the median survival was 23.2 years in non-right-handed twins and 24.2 years in right-handed twins.