Section 27: Limpopo School Toilets
What does it mean to be left off the list?

Schools that are not on the list compiled by the Limpopo Department of Education for the High Court are unlikely to be on the list given to President Cyril Ramaphosa for his SAFE Initiative – an emergency response announced with much fanfare in August to fix unsafe school sanitation after a five-year-old girl, Lumka Mketwa, died in a pit toilet at her school in the Eastern Cape.

One of the toilets at Allegraine Primary School, for the use of learners as young as 6 years old. The school is not on the LDE's pit toilet list.

One such school is Allegraine Primary School in the village of Ofcolaco in a fruit-growing area about 40km southeast of Tzaneen. Its 170 learners, are supposed to share four pit toilets but the pits are full and the toilets are unusable, so the girls share the teachers’ toilets, and the boys relieve themselves in the bush.





One of the toilets at Allegraine Primary School, for the use of learners as young as 6 years old. The school is not on the LDE's pit toilet list.

Dithamaga Primary School, in Ngwaabe village near the small mining town of Steelpoort, isn’t on the official list either. It has eight pit toilets that are shared by 115 learners. They were built in 2003 and even though they are still in good condition, the fact of the matter is that pit toilets are unlawful in terms of the norms and standards regulations and they should be replaced.

Loboli Secondary School built its own pit toilets for its 340 learners in 2017. Even though they are relatively new and in good condition, the toilets do not comply with regulations.

At Utjane Primary School there are eight pit toilets for around 300 learners. The toilets have no doors, so there is no privacy and a portion of the roof is leaking.

There are no doors on the toilets at Lamdzandvo Secondary School either. And the pit toilets are filthy and almost full. Yet, because these schools are not on the official Limpopo education department list, they will not be budgeted for, so it’s unlikely that their plain pit toilets will be upgraded any time soon.

But even schools that are on the list will have to wait for years for the department to improve their toilets. For some, the wait could be as long as 12 years, until 2031.

For example, at Vhulaudzi Secondary School, where 600 learners use pit toilets that are described as “filthy” and in “bad condition”, new toilets won’t be ready for use for another three years. March 2022 is the expected project completion date, according to the Limpopo education department's list.





Sinago Mataga, a grade 12 learner at the school, is afraid to use the toilets: “[F]irstly in our toilets there are no windows and inside it is very dark. It is scary. And the doors are not strong. When you enter, some are falling and others have already fallen. They no longer open properly.“

Sinago Mataga, a grade 12 learner at the school, is afraid to use the toilets: "[F]irstly in our toilets there are no windows and inside it is very dark. It is scary. And the doors are not strong. When you enter, some are falling and others have already fallen. They no longer open properly."

Sinago Mataga at Vhulaudzi Secondary School: "[F]irstly in our toilets there are no windows and inside it is very dark. It is scary. And the doors are not strong. When you enter, some are falling and others have already fallen. They no longer open properly."

“And you can’t, when you ask to go to the toilet if it is an emergency in class, come alone because as you can see it is very bushy such that you can find someone waiting for you or there is a snake and you get bitten by things. So we don’t feel safe when we come to the toilet alone. I will not come to the toilet alone, they are very scary.”

At Matsuokwana Secondary School, 224 high school learners share four pit toilets with cracked walls and no roof – the department expects the upgraded toilets to be finished only in March 2021.

Bolotswi Secondary School, where male learners are relieving themselves in the bushes because the school’s pit toilets are full, can expect new toilets only in five years’ time – by March 2024 – according to the department’s estimates.