M&C Saatchi Worldwide
Privacy & Cookies

Cookies

A cookie is a piece of text which asks permission to be placed on your computer's hard drive. Once you agree (or your browser agrees automatically if you have set it up in that way), your browser adds that text in a small file. We have included a full list of the cookies used on mcsaatchi.com below (cookies used by this site), along with a definition of what the cookie is used for.

Consent to use of cookies

Cookies collect information about how visitors use the site, for instance which pages visitors go to most often, and if they get error messages from web pages. These cookies do not collect information which identifies a visitor and we will not use cookies to collect personally identifiable information about you. All information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. By using the website you agree that we can place these types of cookies on your device.

How to control and delete cookies

We treats all the data held with the utmost care and security. However, if you wish to restrict or block the cookies which are set by mcsaatchi.com, or indeed any other website, or if you wish to receive notification of cookie placement requests or decline cookies completely, you can do this through your browser settings. The Help function within your browser should tell you how. Please be aware that declining or denying cookies may prevent you from being able to use the website to its highest capability.

Alternatively, you may wish to visit www.aboutcookies.org which contains comprehensive information on how to do this on a wide variety of browsers as well as more general information about cookies.

Cookies used by this website

This is a list of the main cookies set by the mcsaatchi.com website, and what each is used for:

Analytics

List of cookies used on this site for Analytics

__ga (2years)

mcsaatchi.com uses Google Analytics, a web analytics service provided by Google, Inc. Google Analytics sets a cookie in order to evaluate our use of our website and compile reports on user activity.

__gat (10mins)

Google stores the information collected by the cookie on servers in the United States. Google may also transfer this information to third parties where required to do so by law, or where such third parties process the information on Google's behalf. Google will not associate your IP address with any other data held by Google. By using mcsaatchiplc.com, you consent to the processing of data about you by Google in the manner and for the purposes set out above.