There’s a Harry Potter version of Pokemon Go on the way apparently
A Harry Potter version of Pokemon Go is reportedly on the way (Picture: Warner Bros/Metro)

The creators behind Pokemon Go are developing a new Harry Potter version of the app, according to reports.

While there’s been rumbles of a Game Of Thrones spin on the incredibly popular mobile game, it looks like the wizarding world has cast a spell over Pokemon Go creators Niantic, who are apparently underway on the project following crazy demand.

According to HelloGiggles, Niantic’s senior developer Marcus Figueroa, said: ‘We have acquired the rights for the app. The demand for this title was absolutely insane, so we figured we’d give it a shot.

‘We want to do something with schools of witchcraft and wizardry, similar to pokestops in Pokemon Go. As wells a quest system, and possibly large scale completely interactive events, but no promises. That’s all I can say,’ he added.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Figueroa also said they’re hopeful for a launch by early 2017, but said ‘it’s hard to tell this early in the project’.

Pokemon Go has become a phenomenon (Picture:AP Photo/Richard Vogel)

A Harry Potter version of Pokemon Go has been something fans have craved for ever since the apps original release, even starting a petition which has gained nearly 40,000 signatures.

So what can we expect from the app if true? Wizarding duels in Tesco car park? Casting spell traps around your household? Maybe even tucking away parts of your soul inside digital trinkets like Voldemort’s Horcruxes and scattering them throughout the land?

Who knows, but we’re sure it’ll just be the start of Pokemon Go based spin-offs. So bring on the Potter walks!

The news also comes nicely timed, considering Pokemon Go users are having trouble with the app following a recent update which has reset people’s progress.

UPDATE:

Metro.co.uk reached out to Niantic and they replied denying it’s happening. All a hoax, unfortunately.

MORE: Lifeboat scrambled to rescue Pokemon Go ‘trainers’ almost stranded on island

MORE: Teacher takes drastic measures to stop kids playing Pokemon Go in class