Scott Walker signs bill clearing public funds for new Bucks arena
Scott Walker holds up the Bucks arena financing legislation after signing it Wednesday morning at the Wisconisn State Fair. Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett is at right. Credit: Michael Sears

SHARE The BMO Harris Bradley Center is seen looking south and slightly east across Juneau Ave. in Milwaukee. Mike De Sisti New Arena

Complete coverage on the Milwaukee Bucks' efforts to get a new arena in downtown Milwaukee. Go to section

By of the

Gov. Scott Walker approved $250 million in public money for a Milwaukee Bucks arena Wednesday, paving the way for a Common Council vote on the proposal next month and a potential groundbreaking as soon as October.

The bipartisan legislation commits taxpayers to paying half the cost of the $500 million arena over the next 20 years in exchange for the team remaining in Wisconsin's largest city.

The governor, a 2016 Republican presidential candidate, made no changes to the bill with his powerful veto pen.

"This is an important day for the state of Wisconsin. It's not just important for Milwaukee, but the state as a whole," Walker said at Wisconsin State Fair Park. "We think this is a good solid move as a good steward of the taxpayers' money here in Wisconsin."

Walker was flanked at the bill signing ceremony by Republican and Democratic state lawmakers, Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett and others. He told those gathered in the packed room that the arena would be a "dynamic new addition in the city of Milwaukee, in Milwaukee County and throughout this region — and really a dynamic attraction for the entire state of Wisconsin."

The governor's approval clears the way for a Milwaukee Common Council vote on the proposal next month. Bucks president Peter Feigin said he believed the groundbreaking could be as soon as October or November.

"A strong city makes a strong state," Feigin said. "This is much more than a basketball arena, this is where people are going to live, work and play by the thousands."

Citing the success of the Green Bay Packers and Milwaukee Brewers, Feigin added that the arena would spur tourism and help economic development statewide.

The city's contribution to the arena project will get at least three public hearings before being voted on by the full Common Council on Sept. 22, council President Michael Murphy said.

The first of the hearings, during which the city comptroller will present his fiscal analysis of the proposal, will be Aug. 31.

"This meeting will stress the importance of digging into the numbers, because this proposal has the potential to impact the city for decades," Murphy said.

"I want to ensure that we are as inclusive as possible at the city level. To that end, citizens will be given an opportunity to offer their input and views on the plan."

"I'm very confident questions will be answered," Barrett said.

"I remain very optimistic."

Opponents have said the bill would benefit the team's already wealthy owners and would come as the state is cutting spending on infrastructure and the University of Wisconsin System.

The criticism hasn't just come from some liberals. It also has come from conservative groups that normally back Walker, such as Americans for Prosperity.

Walker has responded by saying Wisconsin needed to keep the team and its stream of income taxes in the state.

"It's cheaper to keep them," Walker repeated Wednesday.

As he left Wednesday's bill signing, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said he would prefer to allow the "free market to work," but added that Wisconsin was competing against other states that wanted an NBA team.

"It would have been easy for us to say, 'We're not going to be involved,' and the team would have left. So it wasn't an idle threat. We knew they were going to go," Vos said. "And this is a prime example where allowing us to keep the revenue definitely is cheaper for the state."

In addition to the Milwaukee Common Council vote, the Bucks need to work out a land sale with Milwaukee County.

The Bucks deal includes $250 million in contributions from the state, city and county of Milwaukee, and a special arena and entertainment district. The other half of the arena is being paid by the team's current owners and former U.S. Sen. Herb Kohl, the team's previous owner.

State, city and county residents will ultimately pay $400 million on the arena when accounting for $174 million in interest over 20 years, with any construction cost overruns and maintenance expenses being the responsibility of the team.

Of the principal coming from taxpayers for the arena, $47 million would come from the City of Milwaukee providing a parking structure and tax incremental financing.

The rest — $203 million — would come from: bonds issued by an arena and entertainment district and paid off by state taxpayers; a $4 million decrease in Milwaukee County's state aid over the next 20 years; and the increase of a ticket surcharge and the extension of existing local hotel room, rental car, and food and beverage taxes being collected by the Wisconsin Center District.

Milwaukee County Executive Chris Abele said he is confident of his ability to make good on the county's annual $4 million commitment without undermining county services. His primary strategy remains shifting collection of debts owed to the county to the state Department of Revenue, he said.

Though legislators removed that authority from the arena financing plan, Abele said he has asked the county treasurer and clerk of circuit courts to agree to the move. Those two departments are responsible for the largest sources of uncollected debt: delinquent property taxes and debts due to courts for unpaid fees and fines.

After the bill signing, Marquette University President Michael Lovell praised Walker, lawmakers and Bucks owners — and confirmed that the arena would be the new home of Marquette's men's basketball team.

"The new arena is critical to Milwaukee's growth and its status as a first-class city, and the state's investment in that is commendable," Lovell said in a statement. "We are thrilled to be a tenant in the new facility, and we look forward to breaking ground for the new home of Marquette Men's Basketball."

But first, it must win the support of local leaders.

"I have absolutely not committed to supporting this," Ald. Bob Bauman said.

"There are still a lot of holes in this," he said, including the arena's design and the configuration of city streets in and around the complex.

"What's this going to look like?" he asked.

Ald. James Bohl, chair of the development committee, said he was "generally supportive" of the deal, but was eager to see the comptroller's report.

And Ald. Bob Donovan, a candidate for mayor, said, "In a perfect world, the owners would have built it."

This not being a perfect word, he added, "I'm going to support the initiatives."

Ald. Russell Stamper said he planned to meet with Feigin on Thursday. He supports the arena, he said, but " would like to see more investment in the central city, for those who need it most," adding that he would like jobs guaranteed for those most in need of work — African-American males.

Walker included $220 million in state borrowing for the arena in the budget he proposed in February.

But his fellow Republicans who control the Legislature took the measure out of the budget and reworked the deal with some input from Democrats.

Don Behm of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.