Rumor: Warriors unanimously vote not to visit Donald Trump’s White House
Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Google+ (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Flipboard (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Update: Josh Brown was apparently referencing this not necessarily credible tweet:

EXCLUSIVE: NBA championship winning Warriors decide unanimously as a team they will boycott White House invitation to meet President Trump. pic.twitter.com/cTQoOKdiLw — Mike Sington (@MikeSington) June 13, 2017

Shaun Livingston said months ago, if the Warriors won the title, he wouldn’t visit Donald Trump’s White House.

He’s unsurprisingly not alone in that thinking.

Golden State coach Steve Kerr has called Donald Trump’s policies un-American. Stephen Curry essentially called the American president an ass. David West said Trump’s approach is the opposite of what the forward teaches youth.

But this level of unified decision-making would still somewhat surprising to see after the Warriors clinched the 2017 NBA title last night.

Josh Brown of CNBC:

NBA champion Warriors skipping the White House visit, as a unanimous team decision per reports. — Downtown Josh Brown (@ReformedBroker) June 13, 2017

This isn’t based on any credible public reports I could find, but perhaps Brown is attributing it to those with direct knowledge of the Warriors’ plan.

It isn’t necessarily an easy call, with two competing sentiments – participating in a photo op with someone whose policies and rhetoric you find reprehensible vs. respecting the office of the presidency.

This isn’t the first time players faced that conflict, and they usually sided with respecting the office and getting the experience of the lifetime. But Trump’s return to white nationalism, brags of sexual assault and countless examples of indecency alter the equation.

The Warriors should stick to their convictions, though I wouldn’t mind if they visit the White House. There’s a case either way.

I look forward to Trump’s measured response to something that isn’t clearly decided.