FBI joins wide-ranging probe at Lincoln Hills
Some staff at Lincoln Hills School for Boys in Irma are under investigation for possible crimes ranging from second-degree sexual assault of a child to intimidation of witnesses and other misconduct. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Irma— A tip from Milwaukee County officials in late 2014 may have helped trigger what has become a sweeping probe into a troubled Northwoods juvenile correction facility, an investigation that now involves the FBI.

Thomas Wanta, administrator of the Milwaukee County Division of Delinquency and Court Services, said Thursday that he received an anonymous phone call on Nov. 18, 2014, from a woman alleging that youth at Lincoln Hills School for Boys were not receiving adequate education and that some juveniles there had had their arms broken.

Wanta said his agency, Milwaukee County prosecutors, public defenders, and Circuit Judge Mary Triggiano took the matter to the state Department of Corrections and met with state officials about the allegation the next month.

In January, a state investigation started into this secure school 30 miles north of Wausau that has resulted in at least 10 staff being put on paid leave starting in early 2015, and has led to the departures last week of the school's superintendent and the state's juvenile corrections head.

Wanta's disclosure matches interviews with multiple employees at the prison this week who revealed that some Lincoln Hills workers have been put on paid leave following their involvement in incidents in which youth inmates suffered broken arms or wrists. But at least one staff member who was with an inmate when his wrist was recently broken remains on the job, other workers said.

"We took it seriously and we had concerns and we were hoping (state officials) could alleviate our concerns," said Wanta, adding that he had received relatively little information about the probe until the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported Monday on a major weekend raid at the school by law enforcement.

Also Thursday, Leonard Peace, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Milwaukee, confirmed that his agency is also assisting state authorities in the probe, but declined further comment about the nature of his agency's involvement. Authorities are looking into a range of potential crimes, including second-degree sexual assault, physical child abuse, and intimidation of victims and witnesses, according to court records.

In interviews, those who have walked the halls of Lincoln Hills say staff and students who followed the rules couldn't count on safety or fair treatment. Some youth have attacked other youth and staff; some workers have assaulted youth; superiors have been unwilling or unable to take the actions and provide the resources needed for a safe prison; and a racial disconnect has complicated the interactions between rural Wisconsin workers and urban youth offenders.

In one case, a Muslim teenager from Milwaukee had trouble persuading staff to allow him have a Qur'an, according to that former offender and a staff member who worked directly with him.

That man, 21-year-old Andrew Edwards of Milwaukee, today has a wife and child, works as an independent building contractor and has a clean adult record. But he still remembers time at Lincoln Hills in 2011 and 2012 when he says he was scared of staff and of other youth.

"We look back on it and say, 'We went through some s...,'" Edwards said of himself and other former inmates. "It's stuff that I'm still getting past."

Corrections spokeswoman Joy Staab on Tuesday said the agency wants to keep youths and staff safe but can say little because of the ongoing probe that began with a DOC request to the state Department of Justice.

In another sign of the problems, Rep. Mary Czaja (R-Irma), whose district includes Lincoln Hills, said Thursday that she had first raised concerns about the safety of workers there with state corrections officials in a meeting on March 3.

In interviews, Lincoln Hills workers said they have been put on leave without being told why. Some believe the incidents that are being questioned occurred years ago in some instances.

Workers said they were routinely directed to go into cells without following department policies that require staff to wear protective gear and the incidents to be videotaped. The workers agreed to speak with the Journal Sentinel on the condition that they not be named because of a Department of Corrections policy that bars them from speaking to the media.

Patrol officers have to go into offenders' rooms to remove contraband items or to move the students to other areas when they are being disruptive. When they do that, a supervisor is supposed to be present, the room entry is to be videotaped and those going in are supposed to wear helmets, masks and protective gear.

Supervisors are almost always present when staff go into rooms, but the incidents are rarely recorded and the protective equipment is rarely worn, staff said. One worker said he had only been required to follow those policies once in 10 years.

"When you expect staff to respond, they should have the appropriate training and gear," said Mark Towne, a retired longtime Department of Corrections official with three family members on the Lincoln Hills staff.

Workers said dangerous fights among the offenders are common, with multiple kids sometimes ganging up on others. The patrol officers said they typically respond to such emergencies two to four times each shift — and sometimes much more often than that.

When assaults or disruptions happen, the offenders go to a one inmate per room "security cottage," but after a few days the youths return to their regular rooms. Long-term staff said the stays are much shorter than in years past, when inmates could be put in the security cottages for weeks at a time.

In part, they are sent for shorter stays now because they have to make room at the security cottage for other offenders who are acting out.

"They're emboldened because they've gotten away with so much for so long." Towne said.

Little learning

Meanwhile, officials felt pressure over how much time offenders were spending in school, said former teacher and librarian Kelly Knudsen.

Officials from Milwaukee County — where many of the offenders come from — raised concerns about how much time they spent in their dorm rooms, Knudsen said. Wanta, the Milwaukee County official, confirmed that, saying that questions were raised about how much time was spent in classrooms and the quality of the classes being taught.

In response, Knudsen said Wendy Peterson, the educational director and later deputy superintendent, and Sue Holt, the teacher supervisor, told teachers to focus on "quantity (classroom time) over quality." They advised showing Hollywood movies in class, said Knudsen and another current teacher.

"I didn't go to school for four years to show a movie," said Knudsen.

Peterson and Holt didn't return phone calls.

Edwards, the former youth resident of Lincoln Hills, praised Knudsen's work with the youth, saying that she was one of the staff members he felt safe around. Edwards said he did two stints at Lincoln Hills after being charged for being a party to an armed robbery and for not keeping the terms of his initial release.

His juvenile records are sealed, and he has a clean record as an adult.

Edwards said he had a monthslong struggle to convince Lincoln Hills officials that he is a practicing Muslim who wanted a Qur'an and to be able to keep certain dietary restrictions such as fasting on holy days.

"I constantly had to fight for my rights while I was there," Edwards said.

Knudsen confirmed that Edwards — who she had no doubts was genuinely Muslim — had difficulties getting his own Qur'an.

To save money in the June 2011 budget, Walker and GOP lawmakers shut down the youth correctional institutions Ethan Allen School in the Town of Delafield and Southern Oaks Girls School in Union Grove. As part of that change, the juvenile offenders from those closed institutions, including many from southeast Wisconsin, were moved across the state to Lincoln Hills and its sister school, Copper Lake School for Girls.

Edwards, who was transferred from Ethan Allen to Lincoln Hills, said that some of the Ethan Allen staff were minorities whom he could connect with. That wasn't true at Lincoln Hills, where it was also hard to contact family members, he said.

Racial epithets were used by some staff to students and by some students to staff, Edwards said.

Ryan Mendez, a former teacher from Lincoln Hills who left for a different job, said he also heard racially disparaging remarks from staff, calling it a "toxic environment."