Study Shows That Women With Larger Behinds Are More Intelligent And Healthier
According to a research done by the Churchill Hospital and the University of Oxford in the UK, women with larger derriere are smarter and have lower risk of developing chronic diseases.

Researchers claim that this is due to the fat distribution. Namely, it is better to have fat buildup below the waist since it serves as a kind of barrier against diabetes, heart diseases and other health issues attributed to obesity. These women also have lower levels of cholesterol and are more likely to produce hormones which metabolize sugar.

As it was reported by the Journal of Obesity, the protective effects of the lower body fat deposits have been confirmed in numerous studies that involved subjects with different body mass indexes and different co-morbidities.

On the other hand, women with abdominal fat deposits should lead healthier lifestyle, since their belly fat may lead to obesity-triggered health conditions.

Several studies have shown that the risk of obesity-related diseases depends on the buildup of abdominal fat. In other words, abdominal obesity is linked to hypertension and high levels of plasma triglycerides, which contribute to developing type 2 – diabetes.

Dr. Robert Kushner, who is a professor at the Northwestern Memorial Hospital located in Chicago, explained that the belly fat shows higher metabolic activity which affects the overall body and even the brain, whereas the fat stored below the waist is more stable and gives rise to fewer proteins and cytokines linked to insulin resistance – the primary reason for diabetes.

As reported by Elite Daily, leptin is another factor that is related to fat distribution. Leptin is produced by the fat cells and through the bloodstream goes to the brain. Overweight people have larger amounts of leptin. So, their brains stop responding to this hormone which leads to leptin resistance. In other words, their leptin levels are high but their brains can’t see that. It means that even though the body is obese, the brain is starved. This is the reason why overweight people can’t stop eating.

This hormone is also responsible for the weight regulation and for the production of dinopectina (a hormone with anti-diabetic, anti-inflammatory and protective properties). Larger derriere favors the levels of leptin, so the buttocks tissue traps all harmful fatty particles thus preventing cardiovascular issues.

In order to maintain wider hips your body needs omega-3 fatty acids, which are proven to promote the cognitive abilities, memory and overall brain function.

Moreover, the lower-body fat positively affects the supply of polyunsaturated fatty acids which is necessary for the neurodevelopment. Therefore this also predetermines the cognitive abilities both in women and their offspring. So, women with wider hips are more likely to give birth to more intelligent children in comparison to the less curvy mothers.

References: