Restaurant Trends in the New Jersey and New York Markets: The New Realities of the Decreasing Tip Credit
Lay of the Land

To tip or not to tip? The restaurant industry is reaching a tipping point on resolving this “road not taken” issue. Two related social movements are converging to bring about significant changes—the so-called “Living Wage” impositions and the increasing imbalance between tipped and non-tipped employees. Considering that restaurants operate on extremely thin margins and their servers are both dependent upon and accustomed to the tips that frequently equal or exceed 20%, the convergence of these two societal/governmental impulses will necessarily disrupt the standard operating procedures of the restaurant business culture.

Currently, restaurants have a “Nominal Price” and a “Real Price.” The Nominal Price is the price that customers see when they look at the menu. The Real Price is the price that customers actually pay when they add tips, taxes, and any other fees not incorporated into the Nominal Price. The obvious solution to both the increasing minimum wage and the disparity between the front-end and the back-end is to increase the Nominal Price. However, game theory economics offers a stark reality to this direct approach. That is, restaurant patrons are accustomed to the prices already generated by the current restaurant market. Therefore, a restaurant that raises the Nominal Price to accommodate the changes will seem more expensive than those restaurants that make no such adjustment. In the hyper-competitive restaurant industry, unless the restaurant is itself a destination, an increase in the Nominal Price will most likely result in reduced numbers of consumers and withering profits.

Given that reality, the solution could be to eliminate tipping and move the costs over to the Real Price by way of Surcharges or Services Charges. A Surcharge is simply a percent increase to the bill. A Service Charge is a percent increase to the bill but for the express purpose of paying for the service. Research suggests that the service charge could be more palatable to the American restaurant consumer in the absence of tipping. Nonetheless, any new arrangement must be carefully calibrated not only to maintain customer satisfaction but also to comply with state and local laws. The following will present the risks of increasing the Nominal Price, and the parameters of the calibration to the Real Price in New Jersey, New York, and New York City.

Psychology of Tipping

The Living Wage and Pay Disparity

The Living Wage itself is not so much an issue as is the overall drive to increase the base line of pay to achieve a nebulous and largely undefined goal. Currently, restaurants are permitted to take a tip credit against a server’s wages for minimum wage purposes. This credit often reaches the federal maximum limit of $5.12/hour tip credit, which together with the federal tipped employee minimum of $2.13 satisfies the $7.25 minimum wage requirement. Because tips are customarily 15-20%, servers, particularly at upscale restaurants, tend to make significantly more money than the minimum wage (estimated to be $25/hour or more since such wages tend to be under-reported). At the same time, the good fortune of the “front-of-the-house” tipped employees creates a glaring disparity of wages with the “back-of-the-house” employees who cannot participate in the tip pool.

As part of the movement pressing for the Living Wage, the tip credit is increasingly under assault and minimized. As an example, New York just recently increased the standard minimum wage to $9.00/hour and the tipped minimum wage (assuming that the full credit is taken) is now $7.50 an hour. Therefore, the maximum tip credit in NY is only $1.50/hour. An example is illustrative: A line cook at a standard restaurant makes $1 more than the minimum wage, setting her hourly rate at $10/hour. A server at this same restaurant makes the tipped minimum wage of $7.50/hour. A couple comes in and purchases two entrees, one dessert, and two drinks, bringing their subtotal to $48. They spend two hours at the restaurant from start to finish. During this time, the line cook grosses $20. The server earns $15 in direct wages, and, assuming the couple left the customary 20% tip, earns an additional $9.60, thereby bringing his gross income for the time worked to $24.60. Of course in an actual restaurant environment, this server will be serving more than one table and may be subject sharing tips in a tip pool. Nonetheless, the disparity between these two groups of employees is stark.

It is interesting that those in the legislature that pass these increases do not really understand the economics of pay for tipped employees. It is frequently observed by the elected officials in public hearings that such workers only earn $2.13/hour plus tips. As will be discussed in greater length below, non-restaurant employees tend to underestimate the value of tips. Thus, $2.13/hour plus tips seems less than it is.

Although the research suggests only a weak correlation between pay and competency, the above inequality may to some degree reflect the competency and experience. However, the lower pay of the kitchen does not correlate to skill and expertise, but it creates added tension between the classes of workers, as one cannot reasonably argue that a server works any harder than a cook. Conversely, while some may argue that the current system is good because it ensures good service, it also ensures that those actually preparing the food are not paid nearly as well. Thus, by shifting the major share of compensation to the front-end, restaurants cannot guarantee the same quality on the back-end—i.e. to the people actually preparing the food and attending to sanitary requirements. Indeed, New York City restaurants are increasingly encountering the problem that their back-end staff cannot actually afford to live in the city. This drain of human capital from the back-end of restaurant services will no doubt decrease the likelihood of a pleasant dining experience, no matter how good the server is.

Price Partitioning and Consumer Preference

As touched on before, the price that the diner sees before being served and the actual price paid can be quite different. From a competitive standpoint, only those few restaurants with secure cash flows can afford to increase their Nominal Price and reduce tipping. This is because the potential diner will most likely gravitate toward the restaurant that nominally appears less expensive. However, from a macro standpoint, if every restaurant increased its Nominal Price and reduced tipping, thus obviating the problem of Nominal Price competition, then another problem arises: all restaurants will appear more expensive. The restaurant consumer ordinarily does not have a fixed budget for restaurant expenditures per quarter based on Real Prices. Presently, the potential patron to a restaurant will do a rudimentary estimation of cost based on the Nominal Price without accurately calculating the tip and tax into the estimate. Thus, when the check arrives, the patron may groan a little, but, as a general matter, will pay while continuing to underestimate restaurant’s actual expense.

If all restaurants were to increase the Nominal Price, the industry would no longer benefit from this miscalculation. This, in turn, could lead to a substantial, overall drop in patronage.

Therefore, a restaurant may want to consider raising the just the Real Price, whether by the imposition of a Surcharge or a Service Charge, to both obviate the pay discrepancy of front and back-end staff while attempting to maintain usual cash flows. However, in addition to the economic and psychological consequences, this approach is also fraught with legal complexity as discussed below.

Restaurant Surcharges

In New Jersey and New York State, generally no law exists that specifically forbids a restaurant from applying a surcharge to a customer’s final bill. In both states, surcharges are subject to the payment of sales taxes, and they must be appropriately labelled as not being part of the gratuity. Further, the surcharge must be communicated to the diner in some fashion before they order. New York law provides: “The statements shall use ordinary language readily understood and shall appear in a font size similar to surrounding text, but no smaller than a 12-point font.” In fact, there is a rebuttable, legal presumption that any charge which is not for food and drink is a tip. Further, any restaurant wishing to ensure that a Surcharge will not be legally confused with a Service Charge is to call the Surcharge an “administration charge.”

However, New York City Rule §5-59 prohibits restaurants from “adding a surcharge to listed prices.” A restaurant found to be engaged in this activity may be fined $500 per plate. While this ordinance has not been generally enforced, complaints from diners can prompt such a response. Recently, this law has come under increasing scrutiny both from restauranteurs who want it repealed and diners who want the law applied to Service Charges as well. So far no decisive resolution has occurred, but this area must be monitored as restaurants continue to seek ways to solve the problems of making ends in a thin profit environment.

The additional legal wrinkle to the imposition of a surcharge involves taxes. As noted, a Surcharge is subject to sales tax.

Assuming that the adding of a Surcharge were to become the norm, it is conceivable that the customary tip will fall back to the 10-15% range if not lower (depending upon the amount of the Surcharge). This would cause severs to depend on wages subject to full payroll taxes and less susceptible to underreporting. Because this would most likely bring about a gradual shift, it may not shock the economics of the industry in the same manner as a universal Service Charge might. Nonetheless, it would reduce the cash flows to the server and, in certain instances, the restaurateur.

Restaurant Service Charges

Restaurant Service Charges generally follow the same practical (and legal) realities as Surcharges. However, under New York law (but not New Jersey), a Service Charge (or any other charge which the diner reasonably believes to be gratuity) must be paid to the servers in the same fashion as a traditional tip. Failure to comply may result in hefty fines.

In New York City, a service charge not paid over to the wait staff would be considered an unlawful surcharge and thereby expose the restaurant to sales taxes and penalties.

Adding to the above complications, a rule change by the Internal Revenue Service deters restauranteurs from applying a mandatory Service Charge. In 2014, the I.R.S. stated that any distribution of these Service Charges to employees will be treated as wages and not as tips. The employer must withhold and pay Social Security and Medicare (FICA) tax on these amounts, cannot claim a credit against its tax obligations for these amounts (like it can for tips), and must include them as part of the employee’s hourly wage for wage and hour law purposes.

If an employer is simply wishing to increase the cash flow of a particular restaurant, then an appropriate Surcharge would probably be the best way to go, as no diner should think that it is meant for the service. However, Surcharges, as stated, have their own potential pitfalls. Each restauranteur should select which approach suits the restaurant best based its market and perhaps make a working hybrid of the various approaches. However, the even if the restaurant selects the most appropriate method, the increased tax liability may leave both server and restauranteur with a feeling that no good deed goes unpunished.

Conclusion

The easiest and least legally complicated way to address the pay disparity between the front-end and the back-end is to increase the menu (or Nominal) price. However, this shift threatens to be the most assured way to decrease the number of patrons to the restaurant. The legal complications to raising the Real Price through Surcharges or Service Charges, as well as the all but assured increased tax liability that will result, makes such a move unappetizing. However, the status quo is steadily losing its accustomed efficiency because of changing social attitudes and legal actions taken by local and state governments. Increase in minimum wages generally and the disproportionate increase to minimums for servers will put pressure on restaurants not only to increase cash flows but also address that large disparity within their own ranks lest the restaurant risk human capital flight from its kitchens. There is no easy or universal solution to address these pressures. Each restaurant must look to its long term sustainability, the market it competes in, and the state and local laws that apply. Once the parameters are understood, the restaurant should implement a gradual approach to changing its payment structures to ease into the new environment.

Gary Young, Esq

ScarinciHollenbeck, LLC

Marilou Halvorsen

N.J. Restaurant & Hospitality Association