The 2011 La Niña: So strong, the oceans fell
Abstract [1] Global mean sea level (GMSL) dropped by 5 mm between the beginning of 2010 and mid 2011. This drop occurred despite the background rate of rise, 3 mm per year, which dominates most of the 18-year record observed by satellite altimeters. Using a combination of satellite andin situdata, we show that the decline in ocean mass, which explains the sea level drop, coincides with an equivalent increase in terrestrial water storage, primarily over Australia, northern South America, and Southeast Asia. This temporary shift of water from the ocean to land is closely related to the transition from El Niño conditions in 2009/10 to a strong 2010/11 La Niña, which affected precipitation patterns world-wide.

4. Conclusions [20] In summary, we have presented direct observations of a 5 mm drop in GMSL driven by an ENSO-related transfer of mass between the oceans and the continents. Observational closure of the sea level budget provides strong evidence that interannual changes in GMSL on the order of half a centimeter can be driven by this mechanism. The comparison between TWS increase and ocean mass decrease indicates that the decline in sea level was primarily related to the La Niña induced precipitation anomalies over Australia, Southeast Asia, and northern South America. The 5 mm drop in GMSL is associated with an excess transport of freshwater from ocean to land. In contrast, the thermosteric component of this event was very small. [21] The 2010/11 La Niña was by many measures the strongest ENSO cold event in the past 8 decades and led to a significant decrease in GMSL. While the warming trend in the west Pacific has been well documented [Cravatte et al., 2009], it's relationships to global warming remains unclear [Collins et al., 2010]. Nonetheless, higher surface temperatures in the warm pool are likely to augment the effect of La Niña on regional precipitation, particularly over Australia [Evans and Boyer-Souchet, 2012]. Thus, given their significant implications for both precipitation and sea level, SST anomalies and their interaction with ENSO teleconnections in a warming climate will subjects of considerable importance. [22] The connection to ENSO and the fact that most of the additional water on the continents at low and mid latitudes will be subject to runoff suggests a rather short-lived hiatus in GMSL rise. Indeed, the most recent data suggest a recovery of more than 5 mm (Figure 1) in the last few months of the GMSL time series despite the subsequent La Niña in 2011/12. ENSO-driven changes in GMSL like the one described here might mask GMSL variations related to anthropogenic forcing over short time periods, but as expected from the lag of continental freshwater outflows relative to precipitation anomalies, they are unable to curtail the longer timescale trends associated with persistent ice melt and ocean warming as observed in recent decades. [23] Predicting future rates of sea level change and detecting any acceleration in GMSL rise will require the ability to distinguish such events from increases in the net heat content of the ocean, as well as rapid changes in the amount of ice lost from the glaciers and ice sheets. This underscores the importance of complementary global observing systems such as Jason, GRACE and Argo, without which such distinctions would be impossible.

Acknowledgments [24] We thank Michael McPhaden and an anonymous reviewer for their detailed reviews and constructive comments that helped to improve the paper. The work was performed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with NASA and is partially sponsored by NASA awards NNX09AH89G-S01 and NNG06GB91G. We thank the GRACE analysis centers at University of Texas, JPL, and Geoforschungszentrum Potsdam, and the German Space Operations Center (GSOC) of the German Aerospace Center (DLR). [25] The Editor thanks Michael McPhaden and an anonymous reviewer for assisting in the evaluation of this paper.