The potential spread of infection caused by aerosol contamination of surfaces after flushing a domestic toilet
Abstract Aims: To determine the level of aerosol formation and fallout within a toilet cubicle after flushing a toilet contaminated with indicator organisms at levels required to mimic pathogen shedding during infectious diarrhoea. Methods and Results: A semisolid agar carrier containing either Serratia marcesens or MS2 bacteriophage was used to contaminate the sidewalls and bowl water of a domestic toilet to mimic the effects of soiling after an episode of acute diarrhoea. Viable counts were used to compare the numbers of Serratia adhering to the porcelain surfaces and those present in the bowl water before and after flushing the toilet. Air sampling and settle plates were used to determine the presence of bacteria or virus-laden aerosols within the toilet cubicle. After seeding there was a high level of contamination on the porcelain surfaces both under the rim and on the sides of the bowl. After a single flush there was a reduction of 2·0–3·0 log cycles cm−2 for surface attached organisms. The number of micro-organisms in the bowl water was reduced by 2·0–3·0 log cycles ml−1 after the first flush and following a second flush, a further reduction of c. 2·0 log cycles ml−1 was achieved. Micro-organisms in the air were at the highest level immediately after the first flush (mean values, 1370 CFU m−3 for Serratia and 2420 PFU m−3 for MS2 page). Sequential flushing resulted in further distribution of micro-organisms into the air although the numbers declined after each flush. Serratia adhering to the sidewalls, as well as free-floating organisms in the toilet water, were responsible for the formation of bacterial aerosols. Conclusions: Although a single flush reduced the level of micro-organisms in the toilet bowl water when contaminated at concentrations reflecting pathogen shedding, large numbers of micro-organisms persisted on the toilet bowl surface and in the bowl water which were disseminated into the air by further flushes. Significance and Impact of the Study: Many individuals may be unaware of the risk of air-borne dissemination of microbes when flushing the toilet and the consequent surface contamination that may spread infection within the household, via direct surface-to-hand-to mouth contact. Some enteric viruses could persist in the air after toilet flushing and infection may be acquired after inhalation and swallowing.

Introduction Infectious gastroenteritis is caused by a variety of micro-organisms which have the potential to contaminate surfaces in toilets and bathrooms because they are excreted in large numbers during episodes of acute diarrhoea. Flushing the toilet is known to produce aerosols that are capable of causing surface contamination within the toilet and bathroom (Darlow and Bale 1959; Bound and Atkinson 1966; Newsom 1972; Gerba et al. 1975). Many enteric pathogens are spread by the faecal–oral route and it has been suggested that the fallout of droplets containing faecal material, after flushing the toilet, is an important infection hazard within the bathroom (Hutchinson 1956; Darlow and Bale 1959; Gerba et al. 1975). Viruses are a significant cause of gastroenteritis worldwide and virtually all children aged 3–5 years acquire a rotavirus infection. Individuals with acute diarrhoea may shed >1010 infectious rotavirus particles per ml of faeces (Hart and Cunliffe 1999) and toilet flushing could spread aerosols containing the virus onto surfaces in the bathroom. The virus spreads rapidly within families and adults also become infected, although they generally suffer from asymptomatic or mild illness. In the UK, over the last decade the reported incidence of norovirus has increased considerably and it is estimated that at least 3 million cases occur annually (Evans et al. 1998; Wheeler et al. 1999). The virus produces a rapid onset of diarrhoea and vomiting in both adults and children and large numbers of infectious virus particles are found in both vomit and faeces. The infective dose of both norovirus and rotavirus is presumed to be as low as 10–100 virus particles (LeBaron et al. 1990) which undoubtedly contributes to their high infectivity, spreading mainly through contact with infected individuals and virus-contaminated environmental fomites. Norovirus outbreaks can be difficult to control because the virus spreads rapidly in closed environments often resulting in secondary attack rates of >50% (Caul 1994). The risk of environmental contamination occurring in the bathroom is likely to be greatest during acute diarrhoeal illness when billions of micro-organisms are being flushed down the toilet. During such episodes faecal material is likely to contaminate not only the bowl water but also the porcelain surfaces within the toilet bowl. Flushing produces aerosols from the force of the water running down the surfaces of the bowl and from the turbulence caused by mixing with water contained in the bowl. Previous studies have shown that toilet design influences aerosol production. Bound and Atkinson (1966) found that a siphonic toilet produced much lower concentrations of contaminated particles than the older style ‘wash-down’ pan by a ratio of 1 : 14. Newsom (1972) reported that the splashing produced by flushing varied with cistern height and bowl design and noted that a double-trap siphonic toilet produced more splashes than a ‘wash-down’ type. Obviously there is considerable variation in the design of modern flush toilets which is likely to affect the amount of turbulence, splashing, and aerosol production. This report considers the infection risk after flushing a toilet contaminated with indicator organisms at levels required to mimic pathogen shedding during infectious diarrhoea which could be >1010 particles per ml. A domestic close-coupled siphonic toilet, a type used widely in the UK, was used to examine the dynamics of aerosol formation and contamination of environmental surfaces after flushing. The separate effects of bacteria adhering to the porcelain sidewalls as opposed to bacteria present in the toilet bowl water on the formation of bacterial aerosols was determined. In addition, we investigated the effects of sequential flushing on environmental contamination.

Materials and methods Toilet A domestic toilet, situated in a room of 2·6 m−3, in the home of one of the authors (J.B.) was used throughout (see Fig. 1). The cistern had a reservoir containing 12 l of flush water and the toilet bowl contained 2 l of water. The surface area of the internal bowl sides above the water line was 1150 cm2. Before seeding with micro-organisms the toilet bowl water and porcelain surfaces were scrubbed with a chlorine-containing disinfectant (50 000 ppm of free available chlorine) and flushed six times to eliminate traces of the cleaning compound. This procedure was also used to decontaminate the toilet after individual experiments. Figure 1. Open Figure

Download Powerpoint slide The relative positions of settle plates which were exposed for 30 min after flushing the toilet. A: a shelf behind the toilet, 83 cm above the seat; B: the cistern, 41 cm above the seat; C: toilet seat, left; D: toilet seat, right; E: 30 cm in front of the toilet, level with the toilet seat Organisms For bacterial contamination a pigment-producing strain of Serratia marcesens (NCTC 10211) was used throughout because it can be easily identified on nonselective agar and it has a low decay constant when sprayed in aqueous suspension (Darlow and Bale 1959). The organism was grown to stationary phase in 100 ml buffered peptone water (Oxoid Ltd, Basingstoke, UK) on an orbital shaker at 37°C for 24 h to give c. 109 CFU ml−1. The suspension was centrifuged (2080 g for 30 min) before washing and suspending in 10 ml of 1/4 strength Ringer's solution (RS; Oxoid Ltd). The washed suspension was added to 80 ml of semisolid agar (0·2% w/v, Technical Agar; Oxoid Ltd) and mixed thoroughly to produce a seed inoculum containing c. 1010 bacteria. Virus contamination was achieved using MS2 bacteriophage (ATCC 15597-B1) which is a nonpathogenic virus that can be easily propagated in the laboratory. MS2 is a nonenveloped virus, known to be relatively stable in the environment, which has been used previously as an indicator for enteric viruses (Jones et al. 1991; Havelaar et al. 1993; Dore et al. 2000; Allwood et al. 2003). Bacteriophage propagation was performed using an agar-overlay technique using Escherichia coli (ATCC 15597) as the host (Adams 1959). Briefly, a soft agar/host covering was prepared by overlaying agar plates (tryptone soya agar; Oxoid Ltd) with 2·5 ml of melted 0·5% agar (same medium) which contained two drops of a 6-h culture of the host in tryptone soya broth (TSB; Oxoid Ltd). The soft agar was allowed to harden and the surface covered with c. 0·5 ml of the concentrated bacteriophage suspension. After 24 h incubation at 37°C, the soft agar was scraped off the surface of the plates and suspended in TSB. The extract was centrifuged at 3000 g for 20 min to sediment the cellular debris and agar. The supernatant containing the bacteriophage was passed through a 0·2-μm filter and the filtrate stored at 4°C. Prior to use the bacteriophage suspension was allowed to equilibrate to RT. To quantitate the virus, 10-fold dilutions of the stock suspension in TSB were assayed by the overlay method. Plaques were counted after 24 h incubation at 37°C and the results expressed as plaque-forming units (PFU ml−1). To seed the toilet with virus, 1·5 ml of stock bacteriophage suspension was added to 80 ml of semisolid agar (0·2% w/v) and mixed thoroughly to produce a seed inoculum containing c. 1010 PFU of virus. Toilet seeding Experiments were carried out to establish the dynamics of aerosol formation and surface contamination after seeding the toilet with S. marcesens. Key experiments were repeated using MS-2 bacteriophage to determine whether a similar pattern of contamination occurred when the toilet was seeded with a virus. Semisolid agar (0·2% w/v, 80 ml) was used as the carrier for the seed inoculum because it had the consistency of a loose stool. The inoculum was applied with a 50-ml syringe; either directly to sidewalls of the toilet bowl to give, as far as possible, an even coating on the porcelain surface above the water line, to simulate the splashing effects associated with acute diarrhoea or directly to the bowl water avoiding contamination of the sidewalls. The toilet was flushed 5 min after applying the inoculum. Preliminary tests showed that the toilet was not contaminated with pigment-producing Serratia species or with MS2 bacteriophage prior to seeding. To study the aerosol formation produced by Serratia adhering to the sidewalls of the toilet, as opposed to the bacteria present in the bowl water, after applying the inoculum, the bowl water was disinfected with sodium hypochlorite at a final concentration of 5000 ppm of free available chlorine, before the toilet was flushed. After 30 min disinfection the residual chlorine was neutralized for 15 min by adding 8 g of sodium thiosulfate to the bowl water (final concentration 0·4%). Preliminary experiments had shown that after this level of disinfection and neutralization Serratia was not detected in the bowl water nor did the water exhibit residual antibacterial activity. Microbiological sampling The contaminated toilet bowl surface was sampled using cotton swabs (25 cm2) moistened in RS which were rubbed over an area of 50 cm2. The swabs were placed in 6 ml of RS and homogenized for 30 s using a stomacher. To determine bacterial counts 10-fold dilutions were prepared in RS and 0·1 ml aliquots spread onto nutrient agar plates (NA; Oxoid Ltd) which were incubated at 30°C for 18 h. Swabs for virus determination were also homogenized in RS and dilutions assayed by the agar overlay technique. The toilet bowl water was sampled by removing an aliquot with a disposable sterile plastic pipette into a 25-ml universal container. Bacterial air samples were collected onto NA immediately after flushing the toilet, using a portable, single-sieve, impacter MicroBio MB1 (FW Parrett Ltd, London, UK). This device meets the basic criteria for a suitable reference sampler although it does not differentiate particle sizes (Griffiths and Stewart 1999). The sampler was positioned 30 cm in front of the toilet at a height of 20 cm above the toilet seat with the lid open. The door to the toilet cubicle was closed during sampling. Air sample volumes of between 100 and 600 l were collected, depending on whether the samples were collected after the first, second or third flush after seeding. A control 500-l air sample was taken prior to flushing the toilet to establish that there were no Serratia species or MS2 bacteriophage particles present in the air. Virus-laden aerosols were detected using 0·2% semisolid agar for the entrapment medium. Bacteriophage was detected by thoroughly mixing the entrapment medium and assaying using the overlay technique as described above. Settle plates containing NA, exposed for 30 min after each flush, were used to determine the fallout of bacterial aerosols onto five surfaces surrounding the toilet (Fig. 1). Settle plates for virus capture contained 0·2% semisolid agar which was assayed as for the air samples.