About the Partnership

About the Partnership for Patients

The Partnership for Patients initiative is a public-private partnership working to improve the quality, safety and affordability of health care for all Americans.

Who is in the Partnership?

Physicians, nurses, hospitals, employers, patients and their advocates, and the federal and State governments have joined together to form the Partnership for Patients. Learn more about who is in the Partnership.

What is the Partnership about?

The Partnership for Patients aims to engage 100 percent of the nation's acute care medical centers participating in making hospital care safer, more reliable, and less costly through the achievement of two goals:

Making Care Safer. Keep patients from getting injured or sicker. Decrease all- cause patient harm (to 97 Hospital-Acquired Conditions [HACs]/1,000 discharges) by 20% percent compared to the 2014 interim baseline (of 121 HACs/1,000 patient discharges). Improving Care Transitions. Help patients heal without complications. Decrease preventable complications during a transition from one care setting to another so that all 30 day hospital readmissions would be reduced by 12% as a population-based measure (readmissions per 1,000 people).

Learn more about what the Partnership is about.

Key elements of the Partnership

The Hospital Improvement Innovation Network hospitals across the country are critical partners in this work. Through the Partnership for Patients, 16 national, regional, or state hospital associations, quality improvement organizations, and health system organizations serve as Hospital Improvement Innovation Networks. On May 25, 2016 the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) posted a request for proposals for Hospital Improvement Innovation Network contracts to continue the success achieved in improving patient safety.

On September 28, 2016 the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) awarded contracts to 16 Hospital Improvement Innovation Networks as a part of the integration of the Partnership for Patients (PfP) Hospital Engagement Networks (HEN) into the Quality Improvement Network-Quality Improvement Organization (QIN-QIO) program to prepare for the continuation of the Partnership for Patients. The Hospital Improvement Innovation Networks will build upon the collective momentum of the Partnership for Patient’s (PfP) Hospital Improvement Innovation Networks (HIIN) and Quality Improvement Organizations (QIO) to reduce patient harm and readmissions. The HIINs also represent the integration of the work previously done by the HENs in support of the QIO and quality improvement efforts for the Medicare population.

The Community-based Care Transitions Program Another major Partnership for Patients network includes the 46 sites awarded to participate in the Community-based Care Transitions Program. These sites each constitute a collaborative community effort including community-based organizations such as social service providers or Area Agencies on Aging, multiple hospital partners, nursing homes, home health agencies, pharmacies, primary care practices, and other types of health and social service providers serving patients in that community. Through the program, these sites are testing models for improving care transitions from the hospital to other settings and for reducing readmissions for high-risk Medicare beneficiaries. Learn more about the Community-based Care Transitions Program.

Patient and Family Engagement The relationship between health care professionals and their patients and families is critically important to the Partnership. It is a key part of keeping patients from getting injured or sicker in the hospital and helping patients heal without complication through improved transitions across health care settings and reduced readmissions. Learn more about Patient and Family Engagements.

Contact us

Can’t find what you’re looking for? Looking for more information on our activities or have general questions about how you can be involved? Please email us directly. Learn more about contacting us.