Review: Domestic hygiene and diarrhoea – pinpointing the problem
Summary Improving domestic hygiene practices is potentially one of the most effective means of reducing the global burden of diarrhoeal diseases in children. However, encouraging behaviour change is a complex and uncertain business. If hygiene promotion is to succeed, it needs to identify and target only those few hygiene practices which are the major source of risk in any setting. Using biological reasoning, we hypothesize that any behaviours which prevent stools from getting into the domestic arena, the child's main habitat, are likely to have a greater impact on health than those practices which prevent pathogens in the environment from being ingested. Hence safe stool disposal, a primary barrier to transmission, may be more important than hand-washing before eating, which constitutes a secondary barrier, for example. We review the epidemiological evidence for the effect of primary and secondary barrier behaviours and suggest that it supports this conclusion. In the absence of local evidence to the contrary, hygiene promotion programmes should give priority to the safe disposal of faecal material and the adequate washing of hands after contact with adult and child stools.

Introduction: clearing away the fog

Hygiene is a complex and confusing subject. Whilst hygienic practices play a fundamental role in the prevention of infectious disease, they also serve other needs. Amongst these are the desire to create order and beauty and to demonstrate respect for social morality ( Curtis 1998). Those who seek to promote safe hygiene need to both understand the motivations underlying hygiene behaviour in general and be able to identify specific practices that may be putting health at risk.

Whilst hygiene promotion is increasingly favoured by policymakers because of its potential to deliver reductions in diarrhoeal diseases at low cost, such interventions are often ‘foggily formulated’ ( Burgers et al. 1988 ). ‘Good’ hygiene, in the moral sense, is confused with ‘safe’ hygiene in the epidemiological sense. This confusion is apparent in Table 1, which gives examples of messages about hygiene collected from hygiene education programmes in developing countries.

Table 1. Some common messages in hygiene education Some common messages in hygiene education

Changing people's behaviour is a difficult and uncertain process. Programmes have to focus their efforts on a small number of messages of proven public health importance if they are to avoid wasting the resources both of programmes and of the communities which they target ( Loevinsohn 1990; Huttly et al. 1997 ). Public health planners have thus to make hard choices about which specific hygiene practices to promote. Logically, these should reflect the particular practices that are putting health most at risk. It is usually not feasible or desirable to carry out full-scale risk factor studies before designing an intervention. Hence decisions have to be made in the light of what is known about the interaction between human behaviour and the behaviour of pathogens.

In this paper we review the biological, ecological and epidemiological evidence concerning the role of specific hygiene behaviours in the transmission of diarrhoeal disease. We look for basic principles to guide practitioners in the targeting of hygiene promotion programmes. The picture that emerges is incomplete and we highlight areas where more research is needed. Though this review confines itself to developing countries, the distinction between developed and developing countries is growing blurred and a further global review of the problem of diarrhoeal disease transmission is urgently needed.

Risk practices: the evidence Though it has been around for over 40 years, lessons can still be learned from the F-diagram. Firstly, it reminds us that diarrhoeal pathogens originate in stools. Secondly, it suggests that if primary barriers to the transmission of faecal pathogens were in place, then secondary barriers would be less important. Interventions to encourage the safe disposal of stools and adequate hand-washing after stool contact should thus pay greater dividends than those that concentrate on the secondary barriers. Is this common-sense conclusion borne out by the epidemiological evidence? In the next sections we evaluate the evidence for the effectiveness of specific practices constituting primary and secondary barriers including safe stool disposal, hand-washing, protecting water, fly control and food hygiene in the light of this hypothesis.

Safe stool disposal The association between stool disposal and child diarrhoea has been investigated in a number of epidemiological studies. Indiscriminate defaecation near the home or in living areas was found to be associated with an increased incidence of diarrhoea ( Stanton & Clemens 1987; Han & Moe 1990). Baltazar & Solon (1989) found a 64% increase in pathogen-positive diarrhoea in families where children's stools were inadequately disposed. Mertens et al. (1992) reported that unsafe stool disposal was associated with a 54% greater diarrhoea risk in Sri Lanka and deduced that if such practices were reduced from 91% to 50% of the population then 12% of diarrhoeal episodes could be prevented. They also concluded that latrine ownership on its own was not enough to prevent disease, but had to be associated with safe stool disposal behaviour. A case-control study of the risk factors for diarrhoea in children under three in Burkina Faso ( Traoréet al. 1994 ) reported that the unsafe disposal of child stools (left lying on the ground, thrown on a heap or outside the compound) was associated with a 50% increase in the risk of hospitalization with diarrhoea by comparison with disposal in a latrine (95% confidence interval 1.09–2.06). The risk to be hospitalized with diarrhoea was about a third higher for children who lived in compounds where human stools were observed on the ground. In Nicaragua, families with children using nappies or underclothes were at reduced risk of diarrhoea than those that went without, presumably because less faecal material got into the environment ( Gorter et al. 1998 ). A further source of evidence for the importance of safe stool disposal is the literature on the impact of sanitation programmes in developing countries. If the construction of latrines reduces diarrhoeal disease then the effect is presumably due to the safe disposal of stools. Rahaman et al. (1985) found that postneonatal mortality rates were 68% lower in families with latrines than in those without. In Lesotho, Daniels et al. (1990) suggested that the presence of a latrine may reduce diarrhoeal infection by a quarter, especially in households with good hygiene practices. An informal consultation held by WHO to review the evidence on water and sanitation-related hygiene recommended that human excreta should be disposed of safely, particularly the faeces of young children, babies and children with diarrhoea ( WHO 1993). Whilst the epidemiological evidence appears to support the suggestion that safe stool disposal is one of the key barriers to the transmission of pathogens, the conclusions of such studies require critical examination. They all shared the difficulty of getting good measures of what people actually do about stool disposal. Finding out about excreta disposal can be very difficult, and interview surveys provide results generally biased towards safer practices ( Curtis et al. 1993 ; Cousens et al. 1996 ; Manun'Ebo et al. 1997 ). Since such studies have not randomised the intervention, they may suffer from confounding. For example, a study claiming to show that unsafe stool disposal is a risk factor for diarrhoeal disease might actually be showing the effect of some other factor, such as wealth, or attitude to hygiene in general, which had ultimately affected both a child's diarrhoea status and the reported hygiene practice of the mother. Studies of the apparent effectiveness of latrines rely on self-selected exposure groups: those who chose to install latrines may have differed in some significant way from those who did not. Though most of the studies discussed here attempt to con-trol for confounding, some factors, such as ‘mother’s atti-tude to hygiene' for example, are difficult to control for effectively. Nevertheless, the consistent nature of the above findings and the force of the biological argument that human stools in the domestic environment are a source of diarrhoeal infection for small children, support the conclusion that the safe disposal of stools should be one of the key measures to prevent diarrhoeal diseases.

Preventing transmission through water The F-diagram shows how diarrhoeal pathogens use water as a route to reach new hosts. Primary barriers to this transmission route include preventing contamination of water by faecal material, both at source and in transit. Secondary barriers remove pathogens once they have got into water supplies, and include methods of purification both at source and in the home. Fluids can also become contaminated by a failure of other barriers, via unwashed fingers, for example. Preventing transmission through water thus requires action in both the public domain and in the sphere of domestic hygiene ( Cairncross et al. 1996 ). Until the late 1980s, the assumption that poor quality drinking water was the primary source of diarrhoeal diseases was widespread. However, expenditure on improving the quantity of water available may have more impact on the common endemic diarrhoeas in developing countries than ensuring that supplies meet high standards of purity ( Cairncross 1990). This is because accessible, plentiful supplies of water facilitate and encourage better hygiene in general, and more hand-washing in particular. Esrey et al. (1985 and 1991) attempted to distinguish the importance of water quantity from water quality in a review of 67 studies in 28 countries in 1986, and a further 17 studies in 1991, and concluded that improvements in water availability were probably more important than in water quality. Their conclusions are supported by findings from Nicaragua, where children from homes with poor water availability had a 34% higher rate of diarrhoea (Gorter et al. 1991). When all other sources of diarrhoeal pathogens are eliminated, via effective sanitation, then water quality becomes relatively more important ( Vanderslice & Briscoe 1995), as it is in industrialized countries. Of course, water that is free of pathogenic agents at the source may become contaminated with faecal material in the private domain as it is carried home, stored and used. In Sri Lanka, for example, only about 5% of ground water samples contained faecal indicator bacteria, but 50% of samples were contaminated during or after being drawn. However, there was no direct association between this bacterial contamination of drinking water and diarrhoeal disease ( Mertens et al. 1990 ). Kirchhoff et al. (1985) found that heavily contaminated water in the home and chlorination to remove it had no effect on diarrhoea incidence, but Yeager (1991) found that diarrhoea incidence was lower in households where water was stored in a container with a tap in Lima, Peru. It is common in hygiene promotion programmes to promote the boiling or disinfection of water for drinking, but boiling water is expensive ( Gilman & Skillicorn 1985), and there is little evidence that such practices are useful. Though abundant water may have more impact on health than pure water, the prevention of the faecal contamination of public water at source is a vital primary barrier to pathogen transmission. Mertens et al. (1990) and Vanderslice and Briscoe (1991) point out that water contamination at source may represent a greater hazard than contamination in the home. This is because new pathogens coming from outside the home may have more impact on health than pathogens that are already circulating among family members. Maintaining water supplies free of contamination from faeces is also important for the prevention of epidemics of diseases such as typhoid and cholera. Eliminating the transmission of diarrhoeal pathogens in water supplies may also reduce the virulence of microbial strains ( Ewald 1991). The breakdown of water purification for large populations during war, in refugee camps, during flooding or other disasters may set off epidemics of severe disease. Even during such outbreaks, transmission is maintained through poor hygiene practice, especially the unsafe disposal of stools and insufficient hand-washing. Safe hygiene promotion is therefore no less a priority in potentially epidemic conditions than in the much commoner context of endemic disease transmission. Keeping water supplies free of faecal contamination at source and in transit is clearly important for preventing diarrhoeal disease. However, the best way to do this may be to ensure that faecal material is not released into the environment and so does not get into water. This again requires safe stool disposal and effective hand-washing after stool contact.

Flies Flies are commonly thought of as a source of diarrhoeal disease. Flies have been shown to carry pathogens on their feet, in their faeces and in the digestive juices which they regurgitate onto foods ( Oo Khin Nwe et al. 1989 ; Esrey 1991). A number of studies have linked flies to diarrhoea incidence. Cohen et al. (1991) demonstrated a significant reduction in diarrhoea incidence amongst soldiers with yeast-baited fly traps in Israel. A fly control programme using insecticide in villages in Pakistan with heavy domestic animal and human faecal contamination reported a 23% reduction in the incidence of diarrhoeal disease; however, baited traps were ineffective ( Chavasse et al. 1999 ). Emerson et al. (1999) found about 25% less diarrhoea in villages sprayed with deltamethrin than in controls, but pointed out that insecticiding is not likely to be sustainable or cost-effective. Though fly control might be desirable in settings where flies form a major nuisance and where there is substantial faecal contamination of the environment, it is not yet achievable. The logic of the F-diagram again leads to the conclusion that the primary need is to prevent flies gaining access to stools in the first place. Common house flies (Musca domestica) and the related Musca sorbens may breed in scattered human faeces, but only rarely do they breed in latrines ( Chavasse 1998). Safe stool disposal in latrines, sewers, or by burying thus has two benefits. It reduces opportunities for flies to breed and it removes the source of fly transported pathogens.

Food-borne transmission of diarrhoeal diseases The F-diagram shows food as a possible link in the chain of transmission of diarrhoeal pathogens from stools to new host. Potential interventions to break this chain include the secondary barriers of hand-washing before food preparation and handling, safe food storage, avoidance of contaminated foods, adequate cooking and reheating, cleaning kitchens, surfaces and utensils, and hand washing before eating or feeding children. Food is potentially important for disease transmission because pathogens on food have an easy route into the digestive system, and because some gastro-enteric pathogens can multiply on food and thereby increase the dose ingested. Esrey and Feachem (1989) reviewed 70 studies related to the impact of food hygiene on diarrhoea morbidity and mortality. They found that there was evidence for the contamination of foods with agents including Salmonella spp., E. coli and Klebsiella. They found studies that reported the presence of faecal indicator bacteria in food. A number of studies also showed that indicator and some pathogenic bacteria could multiply during the storage of food, in particular in weaning foods. Though these findings indicated that it was highly plausible, from a biological point of view, that food contamination was linked to diarrhoea incidence, they found that evidence for the impact of safer food hygiene in developing countries was sparse and inconclusive. Several studies suggested that improvements in food hygiene had led to reductions in diarrhoeal disease, but few could conclusively demonstrate that better food hygiene had been the cause of the improvement. Indeed, a number of studies that had specifically looked for links between bacterial contamination and diarrhoea were unable to show any significant association. More recently Motarjemi et al. (1993) reviewed the arguments that weaning foods are a dangerous source of diarrhoeal pathogens for children and concluded that interventions to improve food hygiene should be a priority for diarrhoeal disease control. However, their review was based mostly on the biological plausibility of the argument, did not distinguish between illness caused by food spoilage toxins and that caused by diarrhoeal pathogens, and did not address the concerns of Esrey and Feachem about the paucity and limitations of the epidemiological evidence. Seasonal patterns of diarrhoeal disease give a hint of pathogen multiplication in food. Many studies have shown a peak of bacterial diarrhoeal disease in the hottest season (e.g. Projet Diarrhées 1994). One explanation for this could be that pathogenic bacteria can multiply more readily on stored food in warmer temperatures (route 1b) ( Cairncross 1979). If there is little convincing epidemiological evidence for the importance of food hygiene in developing countries, this may be because other sources of pathogens are more important. It may alternatively be due to the methodological difficulty of such studies, requiring, as they do, a combination of expertise in epidemiology, food microbiology and behavioural research. In the absence of conclusive evidence, further studies are needed to clarify this issue. In the meantime, what can we conclude about the risk practices that we should target in our efforts to prevent diarrhoeal disease? First, in the public domain foods should be protected from contamination before they come into the home, especially from food handlers' stools. Second, since food contamination with diarrhoeal pathogens in the domestic domain can only result if stools are inadequately disposed of, or if hands are inadequately washed after stool contact, hand washing and stool disposal are, yet again, key to diarrhoea prevention.

Bottle-feeding A further issue associated with child feeding that has been the focus of much work is the bottle-feeding of infants. Many studies in developing countries have shown bottle-feeding to be a major risk factor for diarrhoeal disease (see the review by DeZoysa et al. 1991 ). Breast-feeding not only protects against infection through better nutrition and the supply of maternal antibodies to the infant, but also reduces the contact that the child has with milk and bottles which may have become contaminated with pathogenic agents. These pathogenic agents come from faecal material, so better hand-washing after stool contact and safer stool disposal are of especial importance for parents who bottle-feed, for whatever reason.

Animal faeces as a source of human infection This review has so far considered only the prevention of the transmission of pathogenic agents originating in human faeces (routes 1a and 1b). Animal faeces have been shown to harbour a number of organisms that may also be infective to humans such as certain Salmonellae, Campylobacter and Cryptosporidium. Animal dung in the environment also encourages fly proliferation. There are a few studies in developing countries that have shown an association between animal faeces and diarrhoea. For example, Bukenya and Nkwolo (1991) found that children in houses which kept pigs had 69% greater diarrhoea incidence than houses without. However, Huttly et al. (1987) found that the presence of animals inside the house was associated with a reduced risk of childhood diarrhoea. Other studies relate to specific pathogens; two studies reported possible links between the presence of chickens in the home environment and an increased isolation of Campylobacter in children ( Grados et al. 1988 ; Georges-Courbot et al. 1990 ). Mølbak et al. (1990) found that young children in households with pigs were 2.5 times more likely to suffer from Cryptosporidium diarrhoea in Guinea-Bissau. Whilst animal faeces in food or water is a matter of current concern in developed countries, they may be of less relative importance in areas where human faeces are disposed of inadequately. Though similar pathogens can be identified in animals and man, there may be less cross-infection than previously thought, as recent genotyping studies suggest ( Kariuki et al. 1999 ). Animals may carry some pathogens infective to man, and their faeces may encourage flies; however, pigs and dogs may also protect human health by eating faeces. Further study of this issue is required. In the meantime, human faeces, even of apparently healthy people, are likely to contain more human pathogens than animal faeces and should therefore be targeted as the first priority, unless we have evidence to the contrary.