Georgia Woman on Vacation in Grenada Killed on Beach by Sword-Wielding Man
A Georgia woman on vacation in Grenada with her husband was killed Sunday morning when she and her husband were allegedly attacked near their beachfront resort by a man wielding a machete.

Jessica Colker, a 39-year-old pediatric anesthetist at Children s Healthcare of Atlanta, was killed in the attack. The U.S. Embassy in Barbados confirms Colker’s death to PEOPLE.

According to CNN, Colker’s husband, Dr. Brian Melito, was uninjured in the attack. He managed to escape and tell authorities what happened. Colker’s body was later found on the beach.

The suspect allegedly fled into some nearby mangroves.

On Monday morning, police may have gotten their first break in the case. According to MTV News Grenada, a Grenadian man, Dave Martin Benjamin, turned himself in to authorities. He is being questioned by police in connection with the attack, but no charges have been filed yet.

In a statement, the U.S. Embassy in Barbados stated, “The Embassy is working closely with officials investigating Ms. Colker s death, and asks that the public respects her family s privacy during this difficult time.” An Embassy spokesperson declined to elaborate on specifics.

• Want to keep up with the latest crime coverage? Click here to get breaking crime news, ongoing trial coverage and details of intriguing unsolved cases in the True Crime Newsletter.

According the couple’s online wedding site, Jessica and Brian met at a dance workshop in Costa Rica. “We had a smoothie together on the second day of the workshop and spent the rest of the week dancing, talking, surfing, eating great food, swimming in the ocean under the stars, and generally falling in love,” they wrote.

They married on November 1, 2014 after a three-month engagement.

The sudden tragedy has shocked and horrified Colker’s friends and colleagues. “Jessica was a valued member of our children’s team,” Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta told PEOPLE in a statement. “We are deeply saddened by this horrific news. Our thoughts and prayers go out to her family during this very difficult time.”