Efficacy and Safety of an Injectable Combination Hormonal Contraceptive for Men: The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism: Vol 101, No 12
Highly effective family planning, a goal men and women share, first became feasible in the second half of the 20th century with the availability of reliable, reversible, steroidal contraceptive methods for women. By the 21st century, the number of methods for women had expanded, whereas options for men to control their own fertility remain limited to withdrawal, condoms, and sterilization. In the past 4 decades, studies have demonstrated that reversible hormonal suppression of spermatogenesis in men can prevent pregnancies in their female partners, although commercial product development has stalled (1–3).

In previous clinical studies, testosterone administration to men demonstrated contraceptive efficacy comparable with modern female methods (4–6). However, supraphysiological doses of testosterone had to be administered, with potential long-term adverse effects in healthy men. The testosterone dose can be reduced by coadministration of a progestogen (7); however, only 2 small-scale studies evaluated the contraceptive efficacy and safety of such a combination (8, 9). The present multicenter study was designed to test the contraceptive efficacy and safety in men of a regimen of im injections of a long-acting progestogen, norethisterone enanthate (NET-EN), when administered with replacement doses of a long-acting androgen, testosterone undecanoate (TU), that appeared to be promising in smaller clinical trials for reversible sperm suppression without raising safety concerns (10–13).

Materials and Methods Section: Choose Top of page Abstract Materials and Methods << Results Discussion Reference CITING ARTICLES

Primary and secondary objectives The primary objectives of the study were: 1) the rate of suppression of spermatogenesis below the threshold criterion for contraception of sperm concentration less than or equal to 1 million/mL induced by a regimen of NET-EN and TU administered every 8 weeks for up to 26 weeks (up to 4 injection visits) (5, 14); and 2) the level of contraceptive protection for an efficacy period of up to 56 weeks. Secondary objectives were: 1) maintenance of suppression of spermatogenesis; 2) reversibility of the regimen as determined by the return of sperm concentrations to the lower reference limits of a fertile population (≥15 million/mL or total sperm count to ≥39 million per ejaculate), as defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) (15, 16); 3) alterations in circulating concentrations of steroid hormones and gonadotropins; 4) safety, as monitored by reports of adverse events (AEs); and 5) acceptability of the regimen, as assessed by questionnaires.

Study design A prospective, phase II, single arm, multicenter study design was applied. The research was conducted in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use Good Clinical Practice guideline, following ethics committee, institutional, and national approvals, as required, at each of the 10 study sites (2 sites in Australia, Germany, and United Kingdom and 1 site in Chile, India, Indonesia, and Italy), as well as the approval of the WHO Ethical Review Committee which functioned as the trial's central Institutional Review Board. The study protocol included a screening phase lasting up to 8 weeks, a suppression phase of up to 26 weeks (ie, injections at 0, 8, 16, and 24 wk), during which men received the intervention, an efficacy phase of up to 56 weeks with continued injections, during which eligible couples were exposed to the risk of pregnancy, and a recovery phase (beginning 8 wk after the final injection) for up to 1 year. The planned sample size (227 couples completing the efficacy phase) was calculated, assuming a 1% true failure probability and 25% dropout during the efficacy phase, with a goal to rule out a 4% failure rate with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) (95% CI, 1 sided) and with 90% power. The trial was registered with International Standard Randomized Clinical Trial Number 07760234.

Study population Healthy men, aged 18–45 years, and their 18- to 38-year-old female partners, in stable, monogamous relationships, were invited to participate in the study. Both partners were informed about the nature, aim, and objectives of the study and gave written informed consent before the initiation of any study procedures, including screening. Male volunteers were required to have a normal reproductive state as demonstrated by sperm concentration more than or equal to 15 million/mL or total sperm count more than or equal to 39 million/ejaculate in 2 semen samples, with no gross abnormalities of sperm motility and morphology; normal gonadotropin and testosterone levels; history and clinical examination without pathological findings relevant to the study, including serious organic or psychiatric diseases and symptoms or signs of a sexually transmitted infection; normal digital rectal examination of the prostate and prostate-specific antigen level within normal range; laboratory test results not suggesting the presence of any illness; and body mass index 20–32 kg/m2. Female partners were required to be healthy with normal reproductive state, no contraindication to pregnancy, and not pregnant at the time of entry to the suppression phase. For the couple, a stable, mutually monogamous partnership for at least 1 year was required, along with a coital frequency of twice/week on average, an intent to remain in the relationship for the course of the study, no desire for pregnancy within the next 2 years, and willingness to accept a low but unknown risk of pregnancy.

Participant follow-up After completing screening, eligible couples entered the suppression phase. The male participants received 200-mg NET-EN (200 mg/mL) + 1000-mg TU (250 mg/mL) by 2 separate gluteal injections every 8 weeks for up to 4 injection visits. All injections were administered by health professionals. During this time, couples were instructed to use alternative, nonhormonal contraception, and the male partner provided semen samples after 8 and 12 weeks in suppression phase and then every 2 weeks throughout the remainder of the suppression phase until the criterion for entry into the efficacy phase was met. Couples entered into the efficacy phase when the male partner had produced 2 consecutive semen samples within 2 weeks demonstrating sperm concentrations less than or equal to 1 million/mL. In this phase, he continued to receive the study injections every 8 weeks, for a maximum of 7 injection visits. Couples enrolled in the efficacy phase were asked to rely only on these injections for contraception. In efficacy phase, semen samples were analyzed every 8 weeks at each injection visit. When the efficacy phase was completed or when sperm concentrations remained higher than required during suppression phase to enter efficacy, or when sperm concentrations rebounded in efficacy phase with concentrations more than 1 million/mL confirmed by a repeated semen analysis within 2 weeks, and at early termination of injections (see below), the male participants were transitioned into the recovery phase and follow-up visits including semen analysis were scheduled every 4 weeks until sperm numbers returned to the normal range (≥15 million/mL or 39 million per ejaculate) (15). Alternative contraception was resumed if required to avoid pregnancy. The final visit (FV) was scheduled within 30 days after sperm recovery as defined above but not later than 36 weeks of recovery. In case of nonrecovery of spermatogenesis, follow-up visits for semen analysis and monitoring of AEs were continued for up to 52 weeks of recovery. Urine pregnancy tests were performed at the beginning of the suppression, efficacy, and recovery phases. The first study participant was enrolled on September 4, 2008, and the last participant completed the study on May 30, 2012.

Physical examinations and registration of AEs Physical examinations were done at baseline and at 8-week intervals in the suppression, efficacy and up to week 16 of recovery phase. Digital rectal examination of the prostate was performed at baseline and FV. Participants were asked about AEs at each study visit from the beginning of the suppression phase.

Laboratory analysis Semen analysis was performed according to WHO recommendations (16). Safety clinical chemistry and serum hormone analysis (screening samples only) were performed at each study center by that center's standard procedures. Further serum samples for hormone analysis in the suppression, efficacy, and recovery phase were frozen and shipped to the central laboratory at the Center of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology in Münster, Germany, for analysis after completion of the study. Serum concentrations of LH and FSH were determined using highly specific time-resolved chemiluminescent microparticle immunoassay (Architect i1000; Abbott Diagnostics). Mean intraassay coefficients of variation (CVs) were below 2% and mean interassay CVs below 5%. Concentrations of testosterone and estradiol were determined using a Shimadzu QP2010 gas chromatography-mass spectrometry system. For testosterone, the lower limit of detection was 0.034 nmol/L, the lower limit of quantitation was 0.084 nmol/L. For estradiol, the lower limit of detection was 2.61 pmol/L, the lower limit of quantitation was 7.71 pmol/L. Precision calculated as CV was 8.36% for testosterone and 13.2% for estradiol, respectively. No serum samples for central hormone analysis could be received from the Indonesian center.

Acceptability questionnaires Acceptability questionnaires were provided to the male participants 4 times and female partners 3 times throughout the study: suppression week 8 (male only), beginning of the efficacy and recovery phases, and at the FV.

Statistical analysis The statistical analysis was done by statisticians of the WHO Department of Reproductive Health and Research (WHO/RHR) according to an intent-to-treat analysis using SAS/STAT software (17). Survival graphics and box-and-whisker plots were generated using R software (18). The normality assumption was not fulfilled for the repeated continuous hormonal variables, and hence median change and corresponding interquartile range for the last individual visits in suppression phase, efficacy phase, and recovery phase compared with baseline were reported. Wilcoxon signed rank test was used for comparison of ranked mean change from baseline for these hormonal outcomes. For all other continuous outcomes, the normality assumption was assumed, and mean change from baseline and corresponding 95% CI were reported. Z test P values were used to determine statistical significance at the 5% level, of the mean decline/increase in these continuous outcomes. For time-to-event outcomes, cumulative hazard rate probabilities were computed using the Kaplan-Meier product-limit method (19), with 95% CI based on the complementary log-log transformation. Contraceptive failure Pearl incidence rate with 95% CI was determined using Poisson distribution, using SAS Procedure Genmod.