The iPhone(s) 6 and more: EW live-blogs Apple's big event
Have you heard? Apple is going to release a new iPhone today. There are some rumors. Today, they will be rumors no longer.

There’s always a lot of hype around an Apple event, and while some of it may seem frivolous and excessive, it’s not all for the tech-obsessed. Thanks to the manufacturer’s immense popularity, the people behind a lot of the pop culture you know and love often follow Apple’s lead when it comes to bringing media your way. So if you want a peek at all the new ways you’ll be able to obsess over pop culture in the coming year, look no further.

If you want to watch the event live, Apple is streaming it on their homepage here—it may be restricted to Safari browsers on OS X and/or iOS devices, however. If you have Apple TV, you can watch it there too, as there will be a dedicated channel for you to tune into.

This post will be updated throughout the event. Refresh for the lastest.

AND WE’RE OFF: Tim Cook is talking about the iPhone’s history.

“Today we’re announcing the biggest advancement in the history of iPhone”

Video showing off the phone. Looks much like leaked images: sleak, nigh seamless body.

And the phones are bigger! iPhone 6 and 6 Plus. 4.7 and 5.5 inches, respectively. The rumors are true!

With the bigger display, comes a revamped horizontal display. More keys on the keyboard, two columns in iMessage and email, etc.

Apps will scale—older apps for smaller screens will automatically resize for the larger displays.

Of course, both come with new hardware: the faster A8 processor (The 5S has a processor called the A7).

There’s a gaming presentation now, a game called Vain Glory.

Now we’re talking battery life: both iPhone 6 models have have equal or better battery life than the iPhone 5S.

There are new motion coprocessors, which will give the phones better performance for fitness apps—measuring distance, motion, and even altitude. Good for health apps.

It looks like size and battery life may be the main differences between the two iPhone 6 models.

Everything is promised to be faster, clearer. You’ll be able to make calls over WiFi, and the connection will seamlessly carry over from WiFi to Cellular if you lose connection.

Now the camera: 8 Megapixels, all-new sensor, Focus Pixels tech brings DSLR-level autofocus to iPhones, improved face detection.

One feature is different between the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus: the larger has optical image stabilization, which allows the lens to move around and help stabilize your image even more than usual.

Video camera is also being updated: it now can capture HD video at 60 fps, double the previous frame rate.

iPhone 6 will come with iOS 8, with a new keyboard, a one handed controller, HealthKit suite and more.

Colors will be gold, silver, and space grey.

COST: starts at $199—$399. 16GB, 64 GB, and 128 GB for the iPhone 6.

6 Plus starts at $299, same storage space options.

AVAILABLE: September 19.

There is a weird ad for the phones being shown. It’s very weird. But there’s lots of applause. It’s by Justin Timberlake and Jimmy Fallon, but you can’t see their faces, so you’d have to be told that.

iPhone news is a wrap. Tim Cook is now talking about replacing the wallet. “Payments is a huge business.”

Cook is talking about how low tech debit cards are, how no one has replaced it yet.

“We’ve created an entirely new payment process, and we call it ApplePay.”

Brief demo video shows user touching their TouchID button and holding the phone up to the swipe-free scanners on registers.

It’s built into every iPhone 6 and 6 Plus, uses NFC chip and new Secure Element chip for security. You can add cards you have linked to iTunes account. Adding a new card is simple: you take a picture, and Apple verifies with your bank. The card is then added to Passbook. Levels of security: uses device-specific account numbers, one-time use security codes, etc.

Apple does not track what you bought, where you bought it, and how much you spent. Cashier doesn’t see your name, credit card number, security code.

ApplePay is supported by AmEx, MasterCard, and Visa, and six biggest banks in US. Major department stores, drug stores, and restaurants are already on board. McDonald’s is even adding ApplePay to its drive through. Whole Foods gets applause, so there’s that.

Here it is: the One More Thing. iWatch?

It’s official: The device is called Apple Watch. Cook talks about how Apple Watch focuses on an entirely new user interface, one focused on the old-school dial you have on regular watches.

There’s a video showing off the design and features of the Apple Watch–the screen can sense touch and force, telling the difference between a touch and a tap. Apple Watch will also give force feedback. Apple Watch will also have wireless charging.

Apple Watch comes in two sizes.

There are three distinct collections, Apple Watch, Apple Watch Sport and Apple Watch Edition. Standard, athletic, and luxury, respectively.

iPhones are required to use Apple Watch.

Instead of a grid, apps are arranged in a cluster—you arrange them how you like. You can customize the watch face as well.

The watch’s notifications won’t buzz, but ‘tap’ you gently on the wrist—no one will know but you, unless of course the sound is on.

Quick Board is a feature that analyzes your messages and suggests quick responses without having to type. Also has dictation, and a new collection of emoji.

Siri is built into Apple Watch.

There’s a new messaging system—you can tap friends and trace small pictures to other friends that have Apple Watch.

You can also….feel their heartbeats?

A number of new apps are being shown off: American Airlines, Pinterest, BMW, MLB, and more.

Tim Cook is back, talking about health and fitness.

Workout app lets you set specific goals for specific types of exercises. Aim is to give you a comprehensive view of your daily activity, along with two other apps: Fitness and Activity.

There’s a video explaining how Apple Watch will “get to know you the way a good personal trainer will.” Lots of Active People Living Life and exercising whilst wearing Apple Watch.

Apple Watch is “so much more that we don’t have time to cover this morning,” says Cook.

Pricing is coming:

Apple Watch will work with all iPhones from iPhone 5 onward. Remember, it needs an iPhone to work. To charge simply attach a magnet to back.

Apple Watch starts at $349, available early 2015.

ApplePay will work with Apple Watch.

Cook mentions the iTunes festival, and Apple’s relationship with music industry and artists in it. Mentions collaboration with U2. Applause. They’re performing.

Bono is on the mic now, announces new album “Songs of Innocence.” It’s out now on iTunes. For free. Exclusive to iTunes through mid-October.

AND THAT’S A WRAP: iPhone 6, iPhone 6 Plus, ApplePay, and Apple Watch, with a dash of free new album from U2. Thanks for following along.