Johnson defeats Feingold in U.S. Senate race
With a businessman's perspective and a wealth of voter angst and anger over the economy to tap into, Oshkosh businessman Ron Johnson on Tuesday defeated three-term U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold.

Johnson, a Republican, won the seat by a decisive margin, running up large totals as expected in GOP strongholds such as Waukesha, Walworth, Washington and Dodge counties but also competing with Feingold for votes in more moderate areas of the state.

Johnson's victory was both historic and compelling. He will become the state's first Republican senator since Feingold defeated Bob Kasten in 1992. And Johnson won even though most state residents, and even those who lived in his hometown, had never heard of the plastics manufacturing executive until he jumped into the race in May.

Johnson accepted victory in front of hundreds of jubilant supporters at the EAA AirVenture Museum in Oshkosh.

"We have awakened a sleeping giant," Johnson told the crowd.

"We need to reverse course," he said. "You know my campaign has really been pretty simple. I think the priority is pretty straightforward: we need to restore fiscal sanity to this nation."

Johnson said he would be looking for allies in Washington.

"And I will be looking for any ally who understands that we can't continue to spend and spend and spend our nation into bankruptcy," he said. "I'll work with anyone who realizes that it is the free-market system that creates long-term self-sustaining jobs. That realizes we need to reignite this economy."

Johnson positioned himself as a citizen legislator, condemning Feingold's status as an 18-year member of the Senate. Johnson vowed he would work to end the growth in spending, find ways to cut the deficit, and replace and repeal the health care law.

While Johnson's ascension from obscurity attracted national headlines, Tuesday's election also put a stop to Feingold's Senate career. In his three terms in the Senate, Feingold became known as a maverick who generally was a reliable Democrat vote but also forged a reputation as an independent spirit by co-authoring the McCain-Feingold campaign-finance law, voting against the Patriot Act, opposing the Wall Street bailout and voting against Wall Street regulation because it was not strong enough.

On Tuesday, however, voters sided with Johnson that a fresh perspective was needed in Washington.

On Tuesday night at a Middleton hotel, Feingold conceded the race to Johnson.

"Being your senator has been the greatest honor of my life," Feingold told the crowd.

Feingold then quoted Bob Dylan, from the song, "Mississippi."

"But my heart is not weary, it's light and free. I've got nothing but affection for those who have sailed with me," Feingold told the crowd.

Feingold, who never received more than 55% of the vote in his previous three elections, knew early on that he was going to be in a tough fight. While Feingold touted his independence and enemy status among Washington lobbyists, Johnson portrayed his opponent as a Washington insider who ignored the wishes of his constituents.

It didn't help Feingold that the economy continued to sputter.

"When you combine tough economic conditions and appeals to extremism, that's a deadly combination," Feingold admitted during the campaign.

Exit polling statewide clearly showed the economy was the biggest issue for voters, with 65% of those surveyed saying it was the most important issue facing the country. Health care, at 20%, was a distant second.

Of the 65% who said the economy was the most important issue, 54% of them were Johnson supporters, compared with 45% for Feingold.

Johnson also captured the majority of supporters who were either dissatisfied or angry with the federal government.

Johnson not only grabbed his Republican base but attracted support from voters who had described themselves as moderate in previous elections but turned more conservative. And he had the early backing of prominent conservative talk-show hosts, including Vicki McKenna and Charlie Sykes.

Johnson was a one-man economic stimulus, tapping into his large personal fortune and benefiting from an unrelenting barrage of third-party ads from national groups that targeted Feingold. Johnson ranked second in the country for the number of ads for a U.S. Senate race; he ranked first in the period of Sept. 1 to Oct. 20.

The most recent campaign finance reports showed Johnson spent at least $10.3 million, $8.2 million of which was his own money. Feingold, according to the most recent reports, spent $10.9 million.

Nationally, groups such as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, American Action Network Inc. and Club for Growth Action spent more than a million dollars to defeat Feingold.

"With Ron Johnson's victory, the voters in Wisconsin sent a clear and resounding message, calling for a robust defense of the American free enterprise system," said a statement Tuesday night from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

Johnson began his campaign with a set of television and radio ads intended to introduce himself to voters. Gradually he began to take aim at Feingold, calling him a career politician who was not a maverick, but a Democrat more in line with Democratic leadership. He then branched out in TV ads, attacking Feingold for his stands on the economic stimulus bill and challenging him on his reputation as a penny pincher.

Feingold shot back, charging that Johnson didn't have his facts right about his voting record. And Feingold said Johnson was unable or unwilling to provide details of the key issues.

No specifics

But Johnson stuck to his campaign message, calling the health care law the greatest single assault on freedom in his lifetime and vowing to put an end to excessive and unneeded spending in Washington.

On the campaign trail, Feingold stayed aggressive, hitting college campuses and Democratic strongholds. Feingold was one of the few candidates around the country to say he was proud he supported the health care law. He challenged Johnson to refute what was wrong with providing insurance coverage to people who didn't have it and reminded voters that he voted against the Troubled Asset Relief Program and an unfunded war against Iraq.

Johnson stumbled at times during the race, telling the Journal Sentinel that sunspots and not man-made factors helped explain climate change; getting caught up in testimony he gave in January in which he opposed a bill intended to make it easier for victims of childhood abuse to sue their abusers; and for using the words "creative destruction" to describe the winners and losers in a free-market system.

Johnson also had to answer to critics who said he was being hypocritical for criticizing the economic stimulus bill and other forms of government assistance while at the same time getting government-run industrial revenue bonds early in his business career at Pacur, his plastics manufacturing company.

Feingold believed he had a wedge with Johnson's support of free and fair trade agreements. Feingold said he opposed such free-trade agreements, saying the deals sent thousands of jobs overseas.

Johnson countered, saying that, as long as the deals were fair, they were good for the state and national economy.

In debates and in campaign appearances, Johnson would often say that he couldn't make judgments on some issues because he did not have all of the details members of Congress have. On foreign policy, for example, he said more than once that he would be reluctant to say anything publicly that might harm U.S. troops.

Feingold leaped on the statements, saying it was the job of a senator to voice his or her opinions.

The distinction didn't seem to matter to Johnson's supporters.

"This is a man who stood up and got tired of yelling at the television set," U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) said.

Journal Sentinel reporters Mark Johnson in Middleton and Bill Glauber in Oshkosh contributed to this report.