Lift NIH restrictions on chimera research
MANY OVERSIGHT MECHANISMS exist for research involving human subjects and cells, as well as the transfer of materials into other vertebrates, partly to reassure the public that biomedical research is ethically conducted. In the recently posted notice NOT-OD-15-158, the NIH stated that it “will not fund research in which human pluripotent cells are introduced into non-human vertebrate animal pregastrulation-stage embryos while the agency considers a possible policy revision in this area” (1). This notice encompasses human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), including human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-based human/non-human chimera studies. We believe that this notice poses a threat to progress in stem cell biology, developmental biology, and regenerative medicine. We hope the guideline recommendations that emerge from the NIH Workshop on 6 November will accelerate the decision to reinstate NIH funding for this research area, which has tremendous promise. We strongly believe that a continued dialogue between scientists and bioethicists regarding human/non-human chimera studies is critical for advancing human health through basic science.

Engraftment of hiPSC (red) into mouse blastocyst-stage embryo PHOTO: HIROMITSU (HIRO) NAKAUCHI

Much of the bioethical concern in regard to human/non-human chimerism arises from the possibility of chimeric animals harboring human neurons and germ cells. Can human neural cells coexist with those from animals and establish “humanized” cerebral anatomy and circuitries? Furthermore, would such chimeras be elevated to a higher metaphysical state and “think” more like us (2)? Current scientific data have not supported such possibilities, despite hundreds of xenotransplant studies introducing human neurons into the mouse brain (3–5). With regard to germline transmission, the National Academy of Medicine and the National Research Council have stated in the Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research that animals in which human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) have been introduced during development should not breed and that hPSC chimerism with nonhuman primates is restricted (6).

Research involving hPSC complementation in non-human, pre-gastrulation-stage vertebrate embryos represents a special topic with tremendous potential to elucidate early human development. Development of stem and progenitor cells from pre-gastrulation embryos occurs over the weeks following blastocyst implantation into appropriate hosts. Currently, it is impossible to accurately recapitulate human development in vitro, and there is no ethical method to obtain post-implantation-stage human fetal tissue for isolating tissue and organ stem cells for regenerative medicine. Although early chimera studies involving hESCs/iPSCs and non-human vertebrate animal blastocysts have shown some capacity for contribution to host tissues (7–9), much work remains to unravel key differences in early development between humans and other vertebrates. If we succeed in inducing significant chimerism between hPSCs and pre-gastrulation-stage embryos from non-human vertebrates, tremendous potential exists to develop humanized disease models for studying drug pharmacology. Similarly, implantation of hPSCs derived from patients with heritable diseases could illuminate genetic disease pathogeneses in an appropriate in vivo context. It may even be possible to generate an unlimited supply of therapeutic replacement organs using porcine or sheep models, an effort that we (H.N.) have undertaken with support from the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine. By eliminating federal funding for this research, the NIH casts a shadow of negativity towards all chimerism studies regardless of whether human cells are involved.

Ultimately, we believe that human/non-human chimerism studies in pre-gastrulation embryos hold tremendous potential to improve our understanding of early development, enhance disease modeling, and promote therapeutic discovery. Given that the objective of the NIH is to enable discoveries that advance human health, the restrictions presented n NOT-OD-15-158 serve to impede scientific progress in regenerative medicine and should be lifted.