Prince Harry Welcomes Michelle Obama and Daughters for Tea at Kensington Palace
Prince Harry welcomed some very special guests to Kensington Palace from across the pond – three generations of Obama women!

The 30-year-old prince hosted First Lady Michelle Obama, her two daughters, Malia, 16, and Sasha, 14, and her mother, Marian Robinson, 77, at the royal residence in London on Tuesday morning for tea.

Malia Obama Splash News Online

Prince Harry and Obama chatted about their shared interest in supporting veterans and their families, while the first lady, 51, also discussed with the Prince her Let Girls Learn initiative to boost adolescent girls’ education around the world.

Get push notifications with news, features and more.

Sasha Obama David Fisher/Rex USA

Her education movement was the focus of the first lady’s trip to the U.K. Later in the day, she paid a visit to the Mulberry School for Girls in Tower Hamlets in East London as part of her campaign, where, donning a printed dress, she greeted pupils with big hugs, gave a speech and answered questions from the students.

FLOTUS also discussed social media with the young girls, recalling a message she passed along to her own daughters.

“Instead of Tweeting what you had for lunch, why don’t you tweet what you learned at school and share it with girls around the world,” she said.

Michelle Obama at the Mulberry School for Girls JUSTIN TALLIS/AFP/Getty

Joining a round table of women, including Campaign for Female Education (Camfed) pioneer Fiona Mavhinga, Dr. Pauline Rose, a member of the Cambridge University faculty of education, and Justine Greening, Secretary of State for International Development, Obama gave remarks about the importance of a partnership between the U.S. and U.K. to develop the initiative.

“I meet girls like [the students at Mulberry] everywhere I go around the world. And that’s who we’re fighting for. That’s what this initiative is all about,” Obama said.

She continued: “There are 62 million young women like all of the girls here and around the country who aren’t getting an education, and their potential is just being lost. And we can’t afford that. We can’t afford that in any of our countries. We can’t afford that on the world stage.”

First Lady Michelle Obama and Prince Harry Amanda Lucidon/The White House/PA Photos/Landov

After her visit to the school, Obama met British Prime Minister David Cameron at Downing Street to further discuss her plan.

Samantha Cameron (left), David Cameron and Michelle Obama Nils Jorgensen/Rex USA

The Obamas landed for the two-day trip at Stansted Airport Monday, where they were greeted by U.S. military families.

RELATED VIDEO: Why Does President Obama Have Royal Envy?

This is not the first time that FLOTUS has met Prince Harry. She hosted the British royalty at the White House for a tea party in May 2013 while he was touring the U.S.

• Reporting by SANDRA SOBIERAJ and SIMON PERRY