Advisory: Various Keebler® and Austin® Cracker Varieties to be Reformulated with Peanut Flour
Yesterday, the Kellogg Company issued two statements announcing their intent to change the formulations of varieties of their Keebler® and Austin® brand crackers. Beginning this April, the varieties will begin using peanut flour.

Individuals coping with peanut allergy and families concerned with peanut residue should avoid these products.

Please note we have removed all varieties Keebler crackers from the Safe Snack Guide as a result of this advisory. Click here to read the announcement.

Here is the announcement from Kellogg’s regarding Austin brand varieties from Food Allergy Research and Education’s (FARE) site:

March 2016: Peanut Flour Added to Austin Sandwich Crackers The Kellogg Company would like you to know that starting in April, 2016; Austin will be changing the allergen statement on four flavors of sandwich crackers under the Austin® label. The flavors, Austin® Cheddar Cheese Cracker Sandwiches, Austin® Grilled Cheese Cracker Sandwiches, Austin® Pepper Jack Cracker Sandwiches and the Austin® Variety Pack Cracker Sandwiches will contain Wheat, Milk, Soy, and Peanut ingredients. The products will contain a new ingredient, peanut flour. The packaging graphics are: The new Austin® Sandwich cracker allergen advisory statement will include Wheat, Milk, Soy, and Peanut ingredients for the Austin® Cheddar Cheese Cracker Sandwiches, Austin® Grilled Cheese Cracker Sandwiches, Austin® Pepper Jack Cracker Sandwiches and the Austin® Variety Pack Cracker Sandwiches. Kellogg Company has a commitment to allergen management. Because product formulations may change from time to time, consumers are strongly encouraged to read the package label prior to every purchase. For more information, contact us at 1-877-453-5837 or visit our website at www.austinqualityfoods.com.

Here is the announcement from Kellogg’s regarding the Keebler brand varieties:

March 2016: Peanut Flour Added to Keebler Sandwich Crackers The Kellogg Company would like you to know that starting in April, 2016; Keebler will be changing the allergen statement on four flavors of sandwich crackers under the Keebler® label. The flavors, Keebler® Club® & Cheddar Sandwich Crackers, Keebler® Cheese & Cheddar Sandwich Crackers, Keebler® Pepper Jack Sandwich Crackers and the Keebler® Variety Pack Sandwich Crackers will contain Wheat, Milk, Soy, and Peanut ingredients. The products will contain a new ingredient, peanut flour. The new Keebler® Sandwich cracker allergen advisory statement will include Wheat, Milk, Soy, and Peanut ingredients for the Keebler® Club® & Cheddar Sandwich Crackers, Keebler® Cheese & Cheddar Sandwich Crackers, Keebler® Pepper Jack Sandwich Crackers and the Keebler® Variety Pack Sandwich Crackers. Kellogg Company has a commitment to allergen management. Because product formulations may change from time to time, consumers are strongly encouraged to read the package label prior to every purchase. For more information, contact us at 1-877-453-5737 or visit our website at http://www.keebler.com.

UPDATE: Please see our petition to the Kellogg Company regarding this issue by clicking here.

Print or share this article Mail Tweet