After criticism, Tammy Baldwin calls for probe at Tomah VA hospital
U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wis.) is asking the attorney general to launch a criminal investigatoin into three deaths tied to the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Tomah Credit: Associated Press

SHARE The Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center has come under fire on allegations patients were overprescribed opiate painkillers. Darren Hauck/ Center for Investigative Reporting A memorial of Veteran Jacob Ward, who died of a drug overdose, is seen on his former bed in his parents house where he grew up in Coon Valley. Darren Hauck Center for Investig Pictures of Marine Corps veteran Jason "Jake" Simcakoski, who died in the Tomah VA psychiatric center, are seen at his parents Marv and Linda Simcakoski's home in Stevens Point. Darren Hauck/ Center for Investigative Reporting

By

U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin is calling for a criminal investigation into the deaths of three individuals who received care at the troubled Tomah VA Medical Center — after she came under attack for her handling of complaints about the facility.

"I request that you investigate both the circumstances surrounding patient deaths and allegations of the illicit distribution of opioids that originated at the Tomah VA facility," Baldwin said in a Friday letter to Attorney General Eric Holder.

Candace Baer-Delis, whose father died after suffering two strokes at the Tomah facility, dismissed Baldwin's action.

"She's doing this for PR," Baer-Delis said Friday. "She's trying to save her reputation."

The medical center is being investigated by the VA Office of the Inspector General and the Veterans Affairs secretary of health. The state Department of Safety and Professional Services is also conducting its own review of the Tomah facility's chief of staff, a nurse and a pharmacist.

The medical center came under scrutiny last month when whistleblowers alleged that physicians were handing out prescriptions like candy.

In her letter to Holder, the first-term Madison Democrat identifies three Tomah patients who had died after receiving treatment there.

The Center for Investigative Reporting disclosed that a 35-year-old Marine veteran, Jason Simcakoski, died at the Tomah facility in August as a result of "mixed drug toxicity."

The center also told the story of Jacob Ward, 27, who died in a Milwaukee apartment of cocaine and heroin overdose after a stint at Tomah.

This week, Gannett Wisconsin Media reported that 74-year-old Thomas Patrick Baer died Jan. 14 after suffering two strokes at the Tomah facility. Baer-Delis said her father had one stroke after spending hours in the medical center's waiting room.

An inspection report from the Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General found last year that officials at the Tomah medical center were prescribing high amounts of opiate pain pills to patients.

Veterans who relied on the facility for care had begun calling it "Candy Land."

For months, Ryan Honl, a former Tomah employee and Gulf War veteran, had tried to get three Wisconsin lawmakers — U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, Baldwin and U.S. Rep. Ron Kind — to intervene.

Baldwin was even sitting on the inspection report since August but didn't act until the Center for Investigative Reporting published its story.

Baldwin has since fired a top state staffer but has refused to disclose the terms of the aide's departure.

In her letter to Holder, Baldwin asked that a U.S. Department of Justice investigation conduct a comprehensive review of the Tomah facility.

"I would encourage your review to not only include the three cases mentioned above, but also include any Tomah VA patient who died after receiving treatment at the facility," Baldwin said in her letter to Holder. "The investigation should include a review of both the administration of care and subsequent internal investigations."

Baer-Delis called the letter unnecessary, saying investigators would call in the Justice Department if they found anything criminal.

Baer-Delis said she sent an email to Johnson's and Baldwin's offices in late January. Johnson and his staff immediately got in touch with her.

In addition, four Wisconsin congressmen — Kind and fellow Democrat Mark Pocan and Republicans James Sensenbrenner and Sean Duffy — are calling for a "field hearing" by the House Veterans Affairs Committee.

Baer-Delis said she didn't hear from Baldwin until the Gannett Media Wisconsin story appeared in print this week. Even though she voted for Baldwin in 2012, Baer-Delis said she was disappointed by the senator's response, calling it "damage control."

"I ended up hanging up on her," Baer-Delis said.

Bill Murat, Baldwin's chief of staff, did not return a call.