The 40th Anniversary of Roe v. Wade
It’s the 40th anniversary of Roe v. Wade. Do your kids know what that means?

Despite the prominence of the abortion debate, a shocking number of young people seem ill-informed about the seminal Supreme Court decision. A recent Pew poll found that among people under 30, only 44 percent know that Roe dealt with abortion.

Fifty-three percent (in all age groups) think abortion “is not that important, compared to other issues,” up from 48 percent in 2009 and 32 percent in 2006. Only 18 percent of Americans think abortion is a “critical issue facing the country.”

The general public seems, by turns, apathetic and accepting of the pro-choice status quo.



Pew found that 63 percent of Americans think the Supreme Court should not overturn Roe (an NBC/Wall Street Journal poll had that number at 70 percent.) That holds in every age group, every education group, every racial group. Even a small plurality of Republicans think Roe should stand. White Catholics think so (63 percent). Black Protestants (65 percent) and white mainline Protestants (76 percent) agree. Only white evangelical Protestants disagree (54 percent want it overturned).

Meanwhile, anti-choice forces have been busy. According to a compilation of statistics by Wonkblog, state legislatures passed 135 laws restricting abortion rights in 2011 and 2012.

What explains the apparent mismatch between what anti-choice groups have achieved, on the one hand, and Americans’ attachment to Roe on the other? If Americans want abortion to remain legal, shouldn’t they be putting up more of a fight against those who wanted to make it illegal again? At the very least, shouldn’t they consider abortion a “critical issue”?

Maybe Americans think abortion isn’t “that important” because abortion rates are down overall, or because some of the more extreme anti-women politicians (the “legitimate rape” crowd), got whipped in the 2012 elections. Perhaps they therefore believe that the right to abortion is safe.

Or maybe something more insidious is at work. Maybe most Americans are under the impression that legal restrictions won’t affect them personally. That they’ll just affect poor women without resources. (The NBC/Journal poll found that Latino and African-American women and women without college degrees are responsible for driving up support of Roe in surveys.)

Whatever the case may be, supporters of Roe should be aware that its opponents are not backing down. They might want to explain to their teenagers that Roe v Wade was not about the best way to cross a river.