Georgia Dem: No issue I don’t live in district
Democrat Jon Ossoff dismissed concerns Tuesday over the fact that he doesn't live in the Georgia congressional district in which he's running for a House seat.

"I grew up in this district; I grew up in this community — it's my home. My family is still there," Ossoff said during an interview on CNN's "New Day."

Dem. candidate for Georgia congressional seat @ossoff: Not an issue I don't live in district, can't vote for myself https://t.co/RcX3MNqMTD — New Day (@NewDay) April 18, 2017

Ossoff currently lives just outside Georgia's 6th Congressional District with his girlfriend, while she is attending medical school. He said that he has been transparent about the fact that he doesn't live in the district and pledged to move back to the district as soon as his girlfriend finishes school.

ADVERTISEMENT

"I'm a mile and a half down the street to support Alicia while she finishes medical school. It's something I've been very transparent about," he said. "In fact, I'm proud to be supporting her career."

"As soon as she finishes her medical training, I'll be 10 minutes back up the road into the district where I grew up," he continued.

Ossoff is facing a crowded field of Republicans on Tuesday to fill the vacated seat of now-Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price, who previously represented the 6th District.

The scrutiny over Ossoff's residency has intensified as the race has grown tighter.

Democrats are treating the race as a referendum on President Trump and the current Republican-led Congress, and Ossoff has run an unexpectedly competitive campaign in a GOP-leaning district.

In a special House election in Kansas last week, Republican Ron Estes narrowly slid to victory in a deep-red district — an outcome that could be an early indicator of tough reelection bids for Republicans in next year’s midterms.

Looking to secure a win for their parties in the Georgia election, both Democrats and Republicans have dramatically upped campaign efforts in the district.

The Congressional Leadership Fund, a super PAC aligned with Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanFormer Ryan aide moves to K street The Hill's 12:30 Report: AOC unveils Green New Deal measure | Trump hits Virginia Dems | Dems begin hearings to get Trump tax returns The Hill's 12:30 Report: State of the Union takeaways | Sights and sounds from the night | Virginia attorney general admits he wore blackface MORE (R-Wis.), has spent more than $2 million in the district. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, on the other hand, has run six-figure ad buys and get-out-the-vote campaigns.

Tuesday's special election is an all-party affair. Any candidate can win by taking a 50 percent majority of the vote. But if no candidate reaches that threshold, the top two finishers will head to a runoff.

This story was updated at 10:18 a.m.