Identity of Baseball Stealing Woman Revealed… – The Damien Zone
Identity of Baseball Stealing Woman Revealed…

To some people, she is:

1 -“That horrible baseball-stealing woman with the lipstick lesbian haircut,”

2 – “That square butt-face old hag in ugly white pants and a big bully belt who snatched away a baseball from a child”

3 -“She is the embodiment of evil and greed and selfishness. She has no soul and she should rot in hell.”

Those are only some of the angry accusations that have been hurled at a woman named Grennele Brashkowitz, who until today, had gone unidentified after she displayed one of the most outrageous examples of human greed in the history of Major League Baseball.

If you already think Grennele Brashkowitz is already the most contemptible wicked witch in the world just by watching the video, wait until you hear what she does for a living. Here are pictures of Grennele on the job – D. and G Brashkowitz Psychology.

Baseball fans the world over have been wanting to know the identity of this horrible jerk ever since she snatched the ball away from the unidentified child to whom it was thrown by Juan Miranda at Minute Maid Park in Houston.

Because The Damien Zone is dedicated to truth — especially when it applies to human stupidity and dumbness — we cracked the case. We found the thieving and heartless woman in question and she agreed to a phone interview from what she thought was an undisclosed location.

“The announcer on TV said what I did was ‘beyond wrong’ but there is nothing wrong with a kid learning that life is about competition and learning to take the hard knocks. Besides that, the announcer didn’t even know what he was talking about,” Brashkowitz said from her home in New York City where she works as — get this — a child psychologist of all things.

“The camera was on me! It was not on the kid! People can be so stupid. They see some cute little girl on the TV screen and they automatically assume that she must be the center of attention. The truth is that I was the center of attention. It was me! Why is this so easily overlooked? Why am I automatically the monster in this story? The camera was pointing at me.”

The Damien zone has watched this video a thousand times and each time we come to the same conclusion as everyone else. Grennele Brashkowitz reached out and snatched the ball from the little girl. There is no debating the issue.

“I was on a cross-country vacation with my life companion Judy, and we decided to go to a baseball game. I even bought a special outfit for the occasion because I wanted to look especially nice. I got a white shirt with white slacks and a high quality Donna Karan leather belt.

“I looked great and I deserved to be on TV. I deserved that ball too. That little kid will have a lot of chances in life. Sometimes she will screw up and sometimes she will succeed. That’s the way life goes for everybody. That’s the way the cookie crumbles ! So get over it!”

Angry and very disillusioned by the American reaction to her ball-snatching, Brashkowitz is now heading back to her native Quebec. She feels that her life has become unlivable since she stole that ball from that poor little girl. She is being drummed out of her job and shunned in her community.

“I didn’t even know the goddam kid was there. I didn’t even see her, but what difference should that make? I win! That is what I do! In the long run that stupid kid will get on TV shows and whatever but I will always be seen as an evil woman with a big ugly belt. Yeah, that’s what the guy on the local news said about me. That’s how I was judged. They didn’t see me. They saw a belt they didn’t like or a haircut they didn’t like. They chose to make me into a monster and to mock my clothes. What sense does that make? One radio announcer said I had an ugly belt. Can you imagine saying that about a belt? I paid a lot of money for that belt. Why talk about a belt? Why not come down to my seat with a microphone and interview me? I guess that would have been too easy and too truthful. They weren’t interested in truth.”

Brashkowitz’s attitude grew increasingly hostile throughout the interview.

“I can’t take it anymore in this country and I don’t care what anyone thinks of me or my hair or how out of style they say I looked or that my ass was big and flat like Howard Stern said on his show the next day. Yeah, so let’s see you live with those kinds of insults and see how long you can take it. And all this because I beat out a little brat for a baseball. Give me a f**ing break!”

Grennele Brashskowitz is a child psychologist in private practice with four other clinicians. So far all of the staff has walked out and the partners are in the process of buying her out of the business. Strangely enough, according to her associate, Daneesh Pargrim PHd. she is beloved by her patients and has never had a blemish on her record.

NOTE: Grennele Brashkowiz’s belt was $139.99 at Nordstrom. Thank you to Heidi from New York City who identified the belt and who always helps us to get our stories 100% accurate.

NOTE: Commenting is easy on TheDamienZone. We have all kinds of automatic anti-spam stuff so we don’t have to put the reader through a lot of steps to comment. Mouth off — hate me — love me — that’s what I’m here.