AHA 30% + BHA 2% Peeling Solution - 30ml
AHA 30% + BHA 2% Peeling Solution

30ml

Recently on Social Media Reviews

10-Minute Exfoliating Facial

pH 3.5 - 3.7 water-free alcohol-free oil-free silicone-free nut-free vegan gluten-free cruelty-free



With 30% Alpha Hydroxy Acids (Glycolic/Lactic/Tartaric/Citric), 2% Beta Hydroxy Acid (Salicylic Acid), Hyaluronic Acid Crosspolymer, Vitamin B5, Black Carrot and Tasmanian Pepperberry



Alpha hydroxy acids (AHA) exfoliate the skin's topmost surface for a brighter and more even appearance. Beta hydroxy acids (BHA) also exfoliate the skin with an extended function to help clear pore congestion. This combined 32% AHA/BHA solution offers deeper exfoliation to help fight visible blemishes and for improved skin radiance. The formula also improves the appearance of skin texture and reduces the look of fine lines with continued use.



This formula contains a studied Tasmanian Pepperberry derivative to help reduce irritation associated with acid use. This derivative is of plant origin and varies in colour seasonally and this colour variation may be apparent in the formula from time to time. This formula is further supported with a crosspolymer form of hyaluronic acid for comfort, Vitamin B5 to assist healing and black carrot as an antioxidant.



Note: This formula contains a very high concentration of free acids. We recommend use only if you are an experienced user of acid exfoliation and your skin is not sensitive.



Contraindications: This formula should not be used on sensitive, peeling or compromised skin. Please refer to additional sun protection note and other warnings in provided Directions.



This pH of this formula is approximately 3.6. Glycolic Acid, the primary AHA used in the formula, has a pKa of 3.6 and pKa is the most important aspect to consider in formulating with acids. pKa implies acid availability. When pKa is close to pH, there is an ideal balance between salt and acidity, maximizing effectiveness of the acid and reducing irritation. Higher pH numbers in such a case would increase salt which counter-intuitively would make the formula even more irritating than if the formula was more acidic.



Note: While exfoliating acids can result in quick visible benefits, we generally suggest indirect forms of skin exfoliation in favour of direct forms such as this formula due to potential inflammation and sensitivity associated with acids. Please refer to NIOD's Non-Acid Acid Precursor for such a reference.



Directions

Clean face and wait for skin to dry. Do not use on wet skin. Apply evenly across face and neck using fingertips, avoiding the eye area. Leave on for no more than 10 minutes. Rinse thoroughly with lukewarm water. Avoid the eye contour and contact with eyes both during application and rinse off. This low-viscosity solution is intended to be used as a masque. Do not leave on for longer than 10 minutes . It is not recommended to use more than twice per week. Contact of the product with the skin must be of limited frequency or duration. If irritation occurs, cease use and consult a physician. Use only as directed on unbroken skin. Patch testing prior to use is advised. Refer to our in-depth guide to patch testing. Keep out of reach of children.



(Sunburn Alert: This product contains an alpha hydroxy acid (AHA) and a beta hydroxy acid (BHA) that may increase your skin's sensitivity to the sun and particularly the possibility of sunburn. Use a sunscreen, wear protective clothing, and limit sun exposure while using this product and for a week afterwards.)

Ingredients

Glycolic Acid, Aqua (Water), Aloe Barbadensis Leaf Water, Sodium Hydroxide, Daucus Carota Sativa Extract, Propanediol, Cocamidopropyl Dimethylamine, Salicylic Acid, Potassium Citrate, Lactic Acid, Tartaric Acid, Citric Acid, Panthenol, Sodium Hyaluronate Crosspolymer, Tasmannia Lanceolata Fruit/Leaf Extract, Glycerin, Pentylene Glycol, Xanthan gum, Polysorbate 20, Trisodium Ethylenediamine Disuccinate, Potassium Sorbate, Sodium Benzoate, Ethylhexylglycerin, 1,2-Hexanediol, Caprylyl Glycol.

Our formulations are updated from time to time as part of our commitment to innovation. As such, the ingredient list shown here may vary from the box of the product depending on time and region of purchase.

Recently on Social Media It sounds really scary. It looks even scarier 💉. It's unavailable in many markets. And yet it's one of our most-loved products of all time. Our AHA 30% + BHA 2% Peeling Solution is a 10-minute exfoliating facial that combines 30% Alpha Hydroxy Acids (Glycolic / Lactic / Tartaric / Citric) with 2% Salicylic Acid to improve visible radiance and texture in no time. While Alpha Hydroxy Acids, and specially Glycolic Acid, exfoliate the skin surface well, Salicylic Acid further exfoliates inside the pores to target congestion and visible blemishes. The formula also contains a hydrating Hyaluronic Acid Crosspolymer, pro-healing Vitamin B5, antioxidant Black Carrot and a soothing Tasmanian Pepperberry to make it tolerable by most skin types including sensitive skin. The pH of ~3.6 matches the pKa of Glycolic Acid to offer exceptionally high pure acid availability while leaving an ideal balance between acid and salt content to minimize irritation from excess presence of either. This loving, lovable product is not available in several markets including our homeland of Canada (permanent regulatory limbo), but we will have alternatives for these markets in early 2018. Some obvious bits: 1) Don't over-use acids; two times per week is plenty (which means these peels should cost you about $1 a month); 2) Avoid unprotected solar exposure at all times but particularly when using peels; 3) Don't let the honest cost of this superstar misguide you. When it comes to exfoliation, your skin only understands acid type, concentration and pH; it doesn't act differently based on how much money you wasted 💸. 4) A really fun way to spend ~10 minutes with your family, partner or friend(s) is peeling together ❤️🐒 It sounds really scary. It looks even scarier 💉. It's unavailable in many markets. And yet it's one of our most-loved products of all time. Our AHA 30% + BHA 2% Peeling Solution is a 10-minute exfoliating facial that combines 30% Alpha Hydroxy Acids (Glycolic / Lactic / Tartaric / Citric) with 2% Salicylic Acid to improve visible radiance and texture in no time. While Alpha Hydroxy Acids, and specially Glycolic Acid, exfoliate the skin surface well, Salicylic Acid further exfoliates inside the pores to target congestion and visible blemishes. The formula also contains a hydrating Hyaluronic Acid Crosspolymer, pro-healing Vitamin B5, antioxidant Black Carrot and a soothing Tasmanian Pepperberry to make it tolerable by most skin types including sensitive skin. The pH of ~3.6 matches the pKa of Glycolic Acid to offer exceptionally high pure acid availability while leaving an ideal balance between acid and salt content to minimize irritation from excess presence of either. This loving, lovable product is not available in several markets including our homeland of Canada (permanent regulatory limbo), but we will have alternatives for these markets in early 2018. Some obvious bits: 1) Don't over-use acids; two times per week is plenty (which means these peels should cost you about $1 a month); 2) Avoid unprotected solar exposure at all times but particularly when using peels; 3) Don't let the honest cost of this superstar misguide you. When it comes to exfoliation, your skin only understands acid type, concentration and pH; it doesn't act differently based on how much money you wasted 💸. 4) A really fun way to spend ~10 minutes with your family, partner or friend(s) is peeling together ❤️🐒