Mom Loses Custody Of Her Kids For What Millions Of Moms Do Every Single Day Too
Becoming a parent is a huge responsibility, and even with all the amazing experiences a child will provide, one fraught with anxiety and self-doubt. As much as we try to be good parents, you never know when someone will be standing by to take you to task for some egregious parental mistake.

Well, we just found a troubling story about a mother who lost custody of her children for the most innocuous of actions. You simply will not believe this until you read her story.

An unnamed English mother has allegedly just lost custody of her two young sons for an absurd reason: she allowed them to sleep in the parent’s bed.

More accurately she lost custody for “continually ignoring advice,” according to court records.

The Cambridgeshire woman was already under investigation by social workers for an injury that her eldest son had sustained. When they examined both children, they discovered bruises on their bodies.

While the judge presiding over the case believes that the bruises were unintentional, he still thought they were caused by excessive force.

The injuries apparently were sustained after the children shared their parents’ bed at night. Social workers advised the parents to prohibit their children from sleeping with them, but they continued nevertheless.

While the mother suggested that the bruises were caused by the boys’ rough play, The judge concluded that “it is more likely, and more likely than not, that the injuries were caused by the mother’s forceful brusque handling.”

While the judge said that he believed the mother loves her children and would not intentionally hurt them, he also found her to be responsible for the injuries and has agreed that, after being warned by professionals to not share their bed with the children, neither parent took action to protect the kids. After his ruling, he removed them from her custody.

The children have been taken into custody of the state and placed up for adoption.

Of course, this story has generated a lot of comments in social media, with people saying things like:

“What does letting kids sleep in your bed have to do with bruises and broken wrists?”- Alison Marie

“I co sleep with my children and they’ve never gotten any bruises from it.. just cuddles. No relation there.”- Desiree Banks

“There is something not quite right with this story.”- Shannon Luttrell

According to the Mayo Clinic, there are a number of warning signs to keep watch for if you suspect a child has been abused.

Some are physical, such as unexplained bruises or cuts, or other injuries that are not consistent with the explanations provided. However, other signs are behavioral and might be trickier to notice. The can include acting out, frequent absence from school, withdrawal from social situations and a reluctance to leave school or other public places. If you are a teacher, medical professional, or clergy member, keeping an eye out for such warning signs can make the difference between saving a life or tragedy.

Have you ever had to intervene to help a child escape an abusive situation? Please share your stories with us here.

Share this story and help build a home for a veteran.