State investigating doctor, two others in Tomah VA case
The Veterans Affairs Hospital in Tomah has also become the subject of a review by the U.S. secretary of veterans Affairs. Credit: Darren Hauck/ Center for Investigative Reporting

The state has opened an investigation of a doctor dubbed the "Candy Man" and two other individuals tied to the death of a patient at the Tomah VA Medical Center.

An official confirmed that the state Department of Safety and Professional Services is investigating David Houlihan, chief of staff at the troubled Tomah facility.

Houlihan had been given the nickname "Candy Man" by some vets for his supposedly easy and widespread distribution of painkillers. He wrote at least some of the prescriptions for a 35-year-old Marine Corps vet who died at the medical center in August.

A nurse and pharmacist who worked with Houlihan are also under investigation by the state.

State officials have the authority to issue reprimands or suspend or strip the state licenses of medical professionals in Wisconsin. The state could also refer the matter for criminal prosecution.

"We do have investigations ongoing against them," said Hannah Zillmer, spokeswoman for the state agency.

"Because there is an alleged death, it is on an expedited process," Zillmer continued. "So we are currently investigating, but I can't give you a completion date."

Two individuals interviewed by a state investigator said the matter could be turned over to the Monroe County district attorney.

But Zillmer said that would not be done until after her agency completes its probe.

"We, of course, take these complaints very seriously," she said. "We're investigating as quickly as possible."

An inspection report from the Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General found last year that officials at the Tomah medical center were prescribing high amounts of opiate pain pills to patients.

Veterans who relied on the facility for care had begun calling it "Candy Land."

Media reports last month disclosed that Jason Simcakoski, a 35-year-old Marine Corps veteran, died at the Tomah facility in August from "mixed drug toxicity."

As a result of the press coverage, members of the Wisconsin congressional delegation called for an investigation of the medical center.

Last week, the Center for Investigative Reporting disclosed that U.S. Secretary of Veterans Affairs Robert McDonalddispatched a team of investigators to the facility.

Those investigators, the center said, are looking into allegations of runaway painkiller prescriptions, drug overdoses and abuse of authority by Houlihan.

Ryan Honl, a former Tomah employee who has acted as a whistle-blower, called for an independent investigation of the facility. For months, Honl had tried to get three Wisconsin lawmakers — U.S. Sens. Tammy Baldwin and Ron Johnson and U.S. Rep. Ron Kind — to intervene.

The state investigation is separate from the federal probe.

Zillmer said Friday that her agency first received an anonymous complaint against Houlihan last fall accusing him of "alleged overprescribing of oxycodone." The investigation was opened Aug. 12.

That would have been a couple of weeks before Simcakoski died of a fatal overdose in the Tomah VA's psychiatric ward. Gannett Wisconsin Media reported that he went to the center for anxiety and an addiction to painkillers and was put on more than two dozen medications.

More recently, Zillmer said, her agency opened its own investigation of Houlihan on Jan. 20 in response to the media coverage of the Tomah facility. Officials are looking into allegations of "overprescribing with suspicions that this practice led to at least one patient's death."

Houlihan has been "temporarily reassigned" from his post as the medical center's chief of staff.

Also under investigation are Deborah Frasher, a nurse, and Margaret Hyde, a pharmacist. Zillmer said it is believed that the two worked with Houlihan at the Tomah center.

The complaints allege the two individuals "collaborated with physician in gross overprescribing," Zillmer said.

Frasher, 55, could not be reached at her home in Mauston. Hyde, 64, also was not available. A female hung up the phone at her residence in Sparta when a reporter asked to speak to Hyde.

Houlihan — a 50-year-old psychiatrist — did not return a call to his cellphone Saturday.

Zillmer said none of the three had been disciplined by the state in the past.

In 2003, a complaint was filed against Houlihan in Iowa, where he was also practicing, but the matter was dismissed, Zillmer said. Also, authorities found no grounds for pursuing a 2008 complaint against the psychiatrist for allegedly bullying staff and changing a patient's medication too abruptly.

Leading the state probe of the three medical professionals is Matthew Wallock, an attorney with the Department of Safety and Professional Services. He declined to comment last week.

Complicating the investigation is the fact that the Department of Veterans Affairs does not require those working at its hospitals to hold a state license. That limits what Wallock's agency can do in this matter.

"If there are no Wisconsin licenses, we do not have authority over those individuals," Zillmer said.

Even before any of the various probes have been completed, there has already been some fallout from the scandal.

Last month, Baldwin dismissed Marquette Baylor, the senator's deputy state director and chief of her Milwaukee office, supposedly over her handling of Honl's complaints, No Quarterreported last week.

Baldwin's office received the federal inspection report of the Tomah facility in August but didn't call for an investigation until the media reported on the problems there in January.

Baylor has been offered a cash payout as part of a severance package that includes a confidentiality agreement. Baylor had three weeks to sign the deal.

It is not known if she has done so.

Baylor has not returned calls. Baldwin's office has declined to discuss Baylor's dismissal.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.