Emory BSA start hashtag against Trump graffiti
#1969not1836 has students everywhere expressing support for Emory students who have felt threatened by recent pro-Trump graffiti

This morning Emory Black Student Alliance (BSA) posted a message of solidarity on their Facebook page encouraging students everywhere to show support for minorities by using the hashtag #1969not1836.

The message reads: “We, the Black Student Alliance at Emory University stand in solidarity with the Black and Brown students at Emory, against the intimidation, lies, and deeply rooted racism that people of color continue to face – on their campus, nationwide and globally. #1969not1836 #BlackBrownAndHere

“If you’d like to stand in solidarity with us, please use this as your status: ‘I, a [identity] from [college/university] stand in solidarity with the Black and Brown students at Emory, against the intimidation, lies, and deeply rooted racism that people of color continue to face – on their campus, nationwide and globally. #1969not1836 #BlackBrownAndHere’.”

Julia Skye Feldman, a Women’s Gender and Sexuality major said: I support the organizations that created the copy/paste status and their message.

“I haven’t posted about the Trump situation otherwise since it’s not really my issue but this was a way for me to stand in solidarity with those most affected.”

Emory was founded in 1836 and many students claim that the administration as well as the university’s culture are still stuck in the 19th century.

Emory students have claimed that this was evident just this past Monday after the school was covered in pro-Trump graffiti showing the true views of at least a few students on campus. On Tuesday many students fought back and covered the school with new anti-hate chalk graffiti.

Across the country students have expressed support for the BSA and Emory minorities by reposting their message and using the hashtag. Last night the hashtag blew up and is now trending.

We, Black & Brown students at Emory, are against the intimidation, lies, and racism that people of color continue to face. #1969not1836 — Top 5 Petty (@LOAteEntao_) March 24, 2016

We, Black & Brown students at Emory, are against the intimidation, lies, and racism that people of color continue to face #BlackBrownandHere — River Bunkley (@rivbunks) March 24, 2016

We, Black & Brown students at Emory, are against the intimidation, lies, and racism that people of color continue to face #BlackBrownandHere — Malkese Edwards (@Malkese15) March 24, 2016

However, despite this support, many have criticized Emory students for overreacting to the chalkings.

One person said: “It’s sad. At University all my professors and TA’s were very leftist and if you wanted good grades you had to pretend to agree with the absolute nonsense.

“This is why so many Bernie supporters are students. Our educational system is in serious trouble, they mold kids minds and feed them lies.”

Emory student, Junior Josh Goodman was recently interviewed on Fox News The O’Reilly Factor and criticized President Wagner for hearing out protesters.

He said Wagner “legitimized their claims” and he had hoped that President Wagner would have defended the first amendment rights of pro-Trump students.