Press Release
~ Company to invest $135 million to establish facilities in Chesterfield County and Dinwiddie County ~



RICHMOND, Va., Dec 22, 2011 (BUSINESS WIRE) --Governor Bob McDonnell and Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ: AMZN) today announced the company's plans to open two fulfillment centers in Virginia, investing a total of $135 million. The company will invest $85 million and create more than 1,000 jobs in Chesterfield County, and invest $50 million in Dinwiddie County, creating more than 350 jobs.

Speaking about today's announcement, Governor McDonnell said, "This project that includes a $135 million investment and more than 1,350 new jobs is a tremendous win for the greater Richmond region. Amazon is known all over the world, and the new centers in Chesterfield and Dinwiddie counties will fulfill orders across the United States. The establishment of these new operations is testament to the positive business climate and success the company has experienced in the Commonwealth."

"Chesterfield and Dinwiddie counties were chosen for this significant project due to the ease and speed with which the facilities can be built and become operational," said Jim Cheng, Virginia Secretary of Commerce and Trade. "In addition, the skill and availability of the region's workforce were key factors. We are thrilled that Amazon recognized the assets and solid infrastructure in place in the greater Richmond region and will make a great investment to establish its new fulfillment centers in Virginia."

"We look forward to opening two new Amazon facilities in the Richmond area next year, bringing tens of millions of dollars and hundreds of new jobs to the state," said Dave Clark, vice-president, Amazon North American Operations. "We're grateful to Governor McDonnell and other state, county and local officials for their commitment to our investment in Virginia."

As a new member of the Chesterfield and Dinwiddie County communities, Amazon also announced that it is donating $10,000 to the Federation of Virginia Food Banks, which will be allocated to food banks in these counties.

The Virginia Economic Development Partnership worked with Chesterfield County, Dinwiddie County, the Greater Richmond Partnership, and Virginia's Gateway Region to secure the project for Virginia. Governor McDonnell approved a total of $3.5 million in grants from the Governor's Opportunity Fund to assist both Chesterfield County and Dinwiddie County with the project. The Virginia Tobacco Indemnification and Community Revitalization Commission approved $850,000 in Tobacco Region Opportunity Funds for the Dinwiddie County project. The company is eligible to receive benefits from the Virginia Enterprise Zone Program, administered by the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development. Through its Virginia Jobs Investment Program, the Virginia Department of Business Assistance will provide funding and services to support the company's recruitment and training activities.

"We are so pleased that international Internet giant Amazon has selected Chesterfield County for their new one million-square-foot fulfillment center," said Art Warren, the Chairman of the Chesterfield County Board of Supervisors. "It is exciting this outstanding announcement coincides with the opening of the new Meadowville interchange which will benefit everyone, present and future. And, the infrastructure surrounding this announcement further positions the Meadowville Technology Park as a key destination for business. Welcome Amazon as the newest member of our corporate family."

"Dinwiddie County is extremely pleased with Amazon's decision to locate a fulfillment center in the Dinwiddie Commerce Park," said Doretha E. Moody, Chairman of the Dinwiddie County Board of Supervisors. "This is an excellent example of the commitment of the Board of Supervisors to economic development and creating employment opportunities for our community."

"The Tobacco Commission is glad that we were able to team up with Dinwiddie and the Governor's Office to attract Amazon to Virginia," said Senator Frank M. Ruff, Jr., a Commissioner of The Virginia Tobacco Indemnification and Community Revitalization Commission. "We believe that they will be a good employer and a good corporate citizen that will provide good jobs for the region. We believe that Amazon will be pleased with our workforce and the region."

The new facilities are expected to be complete next fall. Amazon's fulfillment centers in Virginia will be operated by Amazon.com.kydc LLC.

About Amazon.com

Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ: AMZN), a Fortune 500 company based in Seattle, opened on the World Wide Web in July 1995 and today offers Earth's Biggest Selection. Amazon.com, Inc. seeks to be Earth's most customer-centric company, where customers can find and discover anything they might want to buy online, and endeavors to offer its customers the lowest possible prices. Amazon.com and other sellers offer millions of unique new, refurbished and used items in categories such as Books; Movies, Music & Games; Digital Downloads; Electronics & Computers; Home & Garden; Toys, Kids & Baby; Grocery; Apparel, Shoes & Jewelry; Health & Beauty; Sports & Outdoors; and Tools, Auto & Industrial. Amazon Web Services provides Amazon's developer customers with access to in-the-cloud infrastructure services based on Amazon's own back-end technology platform, which developers can use to enable virtually any type of business. The new latest generation Kindle is the lightest, most compact Kindle ever and features the same 6-inch, most advanced electronic ink display that reads like real paper even in bright sunlight. Kindle Touch is a new addition to the Kindle family with an easy-to-use touch screen that makes it easier than ever to turn pages, search, shop, and take notes - still with all the benefits of the most advanced electronic ink display. Kindle Touch 3G is the top of the line e-reader and offers the same new design and features of Kindle Touch, with the unparalleled added convenience of free 3G. Kindle Fire is the Kindle for movies, TV shows, music, books, magazines, apps, games and web browsing with all the content, free storage in the Amazon Cloud, Whispersync, Amazon Silk (Amazon's new revolutionary cloud-accelerated web browser), vibrant color touch screen, and powerful dual-core processor.

Amazon and its affiliates operate websites, including www.amazon.com, www.amazon.co.uk, www.amazon.de, www.amazon.co.jp, www.amazon.fr, www.amazon.ca, www.amazon.cn, www.amazon.it, and www.amazon.es. As used herein, "Amazon.com," "we," "our" and similar terms include Amazon.com, Inc., and its subsidiaries, unless the context indicates otherwise.

Forward-Looking Statements

This announcement contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Actual results may differ significantly from management's expectations. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that include, among others, risks related to competition, management of growth, new products, services and technologies, potential fluctuations in operating results, international expansion, outcomes of legal proceedings and claims, fulfillment center optimization, seasonality, commercial agreements, acquisitions and strategic transactions, foreign exchange rates, system interruption, inventory, government regulation and taxation, payments and fraud. More information about factors that potentially could affect Amazon.com's financial results is included in Amazon.com's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including its most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and subsequent filings.

SOURCE: Amazon.com, Inc.

Commonwealth of Virginia

Office of the Governor

Jeff Caldwell, 804-225-4260

Jeff.Caldwell@Governor.Virginia.Gov

or

Virginia Economic Development Partnership

Suzanne West, 804-545-5806

Swest@yesvirginia.org

or

Amazon.com

Amazon Media Hotline, 206-266-7180

amazon-pr@amazon.com