Interview with Gordon Bethune, chairman and chief executive, Continental Airlines
Pity the poor cabin crew on a flight with Gordon Bethune. The boss of Continental Airlines finds it a struggle to behave himself as a passenger. A qualified pilot, he has just stepped off a flight from Cleveland, Ohio. He had to fight the urge to ask for a turn in command: "Every pilot thinks they're the best pilot in the world. I think I'm the best pilot.

"But I looked at the two pilots and I realised I had two options. I could either shut up and sit down or get off the plane."

An imposing, 61-year-old Texan with a mane of greying hair, Bethune has flying in his blood - he is the son of a crop-dusting airman. He has developed a reputation as the great survivor of American aviation, since taking charge of Continental when the carrier was close to collapse eight years ago. He steered it back into the black and built it into the world's sixth largest airline.

But a year of turmoil since September 11 has undone much of that good work, with passengers shunning airlines for fear of hijacking, or simply because of the "hassle factor" of drastically increased security. With war threatened in the Gulf, there is more trouble ahead and Bethune in his least favourite position - sitting back and trusting somebody else in command.

"We've got a president and we've got to trust him," he says. "He's the pilot - I'm sitting in the back. Mr Bush has the confidence of the American people to make the decisions ahead."

With a huge hub at Newark airport, Continental carries 20m people a year to and from the New York area - more than any of its rivals. It is among the leading transatlantic carriers with flights to 11 European countries, including regular services to Gatwick, Birmingham, Manchester and Glasgow.

When flights were grounded for four days after terrorists struck the World Trade Centre, the airline lost $120m (£77m).

Days later, Continental was the first carrier to make drastic cutbacks, suspending 12,000 workers and axeing a fifth of its capacity. But even after emergency aid of more than $400m from the government, the airline reported a loss of $95m for 2001, ending six straight years of profit.

Bethune cheerfully admits that American airlines are still in deep crisis. Despite a gradual recovery, Continental's capacity was down 17% last month. "We're sinking - not as fast as our competitors. But we're all sinking," he says.

If things carry on as they are, he says America's entire aviation industry will be bankrupt within 24 months. "If this went on, in two years, every airline in America would be broke. Things will change but I don't know which way. The Iraqi war could make it worse - two years could become 18 months."

US Airways has already filed for bankruptcy this summer. Bethune believes two others could soon be next - America West and United Airlines.

Although Continental's planes are carrying plenty of people, fares have fallen substantially. Yields, according to Bethune, are "shitty".

The Iraqi crisis has sent airline stocks into yet another tailspin. Jet fuel prices have rocketed by 30% to 88 cents a gallon over the last month.

If war breaks out, Bethune says the government must step in with aid. Along with fellow airline chiefs, he recently delivered a blunt message to the US transportation secretary - without much more help, the industry will die. "They [the US government] need a policy on what they're going to do to ensure all the airlines don't go broke," says Bethune.

He lists his demands - a relaxation of competition law to allow airlines to co-operate with each other in planning schedules in a drive to cut out unnecessary duplication of services. More drastically, he has asked the government for a year's suspension of all aviation taxes including passenger facility charges, excise duty and security taxes. At present, he claims, the government takes $40 out of a $100 ticket.

Bethune says: "We tax air passengers like cigarettes and alcohol - we impose sin taxes on travellers. We'd like the department of transport to suspend all those taxes for a year."

Such a move is unlikely to amuse airlines elsewhere in the world. British Airways' chief executive Rod Eddington recently bemoaned the generosity of aid for US carriers, pointing out that BA faced a hefty bill for installing bullet-proof cockpit doors on all its planes - a measure which the Bush administration is funding in America.

Bethune is unsympathetic: "BA is always bitching about something. If the government requires something, and we don't think we need it, then the government should pay for it."

He quickly adds that reinforced cockpit doors are among the most sensible new security measures: "They're the best idea of all the deterrents. Keeping the terrorists from the controls is the best way to keep them from attacking their target."

In other respects he is more sceptical, chuckling at rules banning passengers from carrying nail files and tweezers in their hand luggage: "I think we've over-reacted - although in fairness, it's probably better to overreact than underreact."

He complains that many of the regulations were introduced in a hurry by politicians and bureaucrats who "didn't know the front end from the back end of an airplane".

That could never be said of Bethune, who has been involved with aircraft since he was 15 when his father put him in charge preparing the family's landing strip each night at sunset, for the arrival of his crop-spraying plane at the end of a day's work.

He caught the flying bug and against his mother's wishes, he joined the navy at 17 as an aviation mechanic. While in the military, he endured his scariest moment as a passenger when a flight over the South China Sea ran into trouble. The turboprop plane's propeller went awry, cutting through wires and shorting all the electrics. "We pitched over and there was this explosive decompression," he recalls. "We put on oxygen masks and everything went dark.

"There was a young dentist next to me on his way home, having done his duty in the South China Sea. He grabbed my arm and said 'we're going to die'. I looked at him and said 'yes'."

After almost ditching in the ocean, the pilots eventually steered the crippled plane safely to the Philippines but the experience was scarring: "I jumped off that thing and vowed I was never going to fly again."

Closer to home, Bethune had an eery reminder of mortality in last year's terrorist crisis. Continental had booked the Windows of the World restaurant at the top of the World Trade Centre for a gala dinner due to take place on September 30, to celebrate the opening of a $1.4bn terminal extension at Newark airport.

The dinner never happened and the terminal was delayed for months as construction workers were sent to help clear Ground Zero.

Built with Pilkington glass from Britain, the terminal is now up and running, offering views of the Manhattan skyline following an investment of $800m by the airline. Continental is on a PR drive to persuade passengers that with a new rail link to New York city, Newark is more convenient than the city's scruffy JFK airport.

A year on, Continental's workforce is also largely back to full strength - the airline has 48,000 staff, down from a peak of 50,000, after calling back many of those temporarily laid off last.

But Bethune warns that for the average flight attendant, this renewed job security may not last: "Your job's no longer at risk because the company's not at risk. But to the extent that it might rain on the parade tomorrow, I can't guarantee that."

With a Porsche and a Harley-Davidson to get him around his home town of Houston, Bethune has an appetite for the finer things in life. He tells friends that his priorities are the three Ss - sex, scotch and speed.

Continental's business priorities reflect that philosophy. The airline is proud of the gourmet food in its "business first" class and goes by the slogan "work hard, fly right". However, those back in the economy cabin are expected to pay for their drinks.

The current crisis is clearly cramping Bethune's style: "We're a good airline, we serve good markets. We need to do the best we can to deal with these events. "I just want to be able to get on an airplane and enjoy myself in Disneyland, not sit there worrying about all these assassins."

The CV

Born: 1941 in San Antonio, Texas

Education: Science degree from Abilene Christian University, Dallas. Graduated from Harvard's advanced management programme in 1992

Career: Joined the US navy as an aircraft engineer aged 17. Moved into commercial aviation with a job at Braniff Airlines in 1979. Moved to Western Airlines and Piedmont Airlines before joining Boeing in 1988, where he was responsible for 737 and 757 aircraft. Joined Continental Airlines in February 1994, appointed chief executive 10 months later

Family: Separated, with three grown-up children

Leisure: Rides a Harley-Davidson, collects clocks and watches. Licensed to fly Boeing 757 and 767 aircraft