The Man Without a Face (1993)
advertisement

Overview

User Rating:

MOVIEmeter: Up 4% in popularity this week. See in popularity this week. See why on IMDbPro

Contact: View View company contact information for The Man Without a Face on IMDbPro

Release Date: 25 August 1993 (USA) 25 August 1993 (USA) more

Tagline: A fatherless boy had almost given up all his dreams... until one man believed in him enough to make them come true.

Plot: Chuck wants to leave home but can't make the grade for boarding school. Then he finds out the disfigured recluse living nearby is an ex-teacher. add synopsis Chuck wants to leave home but can't make the grade for boarding school. Then he finds out the disfigured recluse living nearby is an ex-teacher. full summary

Awards: 3 nominations 3 nominations more

User Comments: heartwarming and awe-inspiring heartwarming and awe-inspiring more

Cast (Cast overview, first billed only)

Create a character page for: Catherine Palin Gloria Norstadt Megan Norstadt Chief Wayne Stark Prof. Carl Hartley Douglas Hall, Gloria's Boyfriend Todd Lansing Mrs. Lansing Mr. Cooper Mrs. Cooper Rob Lansing David Taylor-Fife Scott Pearson ----------- more...

Additional Details

MPAA: Rated PG-13 for mature subject matter. Rated PG-13 for mature subject matter.

Parents Guide: Add content advisory for parents

Runtime: 115 min

Aspect Ratio: 1.85 : 1 1.85 : 1 more

Sound Mix: Dolby

Fun Stuff

Trivia: The scene between Justin and Charles on the mountain overlooking the water was filmed on Bradbury Mountain, located in Pownal, Maine. Because of the steep fall to the water, the mountain has had, for many years, a protective fence on the side facing the water. The filmmakers took down the fence prior to filming and replaced it after. The scene between Justin and Charles on the mountain overlooking the water was filmed on Bradbury Mountain, located in Pownal, Maine. Because of the steep fall to the water, the mountain has had, for many years, a protective fence on the side facing the water. The filmmakers took down the fence prior to filming and replaced it after. more

Goofs: Boom mic visible: When Gibson is giving Stahl his mock exam results from his truck, you can see a boom mic reflected in the cars windscreen. Boom mic visible: When Gibson is giving Stahl his mock exam results from his truck, you can see a boom mic reflected in the cars windscreen. more

Quotes: McLeod: What is your name?

Chuck Norstadt: Chuck. Chuck Norstad.

McLeod: Well, Chuck Chuck Norstad.

more : What is your name?: Chuck. Chuck Norstad.: Well, Chuck Chuck Norstad.

Soundtrack: BORN A WOMAN BORN A WOMAN more

FAQ

Message Boards

Recommendations

Related Links

You may report errors and omissions on this page to the IMDb database managers. They will be examined and if approved will be included in a future update. Clicking the 'Update' button will take you through a step-by-step process.

Discuss this movie with other users on IMDb message board for The Man Without a Face (1993)