Answers to Questions About UK Passports
Passport FAQs

What is a passport?

A passport is a travel document that serves as the ultimate form of proof for your citizenship. Every country issues passports to citizens of that country. British Citizen passports are issued by the United Kingdom Identity & Passport Service (IPS). UK passports come in two sizes to accommodate frequent travellers, jumbo and regular. Jumbo passports contain 48 pages while regular passports contain 32 pages.



Do I need a passport?

British citizens require passports to exit and enter the UK and all other countries in the world. It is your responsibility to carry the correct identification while travelling abroad.



Do British Subjects have the same rights of entry to other countries as a British Citizen passport?

No. British Subject passport holders have different entry requirements than British Citizen passport holders. If you hold one of these passports and require information on passports and visas, email info@uk.visacentral.comfor further information.



How does VisaCentral obtain a passport for me?

VisaCentral provides passport services for UK citizens by submitting proper documentation on your behalf to the UK Identity & Passport Service (IPS). This eliminates the need for you to visit, communicate, and correspond directly with the IPS. VisaCentral also provides Passport Renewal and Extra Pages services for US Passport holders. Please go to Passports to see the full range of passport services VisaCentral provides. For citizens of any other country residing in the UK, please consult your home country's local consular office for passport details.



How long is my passport valid?

If your passport was issued when you were 16 years of age or older, your passport is valid for 10 years. If your passport was issued when you were 15 years of age or younger, your passport is valid for 5 years.



When applying for a passport renewal, will my old passport be returned to me?

Yes, your old passport will be returned unless it is deemed to be damaged by the UK Identity & Passport Service (IPS). The passport will clearly indicate that it is invalid and it is important that you advise whether any valid visas remain in the passport before applying for it to be renewed.

How long must my passport be valid for international travel?

Most countries require that a passport be valid for at least six months beyond the completion of a trip. If your passport expires sooner than that, you must apply to renew your passport. Go to Visas to determine how long a passport must be valid for each specific country of travel. In the event that your passport is set to expire go to Renew Passport and get started.



Can VisaCentral obtain additional passport pages for my passport?

No. You must apply for another passport. Go to Renew Passport for details.



How many blank passport pages do I need to meet entrance requirements and what is considered a 'blank' passport page?

Passports must have enough blank pages to accommodate entry and exit immigration stamps for each country of travel. At least one visa page in your passport is required for each visa. Most travel visas that are stamped into your passport require an entire blank visa page. A 'blank' visa page must be clean, clear, and not show ink or stains from any other pages in the passport.



I am recently married or divorced and have changed my name. Can VisaCentral help me change my name on my passport?

With proper documentation, you are able to change the name listed in your passport. VisaCentral can assist you in this process by submitting the necessary documents on your behalf. Visit Passport Name Change for details.

Can VisaCentral replace my lost or stolen passport?

With correct documentation, VisaCentral can replace your lost or stolen passport in as little as a day. Visit Lost or Stolen Passports for details.



Do my children require passports?

Yes. Each individual citizen, including infants, must possess his or her own passport. You are not allowed to represent other members of the family inside your passport. VisaCentral can assist you if you need to get a new child passport or if you need to renew a child’s passport. Visit Child Passport to learn about passport requirements for children.

How old must my children be to apply for a Child Passport?

Your children must be 15 years old or younger to apply for a Child Passport. Visit Child Passport to learn about passport requirements for children under the age of 15.

How long will it take VisaCentral to process my passport?

For most passport services VisaCentral has two processing times: Same Day - 1 day and Fast Track - 6 working days. Visit Passports to determine the passport processing time for the type of passport you are looking for.



What mailing method does VisaCentral recommend for submitting my completed VisaCentral Application Pack?

VisaCentral recommends using Royal Mail Special Delivery or other traceable methods of delivery when submitting your completed VisaCentral Application Pack.