Report: RGIII Told By NFL Not To Wear ‘Know Jesus, Know Peace’ Shirt For His Press Conference
RGIII was instructed to turn his shirt inside-out before yesterday’s press conference. (via @JPFinlayCSN) http://t.co/wZN42JYf1O —

Matt Smethurst ن (@MattSmethurst) September 15, 2014

WASHINGTON (CBSDC) — Washington Redskins quarterback Robert Griffin III was reportedly told by an NFL uniform inspector not to wear his “Know Jesus, Know Peace” t-shirt before Sunday’s postgame press conference.

Michael Phillips, the Redskins reporter for the Richmond Times-Dispatch, posted on Twitter that Griffin was told he couldn’t wear the t-shirt because it wasn’t a Nike product.

Redskins Owner Dan Snyder Offers Support For Roger Goodell

“RGIII was wearing a t-shirt that said ‘Know Jesus, Know Peace.’ NFL Uniform Inspector Tony McGee (former Skins DE) approached Griffin,” Phillips tweeted. “McGee told Griffin he couldn’t wear the shirt because it wasn’t a Nike product. Made him turn it inside out for the press conference.”

RGIII was wearing a t-shirt that said “Know Jesus, Know Peace.” NFL Uniform Inspector Tony McGee (former Skins DE) approached Griffin... —

michael phillips (@michaelpRTD) September 14, 2014

McGee told Griffin he couldn’t wear the shirt because it wasn’t a Nike product. Made him turn it inside out for the press conference. —

michael phillips (@michaelpRTD) September 14, 2014

CSN Washington reports that Redskins linebacker Ryan Kerrigan wore a t-shirt from Five Four Clothing to the podium for the postgame press conference and was not asked to change his shirt.

According to NFL bylaws, players are prohibited from wearing clothing with personal messages on game-days.

“Throughout the period on game-day that a player is visible to the stadium and television audience (including in pregame warm-ups, in the bench area, and during postgame interviews in the locker room or on the field), players are prohibited from wearing, displaying, or otherwise conveying personal messages either in writing or illustration, unless such message has been approved in advance by the League office.”

Denzel Washington Doesn’t Say ‘Redskins’ Name

A Redskins representative told CSN Washington that Griffin flipped his shirt inside out by choice and chose to avoid a potential fine.

In December 2012, Griffin was fined $10,000 by the league for wearing Adidas at his postgame press conference.

Griffin dislocated his left ankle during Sunday’s 41-10 win over the Jacksonville Jaguars.

Redskins News And Rumors

Follow 106.7 The Fan on Twitter.