New York Post Online Edition: Columnists
According to an Associated Press story this week, National Park Service researchers are seeking to determine whether there's been a century-long coverup of the true history of the Statue of Liberty -- whether, in fact, the statue was intended as a monument to black troops and the abolition of slavery.

Moreover, according to a widely circulated Internet document, the statue's original model was a black woman -- but the design was altered so as not to offend the South.

The cited proof? According to the Internet, it's a photo and article in the June 17, 1986 New York Post -- an installment in a 10-part history of the statue which I wrote for its centennial celebration.

Like most Internet rumors, this one has a kernel of truth to it. But it's been exaggerated and combined with outright misinformation. Yes, the true story of this magnificent monument is far more complex than most people realize -- but it's certainly no racist coverup designed to "promote white supremacy at the expense of Black Pride."

In fact, Liberty's history is tied primarily to French and European politics during the 1860s and 1870s. And while it has now become known as "the Mother of Exiles," immigration didn't even figure in its creation and design.

The U.S. Civil War and the abolition of slavery was, in fact, the critical inspiration for the statue, which was conceived at an 1865 dinner at the home of Edouard-Rene de Laboulaye, an internationally famed jurist and France's leading expert on American constitutional law. Like his guests, de Laboulaye was an ardent republican -- and France was then experiencing a revival of monarchist sentiment not seen since Napoleon Bonaparte a half-century earlier.

France and the United States, after all, were the two western nations that had waged successful democratic revolutions, although only America's had taken permanent root. De Laboulaye suggested a political ploy designed to reinspire that revolutionary spirit: "an imperishable memorial [to] the friendship that the blood spilled by our fathers sealed between the two nations."

The time, he felt, was ripe for such a monument; Abraham Lincoln's assassination a few months earlier had provoked a massive outpouring of grief in France. In fact, however, it would be seven years before the project first got off the ground -- and two decades until it reached completion.

Sculptor Frederic Auguste Bartholdi at first won enthusiastic support for the idea in America -- former abolitionists were his biggest supporters; in France, the Freemasons had been the most fervent backers -- but the project was put on hold due to turmoils in French politics. Not until 1875, with the formation of France's Third Republic, did de Laboulaye believe that monarchism was dead and the time was ripe to proclaim Liberty throughout France and America.

Bartholdi adapted the statue from a failed project to construct a giant lighthouse at the entrance to the Suez Canal in Egypt; the structure was to portray a robed Egyptian woman, holding a torch, standing on a fortress-like pedestal. But the khedive of Egypt rejected the project as too expensive.

In 1870, Bartholdi prepared his first sketches of "Liberty Enlightening the World," which closely resembled the Egyptian statue but included the broken chains of slavery at her feet. Later that year, he redesigned the face -- using as a model not an African woman but his severe-faced mother, Charlotte (Liberty's body was modeled on the sculptor's mistress, Jeanne-Emilie Baheux de Puysieux).

As for the photo of the supposed "African" face featured in The Post, the picture is not -- as incorrectly captioned -- an early model, but shows the actual face that now stands over New York Harbor. The photo, as shown in Marvin Trachtenberg's marvelous 1976 architectural history of the statue, shows Liberty's head during contruction on what was then Bedloe's Island shortly before its dedication in October 1886.

It appears "black" for a simple reason: the copper statue's original color was not the familiar green we see today -- the patina that naturally occurs over the course of repeated exposure to the elements -- but a much darker orange-red bronze. (Actually, as the oxidation process continued, the statue first turned pitch black before reaching its current green hue, as Bartholdi knew it would.)

But there was no African model and the statue was never meant to portray a freed slave. Nor was there any "racist" uproar that forced Bartholdi to alter his design.

Simply put, the Statue of Liberty was a political device whose greatest impact was meant to be in France, to spur support for the cause of putting an end once and for all to the despotism of monarchy that had first fallen in the revolution of 1789. Although inspired by the defeat of slavery in America, it was not meant to depict that event.

The Statue of Liberty's true history is sufficiently inspiring (and complicated) without adding unfounded accusations of a racist coverup. I only hope the National Park Service's researchers will tell that story truthfully.

E-mail: efettmann@nypost.com