ORIOLES 10, Brewers 5

(c) 1996 Copyright Nando.net

(c) 1996 Associated Press

Milwaukee 110 000 300-- 5 13 2 Baltimore 402 004 00x--10 9 1

BALTIMORE (May 5, 1996 - 02:53 EST) -- This time, the Baltimore Orioles took advantage of yet another one of Brady Anderson's leadoff homers.

Anderson homered for the fourth time in three games and Roberto Alomar hit a grand slam Saturday as the Orioles defeated the slumping Milwaukee Brewers 10-5 Saturday.

Anderson's major-league leading 15th homer sparked a four-run first inning that gave Baltimore the lead for good. It was the sixth game this season he led off the Oriole first inning with a homer but only the first time Baltimore went on to win.

"I really have no idea what effect it has, but it's a run so it has to help," Anderson said.

"So what if we lost the other five? That's just one of those stats," teammate Tony Tarasco said. "How else would you want to start a game? What could be better than getting one run out of one at-bat?"

Anderson's six leadoff homers in one season broke the club record of five, set by Don Buford in 1971. It's the 17th time Anderson has done it in his career.

Now in his ninth season, Anderson has never had a home-run binge quite like the one he's enjoying this week. He hit one homer against New York on Wednesday and two Friday night against the Brewers.

"It's pretty amazing. You don't think it's possible that he could hit another, and then there it goes," Tarasco said.

Milwaukee got a run in the first on an RBI single by Kevin Seitzer, but the Orioles countered with four runs against Steve Sparks (1-4). Anderson drove a 3-2 pitch over the right-field wall and Sparks loaded the bases with three straight walks before Tarasco cleared them with a double.

"I thought I punched (Anderson) out twice, then I end up leaving one up," Sparks said. "Then, after those walks, I had to throw Tarasco a fastball and he took advantage of it."

Long after Sparks departed, Alomar's second career grand slam made it 10-2 in the sixth.

Jeffrey Hammonds also homered for the Orioles, who have won two straight after losing 11 of 14.

Mike Mussina (4-2) allowed two earned runs and 11 hits in 6 2-3 innings to end a two-game losing streak. The right-hander struck out eight and walked two.

"Mike really didn't have great stuff, but he pitched a great game," Baltimore manager Davey Johnson said.

"It's nice to get a win, but I wish I could have pitched better," Mussina said. "A lot of innings I'm allowing a lot of baserunners, and that's something I haven't been accustomed to."

Matt Mieske and Jose Valentin homered for the Brewers, who have lost five straight overall and seven consecutive road games.

Mieske got Milwaukee to 4-2 by leading off the second with his fourth homer, but Hammonds chased Sparks with a two-run shot in the third. Sparks has allowed 23 runs in his last three starts and has an ERA of 8.83.

"It was the best knuckleball I've had all season, but I couldn't get it over," Sparks said. "I just didn't get ahead of guys and I lost the feel of it for a while."

After the Orioles loaded the bases against Michael Potts in the sixth, Alomar hit the first pitch from Kevin Wickander into the left-field seats. Alomar went 2-for-4, raising his batting average to .358 with his major-league leading 15th multi-hit game of the year.

Valentin homered off Mussina with two aboard in the seventh. Notes: Actor Kevin Costner watched the game with Cal Ripken's wife, Kelly, in the front row behind the screen. ... Mussina came in with a career 4.45 ERA against Milwaukee, the worst against any AL team. ... Milwaukee starters have a 9.49 ERA over the last 11 games. Brewer pitchers have allowed 17 homers in the last six games. ... Milwaukee's Fernando Vina broke a 1-for-17 slump with two singles. ... The start of the game was delayed 26 minutes by rain.