NewsMax.com: Inside Cover Story
With Carl Limbacher and NewsMax.com Staff For the story behind the story... Saturday, May 26, 2000 8:35 PM EST Hillary Snubs Gold Star Mothers America has long known of Bill Clinton's disdain for the U.S. armed forces, going back as far as his comment during his draft-dodging days when he said he "loathed the military." This, of course, was at the time he was participating in protests against the United States military while he was on foreign soil in England. Hillary Clinton has also never concealed her own similar sentiments. But it may come as something of a shock to New Yorkers to learn that their new junior senator recently dished out her by-now-familiar rude treatment to a group of Gold Star Mothers. Former Congressman Dan Frisa, NewsMax opinion columnist, reports that John Behan, who headed the N.Y. Division of Veteran Affairs and himself a double-amputee Marine Corps combat veteran of Vietnam, recently attended a gathering of New York State Gold Star Mothers who recounted the outright shabby treatment shown them by the former First Lady. The Gold Star Mothers is an organization of women who sons were killed in combat during service in the United States armed forces. Begun following World War I, the name of the group is derived from the gold stars that were placed over blue stars on military service banners, displayed in the windows of homes with family members serving during wartime, when word was received that a loved one was killed in action. New York chapter president Shirley Jones and member Mary Wheeler, both of upstate New York, told Behan they had been in Washington visiting Senate offices. The only office that refused to meet with the Gold Star Mothers was none other than New York Senator Hillary Clinton. She and her staff simply refused to meet with them. The group then sent a letter to Clinton's office requesting a meeting with the senator to discuss issues of concern to the Gold Star Mothers. When they received no reply they sent another letter, only to be only to be left, yet again, with no response from Hillary to their request. One can only assume that the senator doesn't much care to meet with these special New Yorkers. Both women and their membership, needless to say, were shocked at such treatment at the hands of one of the state's highest elected official. Those who have followed her sleazy career, oversized ego, and the utter contempt she displays toward average Americans probably would expect as much from Slick Hilly. But who would have guessed that even she would disrespect and dishonor these women who lost their sons to the cause of freedom in service to the nation, the very same souls whose heroism and sacred memory we honor on Memorial Day? Printer Friendly Version

Reprint Information