Reader's Companion to American History
TEXAS REVOLUTION AND ANNEXATION

The Alamo, a line drawn in the dust—the images of 1836 are almost as familiar to Americans as those of 1776. Many recognize the distinctiveness of Texas's experience—its revolt against Mexico, its life as an independent republic, and finally, its voluntary surrender of nationhood. But the causes and consequences of its unique course are less well understood.

After gaining independence from Spain in the 1820s, Mexico welcomed foreign settlers to sparsely populated Texas. Promised land on generous terms, some twenty thousand to twenty-five thousand Americans migrated there within a decade, far outnumbering the resident Mexicans (Tejanos). These immigrants clustered in relatively autonomous colonies along the lower Brazos and Colorado rivers and in the east. Alarmed at their reluctance to assimilate, Mexico passed laws in 1830 to slow American immigration. But rent by conflict between federalists and conservative centralists, the government could not enforce them. The regulations succeeded only in angering both settlers and those Tejanos interested in economic development.

Yet these laws were as much symptom as cause of friction. Some immigrants had never been reconciled to Mexican rule, citing putative U.S. claims to Texas by virtue of the Louisiana Purchase. Speculators counted on American annexation to raise the value of their land. Many Texans balked when earlier privileges, such as exemption from import duties, began to be withdrawn. The status of slavery rankled, too. The national government and the state government of Coahuila and Texas (in which Texans had little influence) passed various emancipation measures and banned the import of American slaves. Slaveholding Texans won exemption from some of these laws and evaded the others, and by 1835 slaves represented 10 to 15 percent of the non-Indian population. Though the laws did little except slow the immigration of slaveholders, they clearly worried those who believed rich but labor-scarce Texas could prosper only through slave cultivation of staple crops.

Mexico's ability to offend Texans without effectively regulating their behavior bespoke more general sources of trouble. The Mexican government presumed it could mold economic, social, even religious life in Texas. It allowed the military to intrude upon what Americans took to be civil affairs—trade, legal proceedings, the master-slave relationship. Yet this same government could not with any regularity provide such seeming fundamentals as speedy justice or trial by jury. Immigrants from Jacksonian America had certain expectations of republican government, expectations that involved government neither claiming so much nor delivering so little.

This failure of government to behave in accustomed ways provoked a crisis in 1835. Developments in Mexico had overshadowed political and legal reforms Texans had won in 1833 and 1834. Political turmoil allowed Gen. Antonio López de Santa Anna to amass an increasingly authoritarian power. Like colonists in prerevolutionary America, Texans perceived in the prospect of more strictly governed relations with the central government larger threats to their liberties and property. Santa Anna's triumph seemed also to dash the hopes of Tejanos for a democratic, decentralized Mexico. The coincidence of renewed trouble with the Mexican garrison at Anahuac and Santa Anna's march against various opponents in northern Mexico catalyzed resistance in the summer of 1835. A "war party" had been agitating for separation for some time, but the insistence of Mexican authorities that troublemakers be turned over to the military and, finally, an influx of Mexican troops in September convinced even the traditionally conciliatory Stephen Austin that "war is our only resource."

A chaotic rebellion ensued. Significant military action occurred well before the rebels officially declared for independence. A provisional government, established in November, called only for separate statehood within Mexico and the federalist constitution of 1824, hoping to win the aid of liberal Mexicans elsewhere. That government could barely rally support within its own ranks, however, as the governor and council vied for authority. No single, effective military authority existed either. Volunteers held the Alamo, for instance, despite orders to the contrary. The creation of a new government and a consolidated military command after Texas declared independence in early March 1836 did not immediately bring order. The fall of the Alamo and the retreat of Sam Houston's forces eastward provoked panic and mass flight among civilians. Perhaps only the overconfidence this bred in Santa Anna—and the anger of Texan volunteers over the massacres at the Alamo and Goliad—saved the day. In late April, Houston's men surprised a Mexican force at San Jacinto. Houston's victory and the capture of Santa Anna suddenly ended Mexico's effort to subdue Texas.

But apparently, independence was not what many Texans really desired. Voters elected Houston president, but also overwhelmingly endorsed union with the United States. The Jackson and Van Buren administrations spurned annexation, however. They feared both diplomatic trouble and the political consequences of pressing for the admission of a territory in which slavery, now constitutionally protected, was growing rapidly. A contributing factor to the Revolution, slavery had become the paramount consideration in annexation. As a result, the new republic struggled on alone. Presidents Houston, Mirabeau Lamar, and Anson Jones pursued various policies as to Mexican and Indian relations and the mounting debt, but none of them rendered Texas secure or solvent.

By 1844, American caution about issues that might divide national parties along sectional lines had diminished. Some hoped the increased enthusiasm for territorial expansion, or anxiety over possible European machinations in Texas, might eclipse northern concerns over slavery. Many southerners, eager to secure and expand America's slaveholding territory, worried that Britain intended to promote abolition in Texas. For Secretary of State John C. Calhoun, the well-being of the South overrode any commitment to the existing party system. The health of that system did not overly concern President John Tyler either. Having alienated both parties, he vainly hoped the Texas issue might win him a new following.

Initially, the traditional restraint regarding sectional issues seemed to prevail. The front-runners for the 1844 presidential nominations, Democrat Martin Van Buren and Whig Henry Clay, announced against immediate annexation. A treaty admitting Texas as a territory failed to win a majority in the Senate, much less the required two-thirds. But southern Democrats blocked Van Buren's nomination, opening the way for dark horse James Polk who campaigned for the acquisition of both Texas and Oregon (which presumably would remain free territory). Clay's subsequent equivocations on Texas may well have hastened the defection of antislavery Whigs to the Liberty party, a defection that probably cost him the election. Annexationists heralded Polk's narrow victory as a mandate. In early 1845 Congress, employing its power to admit new states, simply annexed Texas by a majority vote. Texan leaders who had been coy on annexation, hoping to prod either Europe into guaranteeing Texas independence or America into admitting Texas on the most favorable terms, likewise yielded to public sentiment. In June 1845 the republic's Congress accepted U.S. statehood.

James Buchanan would later compare Texas to the Trojan horse. Its admission hastened the unraveling of the national parties. Many Van Buren Democrats, convinced that southerners had ridden roughshod over them in 1844, found their way into the Free-Soil or even the Republican movements. Annexation helped provoke war with Mexico, bringing America additional southwestern territory and fatally linking the politics of slavery and expansion.

Robert Calvert and Arnoldo De León, The History of Texas (1990); Andreas Reichstein, Rise of the Lone Star: The Making of Texas (1989).

Patrick G. Williams

See also Alamo; Austin, Stephen F.; Calhoun, John C.; Clay, Henry; Compromise of 1850; Elections: 1844; Houston, Sam; Mexican War; Polk, James K.; Slavery; Tyler, John; Van Buren, Martin.