Porsche "Drive for Hope"
Porsche Fights Cancer with 50-State "Drive For Hope" Cross Country Trek







To obtain a hi-res copy of this image, contact Susan Childress or Martin Peters.



Click here for hi-res photo



PORSCHE® SLATES 2001 50-STATE DRIVE FOR HOPE FOR OCT. 18



Incorporates New York Firefighters Fund Into Charitable Focus



ATLANTA, October 3, 2001 --- Porsche Cars North America (PCNA) today announced the delayed start of The Porsche 50-State Drive For Hope will begin on Thursday, Oct. 18 in Honolulu. The record-setting challenge to benefit The Hope Foundation, one of the nation’s leading cancer research organizations, was originally scheduled to begin Sept. 20 but was postponed due to the national tragedy on Sept. 11.

PCNA also announced it will donate twenty percent of all proceeds raised from the 2001 Porsche 50-State Drive for Hope to the New York Firefighters 9-11 Disaster Relief Fund, a disaster relief effort established by the International Association of Fire Fighters. The donation will go directly to the families of both the fallen New York fire fighters and EMS personnel.

“We are very saddened by the unthinkable events that occurred last month and want to do our part to support the relief efforts,” said Fred Schwab, PCNA president and CEO. “Porsche also remains committed to helping The Hope Foundation raise the level of awareness and support for cancer research. The 2001 50-State Drive for Hope will allow communities across the U.S. to show support for those affected by cancer as well as the survivors and victims’ families of the national attacks.”

Yahoo!, a leading global communications, commerce and media company, has signed on as the presenting sponsor of the 50-State Drive for Hope and will provide online marketing support for the event. In addition, Yahoo! Auctions will serve as the official auction site for the 50-state drive. The auction will launch Oct. 8, and items on the block will include one of the 2001 Porsche 911 Turbos used in the event, a Drive for Hope special edition Gibson Custom Edition Les Paul guitar and other Porsche memorabilia.

The event will begin in Honolulu on Oct. 18, 2001. After the initial drive, the three all-wheel drive Porsche 911 Turbos will be loaded onto a cargo jet where official transportation partner, Pacific Air Cargo, will fly the sports cars to Los Angeles to continue the nine-day, around-the-clock adventure. Yahoo! will also equip each car involved in the record-setting challenge with eLink service Fortified with Yahoo! from Motient Corporation on RIM Wireless Handheldsä from Research in Motion (RIM). These capabilities will allow driving teams to communicate in real time with supporters everywhere they travel using Yahoo! Messenger and Yahoo! Mail. Those wanting to follow the event daily can visit www.driveforhope.org

“Porsche and The Hope Foundation have created a unique event that promises to raise community awareness and support across the U.S. for cancer research as well as the survivors of the Sept. 11 attacks,” said Rich Godwin, senior brand manager, Yahoo! Inc. “Yahoo! is proud to join Porsche in the fight against cancer and help aid the victims’ families of the Sept. 11th tragedy.”

As the official transactions partner of the 50-State Drive for Hope, iBill (Internet Billing Company), the global leader in online transaction processing, will provide the technology necessary to accept online donations directly through The Hope Foundation Web site. iBill will also promote the event through its own Web site, recently named by Forbes Magazine as the “5th Most Visited B-2-B Site on the Web.”

Throughout the record-setting event, each 911 Turbo will travel on Continental® ContiSportContact 2™ tires provided by Charlotte-based Continental Tire North America Inc., which is a group company of Germany-based Continental AG.

Exclusive sponsors of the 2001 Drive for Hope include Amgen, AstraZeneca, Aventis, Bristol-Myers Squibb, CitiCorp, Eli Lilly, Gibson, Hyatt, Ortho Biotech and Roche. Each has pledged $1 per mile for every mile driven by the team.

Also participating in the event is Porsche Club of America (PCA). With more than 45,000 members, PCA is the world’s largest club dedicated to a single brand of car. Five club members will be taking the wheel during the marathon drive.

Established in 1992, The Hope Foundation, a 501(c)(3) organization, supports the increasing financial and awareness needs for the cancer research and trials of the Southwest Oncology Group. As a result of continually decreasing funds available from the federal government, the role of The Hope Foundation has and will become even more vital to the longevity and success of clinical cancer research. The mission of The Hope Foundation is to bring greater financial resources and awareness to the Southwest Oncology Group's efforts. The Foundation's vision is to continue efforts to support the prevention, treatment and eventual cure of all cancer.



PCNA is the exclusive importer of Porsche cars for the United States. A wholly owned, indirect subsidiary of Dr. Ing. h. c. F. Porsche AG, PCNA employs some 200 people who provide Porsche vehicles, parts, marketing and training for its 204 dealers in North America. They, in turn, provide Porsche owners with best-in-class service. For photographs and other Porsche news releases, visit the PCNA Media Website at www.press.porsche.com.



### For more information, contact: Martin Peters (770) 290-3667