Mister Ed Episode Archive
Welcome to the Mister Ed Episode Archive! Here, you'll find titles, airdates, and descriptions for all 143 Mister Episodes, plus the unaired pilot! The Guide was written by me, and all corrections should go to milsancks@aol.com . For pictures from many episodes, check out The Mister Ed Photo Gallery!





000- The Wonderful World of Wilbur Pope (Unaired Pilot)

This episode, much like the "real first episode" includes only Rocky Lane (voice of Mister Ed) as the regular cast members. All others are played by different actors/actresses. There is no Addison charracter in the pilot, either. The theme is different, and instead of the character of Wilbur Post, there is Wilbur Pope. The story line is the same as "The First Meeting".

Season 1

(1961)

001- The First Meeting

Original Airdate: January 3, 1961

Wilbur Post and his newlywed, Carol, move into their first house in beautiful California. Soon after arriveing, Wilbur discovers a horse in his barn, which he plans to turn into his office. He agrees with Carol when she suggests selling him. Wilbur soon changes his attitude about selling the horse after he fixes him up, but can not convince Carol not to sell him. Once he discovers the horse can talk, he refuses to sell him. When the man comes to buy the horse, Ed lies down to convice the man he's lame. Carol finally agrees to let Wilbur keep the horse. When Wilbur learns the horse talks, he tells all of the neighbors. Carol is furious when everyone treats Wilbur and her like they are crazy... Ed comes to the rescue with a sure-fire plan.

Worth Mentioning...

Ed's firstwords to Wilbur are.. "It's been a long time since I've been a pony"

002- The Ventriloquist

Original Airdate: January 10, 1961

Addison gets Wilbur to come have lunch with him with a very important client that could make Wilbur and Carol rich if he gives Wilbur a contract to design his clubhouse. Ed almosts ruins it for Wibur when he tries to get the contract for him..

003- Busy Wife

Original Airdate: January17, 1961

With all of Carol's clubs, she has little time to spend with Wilbur . Wilbur, getting jealous, asks Mister Ed for help win her back .

004- Stable for Three

Original Airdate: January 31, 1961

Mister Ed is getting on Carol's bad side.. knocking over the barbecue, trampling her plants.. When Wilbur takes Ed's side, Carol thinks he loves his horse more than his wife, so she insists he sleep out with Ed in the barn. Ed soon finds he's sharing his stable with another guest as Addison is kicked out of his house for the night, also.

005- Kiddy Park

Original Airdate: January 24, 1961

The Addisons and Posts are planning a vacation... without Ed. When Ed learns of this, he is furious and hurt. He runs off to start a new life in a Kiddy Park. When the person who is checking in on Ed tells Wilbur his horse is missing, Wilbur is very disturbed. He soon finds Ed in a Kiddy Park, going around a track with kids riding on back. Wilbur takes another pony out on the track to try and talk Ed into coming home.

Worth Mentioning...

We see Ed talking directly to another human in this episode, a child riding on his back.

006- Sorority Horse

Original Airdate: February 7, 1961

Wilbur agrees to let Addison use Ed as a mascot for a local college sorority house, but when Ed is stolen by the rival sorority house, Wilbur dresses up in a dress and wig to get into the girl's sorority house and free Ed, who had been taken to the basement.

007- Little Boy

Original Airdate: May 9, 1961

A new boy in town has trouble meeting friends, so Carol arranges a party for him and some other neighborhood children. When the other children fail to accept him, Ed comes to the rescue by making the boy look like a hero.

008- Ed, the Lover

Original Airdate: February 14, 1961

Ed is not happy when he first learns he is to play in a western.. it's just not right for horses to be abused like they are in them.. but when Ed meets the pretty young filly who is to also be in the western, he quickly changes his mind.

009- Pageant Show

Original Airdate: February 21, 1961

Wilbur is preparing a magic portion for a show Carol is helping organize. When Ed begins to mis-use the phone in the barn by making prank calls and playing tricks on Wilbur and Carol, Wilbur removes the extension in the barn. Ed continues to play tricks on Wilbur and Carol anyways, much worse ones, so Wilbur decides to let the horse have his phone back.

010- The Aunt

Original Airdate: February 28, 1961

Wilbur is dismayed when he learns when his "not-so-favorite" aunt comes to visit, ruining his vacation. Along with his aunt comes a talking parrot, that Ed ends up not liking too much.

011- Missing Statue

Original Airdate: March 7, 1961

Carol falls in love with a "beautiful" statue she sees at an antique shop, and decides she must have it. Wilbur is not too pleased to find it at home. When Carol goes on an all fish diet, Wilbur decides to give in and let Carol keep the statue, in return for some non-fish meals.

012- Ed, the Witness

Original Airdate: March 14, 1961

The Addisons and Posts are stuck in a small Mexican town when a local mechanic claims wilbur's trailer (which Ed was riding in) hit his truck, causing some damage. Wilbur is put in jail after he rufuses to pay for the repairs, saying he's innicent. Ed saw the mecahnic sabotage his truck himself, and helps Wilbur out of jail by testifing. (With his hooves...)

013- Ed's Mother

Original Airdate: March 21, 1961

Roger and Wilbur try to convince their wives not to go to any auctions, fearing they will go on a buying spree, but fail. The men decide to go along with the women, to make sure they don't over-spend. Once at the old farm auction, Ed sees his mother being auctioned off, and insists on buying her. Ed brings he mother home, which only causes more problems for Wilbur.

014- Ed, the Tout

Original Airdate: March 28, 1961

Wilbur bets on a horse Ed tells him to. The horse is a longshot, and when the horse wins, The Addisons and Carol insist he bet on another one for them. Instead of betting on the horse Ed picks, however, Wilbur mistakenly bets on a horse he had circled in the paper.

015- Ed, the Songwriter

Original Airdate: April 4, 1961

Ed writes a song, and he wants to get it published and make it a record. However, since he only talks to Wilbur, he has Wilbur lip-sing the song while Ed sings it in the background. With this problem, the music studio has to bring the band and recording machines out to Ed's stable.

Worth Mentioning...

This is the first time we hear Ed's "Pretty Little Filly" song on the show. Through out the rest of the series, you can often hear Ed humming of singing it to himself.

016- Ed, the Stoolpigeon

Original Airdate: April 11, 1961

When Wilbur and Carol adopt a cute little poodle, Ed becomes jealous. He watches the poodle carefully, in hopes to get him in trouble and kicked out of the house.

017- Psychoanalyst Show

Original Airdate: April 18, 1961

Ed has a fear of heights, and asks Wilbur to get him psychiatric help. When Wilbur visits the psycologist, everyone thinks it's Wilbur who has the problem.

018- A Man for Velma

Original Airdate: April 25, 1961

The Posts hire a man-crazy cook. Wilbur instantly falls in love with her cooking, as do the Addisons, who appear at the Post's house every evening for dinner. Soon, the cook threatens to quit when she finds no eligible men around, so Addison and Wilbur search for a man for her so they can keep getting her cooking.

019- Ed Agrees to Talk

Original Airdate: June 2, 1961

When Wilbur refuses to buy Carol a new carry, Carol hitches Ed to a buggy to carry her around. Ed claims he is being mis-treated by Carol, and decides the only way for her to stop mistreating him is for Wilbur to buy the car, or for Ed to talk to Carol. Wilbur doesn't seem like he will be the one to give in, however...

020- Ed's New Shoes

Original Airdate: May 2, 1961

Wilbur hires a handyman to give Ed new shoes, but trouble arises when he squirts water all over a photographer who is doing a feature on Wilbur.

021- The Mustache

Original Airdate: May 23, 1961

Addison encourages Wilbur to grow a mustache, saying it gives him a more sophisticated look. Wilbur is not sure at first, but agrees to try it out and see how he likes it. When the mustache changes Wilbur's whole personality, Ed and Carol try to get Wilbur to shave it off. At the same time, Kay tryes to get Addison to shave his mustache off, but refuses to unless Wilbur does first.

022- The Contest

Original Airdate: June 6, 1961

Ed encourages Wilbur to enter a contest. Thinking that he's smart enough to give Wilbur the answers, Ed studies books, foreign language, and talks on the phone to try to be ready for the contest.

023- The Other Woman

Original Airdate: May 30, 1961

Ed tryes to convince Wilbur to buy a filly he likes. When Wilbur utters the filly's name in his sleep, Carol thinks it's the name of another woman.

024- Wilbur Sells Ed

Original Airdate: June 13, 1961

When Ed falls in love with a filly owned by a client of Wilbur's, he asks Wilbur to sell him to his client, a move that almost ruin's Wilbur's contract with him.

025- Ed Cries Wolf

Original Airdate: June 20, 1961

Ed wants to play Chess with Wilbur, but Wilbur says he has other, more important things to do. Ed phones Wilbur in the house and tryes to get Wilbur in the stable. When there really is a thief in the house, and Ed warns him, Wilbur thinks Ed's just trying to get him to play chess again.

026- Pine Lake Lodge

Original Airdate: June 27, 1961

The Posts and Addisons go to Pine Lake Lodge, leaving Ed at home. When the arrive there, they find the lodge is in some financial troubles, and they are their only guests. Season Two (1961-1962)

027- My Son, My Son

Original Airdate: October 1, 1961

When Ed discovers he's growing gray hairs, he decides he's getting older, and wants a boy of his own. Of course, this puts Wilbur in another troubled spot.

028- The Hoursetronaut

Original Airdate: October 8, 1961

Wilbur decides the stable's not the best place for him to do his work, especially with Ed bothering him all of the time. He decides to rent a place downtown to work. Ed, feeling unwanted, decides to run away.

029- My Horse, the Jumper

Original Airdate: October 29, 1961

A college buddy of Wilbur's visits the Posts, and persuades Wilbur to enter Ed in a jumping contest against his slick racing horse. Wilbur and Ed practice, but they just can't quite seem to get over those bushes...

030- Ed, the Redecorator

Original Airdate: October 22, 1961

Carol is pestering Wilbur to re-decorate the house. She suggests a Hawaiian style. Wilbur's not too thrilled about the idea. When Ed convinces Wilbur to first re-decorate the stable, Carol isn't too thrilled, either.

031- Ed's Ancestors

Original Airdate: October 15, 1961

Wilbur is asked to design a statue to be in the park, and decides the american horse would be a good subject. He asks Ed to pose as a model, but refuses until he knows for sure about his ancestry.

032- Ed, the Voter

Original Airdate: November 5, 1961

Carol and Wilbur decide to use the stable for a voting place for an upcoming election, but Ed isn't all too happy about it.

Classic Scene:

Watch the situations that arise when Addison trys to show off his public image when he conciders running for mayor.

033- Ed, the Hero

Original Airdate: November 26, 1961

Ed is concidered a hero when the saves the life of a small girl he sees in the park. The girl's grandfather invites Wilbur and Ed to their huge estate in Catalina, but Ed refuses to go.

034- Hunting Show

Original Airdate: November 11, 1961

When Ed hears of Addison and Wilbur planning a camping trip, he's all for it... But when he hears the trip is mainly for hunting, Ed rebels.

035- Mister Ed's Blues

Original Airdate: November 19, 1961

Wilbur is asked to compose a song to save a music company from going out of business, but not having all the talent needed, he asks Ed to help. Ed , who (as we see in episode 15) is much more talented at music than Wilbur is. Ed, however, isn't too sure he wants to compose the song.

036- Ed and the Elephant

Original Airdate: December 17, 1961

After Wilbur and Carol watch a magician's act at a local magic show, Wilbur is determined to find out how he did one of his tricks. Being the amatuer magician that he is, Wilbur had figured out how all of the tricks were done except one, in which an Elephant floated in mid-air. Wilbur decides to take the elephant into the barn to stay for awhile, while he trys to figure out the trick. Ed and the elephant don't quite get along, however...

Classic Scene:

While Wilbur is trying out the magic trick, he accidently gets stuck in the air on a harness he had rigged up. Of course, Addison happens to walk in at that moment..

037- Ed, the Salesman

Original Airdate: December 3, 1961

It's Wilbur and Ed's first anniversary, and Ed expects a great present, something every horse should have.. a color television set. When he finds he's not getting his wish, Ed takes matters into his own hooves..

038- Zsa Zsa

Original Airdate: January 28, 1962

Zsa Zsa Gabor guest stars in this classic Mister Ed episode. In it, she is making a new movie, a western, but she isn't too comfortable around horses. Wilbur decides to lend Ed to Zsa Zsa to get her used to horses.

039- Ed, the Beneficiary

Original Airdate: Currently Unknown

While reading the paper, Ed reads of a cat inheriting a large sum of money from his late owner. Having read this, Ed demands to know what he's got in Wilbur's will.

040- Ed's Bed

Original Airdate: January 14, 1962

Ed has come down with a cold, and Wilbur spends all of his time with him trying to cure him. Ed decides he sound have a bed to recouperate.. During all of this time spent with Ed, Wilbur is threated by Carol who says she'll leave him.

041- The Wrestler

Original Airdate: January 7, 1962

Addison and Wilbur buy a wrestler... "The Tiger". However, when Tiger announces he always stays with his managers, the two men worry which house he'll stay in. When the wrestler makes a very good impression on Carol and Kay, both are eager to let him stay at their house. However, Tiger decides he wouldn't mind staying in the stable. Ed isn't too keen on sharing his stable with a human, however. The girls spoil Tiger, giving him cake, ice cream, pies, ect.. Soon, he becomes overweight and out of shape, and Addison and Wilbur insist he get back into shape for his first fight. The girls have an idea.. he can come to their ballet class...

Worth Mentioning...

Wilbur was the middle-weight wrestling champion at his college.

042- Ed, the Horse Doctor

Original Airdate: February 11, 1962

Addison makes a great investment, he buys a racehorse. When the horse suddenly comes down with an illness, Ed goes to the stables and talks to the horse and quickly remedies the situation.

043- Horse Wash

Original Airdate: February 4, 1962

Wilbur's father in law makes his first appearance on the series in this episode. We discover him and Wilbur never quite got along. During this unexpected visit, Ed decides to impress a new love interest, and strolls down the the local car wash to get cleaned up.

044- Ed's Word of Honor

Original Airdate: February 25, 1962

When the Posts give Addison a birthday present, problems arise, and Ed's word of honor is in jeopardy.. for the time being.

045- Ed, the Beachcomber

Original Airdate: April 1, 1962

Addison enlists Wilbur's help to get a bunch of "beach bums" off of his property. Wilbur runs down the the area, and soon finds his own problem. Ed decides to run away and become a beatnik...

046- George Burns Meets Mister Ed

Original Airdate: February 18, 1962

Wilbur reads George Burns is offering $25,000.00 for a new act to appear with him in Las Vegas. Wilbur tryes to persuade Ed to be has partner in the act, but Ed is reluctant to accept the offer.

047- Ed's New Neighbors

Original Airdate: March 25, 1962

The Addison's are excited about their inheritance of a large estate in the east. (Kay's inheritance to be specific..). Wilbur and Carol are also excited for them, but are very sad to see them go. They're even sadder with they meet the new neighbors, Mr. Douglas (an agent for the I.R.S.), Mrs. Douglas (who wouldn't be much of a pal with Carol), and their cute little boy, (who plays William Tell with Mister Ed). When the Addisons decide not to leave, they have to convice the Douglas's to tear up their contract.

Classic Scene:

Watch Wilbur play his bagpipes, and check out Carol's new attiude while the Posts try to get the Douglas's to leave

048- Bald Horse

Original Airdate: March 18, 1962

Ed discovers he's loosing his hair, and keeps Wilbur running until he finds the reason and a cure for his mis-fortune.

049- No Horses Allowed

Original Airdate: March 4, 1962

Carol, not thinking clearly, signs a petition that was going around the neighborhood to ban all horses from the area. Wilbur has to get the petition recalled so he can keep Ed.

050- Ed, the Matchmaker

Original Airdate: April 29, 1962

A teenager who has moved in not far from the Posts gets The Posts and Ed involved in her romantic problems. Ed comes to the rescue...

051- Clint Eastwood Meets Mister Ed

Original Airdate: April 22, 1962

Clint Eastwood and the Post's phone lines get mixed up in a party line, and Ed causes trouble when he makes trouble for the tv star by angering his lady friend, and almost messing up a movie opertunity for Mr. Eastwood. Thinking Wilbur is responsible, the star, angry at what is happening, comes to punch Wilbur's light out.

052- Lie Detector

Original Airdate: April 8, 1962

Addison asks Wilbur to help him make a new lie detector machine, but it causes trouble when it reveals Ed, Wilbur, and Carol's little lies to each other.

053- Ed and the Secret Service

Original Airdate: February 7, 1962

Kay and Carol get their husbands to joing the hunt club. When Wilbur asks Ed to ride in the hunt, Ed isn't very co-operative.. Season 3 (1962-1963)

054- Ed Gets Amnesia

Original Airdate: September 27, 1962

While getting some carrots, Ed accidently gets hit on the head with the bucket of carrots. He doesn't know who he is, and doesn't recognize Wilbur at all.

055- Wilbur, the Good Samaritan

Original Airdate: October 5, 1962

Ed is responsible of causing a newspaper boy to loose his job. Addison and Wilbur both think it's each other's fault.

056- Wilbur's Father

Original Airdate: February 28, 1963

Wilbur's ageing father pays a visit to the Posts, and announces he's going to remarry. The woman he has chosen has a pretty young daughter, and Ed tricks Wilbur into thinking his father is marrying the young girl.

Worth Mentioning...

Wilbur's father is also played by Alan Young.

057- Wilbur in the Lion's Den

Original Airdate: November 8, 1962

Ed persuades Wilbur to take him to fly kites in the park. Wilbur ends up cornered in a lion's pen.

058- The Bashful Clipper

Original Airdate: October 18, 1962

Wilbur says Ed needs a haircut, but Ed doesn't want just any old clipper. He wants a human hair-cutter. Wilbur brings an acomplished, young hairdresser to do the job.

059- Wilbur and Ed in Show Biz

Original Airdate: October 11, 1962

Ed's at it again! The michevious horse is swiping apples when Wilbur's working on a job.. a plush living quarter for an elephant.

060- Ed and the Allergy

Original Airdate: October 25, 1962

Kay's mother is visiting the Addisons, and Roger never quite got along with her. She arrives sneezing and very uncomfortable, and everyone thinks Roger's responsible for his mother-in-law's allergy. In reality, she's alergic to Ed. When Ed gets lost in the woods, Roger and Wilbur use Kay's mother's sneezing to locate Ed. When Addison trips and hurts his ankle, his mother-in-law and him finally begin to get along.

061- Horse Sense

Original Airdate: November 1, 1962

Much to Wilbur and Ed's dismay, Addison writes a letter to the editor of the newspaper, suggesting the bridle path be demolished to extend the golf course. Fortunately, the letter fails.

062- Ed and Paul Revere

Original Airdate: December 6, 1962

Addison hires a sculpter to make a statue of his distant ancestor, Paul Revere. As usual, everything doesn't go smoothly with Ed around...

063- Wilbur, the Masher

Original Airdate: December 13, 1962

Ed gets Wilbur into trouble one day while taking a ride through the park. He spots a beautiful filly, and goes over to her. Unfortunatly, on the filly is a beautiful woman.. and everyone thinks Wilbur is interested in her and not Carol.

064- Horse Party

Original Airdate: November 15, 1962

It's Ed's birthday, and he wants Wilbur to give him a party. When Carol's club meeting is moved to the Post's house, Wilbur knows he can't have the party.. he doesn't want to look stupid in front of all of those people. Ed takes matters into his own hooves, when he moves the club meeting to another house. Wilbur gives Ed the party, just as the entire club of Carol's comes by...

065- Ed, the Pilgrim

Original Airdate: November 22, 1962

Ed tells Wilbur the "real" story of Thanksgiving

066- Disappearing Horse

Original Airdate: November 29, 1962

Wilbur wants Ed in another magic show of his, but Ed is reluctant to appear.

067- Ed and the Bicycle

Original Airdate: January 3, 1963

Wilbur takes up bicycling, instead of riding Ed. Ed gets jealous and feels left out. Wilbur comes back to Ed in the end, however.. he realizes the bicycle doesn't make good converstation with him like Ed does..

068- Horse of a Different Color

Original Airdate: December 20, 1962

The circus comes to town, and it's Addison's lucky day.. sort of.. The cicus uses his property, and he would make a large profit from the deal. However, Ed ruins it for Addison once again...

069- The Blessed Event

Original Airdate: May 5, 1963

Ed learns he is to become an uncle. Delighted at the idea, he begins listing names he feels suitible for his young nephew.

070- Old Rockin' Chair

Original Airdate: January 10, 1963

As an extra hobby, Wilbur using some of Ed's old shoes and makes a rocking chair out of it. However, no one is too excited about Wilbur's masterpiece.. it isn't even very comfortable. Ed decides to dump the chair.. in the lake.. but then an antique dealer becomes interested in the chair, and Wilbur and Ed must go chair diving.

071- Unemployment Show

Original Airdate: January 24, 1963

Wilbur puts Ed to work at the stable, but when Ed becomes unemployed, he feels he is due for unemployment insurance.

072- Big Pine Lodge

Original Airdate: January 17, 1963

The Addisons and Posts travel up to a peaceful lodge by a lake, and they bring Ed along. Also at the lodge, are some crooks who want to make some money by cheating at poker. Addison, not knowing the deck is marked, looses a lot of money, and Wilbur must get it back.. with Ed's help..

Classic Scene:

Look for the cook's expression when he sees a horse standing in his kitchen!

073- Horse Talk

Original Airdate: January 31, 1963

Ed and Wilbur feel sorry for a nice handyman who was accused to giving a horse a drug before an important race. Wilbur and Ed decide to help the man out and find the real crook.

074- Working Wives

Original Airdate: February 24, 1963

Wilbur and Addison stupidly suggest the woman get a job if they want to spend so much money. Kay and Carol do, and in result leave Addison and Wilbur to try and to the housework.

075- Ed , the Emancipator

Original Airdate: February 24, 1963

The Posts give Kay a cockatoo for her birthday. Addison's not happy about the new arrival, but Ed grows fond of him.

076- The Price of Apples

Original Airdate: March 7, 1963

Ed can't stop taking Addison's apples, and he announces he's an "appleholic". But Addison doesn't see eye to eye, and insist the horse stop immediatly.

077- Doctor Ed

Original Airdate: March 21, 1963

Ed loves his medical dramas! But when Addison 's TV stops working, he asks if he can take Wilbur's TV in the barn. Being the good neighbor that he is, Wilbur agrees, but leaves Ed tv-less. To get his television back, Ed knocks down Addison's antenna. Ed dreams he's a doctor, and must save Addison, but refuses because he doesn't like him.

Classic Scene:

Be sure to check out Ed in his surgeon's suit!

078- Ed, the Zebra

Original Airdate: March 21, 1963

Addison wants Wilbur to pose for a very undignified contest photo, but Ed refuses, and runs away to the zoo to start a new life as a Zebra. He puts himself against a newly painted black fence and wanders in with the other Zebras

079- Wilbur Post, Honorary Horse

Original Airdate: October 6, 1963

Ed suggests Wilbur write a book on horses, after all, he Ed to tell him everything he needs to know. Ed wants the book to get finished, so he pesters Wilbur while he's working on a huge building Addison wants him to design, and almost causes Wilbur to loose out on the deal. Wilbur dreams Ed inducts him to be an honorary horse.

Worth Mentioning...

Each direction has a special smell to a horse.

080- Patter of Little Hooves

Original Airdate: October 20, 1963

Ed enters a contest in the newspaper (using Wilbur's name and address) and wins a prize.. a rare, miniture horse. Ed immeadiatly adopts him.

Season 4 (1963-1964)

081- Leo Durocher Meets Mister Ed

Original Airdate: September 29, 1963

Ed's favorite team, the Los Angeles Dodgers, aren't doing so hot. Ed, being the baseball expert that he is, calls up Leo Durcocher and gives him tips on how to help his players. Leo doesn't pay much attention to him at first, but realizes Ed's tips are right. Thinking it's Wilbur who had called him, Leo invites Wilbur down to the field to give him some more tips. Unfortunatly, Carol and the Addisons want to go to Palm Springs. Ed fixes that, by giving Carol a phony weather report for Palm Springs. Ed and Wilbur travel to Dodger's stadium to give some tips.

Classic Scene:

Ed hits a homerun! He runs the bases and slides into home.. too bad he missed second base.

Worth Mentioning...

This is often concidered to many fans to be the best Mister Ed episode. This is Addison's final episode. He died soon after of leukemia at age 67.

082- Ed Discovers America

Original Airdate: October 13, 1963

Wilbur is asked to plan a statue for a museum, and Ed suggests the horse. Wilbur is scepticle at first, but Ed tells Wilbur the real story of how Columbus discovered America.. or how Columbus's horse discovered America.

083- Taller than She

Original Airdate: December 1, 1963

Ed falls head over hooves for a French filly, but is dismayed to discover she is a great deal taller than himself.

084- Be Kind to Humans

Original Airdate: October 27, 1963

Ed invites some hobos to stay in his stable. Wilbur wants them out , and fast. A client of Wilbur's and they think Wilbur's a kook.

085- Don't Laugh at Horses

Original Airdate: November 3, 1963

Kay's brother and herself dress up in a horse suit for a masquerade party. Ed thinks it's quite undignifed, and is determined not to let them go.

086- Getting Ed's Goat

Original Airdate: November 10, 1963

Another birday comes.. this time it's Wilbur's birthday. Ed gets Wilbur a cake, but is angry when he finds a goat has snuck into his stable and ate the cake.. and the plate! Ed soons warms up to the little goat, but Kay's brother has a hard time adjusting to the little animal.

087- Ed, the Musician

Original Airdate: April 12, 1964

A variety show is coming around, and Ed wants to be in it. He gets a drum set, and practices all night long, disturbing the neighborhood. Ed decides to give up the instrument, but picks up another one..

088- Oh, those Hats!

Original Airdate: November 17, 1963

Wilbur is desiging a beach house for a famous woman columnist. The woman has a surplus of hats, and is held in very high fashion. Carol wants her to host an upcoming fashion show she's involved in, but Ed ruins it when he shows off his homeless animal friends from an animal farm which has closed down.

089- Ed, the Shichkebob

Original Airdate: January 19, 1964

Another magic show of Wilbur's is on, and he wants a trick that could win him the prize. He asks Ed to help.. The trick? Sticking swords through a box with Ed in it. Obviously, Ed's not to happy about this. He softens the blow by putting up some of Carol's packages in the box.

Classic Scene:

Watch Ed's dress as he emerges from the case at the end of the episode.

Classic Guest:

Magician "The Great Blackstone" makes a brief appearance in the magic show.

090- Ed, the Desert Rat

Original Airdate: February 16, 1964

Ed and Wilbur have a fight, and Ed heads out to the desert, but he soon finds it's not the greatest place to be.

091- Home Sweet Trailer

Original Airdate: December 8, 1963

Wilbur's Air Force commander comes by with their trailer. The colonel's wife, Winnie, ends up with a cold living in their trailer, and Wilbur offers their house until she re-cooperates. Carol isn't keen on sleeping in the small trailer, and wants her house back, pronto! In the end, The Kirkwoods decide tomove into Addison's old house

Worth Mentioning...

This is the first appearance of the Kirkwood's, the Colonel and Winnie.

092- Love Thy New Neighbor

Original Airdate: December 15, 1963

Wilbur thinks he's in the airforce again, and reverts back to his old air-force behavior in front of him.

093- Moko

Original Airdate: May 17, 1964

A mischevious little alien ruins Col. Kirkwood's party by making him go ape for a pretty young client of Wilbur's. The little alien soon does the same with Wilbur and Col. Kirkwood's guest of honor... an old air-force chief.

Worth Mentioning...

The non-mischevious alien's voice is that of Richard Deacon, who played Mel Cooley on The Dick Van Dyke Show.

094- Ed in the Peace Corps

Original Airdate: February 2, 1964

Wilbur hires a pretty young Japanese secretary. The secretary is too polite for Carol and Winnie's tastes, as well as Ed's who threatens to go out to the Peace Corps.

095- Ed Gets the Mumps

Original Airdate: January 5, 1964

The Posts and Kirkwoods have to look after a baby, and Ed feels left out. He comes down with a case of mumps, that he whips up.

096- Ed's Christmas Story

Original Airdate: December 22, 1963

Ed gives Wilbur a huge list of gift ideas for Christmas, and he goes on to tell Wilbur of the story of who was behind getting Santa Claus his first year of making presents for all of the children around the world.. Santa's horse.

097- Ed's Dentist

Original Airdate: January 12, 1964

Ed's got a toothache, and wants to go to a human dentist because of the huge needle the vet has for him.

098- Ed Visits a Gypsy

Original Airdate: March 1, 1964

Ed wants his hoof read by a gyspy, and insists Wilbur takes him to one.

099- Ed, the Chauffeur

Original Airdate: January 29, 1964

Ed's feet hurt, and he's tired of walking and standing all of the time. He decides to rent a car and take it out on a drive. He ends up being the result of Winnie recking the Colonel 's new car.

Classic Scene:

Don't miss the comedy as Ed drives the car.. sticking his foot out to turn left and right, and be sure to catch the reactions of everyone who sees him!

100- Old Swayback

Original Airdate: January 8, 1964

Ed befriends an old swayback horse names Sam, and wants to rebuild his confidence in himself, but this is impossible to do with Col. Kirkwood and everyone making fun of Sam.

101- Ed, the Donkey

Original Airdate: February 23, 1964

Wilbur insults Ed by saying he has no sense of direction when they get lost on a ride. Col. Kirkwood procedes to call him a donkey, and Ed begins to wonder if he really is a donkey . When the Kirkwoods and Posts go on a trip, Ed insists he be left with other donkeys to see if he is one of them.

Classic Scene:

Wilbur goes to a vet to ask him if he think's Ed's a donkey. When he thinks Wilbur's a kook, he says loudly in front of Ed that he thinks he's a donkey. Upon hearing this, Ed continues to "hee-haw".

102- Mae West Meets Mister Ed

Original Airdate: February 22, 1964

Wilbur is designing a stable for Mae West's horses. When Ed hears of how well she treats her horses, he asks Wilbur to sell him to her. He refuses, so Ed goes himself with a sign asking for adoption.

Classic Scene:

Mae West gives Ed a bubble bath.

103- Saddles and Gowns

Original Airdate: May 3, 1964

Wilbur's declared a penny pincher when he refuses to buy Carol a new dress or buy Ed a new saddle.

104- The Prowler

Original Airdate: April 19, 1964

A prowler is said to be in the neighborhood, and not knowing the theif is hiding in Ed's barn, Wilbur searches everywhere else for the prowler.

105- Ed, the Pool Player

Original Airdate: October 11, 1964

Col. Kirkwood gets involved with pool sharks and he looses lots of money. Ed comes to the rescue, however.

106- Ed Writed Dear Abby

Original Airdate: October 18, 1964

Ed wants a place of his own, so Wilbur says if he writes to Dear Abby and she suggests he have a place of his own, he can leave. Abby does say he should have his own place, so Ed goes out on his own. He soon realizes he'd rather live back with Wilbur. Season 5 (1964-1965)

107- Hi Fi Horse

Original Airdate: October 4, 1964

Carol is hoping for a romantic gift from Wilbur for their anniversary, but instead he buys a sterio. However, Ed is quite happy with the gift.

108- Ed's Tunnel to Freedom

Original Airdate: October 25, 1964

Ed gets locked in his stall for being a bad horse, and Ed decides he's going to tunnel out to freedom.

109- John Provost Meets Mister Ed

Original Airdate: December 16, 1964

Wilbur is coaching a little league baseball team. Jon Provost (Timmy from "Lassie" ) guest stars as the pitcher for the team, who almost missed a very important game.

110- Like Father, Like Horse

Original Airdate: February 10, 1965

Ed tryes to play a joke on Col. Kirkwood, but for once, the Col. gets him back!

111- Ed, the Race Horse

Original Airdate: January 27, 1965

Col. Kirkwood is cheating when he races Ed on the bridle path everyday. In result, Carol has to cook for the Kirkwoods and Wilbur. Wilbur buys Ed sneakers to run faster, and he wins, and also find the Colonel cheating.

Classic Scene:

The shoe salesman thinks he's on Candid Camera when Wilbur brings Ed in for sneakers.

112- My Horse, the Ranger

Original Airdate: December 13, 1964

Carol is going on a hiking trip, and Wilbur is asks to head a similar trip for boys. Ed wants to tag along.

113- The Heavy Rider

Original Airdate: December 30, 1964

Wilbur may have a chance to design a million dollar shopping mall! The heavy man who is behind the mall comes to stay with the Posts, and he loves riding horses, especially Ed. Ed soon is tired out after the 450 pound man rides him.

114- Ed, the Pilot

Original Airdate: January 6, 1965

The colonel and Wilbur go in together to buy an old Army plane. Ed is determined to fly it. Wilbur has to talk Ed down to safety.

Classic Scene:

While Ed is driving the plane, he flys upside down, almost knocks down the radio tower, and finally comes down to safety in the Pacific Ocean.

115- Ed, the Stowaway

Original Airdate: February 17, 1965

The Kirkwoods and Posts are going to Hawaii, and Ed stows away on the boat with them. Once in Hawaii, he begins to like it there, and Wilbur decides to sell him to a hotel owner. When Ed decides he wants to come home, the owner isn't about to let him go.

Classic Scene:

Watch Ed surf! Later on in the episode, Wilbur dresses up as a hula dancer to get in to see Ed and get him home.

116- Animal Jury

Original Airdate: January 13, 1965

Ed's in trouble again. This time, Wilbur's aunt has paid the Posts a visit, along with her pet bird. Ed's not too fond of the bird, and Wilbur knows this. When the bird ends up in a pet shop, Ed gets blamed. He dreams he is on trial, but has an animal jury on his side.

117- What Kind of Fool Am I?

Original Airdate: January 20, 1965

When Carol's father comes to visit, Ed starts thinking about his father. He decides he wants to find him, and sends Wilbur on the horse hunt.

118- Ed's Juice Stand

Original Airdate: February 3, 1965

Colonel Kirkwood is interested in starting a small business of his own, and so if Ed. He decides to be an entrepreneur and sets up his business.. a juice stand.

119- The Dragon Horse

Original Airdate: March 31, 1965

An auction's coming up, and the things are being stored in Ed's stable. One of the items is an ancient Chinese horse, which is rumored to give bad luck. Ed's luck isn't too good around it, and Ed decides to get rid of it.

120- Never Ride Horses

Original Airdate: February 24, 1965

Everyone seems to be riding Ed, and he's getting sick of it. He decides people should not be aloud to ride horses, and he's determined to do something about it.

121- Ed, the Sentry

Original Airdate: March 3, 1965

Poor Carol.. she develops an allergy for horses. Ed's always liked Carol.. she's never done anything bad to him or anything. So, being the kind horse Ed is, Ed joins the Air Force sentry duty.

122- Ed's Diction Teacher

Original Airdate: March 10, 1965

Clumsy Wilbur accidently knocks the stuffing out of a little stuffed horse. When he talks about "stuffing the horse", Ed thinks he means him, and panics.

123- Ed, the Godfather

Original Airdate: March 17, 1965

When a neighbor goes away, the neighbor asks Wilbur to look after his filly, who is going to have a colt soon. The filly gives birth, and the colt stays with Ed until the owner gets back. Ed is delighted to be dubbed "godfather".

124- Ed's Contact Lenses

Original Airdate: March 24, 1965

Someone sees Ed wearing glassses in public. Ed thinks he looks goofy and doesn't want to wear them where other people (And fillys!) can see him. He decides he'd much prefer contact lenses, much to the dismay of Wilbur.

125- Ed's Cold Tail

Original Airdate: April 7, 1965

Ed complains to Wilbur that his stable is too cold, and he needs a heater. At the same time, Carol needs a new refriderator. Ed shows how much he needs a heater by showing his tail frozen solid. Wilbur decides to give in to both Ed and Carol.

126- The Bank Robbery

Original Airdate: April 14, 1965

A bank robber stuffs some money he stole in Ed's saddle. When he returns late at night to get the money, he traps Wilbur and holds him hostage. Ed works out a plan to capture the crook.

127- My Horse, the Mailman

Original Airdate: April 28, 1965

Ed learns from Wilbur that his ancestors used to deliver mail on the Pony Express. Ed decides he'd like to carry on the tradition..

128- Whiskers and Tails

Original Airdate: May 5, 1965

There's a new neighbor in the neighborhood, and Ed and him don't start off on the right foot. He's an archaeology professor at a nearby college, and he insults Ed by saying "it's been proven that horses are among the dumbest animals". Ed aims to show him differently.

129- Robin Hood Ed

Original Airdate: May 12, 1965

A movie producer's in town looking for an ameteur to play Robin Hood in his movie. After much persuasion from Carol, Wilbur decides to try out. Ed decides he's like to be Robin Hood, too..

130- Ed, the Artist

Original Airdate: May 19, 1965

Ed decides being a horse isn't enough. So, he decides to take up painting. However, his subject is Carol, and he paints a very unflattering picture of her.

Season 6

(1965-1966)

131- Ed, the Counterspy

Original Airdate: September 12, 1965

Ed cleverly finds out spies are in the neighborhood, and he concludes the park is a drop-off place for secret messages. When Wilbur finds some micro-film, the spies are out to get him.

Worth Mentioning...

The final season of Ed included some episodes in which Ed and Wilbur were working secretly for the government.. this is the first of them.



132- Ed a Go-Go

Original Airdate: September 19, 1965

To help Wilbur get a job, Ed gets Wilbur an appreciation of "go-go" music.

133- Cold Finger

Original Airdate: September 26, 1965

The Secret Intelligence Agency calls up Wilbur and Ed (who helped them capture spies they were after in episode 131), and asks Wilbur to find a radio that has disappeared. Working with Ed, Wilbur finds the radio.

134- Spies Stike Back

Original Airdate: October 3, 1965

Once again, Ed and Wilbur are involved with the spies when the spies discover that Wilbur and Ed have taken a secret radio and given it back to the Secret Intelligence Agency. The spies capture both Ed and Wilbur and take them to a hide-out. Ed figures out a plan to escape.

Worth Mentioning...

This is also referred to as "Ed Breaks the Hip Code".

135- Love and the Single Horse

Original Airdate: October 10, 1965

Ed types up his memoirs (and his love stories). When Wilbur finds out, he wants to read them. Ed agrees, as long as Wilbur keeps them to himself. Wilbur loves the book, and when he accidently falls asleep, Carol starts reading it. She decides to have it published. When Ed finds out his love stories are being published, he runs away to a wax museum.

Worth Mentioning...

When at the wax museum, Wilbur has to dress up like an indian to talk to Ed, who has placed himself in the middle of a western scene.

Irene Ryan (Granny from "The Beverly Hillbillies" ) guest stars as a woman in the wax museum.

136- Monkey Involved in Spy Ring

Original Airdate: Currently Unknown

In the last of the four spy episodes, the SIA once again asks Wilbur to help discover who has been stealing papers from the SIA offices. Wilbur's stumped, but Ed's not. He discovers an organ player has trained a monkey to come into the offices and bring the papers back to his master. Ed feels sorry for the monkey.

137- Ed Wins aColor Television Set

Original Airdate: Currently Unknown

Ed wins a contest on the radio by answering a tough question he knew about chess. His prize is a color television set.. something he's always wanted.

138- The Horse and the Pussycat

Original Airdate: October 31, 1965

Carol's friend asks her to look after her cat for awhile, but Carol gets busy and leaves Wilbur with most of the work. Ed feels neglected.

139- Ed, the Bridegroom

Original Airdate: December 26, 1965

Ed decides it's time for him to settle down, and he asks Wilbur to get a justice of the peace to perform the marraige ceremony.

140- Don't Skin That Bear

Original Airdate: November 7, 1965

Wilbur returns everything his father -in-law gets him, and when he gives him a bearskin rug, he doesn't like it too much, but he doesn't want to get his father-in-law mad, so he keeps it. Ed, on the other hoof, is furious! That poor little bear who's mother is laying in Wilbur's living room. Ed decides to get rid of it. He puts an ad in the paper asking for a trade for the rug. Wilbur turns everyone away without Carol's father suspecting anything. The next night, Ed has a bigger suprise for Wilbur..

Worth Mentioning...

A lady offers Wilbur some rare fish for the bearskin rug. The woman was played by Barbara Pepper.. who appeared as an extra in many episodes of "I Love Lucy" , and was the first Doris Ziffle on "Green Acres" .

141- Ed Acquires a Rival... a Motorcycle

Original Airdate: Currently Unknown

Ed says he will only be ridden bareback, and Wilbur doesn't like this idea. To show Ed he won't ride him bareback, Wilbur buys a motorcycle, and Ed once again feels neglected.

142- Cherokee Ed

Original Airdate: January 9, 1966

Ed finds out he's part indian, and refuses a parrot that is said to be a desendant of one of General Custar's pets.

143- Ed Goes to College

Original Airdate: Currently Unknown

Ed decides to go to college and become a doctor. He listens in at the windows of the college, often distracting some of the students.

Worth Mentioning...

This was the final "Mister Ed" episode.

Return to Mister-Ed Net!

©1998,

MILsnacks@aol.com