Florissant Police Department
ERRONEOUS E-MAIL CAUSES ALARM IN CITY OF FLORISSANT

Chief William Karabas of the Florissant Police Department wants to make the public aware of an erroneous e-mail circulating in reference to auto thefts, specifically ‘car jacking ’ incidents in the City of Florissant.

“I want to put an end to this rumor. The City of Florissant has not had any incidents of this nature!”, said Chief Karabas. In fact, the e-mail makes reference to many false claims. Chief Karabas stated, “Some of the points include, referring to the Florissant Police Department as a Sheriffs Department, which we are not, we DO NOT have a Detective Bledsoe, there is NO State Trooper named Bartholome, there is NO Missouri Neighborhood Watch Association, there is NO such address (1456 Washington Ave) in Florissant and the telephone number given on the e-mail is NOT IN SERVICE!”

Again, there is NO validity to this e-mail. It is FALSE. We ask that people be informed and get the correct information. One way to check e-mails for validity is to call your police department or go on-line to check ‘Urban Legends’ at www.snopes.com

To see this particular Urban Legend (original e-mail attached), go to www.snopes.com/crime/warnings/carjack.asp

Following is the false email that has been forwarded:

Detective Bledsoe, of the Florissant, MO Sheriff’s office confirms that this is happening in St. Louis County, Missouri and could be happening near you, so be careful and take note. Lieutenant Tony Bartholome of the Missouri Highway Patrol urges everyone to keep this email circulating---the more people who are aware of this MO, the better. Description of new carjacking scheme:

You walk across the parking lot, unlock your car and get inside. Then you lock all your doors, start the engine and shift into REVERSE, and you look into the rearview mirror to back out of your parking space and you notice a piece of paper stuck to the middle of the rear window with official looking writing. So, you shift into PARK, unlock your doors and jump out of your car to remove that paper obstructing you! When you reach the back of your car, that is when the car-jacker appears out of nowhere, jump into your car and take off! Your engine was running, (ladies would have their purse in the car) and they practically mow you down as they speed off in your car with your ID inside. There have been six incidents in North St. Louis and four in Florissant and three reported around the Fox heatre on Grand Ave in August of 2005.

BE AWARE OF THIS NEW SCHEME THAT IS NOW BEING USED. Just drive away and remove the paper that is stuck to your window later, and be thankful that you read this email.

Hope you will forward this to friends and family ...especially to women! A purse contains all identification, and you certainly do NOT want someone getting your home address.

They already HAVE your ID.