DAILY POST: SHOCKER!!!! A UNIVERSITY Female Student Confesses to have infected more than 324 MEN in Nakuru with HIV … She targets 2000 before Year Ends!!!!!!!
SHOCKING: A KABARAK UNI FEMALE STUDENT CONFESSES TO HAVE DELIBERATELY INFECTED 324 MEN IN NAKURU TOWN WITH HIV AND TARGETS 2000 BEFORE YEAR ENDS AND LISTS HER VICTIMS



This lady got the whole Kenya Scandals team shaken,she in boxed with he r own Facebook page not a pseudo account,"i see you people exposing scandals i also have a big one to tell just dont expose my name" her opening clause to Kenya Scandals. After assuring of her identity protection she went ahead and burst her bubble,"im 19 and a 2nd year here at Kabarak Uni,i joined this college a virgin though ive had boyfriends before,my parents are strict so having sex was never on my mind.





Sep 22nd 2013 is a day ill never forget,we went clubbing in town and got drunk with some senior students then went back hostels for party round 2,i rem less but i rem waking up naked to some guy called Javan with my P painful n new he had sex with me when drunk i only asked if he used a condom n he said yes,however when taking bath i noticed sperms down there,i wanted to commit suicide,i feared getting pregnant n HIV,took contras n hoped i was HIV free,in November i tested HIV posted,i felt like cutting off my neck,i confronted that guy and he insisted he was clean that i got it from somewhere,i was so depressed and took alcohol to die,i even bought poison,the pain was just unbearable how was i gone face the world,i let my parents down,i gave up on the world and just wanted to end my life" the lady narrates her story to Kenya Scandals and you can feel tears in her words.



Quickly goes to her FB profile to see her photos and take it from here,she is one fine piece of art,right features in the right places,a bad joke but Jesus would say OMG on spotting her,no man can resist this ladys charm,not even Jimmy Gathu,back to the confession and btw there's no a single clue from her photos that she could be infected,"something came up in my mind that i should revenge,i hated men and didn't want to be near any,my future had been ruined,somehow someone had to pay,after private therapies and sessions i gained strenght not even my parents,friends new of my conditions even up to now,my life would then take a turn and depend on ARVs. I accepted my fate and promised to make all men i come across suffer,i know im attractive and men both married n unmarried chases me left right and center,luckily my body has remained good and if anything my curves got better something you men like.





I buried the good girl in me and became the bad girl,my goal was to infect as many as possible so far since Dec up to now i have infected 324 men and i make sure to note down there list which i secretly keeps when ill be on my death bed i will release it. I know i have nothing left to do on earth but wait for my death but before i do,men will get it. My target is over 2k by the end of the year,pregnancy is out of question im on contras so i just do raw which most men here love they dont even question,my looks and body works greatly for me,i give it good. Of the 324 about 156 are students here at the college,the ret are married men outside,lecturers,lawyers,some celebs and 3 politician. Not a day passes without me having sex,mostly 4 people per day" she continues to reveal her shocking confession exclusively to Kenya Scandals.



She goes to conclude,"i know this story will get people talking but nothing will stop me from accomplishing my mission by continuing to sleep around,you never know but maybe you have slept with me or your husband,boyfriend,brother,father or any has slept with me and i never allow condom go have HIV test and for those who haven't and here in Nakuru or outside,your day is coming,you men destroyed my life and i will make you and your people pay for it. I don't have any regrets at all,im gone for now,i have had one today and got two more men lined up to receive it" she daringly sums up her confession to Kenya Scandals.