Woman Claims She Is The Daughter Of Marilyn Monroe And JFK -
Burbank, California| A 53-year old woman had presented a paternity action lawsuit before the California state court, alleging that she is the biological daughter of Marilyn Monroe and former President of the United States, John Fitzgerald Kennedy.

Gladys Baker Morris spent most of her life believing that Marilyn Monroe’s cousin, Meredith Baker, was her biological mother. In March 2014, while on her deathbed, her “mother” told her that she had actually been adopted, and that her biological parents were incredibly famous.

“My mother confessed to me on her deathbed, that my real mother was in fact, Marilyn Monroe,” Ms. Morris told reporters. “She told me that Marilyn was afraid that the Kennedy brothers would have her and her baby killed if they learned of her pregnancy, so my mother had given birth in secret and hidden me away as soon as I was born.”

After hearing her mother’s confession, Ms. Morris underwent a lot of research to clarify her origins, and rapidly found out that she had indeed been adopted.

In took a total of 18 months of legal proceedings, however, before she was finally able to obtain her adoption record, including her birth certificate.

This amazing document, which has become the cornerstone of her legal claim, clearly states that she is the daughter of Norma Jeane Mortenson, better known as Marilyn Monroe, and of the assassinated U.S. President, Jonh F. Kennedy.

More than 50 years after her death, stories concerning Marilyn Monroe’s love life or alleged pregnancies continue to regularly make the headlines.

Two ill-fated pregnancies in 1957 and 1959 are known to have lead the actress to have surgery to correct an ectopic pregnancy.

Some persistent rumors, originating from her gynecologist, Dr. Leon Krohn, have suggested that Marilyn Monroe had become pregnant again in 1961, and given birth to a baby girl in June 1962.

There has always been very little evidence to back these allegations, however, and many people hope that the court procedures launched by Ms. Morris will finally bring an end to more than 50 years of speculation, concerning the existence and identity of this mysterious child.

Gladys Baker Morris must now wait for the results of the DNA tests, before she can launch any lawsuits to claim any eventual heirloom.

If her claims turn out to be true, she could the only natural heir to the estate of Marilyn Monroe, which is estimated to be worth more than $100 million and still makes more than $5M each year.

Indeed, she confirms that she intends to sue the Marilyn Monroe Foundation over rights and royalties, once the DNA test confirms her identity.

She also hopes to be able to meet and possibly develop a relationship with her estranged half-sister, United States ambassador to Japan, Caroline Kennedy.

Source : worldnewsdailyreport.com