Prayer Board – Woodland Hills Baptist Church
01/27/17

Please pray for Hugh Harrell who is in Longview Regional. He had some stents put in about two weeks ago and was doing well until yesterday he got such severe pains he had to be taken to the emergency room. He is having blood clots forming and they are trying to take care of his problem. He is 92 and his wife is 94 and she needs him to help her. Please pray they will find the cause of his problem and get it corrected and his health restored and he can come home to his wife. They are so precious. Thank you for your prayers. Janelle Brown

Lauren Burton is in good shepherd, doing better, but doctors are worried about her liver. Please pray for her. Her husband is Rocky Burton

01/26/17

Lift up Darlene Hardin. She is in the Berean Life Group, but has been homebound for a while because she is at a high risk for a stroke. She has been waiting on the OK for surgery to be performed to partially alleviate the problem. Surgery is now scheduled for Monday the 30th at 6am at Trinity Mother Francis in Tyler.

Continue to lift up Weldon and Gloria Richie. Weldon fell several times last week and has some bruised or cracked ribs. He went to the E.R. yesterday and is back at Eden Place.

Please keep Tom & Doris Moore in your prayers. Health problems.

Pray for Connie Silva. She recently had an eye exam and prognosis was not good. Searching out second opinions.

Donnie Moore, Tom Moore’s son had a possible stroke and heart attack. Keep this family in your prayers.

01/25/17

Update on Sally Hudson (Barbie Baker’s Daughter):

After questioning her, the GI doctor said what she needs is a colonoscopy! Very wise decision based on where that extreme pain is. They will have to prep her a bit and then do that procedure tomorrow! Keep on praying. She’s good with that decision! Thanks for the prayers.

I am in Shreveport with Sally at hospital. She is still in a lot of pain and not able to rest or get comfortable. She has been seen by 3 doctors so far, but not the gastroenterologist. I think he is going to have the answers we need. Please keep her in your prayers!

Please remember my Cousin JUDY UNRUH’s son James and family and my family. Judy passed away last night from a long battle with MS and oher serious health issues. Thank you, Vivian Roland

Please keep Judy Cooley and family in your prayers. She is Michelle Kornegay’s (friend of Mandy Williamson) mother in law. She was taken by ambulance from Good Shepherd to Mother Francis-Tyler. She is in critical condition with a clot at the base of her brain and many other health issues.

Would you please be in prayer for my parents, whom live in Amarillo? Mom (Leah) is having a total knee replacement this morning at 10. They are already at the hospital for admittance. She worked as an OR nurse for many years, so she knows the procedure really well and is beginning to have panic attacks about the anesthesia and the procedure itself. Please pray for her to be calm, have the peace of the Spirit, and for her doctors and nurses hands to be guide by our Great Physician. She knows to whom she belongs, but she is still a little scared of the pain. I desperately want to be there to help care for them, but am unable due to kiddos and school. Thank you all! ~Ashleah Daugherty

Our son Mike was diagnosed with fatty liver, small cyst on liver, and with kidney stones in both kidneys. An MRI is pending to determine treatment. He and his family live in Argyle. Continue to pray for Dan. Infectious disease doctor has given us no results on her tests. Hope we will get info on Monday when we see her. In the meantime the podiatrist says the gangrenous toe will hold another week or so. Pain is being better controlled now than before. Open wounds on legs slowly healing. We miss not being in church. Love to all. ~Lois Templin Our son Mike was diagnosed with fatty liver, small cyst on liver, and with kidney stones in both kidneys. An MRI is pending to determine treatment. He and his family live in Argyle. Continue to pray for Dan. Infectious disease doctor has given us no results on her tests. Hope we will get infowhen we see her. In the meantime the podiatrist says the gangrenous toe will hold another week or so. Pain is being better controlled now than before. Open wounds on legs slowly healing. We miss not being in church. Love to all. ~Lois Templin

Please be praying for the owner of my place of employment, whose name is Laura Kinsel. She has had health problems for quite some time now. Her heart and kidneys are trying to shut down now, and the heart was damaged last night, so that if she pulls through this, she will have a whole new set of problems to deal with, but at this time the prognosis is at best days, at worst hours. Please also pray for my boss, Bill Lane. He wants to go see her, but he doesn’t deal well with seeing people who are struggling for life when they are someone with whom he has had a close relationship for a long time. Thanks for praying, and I will send along updates as they happen. ~John Zenter

01/24/17

Please pray for Sam Wedgeworth. He was just airlifted after a very bad car accident . No details other than it is very serious. He is active in the Marines also.

Please pray for my cousin Judy, she had a massive stroke yesterday. Her son and I stayed last night with her in the nursing home. Please remember James, her son, as he goes thru this sad time. Some of you may remember Judy’s mother, Joanna Bryant who passed away a few years ago. Thank you all in advance for prayers, Vivian Roland

My niece Kodi lost several frequency levels of hearing due to chemo affects several years ago. Over time, the hearing loss has worsened, and the hearing aides that she had were no longer effective. She was able to receive new hearing aids, that cannot be seen (unless really trying to see them) and they are working beautifully! She was able to hear the ding on the microwave, and the turn blinker in the car. She is also very excited because they cannot be seen, and for a girl in Jr. High that’s a big deal! She will go through her last 2 rounds of chemo/antibody treatment, and the doctors are currently trying to plan what to do when that is complete. (Around April) This treatment is all still very new and they are trying to come up with the most effective treatment plan possible. Please pray that God will guide the doctors to the right treatment at the right time…His time! Thank you for continuing to pray for her! ~Christy Mayfield

Requesting prayer for my brother-in-law, Jeff Dykes. He’s 54, and was just diagnosed with stage four cancer. A cat scan showed tumors in his brain. There are also spots on his lungs and liver. The outlook does not look good, but we serve a mighty God and our family is praying for God to heal him, if it be His will. Thank you for your prayers. –Pam Dykes

01/22/17

Jim Albritton is at Northpark ER. They have ruled out a stroke or heart attack. May have been medicine and dehydration.

Charlie Hunt is at 5L of HiFlo, might go to regular oxygen today. Talking about moving him to a less critical floor. His strength is returning.

Welcome to the world little Mollie Wooley. Brandy and baby are doing good. More details soon.

01/20/17

Please pray for Charlie Hunt. He has had a setback and is having to go back on CPAP.

01/19/17

Good morning. I would like to request prayer for Corey. I don’t know what is going on but as a mother, I can tell something is not right. Thank you for your prayers. ~Ora Williams

My friend’s adult son disappeared several days ago. This is out of character for him. ~Judy Arroyo

01/18/17

Pray for Lois Graham. She has a problem with one of her eyes that she had surgery on. Going to the doctor on Thursday. Bless everyone.

Peggy Worsham is out of surgery and did well. It was more extensive than they first thought, so she will be in the hospital 2-3 days in Dallas.

Emme is out of surgery and into a room. Surgery was very successful. Continue to pray for her recovery.

Charlie is in a room and had a good night. Pray for his continued recovery.

Please pray for Sandy Sanders, he is currently in surgery at GSMC. He should be out of surgery soon and go home today.

Please be in prayer for the family of Tim Jones – this is my coworker Juanita Hampton’s brother, for whom I have requested prayer many times in the last years. Tim went home to be with the Lord last night after a prolonged and valiant fight against diabetes, liver problems, and several other major health issues. Juanita sent a text this morning, and the last thing she said is “He is at peace now.” Please also pray for Juanita, that God will refresh and restore her physically, emotionally, and spiritually – she was Tim’s primary care giver for the last several years of his life, and has been totally exhausted and depleted for a while now. ~John Zenter

Please keep Cynthia Daniels and family in your prayers.

01/17/16

Peggy Worsham’s surgery is more extensive that first thought. The doctor looked at today’s MRI. Surgery will be Wednesday at Baylor Hospital on Lemmon Ave in Dallas.

Mozelle Strain had surgery last night at Good Shepherd. She did fine thru the surgery.

Charlie was moved to the PICU (at Texas Children’s) during the night. Last night he seemed to be working harder than usual to breathe, even with being on the high flow oxygen. They’ve put him on a CPAP to help keep his lungs open a little bit more when he’s breathing. They are going to observe him for today and decide what the next step will be. He’s on day 4 of RSV. His fever has not spiked anymore and that’s a good thing. Thanks for praying…

Also remember…

Emme will have surgery early Wed. morning at Children’s Hospital in Dallas. This is major, so please pray…

Peggy Worsham will have back surgery early Wednesday morning at Methodist Hospital in Plano. Pray for her and family.

01/15/17

Charlie Hunt tested positive for RSV and has been admitted to Texas Children’s in Houston. His oxygen level keeps fluctuating. They may have to put him on oxygen.

01/14/17

Please pray for Charlie Hunt. His fever has been 103 and not able to keep anything down or drink much. They are at Texas Children’s Hospital in Houston.

Please keep Charlie in your prayers. He has had fever today and not drinking much. They are visiting family down in Houston while I am at dnow so this is taking a toll on Ashley and Charlie. Pray for quick healing. ~Jason Hunt

01/13/17

I have a very special friend who is sick and needs prayer. He helps care for his father, who is also not well. Please pray that he will be better soon, so he can go to work Monday. Thank you. ~Ora Williams

Praise the Lord! Kenya pastor Samuel Rama’s daughter Gloria received the blood she needed today! Samuel a little while ago sent messages and photos. Her life has been spared! Samuel says, “Thank God for prayers of the people. May the Lord bless them. Am feeling free in my life. Gloria’s strength is coming even though she is sleep but I can see change. Praise the Lord.”

01/12/17

Please continue to pray for Punky’s son (50 years old). He is now on the transplant list for a liver. Pray that they find a match.

Larry Ward requests prayer for his brother Jim’s wife, Jeannie Ward. Spots have been found on her lung and pancreas, highly suspicious for cancer. She is caring for Larry’s brother, who is fairly stable with the effects brain cancer and the treatment, so there is concern about their care if she is sick. They do belong to a loving, very helpful church in Houston.

01/11/17

Pray for Sally Hudson and Barbie Baker. Sally had a rough night and is in great pain. Barbie is there taking care of her.

Pray for Dan & Lois Templin. Dan is in Good Shepherd, Longview. May have to amputate his toe or part of it. Lois has pneumonia and is home.

Please pray for another auto wreck victim. Just received a post from a friend. LPD responded to a second fatal crash on Gilmer Road, this time involving a motorcycle that crashed with a car. Motorcyclist died of massive head injuries.

When I came around Loop 281 and tried to turn onto Hiway 80 about 7:50 am this morning, the turn lane had been blocked, and there were about six LPD units on the westbound side of 80 west of the intersection, and the westbound side was completely blocked off for about two blocks west of that. I made the jog with other traffic to get past that, and when I got up to 80 again and looked to my left, there was a sheet covering up something (apparently a fatality) from the wreck that caused the street to be blocked. Please pray for all the folks involved in the wreck, and especially for the family with one member who won’t be returning home today. ~John Zenter

01/10/17

Six year old Gloria is feeling somewhat better, praise the Lord. BUT her lab work that her father sent shows that she doesn’t have anywhere near enough red blood cells. Nursing experience tells me people need transfusions at much higher levels than this child has right now. Dropping a little more could have her life in danger.She still has infection, too, even though no longer having high fever. Last time she was so sick she had transfusions. Putting her in much more danger, Kenya’s government doctors, most of the healthcare system, have been on strike for over a month! Lab work was done at a school. I don’t know yet if they can treat her or not. Money for care can be a problem, too.

01/09/16

Please pray for Von Schalttel’s coworker, Mark Horner. He works for FlyntHills and had to be taken by ambulance today with his blood pressure dropping and very weak pulse. He doesn’t have much family around the area as well so please keep him in your prayers.

Our Kenya brother Pastor Samuel Rama’s precious daughter, Gloria, about 8 years old, is again very sick with sickle cell disease. He asks us to pray for her, is very grateful, and is trusting the Lord with all his heart. He didn’t say this time, but surely part of the need is financial, for adequate treatment.

Please pray for the Templins. Dan is ER at Good Shepherd at present. The doctor he saw this morning does not agree with pyoderma gangrenosus diagnosis. He believes It is a vascular problem. About to lose big toe on left foot. Also I can’t be with him because I was diagnosed with strep and pneumonia this weekend. Lois Templin

Please pray for Paulette and especially her daughter. Paulette’s daughter is 12 and was raped over the weekend. Paulette and her husband were one of the couples who accepted Christ in Haiti. They have gone to police but the police there are not very helpful. The guy took off and they can’t find him. Pray also for Alex as she continues to minister to them. Thank you, Denise Please pray for Paulette and especially her daughter. Paulette’s daughter is 12 and was raped over the weekend. Paulette and her husband were one of the couples who accepted Christ in Haiti. They have gone to police but the police there are not very helpful. The guy took off and they can’t find him. Pray also for Alex as she continues to minister to them. Thank you, Denise

I want to thank all of you who prayed for my boys’ dad. He was dismissed from the hospital yesterday. Also, if you remember my prayer request for a couple who was hit by a car leaving a football game last fall, every few weeks they send word for me to thank you for the prayers. Jim is fine and Diane is finally out of the wheel chair and in a walker and doing much better. She has a long way to go, but God is healing her and they realize that. Thank you for the prayers for these two also. Gracie

01/08/17

Please continue to pray for my best friend’s husband Don Thrash in Ruston, LA. He is taking chemo and radiation for lung cancer. The largest spot has shrunk some, but they won’t know until a pet scan is done in April if the treatment has done its job. They are so appreciative of your prayers and I also am so appreciative and thankful for your prayer and support. It is so wonderful to be here in church with all of you. Thanks, Janelle Brown

01/07/17

Pray for The Whisnants. As I write this they are stuck in Birmingham, Alabama and have been for 12 hours. They will be arriving late into the night for the service in the morning. Pray for their safety as they travel.

01/06/17

I just received a call from my oldest son asking for prayer for His Dad. He is in Longview Regional with serious health issues. An artery in his leg had about a five inch blockage and the surgeon was able to repair/open up that artery to give blood flow to his legs. His legs and feet appear to have blood flowing at this time. Thank you so much for praying, as both Buddy and I will be praying, for Jimmy Pleasant, the Dad of my four boys.

Also, We have a huge praise. We have been praying for some time for a family situation to be resolved and I was told this evening that those fences are being mended. PRAISE GOD, I am so happy that we have an awesome God who answers prayer.

Thank you, prayer warriors, for your dedication to the task of being a “prayer warrior”. God bless you all. Gracie and Buddy

Latest Update on Sally: From Barbie Baker on her daughter Sally…

Had to send this so I could copy it! Alright, I’ll try to let y’all know what’s going on. She tolerated surgery well. They removed all of the distressed/diseased area of her colon. Removed a mass, but not sure where that was or the size. One spot looked suspicious, so they biopsied that and we’ll hear back on Tuesday or Wednesday. She should be coming to the room any minute. We are now in #7740. Don’t expect her to be very awake this afternoon. Thanks for all the prayers. We have felt them in a mighty way! Love all of you.

Update on Sally: They came early! She is back in the surgery area already! Don’t worry. She’s in God’s hands and good hands! Please pass it on. I’ll keep you posted as I can. Sometimes things in the room are just happening in rapid succession! Stand in the gap for us! Thanks for all you do! Love you, Barbie Baker

Please keep Connie Silva and family in your prayers. Her father passed away this morning

Help and pray for me in my the fight against false doctrine who does not confess Jesus blood in salvation, but use own victim to save a lot place of Scandinavian. Thanks for helping. Bless, Keijo Sweden

01/05/17

Sally just saw a surgeon and surgery is set for tomorrow! They are thankful to the Lord! Pray!

Sally had colonoscopy this morning. The doctor couldn’t see all that he needed to, but he saw enough to realize her condition is very, very serious. They ordered blood tests, did a biopsy and a frozen section. She needs to see another surgeon quickly and have some surgery to see exactly what’s going on. Please pray for just the right doctor and the answers we still need! Thanks, Barbie Baker

Daniel Golden will have a procedure done in Tyler at noon tomorrow and then again two weeks from now at 8:00am. Please keep him in your prayers.

01/04/17

Please be in prayer for Good Shepherd employees. We were presented with an offer and need to make a very difficult decision soon. Please pray for godly wisdom for each of us as we consider our options. I have many friends within the company who are undecided. Thank you! – Misty

01/03/17

Please pray for my beloved son-in-law Tony Azzam, admitted a little while ago Longview Regional with chest pain and abnormal EKG. My daughter, Melissa, and RN, said the admission is mostly precautionary, Tony feels good. ~Judy Arroyo

01/02/17

Barbie Baker asks you to pray for Sally. She’s in extreme pain in the hospital and waiting to see a gastroenterologist tomorrow. Thank you for praying!