Ebooks Apple Settlement > mainpage > Home
This is the official website for State Attorneys General and Class Counsel Apple E-books Settlement. On this website you can find details about the Settlement and your options. A federal court has approved the notices and forms on this site, and the Claims Administrator who runs the site operates under the supervision of the State Attorneys General and Class Counsel.

The Court granted final approval of the Apple E-book Settlement on November 21, 2014. Credits from the first Apple distribution were emailed to eligible customers starting on June 21, 2016, and concluded on June 23, 2016. Postcard checks from the first distribution mailed on June 23, 2016. Please note that the deadline to use your credit or cash your check from the first Apple distribution has passed.

The court approved a re-distribution of remaining funds from the Apple Settlement on September 7, 2017 to customers that used their credit or cashed their check from the first Apple distribution that concluded in June of 2017. Credits to customers that were eligible for a re-distribution were emailed on October 18, 2017. Postcard checks were mailed to eligible customers on October 18, 2017. Per the court approved order, checks for an amount less than or equal to $3.00 have not been and will not be issued. If you did not use your credit or cash your check from the first distribution that concluded in June 2017, you were not eligible to receive a credit or check from the most recent re-distribution.

** Please note that if you were eligible to receive a credit or check from the court approved re-distribution, you must use your credit or cash your check on or before April 20, 2018.

If you received a check from the re-distribution, and need it reissued due to a name change, or have any other check specific questions, please email the Settlement Administrator at info@ebooklawsuits.com. Please note that any check reissue requests must be submitted to the Settlement Administrator by March 1, 2018 in order to be reissued. Any reissue request submitted after March 1, 2018 will not be honored.

For a summary of the lawsuits and settlement, click HERE. For more detailed information and answers to frequently asked questions, click HERE. Other information and important documents are available using the navigation bar on the left of your screen.

To update your contact information for any future settlement notices or credits, click HERE.