Justine Damond shooting: Australian woman remembered at Sydney beach vigil

Updated

A vigil has been held in Sydney to remember Sydney woman Justine Damond, who was shot and killed by a police officer in the United States.

About 300 family members and friends of Ms Damond gathered at Freshwater Beach this morning to "honour, love and respect" the life of an "extraordinarily kind, funny, smart and loving woman".

Candles were lit in silence before the haunting sounds of a gong and a digeridoo rang out as the sun rose.

At 7:00am flowers were released into the ocean as people stood arm in arm at the water's edge.

Ms Damond, 40, was shot and killed by police officer Mohamed Noor in the US city of Minneapolis over the weekend after she called 911 to report an assault near her home.

It has since been revealed that the responding officers did not have their body cameras on at the time and the dashboard cam in the police car was not activated.

An investigation is underway in the US with the death being treated as a homicide.

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said the Federal Government is seeking answers about the "inexplicable" shooting of Ms Damond.

Speaking on Channel 9's Today Show on Wednesday morning, Mr Turnbull said something "clearly went tragically wrong".

"How can a woman out in the street in her pyjamas seeking assistance from the police be shot like that?" he said.

"It is a shocking killing.

"Yes, we are demanding answers on behalf of her family and our hearts go out to her family and all of her friends and loved ones."

On Tuesday night, Minnesota senator Al Franken tweeted: "The death of Justine Damond is an inexplicable tragedy.

"Any loss of innocent life in our communities is devastating. We need a swift, thorough investigation to get to the bottom of what happened."

Her family say they want justice for Ms Damond, who was a vet and yoga instructor. She moved to the US in 2015 and was engaged to businessman Don Damond.

Topics: law-crime-and-justice, police, harbord-2096

First posted