About Us
The American College of Pediatricians (ACPeds) is a national organization of pediatricians and other healthcare professionals dedicated to the health and well-being of children. Formed in 2002, the College is committed to fulfilling its mission by producing sound policy, based upon the best available research, to assist parents and to influence society in the endeavor of childrearing. Membership is open to qualifying healthcare professionals who share the College’s Mission, Vision and Values. The College currently has members in 47 states, and several countries outside of the US. The College is a not-for-profit corporation organized for scientific and educational purposes, exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. The home office is in Gainesville, Florida and the office telephone number is 352-376-1877.

Mission of the College

The Mission of the American College of Pediatricians is to enable all children to reach their optimal physical and emotional health and well-being. To this end, we recognize the basic father-mother family unit, within the context of marriage, to be the optimal setting for childhood development, but pledge our support to all children, regardless of their circumstances.

Vision of the College

The American College of Pediatricians promotes a society where all children, from the moment of their conception, are valued unselfishly. We encourage mothers, fathers and families to advance the needs of their children above their own. We expect societal forces to support the two-parent, father-mother family unit and provide for children role models of ethical character and responsible behavior.

Core Values of the College

The American College of Pediatricians:

Recognizes that there are absolutes and scientific truths that transcend relative social considerations of the day. Recognizes that good medical science cannot exist in a moral vacuum and pledges to promote such science. Recognizes the fundamental mother-father family unit, within the context of marriage, to be the optimal setting for the development and nurturing of children and pledges to promote this unit. Recognizes the unique value of every human life from the time of conception to natural death and pledges to promote research and clinical practice that provides for the healthiest outcome of the child from conception to adulthood. Recognizes the essential role parents play in encouraging and correcting the child and pledges to protect and promote this role. Recognizes the physical and emotional benefits of sexual abstinence until marriage and pledges to promote this behavior as the ideal for adolescence. Recognizes that health professionals caring for children must maintain high ethical and scientific standards and pledges to promote such practice. Recognizes the vital role the College has in promoting quality education for parents, physicians, and other health professionals.

Objectives of the College

The Objectives of the College are:

To foster and stimulate improvements in all aspects of healthcare of infants, children, and adolescents;

To promote the basic father-mother family unit as the optimal setting for childhood development, while pledging to support all children, regardless of their circumstances;

To affirm that parents have the inalienable right and responsibility to educate and rear their children;

To advocate for children at all stages of development, from conception to young adulthood;

To cultivate and encourage parental responsibility for and involvement in the child’s life;

To engender the honest interpretation of scientific pediatric research, without deference to current political persuasions;

To promote the highest standards of medical practice among its Members and within the field of pediatrics;

To encourage and support sound, ethical scientific research in all aspects of healthcare for infants, children, and adolescents; and

To cooperate with other organizations having similar purposes and standards.

History

The American College of Pediatricians is a national organization of pediatricians and other healthcare professionals dedicated to the health and well-being of children. It was founded by a group of concerned physicians who saw the need for a pediatric organization that would not be influenced by the politically driven pronouncements of the day. The College bases its policies and positions upon scientific truth within a framework of ethical absolutes. Of particular importance to the founders were (as it is today) the sanctity of human life from conception to natural death and the importance of the fundamental mother-father family (female-male) unit in the rearing of children. The first official meeting of the newly formed college was held in Boston in October 2002. Since its inception, it has grown to have membership representation across the U.S. and in several other countries. The College’s home office is in Gainesville, Florida.

College Board of Directors Meeting September 2017. Photo above.

L to R back row: Scott Field, Randolph Matthews, Carl Pfanstiel, David Olson, Randolph Matthews, Michael Garver, Quentin Van Meter, Michelle Cretella, Joe Zanga, David Olson, Tom Benton.

L to R middle row: Brittney Cooper, Rebecca Huizen, Jane Anderson, Lisa Hawkins, Den Trumbull, Michael Artigues.

Front row: Patricia Lee June

The Executive Committee and Board of Directors

Executive Director: Michelle Cretella, MD, FCP

President: Quentin Van Meter, MD, FCP

Secretary: Patricia Lee June, MD, FCP

Treasurer: Randolph Matthews, MD, FCP

Past-President: Den Trumbull, MD, FCP

Board of Directors

Jane Anderson, MD, FCP

Tom Benton, MD, MPH, FCP

Scott Field, MD, FCP

Michael Garver, MD, FCP, FAAP

Donald Hagler, MD, FCP

Michael Artigues, MD, FCP

David Olson, MD, FCP, FAAP

Carl Pfanstiel, Jr., MD, FCP

Bill Shaw, MD, FCP

Nick Yates, MD, FCP, FAAP

Directors, Emeritus

Eugene Diamond, MD, FCP

Joseph Zanga, MD, FCP, FAAP

Felipe Vizcarrondo, MD, FCP, FAAP

Phillip Kaleida, MD, FCP, FAAP

Consultant

Christopher Ferrara, Esq.