Hurricane Irma: Disney closing Sunday, Monday; Universal, SeaWorld, Lego Land shut down
Walt Disney World in Orlando is closing Sunday and Monday (Sept. 10-11) in response to the threat from Hurricane Irma.

Reports hotels will remain open and Disney said it hopes to resume normal operations on Tuesday, Sept. 12.

The closures mark the fifth time the theme park has shut down since the park opened in 1971. Each of the closures was due to an impending hurricane, with the most recent being last October for the threat of Hurricane Matthew.

Hurricane Irma is expected to hit south Florida on Sunday as a strong category 4 storm before making its way up the peninsula. Evacuation orders have been issued for Key West and parts of the southern coast.

Water parks Typhoon Lagoon will close Saturday at 5 p.m. and will remain shut down on Sunday and Monday. Blizzard Beach, which was closed Friday, also will be unavailable Sunday and Monday.

Most of Disney's parks will close at 7 p.m. on Saturday; the Magic Kingdom and Epcot will remain open until 9 p.m. but the Happily Ever After fireworks performance is canceled. Several special events, including Saturday's Night of Joy Concert and Mickey's Not So Scary Halloween party on Sunday, have been canceled.

Storm preparations are currently underway at the parks.

"The spires of Cinderella's Castle at Disney's Magic Kingdom are being removed in preparation for Hurricane Irma, ... https://t.co/cv3VsWKApl pic.twitter.com/1BsQib1pLt -- Lori Miggins (@lorimiggins) September 8, 2017

According to DisneyLists, Cinderella's Castle, one of the park's most recognizable structures, is built to withstand winds of over 110 mph. Irma currently has maximum sustained winds of 155 mph.

Universal Studios, other parks closing

Universal Studios, also in Orlando, will close at 7 p.m. Saturday and will remain close Sunday and Monday. Universal said it plans to resume normal operating hours on Sept. 12.

SeaWorld is closing at 5 p.m. Saturday and will remain closed Sunday and Monday. All animals at the facility will be cared for during the storm, officials said.

"We have comprehensive weather preparedness plans, and security and zoological staff will remain on property in secure locations as we monitor the storm. We're also providing support and temporary housing for animals from other zoological facilities in coastal areas expected to have greater impact," SeaWorld's website announced.

LegoLand's Florida Theme Park and Water Park will be closed Saturday through Monday.

Those planning trips to each of the parks were advised to check their respective websites for refund and rescheduling information.