The Way Things Aren't: Rush Limbaugh's Reign of Error : Over 100 Outrageously False and Foolish Statements from America's Most Powerful Radio and TV: FAIR: 9781565842601: Amazon.com: Books
This book by Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR), the outstanding media watchdog group, was published in 1995, after FAIR had published a report in June 1994 documenting Limbaugh's quackery to which Limbaugh responded with venom but with little substance. FAIR printed their rebuttal to Limbaugh's response to their original report at the end of this book. This book might seem rather dated; they have gathered a few more juicy things about Limbaugh since it was published, available on their web site, especially about his antics during the budget battles of 95-96' but I don't think they have kept track of him as much.

But on the whole, the documentation is excellent and the discussion of all aspects of Limbaugh--his power in the media and on capitol hill, messiah complex, racism, sexism, context of his rise to fame,etc.--as well as the prospects for developing alternatives to the center-right corporate and "public" television and radio is excellent. FAIR, though not in this book, has also been harshly critical of Bill Clinton and the Democrats.

Here are some examples that they present of the more than "one hundred outrageously false and foolish statements from America's most powerful radio and TV commentator."

The quote Limbaugh as saying in "The Way Things Ought to Be" that construction of public housing "actually increased during the Reagan years." The quote sthe Statistical Abstract of the U.S. which shows that there were almost twenty one thousand low income housing units under construction in 1980 but in 1988 there were only 9,700. They quote HUD figures which show that the money for construction of new housing was slashed from $3.7 billion in 1980 to $573 million in 1988.

They quote Limbaugh as saying in "The Way Things Out To Be" that there was no increase in the gap between the rich and the poor during the eighties and that "Figures compiled by the Cogressional Budget Office dispel that myth." FAIR says that CBO numbers actually show that in 1980 the after tax income of the richest fifth was eight times that of the poorest fifth. "By 1989, the ratio was more than twenty to one."

They quote him as saying on his now defunct TV show as claiming that the TV networks, including the "Today" show were attempting to suppress coverage of a pro-Clarence Thomas book by David Brock and that supporters of Anita Hill were refusing to come on TV to debate Brock. FAIR responded by noting that Brock had appeared a week before Limbaugh made this assertion on the "Today" show debating a Hill lawyer, Charles Ogletree.

The quote him as speaking of the superiority of American health care compared to other industrialized nations in "See I Told You So" and saying that "the health of the American people has never been better," using the measurements of life expectancy and infant mortality. FAIR responded by citing the 1993 CIA World Fact Book as ranking the United States 19th in life expectancy and 20th in infant mortality. They also note that although the United States has the lowest health care satisfaction rate of the ten largest industrialized nations, it spends the most per capita. FAIR quotes Limbaugh as responding to this by saying that those two measures have nothing to do with the quality of health care, though he said exactly the opposite in his original point. He claimed that the high infant mortality was due to low weight teenage births and drug addicted babies and that the relatively low life expectancy was due to big city homicides. FAIR responded by saying that the amount of prenatal care is closely linked to infant mortality and that according the Center For Disease Control, homicides only lower the U.S. life expectancy by three months.

They quote Limbaugh as saying that there were "no indictments" in the Iran-Contra scandal. Limbaugh responded by saying that he "misspoke" and what he meant to say was that there were "no convictions." FAIR responded by saying that he had actually devoted a large part of his TV show on January 19 1994 to arguing that no indictments had occured. There were not only fourteen indictments, but eleven convictions, two later reversed on technicalities, including that of Oliver North.

They quote him on his radio show as saying "It's not happening. That kind of thing isn't happening" with regard to Al Gore's claim in the 1992 debates that the Bush administration was giving tax breaks to U.S. companies to relocate to low-wage "free economic zones" in Central American and the Caribean, through the Private Sector Program of the U.S. Agency for International Development. They note that this was documented by "60 minutes," "Nightline" and the National Labor Committee Education Fund.

They quote Limbaugh as saying that the "democrats have never had any problem with liberal religous people being involved in politics," and thus that they had "no trouble" with Martin Luther King, the Berrigan brothers or Jerry Rubin and Abbie Hoffman "entering the political fray." FAIR notes that wiretapping of MLK was begun by John and Robert Kennedy and that harrassment of him was greatly increased during the Johnson administration. They note that the Berrigan brothers came into prominence by protesting Johnson's Vietnam policies and that Rubin and Hoffman were actually not religous leaders nor leaders of the SDS; they actually led the Yippies who sparked the protests at the 1968 Democratic convention.