The Queen James Bible: 9780615724539: Amazon.com: Books
As a Libertarian, I don't care how other people live their lives, so long as they don't violate the constitutional rights of any citizens. So, if someone wants to change verses in the KJV and make the Bible say whatever they want it to say, that is their right as an American citizen, so long as they don't force their changes on others.



As for the Bible and description given, the information given about the KJV is patently false. Genesis 19, for instance, states that the men of Sodom wanted to know the men staying as quests in the home of Lot. Over 3 decades ago, I heard a speaker on Public Radio state that all the men of Sodom wanted to do was know who the men are who were staying in Lot's home. I knew the speaker was misrepresenting the passage at the time. So, I know the claim made in the description that:



"Homosexuality was first mentioned in the Bible in 1946, in the Revised Standard Version. There is no mention of or reference to homosexuality in any Bible prior to this - only interpretations have been made. Anti-LGBT Bible interpretations commonly cite only eight verses in the Bible that they interpret to mean homosexuality is a sin; Eight verses in a book of thousands!"



is patently false and an attempt to rewrite history.



By claiming falsely that those verses were improperly interpreted and then issuing their own translation, the group responsible for the publication of this translation seem to want rewrite history and then claim that anyone who reads chapters like Genesis 19 in context is in error. Hence:



"The Queen James Bible seeks to resolve interpretive ambiguity in the Bible as it pertains to homosexuality: We edited those eight verses in a way that makes homophobic interpretations impossible."



The group responsible for this translation is actually slandering everyone who holds what is the traditional view for Millennia about these passages.

Apparently, many LGBT really do want to force their ways on anyone and everyone who holds the traditional view. What's next? Making a law against owning a copy of the King James Bible? These are clear violations of the guaranteed constitutional rights of American citizens. By rewriting history a la Orwell's 1984, it is clear that many LGBT want to be able to oppress citizens who hold what was the view universally for millennia!



Why not just say "we disagree with some passages in the Bible and so we are publishing a bible that fits what we truly believe". That would be the honest thing to do.



"Know" in Genesis 19 is a figure of speech. Adam knew Eve. That's how they had children. So, why would Lot ask the men of Sodom not to act wickedly? Why would he offer his two daughters instead? Lot was a judge in Sodom, a magistrate. If a male mob came to an American judge's door and demanded to "know" two male visitors, and the judge in fear offered his daughters instead, that mob would be arrested by the police. Further, the context has Lot attempting to save the male visitors from a male mob. Why try to get the male mob to take his daughters instead? The reason is obvious: They male mob wanted to know the male visitors in the same way Adam knew Eve.



So obviously, some in the LGBT community wants force those who believe these Bible passages to read a bible that does not state God is angry at homosexuals for their practices.



There is a much better way to do things. Why not publish a KJV bible where these verses are bracketed off with marginal notes. An even better way is to write a book using modern biblical scholarship to demonstrate that Moses did not write the Torah.



I think many in the LGBT community, now that they have more rights in Secular America, which is guaranteed to them by the US Constitution and Bill of Rights (which allows Freedom Of Religion and Freedom FROM Religion) now want to take rights away from those Christians who believe those passages in the Bible. They want to do so by forcing the issue and using the Queen James Bible to eliminate any possible interpretation of Bible passages that offends the LGBT community.



Just as violating the constitutional rights of members of the LGBT community is a crime, so is violating the rights of Bible Believing Christians.



This goes to show that some in the LGBT community are just as hateful and selfish as some Bible Believing Christians who want to force their Rule of Law on Americans.



Now, if the publishers of the Queen James translation came clean and said they wanted to publish a KJV Bible with verses showing God as described in the Bible to have no problem with the LGBT community, I wouldn't have bothered to write this review. I would have ignored the product.

However, with the agenda stated in the description so clearly showing they want to force their views on others, I have to complain.



I don't want the LGBT community controlling my life anymore than I want Bible Believing Christians controlling my life. However, under the US Constitution and Bill of Rights, both have the right to freedom of speech, so long as they don't infringe upon the rights of others.



By the way, I am NOT a Bible Believing Christian!