Return to Love: Reflections on the Principles of a Course in Miracles: Marianne Williamson: 8601405342997: Amazon.com: Books
So I am not finished with this book yet (about 70% of the way) but I felt like I needed to write a review today because I got to a point in the book where things started to go a bit sideways.



I was recommended this book by someone, and I think the underlying message of the book is quite powerful. It basically teaches you to let go, focus on your inner light, aka your love, and let the rest happen as it will. I think this does wonders to curb your anxiety, and in a world were we are constantly bombarded with the collective neurosis that we constantly need to be "doing" and "making things happen," this offers a refreshingly saner perspective. It is counter-intuitive at times how, by letting things unfold as they will, we often get the things we so wanted as a by-product of focusing on our own inner light and bringing love to the world around us. This is where the message of this book is powerful.



This book does use Christian theology as the way to explain this process. So it is based a lot on faith and prayer. As an atheist, I was able to overlook this and re-frame some of this as thinking about it in terms of the universe, and allowing the universe to unfold as it will. I don't particularly believe in prayer, but again I was able to overlook this in order to follow the message of the book, which really is about love.



However, things got a bit sideways around Chapter 8. The author makes several claims, without citing any sources or studies:



1. That the pill that the doctor gives us only heals us because we believe it heals us.

2. That holistic medicine is just as effective in treating cancer as traditional medicine, because it is the patient's mental and emotional interaction with his treatment that activates the healing power.

3. That when the cure for AIDs is finally found, we will give prizes to a few scientists, but many of us will know that millions and millions of prayers helped it happen.



Especially the last one made me yell "Bullshit!" so loud that I am pretty sure I woke my neighbors. First of all, the author provides no evidence to back up the exceptional statements she makes. I don't see any studies or sources which can confirm her rather bold statements. As Hitchens said rather succinctly, "Exceptional claims demand exceptional evidence, and that which can be asserted without evidence, can be dismissed without evidence."



In the US especially where anti-scientific attitude is pervasive (see: anti-vaxxers) her words here are actually quite dangerous. I really hope they don't lead people down the wrong path, and that people go to qualified medical professionals for their illnesses rather than try and pray themselves to health.



So the book, which uses primarily Christian theology to explain the idea of love, unfortunately also suffers from the insanity of Christian theology in the belief that prayer can cure something like AIDs.



Has this book overall been helpful to me, personally? I would say yes, it has. There is beauty and positivity in focusing on giving love and paying attention to your inner light. However, I would only recommend this book with a warning clause that some of the statements made by the author suffer from the archaic (and potentially dangerous) thinking that plagues most theologies.



*edit: After finishing the book I still stand by my original review. One thing I wanted to add is that I have been using the “prayers” from the book (I just make them secular) as they seem to be a good way to ease anxiety and emotions when faced with difficult events or thoughts. Coupled with meditation it’s a good way to cope in harder times. The methods in this book are quite good in that regard; reframing your thoughts.