Amazon.com : Tab Soda, 12 oz Can (Pack of 24) : Soda Soft Drinks : Grocery & Gourmet Food
I have been purchasing TAB from this seller for at least four or five years. Several reviewers have posted some inaccurate statements about TAB. It was the first diet drink from the Coca-Cola Company, introduced in the 1960s. Tab was sold for many years before they finally invented Diet Coke, which doesn't taste half as good as Tab. Tab is still made and available all over the United States. The problem is that some Coke bottlers don't have all of the machines needed to can everything, and many have stopped making Tab for their areas.



In California, Tab is everywhere in Los Angeles and nearby areas, but Northern California doesn't make it. I have bought Tab and never had a problem with them. The Tab I bought in the beginning of June doesn't go out of date until the middle of September, longer than Diet Coke, because Tab has a different sweetener than Diet Coke.



The bad thing about diet drinks in general is that they are very sensitive to heat! You have to store it in your home or other cool place. Don't leave it in your garage, anywhere outside or in your car! It doesn't take much time in the heat for the sweetener to dissipate and leave you a can of bad tasting chemicals. If your mailbox is in the sun, go out and get it as soon as you can. One hot day will kill sugar replacements. As far as delivery goes, I have never had a can explode and I have bought a lot of Tab.



Sugar-free drinks can also freeze at a few degrees warmer than regular sugar drinks. If a can freezes in your very cold refrigerator, it can explode.(This is pretty rare but it has happened to me a few times, but I have bought several thousand cans since the 1960s. If you order during the winter and you live in a very cold environment, this can happen. Sugar freezes at much colder temperatures than sugar-free sweetners.

The only other reason a can of Tab can explode if the box is dropped on a corner. You will be able to tell if that happened and you can file a claim with the delivery driver. If he is still there, do it then and show him your box where it is damaged. I bought six 12-packs the other day and the box weighed 66.6 pounds. It pays to have a cart to bring it into the house! Good luck and you should be able to drink Tab for many years without a problem.