Divided Soul: The Life Of Marvin Gaye: David Ritz: 9780306811913: Amazon.com: Books
Marvin fans will definitely appreciate the thoroughness of this book, which is compiled with a myriad of testimonies from friends, family, label mates, and even Marvin himself. This book is very detailed and EXTREMELY honest, unlike some other music biographies (*cough* Temptations *cough*) BUT...it may shatter your sweet, pristine image of the "Prince of Soul." I had fallen in love with Marvin the singer, the swooner, the seeming romantic, so I wanted to know more about him. And I must admit...that though I appreciated the candidacy of this book, I wasn't quite ready to be introduced to the "other" side of Marvin. Beyond the smooth voice, the sensual lyrics, and the gorgeous face...there was the highly disturbed, contradicting, paranoid, coke addicted, sexist, abusive, mentally unstable, emotionally tortured, self-destructive, incredibly insecure...Marvin Paige Gaye. Oh, and other aspects to this very disconsolate character that I won't touch on. I cry for Marvin because he never conquered his inner demons. He never sought the professional help that he so desperately needed. He continued on his reign of self-sabotaging terror until, I'm sad to say it, his very predictable demise. It hurt to read about such a tragic life. And it hurt me even more to read about his death in, finally in raw detail, by the man who never showed him any affection or support in all of his life: his father. But it was all foreshadowed, it really was. Such a perilous life was not meant to have a happy ending. As I was reading, I felt myself wanting to jump in the book as if it could take me back to his time to where I could intervene in his life and his self-crippling behaviors. "No Marvin, stop...!" I found myself pleading with him. I shook my head throughout most of the book. This man needed to be saved. But it truly felt like...such a person could not be. He didn't even want to save himself. I don't quite listen to his music the same anymore. Don't get me wrong; I still appreciate all of his music and I greatly respect and adore his talent. Marvin (along with The Temptations) are my favorite male singers. But now that I know the story behind the music...I'm not so much swooned by Marvin the "heart throb." I just feel sorry for Marvin the tortured artist. In every song, through every word, gliding on every melody... I feel the tragedy he was living while creating it decades ago.



By the end of the book, I found myself most upset at his family. I feel like his mother could have done more to save her son years before the final showdown between Marvin Senior and Junior. Like...not waiting to divorce him AFTER her twisted husband killed him. Again, I really feel like all of this was foreshadowed. Why didn't anyone intervene? I wonder why no one sought professional help for Marvin during the final years of his life at home when he was alone with his drugs and extreme paranoia. It was suggested that Marvin could've perhaps had schizophrenia. Whatever he had, his decaying and finally his destroyed mental state was evident, but it was IGNORED. His mother tried to pray it away. Ummm...no. I'm a praying woman myself, but there are some things you DO need additional help and resources for. If Marvin was my family member, I would've had him FORCED into a hospital kicking and screaming to receive the treatment and services that he obviously needed. How anyone could keep a drug addict, obviously mentally incapacitated man just chillin' in their home is BEYOND me... I see that 2 of Marvin's siblings have wrote their own memoirs revolving around Marvin. That is something that I definitely have to check out for further answers and clarification...



This book is literally an experience that you have to undergo for yourself to really understand this complicated man and his complicated, and disturbing, life. I can only pray that Marvin has finally found the peace he could never find on earth. Rest easy, prince. I still love you. XOXOXOXO