Amazon.com Help
What are the settlements?

Apple, Inc. (“Apple”) settled several antitrust lawsuits about eBook prices that were brought against Apple by a coalition of state Attorneys General, and by a Plaintiff Class. Amazon was not a party to these lawsuits. Under the settlements, Apple provided funds for credits that were applied directly to Amazon accounts of eligible customers in June 2016. The account credit appeared automatically and could be used to purchase eligible products sold through Amazon.com, an Amazon device or an Amazon app. For additional information, please visit www.EbookLawsuits.com.

Who was eligible for the settlement credit?

If you received an email from Amazon in June 2016 about the settlement credit, you were eligible for the credit and it was applied automatically to your Amazon account. To be eligible, you must have had a U.S. billing address and must have purchased a Kindle book published by Hachette, HarperCollins, Simon & Schuster, Penguin or Macmillan between 4/1/10 and 5/21/12. Customers who returned these books or were refunded their money did not qualify. For additional information, please visit www.EbookLawsuits.com.

Didn’t I already receive a credit?

Previously, you might have received a credit funded by publishers Hachette, HarperCollins, Simon & Schuster, Macmillan and Penguin. Credits distributed in June 2016 are from a separate settlement between Apple and a coalition of state Attorneys General, and by a Plaintiff Class.

I think I'm entitled to a credit but I didn't receive an email. How do I check?

We sent emails to eligible customers based on the criteria provided to us by the Attorneys General and Plaintiff Class. All eligible customers will have the settlement credit automatically applied to their accounts. If you have questions about the criteria, please visit www.EbookLawsuits.com. If you think you made a qualifying purchase but did not receive an email from Amazon, please contact Amazon Customer Service using the Contact Us button on the left side of this page.

When will I receive my credit?

Amazon added settlement credits to the accounts of eligible customers on June 21, 2016. You don't have to do anything to claim your credit. We will automatically apply the credit to your purchase of any item through Amazon.com. The credit applied to your purchase will appear as a gift card in your order summary during checkout and in your account history.

How can I tell if the credit has been applied to my purchase?

We will automatically apply your available credit the next time you purchase any product through Amazon.com, an Amazon device or an Amazon app. The credit applied to your purchase will appear as a gift card in your order summary during checkout and in your account history.

How can I tell how much credit I have left?

You can check your settlement credit balance here.

Will this credit expire?

The settlement credits will be valid through June 24, 2017. After that date, they will expire by order of the court overseeing the settlements.

What if I bought an eligible book but returned it?

We're sorry, but returns are not eligible for this credit.

Who is funding the credits?

Apple is funding these credits.

Can I use this credit for non-book purchases?

Yes, you can apply this credit toward any item purchased through Amazon.com, except Amazon gift cards or certain subscriptions.

Is there anything I cannot use this credit for?

You cannot use this credit to purchase Amazon gift cards or certain subscriptions. Otherwise, you can apply this credit to any item sold through Amazon.com, an Amazon device or an Amazon app.

Did Amazon disclose any of my personal information?

No, Amazon did not and will not disclose any of your personal information. Eligible customers do not need to do anything or give any information to anyone to receive the settlement credit.

What if I bought a qualifying eBook from another retailer?

For more information about other retailers, please visit: www.EbookLawsuits.com.

What is the Settlement ID Number?

The Settlement ID Number is generated by Amazon and included within the legal notice from the Attorneys General and Plaintiff Class, which we included in the email we sent to eligible customers. Eligible customers do not need to do anything with the Settlement ID Number in order to receive the credit.

Where can I read more about the settlements?

For more information, please visit the settlement website: www.EbookLawsuits.com.

How can I access my credit if my Amazon account is closed?

Please contact Amazon Customer Service.

How can I as the executor/beneficiary of an estate access an account credit (Deceased Party)?

Please contact Amazon Customer Service.

Can credits be transferred to another Amazon account?

No, credits cannot be transferred or redeemed for cash.

Can I use the settlement credit toward payment of sales tax?

Yes.

What if I return the item I purchased with my settlement credit?

Amazon will restore your settlement credit to your Amazon account, subject to the same terms and conditions as when it was issued, including that it will expire after June 24, 2017.

I submitted a check request and received notice that a settlement credit was issued. What can I do to receive a check?

Amazon is not able to change how your credit was issued. We attempted to validate all of the check requests submitted but we were not always able to link the Settlement ID Number to a valid Amazon account. In order to reduce the risk of issuing a settlement credit to the wrong account, we issued a settlement credit to the customer‘s Amazon account where we could not validate a check request. We apologize for any inconvenience this may cause and hope you will be able to use your account credit and enjoy the wide variety of Kindle books, print books or other products available from Amazon.