Disney Announces, ‘Princes’, First Film With Openly Gay Characters.
Putting Archer Quotes On James Bond Images? Pure Genius! Read most of these in Sean Connery's voice. "I'm Schorry, I couldn't hear you over the schound of my throbbing..." Hahaha

This Disfigured Kitten Was Abandoned By Everyone. Then A Little Girl Did Something Amazing When a disfigured kitten was abandoned on the streets of Istanbul, Turkey, residents were too put off by her looks to stop and help. Starving and in pain, the entire city had seemingly written her off

If You’re A Star Wars Fan, This Is The Drone You’re Looking For! When I was a child I dreamed about a toy like this. I must have one!

What This Artist Makes From Old Propane Tanks Will Blow Your Mind. OMG I Want One! This artist makes unique Star Wars and fantasy themed wood stoves from scrap and they are Gorgeous!

Things That Look A Lot Like Donald Trump. Donald Trump is an interesting character and the current GOP front-runner, but his distinctive style draws comparisons to many things...

18 Powerful and Inspiring Bill Murray Quotes. Pretty Deep Not only is Bill Murray a hilarious actor and all-around good guy, it turns out that he's also a bit of a modern day philosopher - as the quotes

Nobody Really Cares About Your Stick Figure Family. I always like it when a trend starts and grows and then spawns an equally large trend for the express purpose of announcing to the world that you don't

Just About Everything Can Kill You, If You Try Hard Enough! Who would think that too much calcium could kill you. Flip Flops too? I am definitely dying early!

Struggles That The Kids Of Today Will Never Experience. This makes me feel nostalgic for a simpler time, a time when music was sold on discs called CDs and computer mice had balls!

Bored In The Office? Try Playing “Desktop Safari”. The rules are simple, just capture your co-worker faces when they aligned with wild animal bodies.

Elderly Man Caught Hiding Prostitute Under His Bed, Evicted From Nursing Home. A man in his 70's living in in an assisted living home has been evicted out after officials found a prostitute hiding under his bed. Authorities say that the

20 Amazing Examples Of Stoner Food. Delicious! Curing a case of the munchies may, at times, require extraordinary ingenuity and the ability to think outside of the box.

The Chinese Names For Animals Are Surprisingly Accurate! LOL Behold the Chinese words for animals translated literally into English. LOL

These Are Some Of The World’s Biggest Records And They Will Blow Your Mind. From the largest schnoz to largest rear-end, these world records will blow your mind.

It Is Perfectly OK Not To Want Children, Right? Sure Seems Reasonable To Me. Why is it so hard for people to accept that you don't want kids? The next time a pushy relative won't take no for an answer, show them this.

Muscle-Bound Behemoth Arm Wrestles A Selfie-Taking Geek. What Do You Expect? Everyone expects the big guy do handily win the contest... Wrong.

These Amazing Shelter Dog Transformations Will Warm Your Heart! There are all kinds of sad stories on the web about animals and cruelty, it is nice to see some positive stories about shelter animals.