Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation
WHAT IS THE ALASKA PERMANENT FUND?

A dedicated fund owned by the State of Alaska

In 1976, as the Alaska pipeline construction neared completion, Alaska voters approved a constitutional amendment to establish a dedicated fund: the Alaska Permanent Fund.

Created by a constitutional amendment

Alaska Constitution Article IX, Section 15

Section 15. Alaska Permanent Fund.

At least twenty-five percent of all mineral lease rentals, royalties, royalty sale proceeds, federal mineral revenue sharing payments and bonuses received by the State shall be placed in a permanent fund, the principal of which shall be used only for those income-producing investments specifically designated by law as eligible for permanent fund investments. All income from the permanent fund shall be deposited in the general fund unless otherwise provided by law.

Comprised of income-producing investments

The Fund is invested in a diversified portfolio of public and private asset classes. All investments, whether in Alaska or around the world, must be expected to produce income with an acceptable level of risk. The Fund is not invested in projects that are primarily focused on economic or social development.

Used for both savings and spending

The entire Fund is managed as a single investment pool, and is invested in a range of assets including stocks, bonds and real estate. However, for accounting purposes it is divided into two parts: principal (the non-spendable funds) and the earnings reserve (assigned funds). The Alaska Constitution says that the principal may not be spent. The earnings in the earnings reserve may be spent by the Legislature for any public purpose, including the Permanent Fund Dividend distribution. The earnings reserve contains both realized earnings from all of the investments, and unrealized gains on assets in the portion of the Fund that is accounted for in the earnings reserve.

What are realized earnings? Realized earnings are the income from bond interest, real estate rent payments and stock dividends as well as the net gain (or loss) from the sale of an investment that has changed in value.

Of the spending that has occurred from the Fund, most of it has been for dividends to qualified Alaska residents. The Permanent Fund Dividend Division (a separate entity from the APFC) operates the PFD program, which the Legislature established in 1980.

Managed by a state-owned corporation

In 1980, the Legislature established the Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation to manage Fund investments.

30th Anniversary Video

Click here to view flash video

install flash video player