All about the Barack Hussein Obama Muslim connection to Common Core
In the last few years we have seen a movement in our country to nationalize our educational system, to implement Common Core in all schools. Inside the schools, the most drastic change has been an overwhelming influence of Islam and Sharia law. Education publishing giant, Pearson, whose biggest investor is the Libyan Investment Authority, is a major supplier of Islam-oriented text books for American schools. As is the nation of Qatar.

Pearson owners are deeply involved in the Muslim Brotherhood and linked to CAIR. “Muslim Brotherhood documents seized by the FBI and presented at the Holy Land Foundation Trial in Texas revealed a plan by the Muslim Brotherhood and their subsidiary organizations like CAIR to penetrate and indoctrinate American K-12 students.”

Freedom Post In 2008, seven members of an Islamic charity known as the Holy Land Foundation were convicted by a Richardson, TX, jury of violating a 1977 law known as the International Emergency Economic Powers Act through money laundering activities on behalf of the Muslim Brotherhood.

An Explanatory Memorandum on the General Strategic Goal for the Group in North America“ Dar Al-Hijrah A key prosecution exhibit was an 18-page document entitled,by Mohamed Akram, one of 300 unindicted co-conspirators in the case. The memo was seized from the home of Ismael Elbarasse, a founder of themosque in Falls Church, Virginia, during a 2004 search coordinated by the FBI’s Washington office. Elbarasse was a member of the Palestine Committee, a front group created by the Muslim Brotherhood (Ikhwan) to garner public support for Hamas within the U.S.

Akram’s memo recommends penetrating America’s schools and indoctrinating American K-12 students with the goal of “eliminating and destroying the Western civilization from within and ‘sabotaging’ its miserable house by their hands … so that … God’s religion [Islam] is made victorious over all other religions.” Examples of pro-Islamic bias can be seen in the “Whose Jerusalem” assignment, which sides with Hamas while fostering hatred of the US and Israel.

According to Ken Mercer, a member of the Texas Board of Education who has seen the Advance Placement US History (APUSH) that parents and members of the general public aren’t allow to view, there is no mention of Hitler or the Holocaust. Pivotal battles of World War II, including Pearl Harbor, Midway, and the Normandy invasion have been airbrushed out of the history texts, along with any mention of Ben Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Rosa Parks.

The Islamic and other groups influencing American education, to its detriment, use the one tool that is in abundance for them: money. A nearly $50 million grant from a Qatar Foundation International board member to fund the education-reform group domestic terrors Bill Ayers and Obama co-chaired in Chicago was given to Ayers to promote their views and lead American children away from objective evaluation of actual historical events, replacing them with destructive propaganda.

In addition to Obama, Bill Ayers enlists others to his cause. Vartan Gregorian, former president of Carnegie Corp’s charitable foundation, was appointed by President Obama to the White House Fellowships committee in 2009. In 2011, the Qatar Foundation International partnered with the Department of State and the US Dept. of Education for the “Connect All Schools” project to link classrooms worldwide, with the goal of connecting all schools by 2016.

President Obama announced his ambitious plan in a June 2009 speech in Cairo, with the Muslim Brotherhood seated in the front row. The vicious Yusuf al-Qaradawi, who gave the killing of American troops in Iraq his blessing, has attended numerous events sponsored by QFI and even has a center named in his honor. Al-Qaradawi has openly praised Hamas for its “heroic deeds.” In his eyes, the 19 men who hijacked four planes on September 11, 2001, were not terrorists, but freedom fighters!

PEARSON is a main a publisher of radical Islamic biased text books, many of which are now being used in American public schools. Pearson is in a very strong position to influence the minds of America’s children as well as numbing the attitudes of Corporate America regarding the threat of Islamization in the United States. Public officials for the most part seem unconcerned about this situation. Elected education officials are undeterred regarding Pearson plc biased textbooks and their role in Common Core.

In February 2012, the group Citizens for National Security conducted a study of Pearson-aligned in Florida and found “significant” pro-Muslim bias. To cite just one example, here is an actual assignment:

“Distinguishing terrorism from other acts of political violence can be difficult. For example, if a Palestinian suicide bomber kills several dozen Israeli teenagers in a Jerusalem restaurant, is that an act of terrorism or wartime retaliation against Israeli government policies and army actions? Competing arguments are made”

Title VI of the Higher Education Act has become a “magic carpet” for Saudi influence over American schools. Title VI requires Middle East study centers receiving federal funding to engage in cultural-exchange programs with U.S. schools. Outreach coordinators, funded by the Saudis, then create lesson plans for American k-12 teachers. A class assignment in a Rialto, California, eight-grade class asking students whether the Holocaust was “an actual event in history, or merely a political scheme created to influence public emotion and gain” was likely funded by the Saudis.

Sixth-graders in Wellesley, MA, were spirited to a mosque, where they were required to observe Shahada law by covering their heads. For a child of any faith—or no faith—to be required by school officials to kneel before someone else’s God is an outrageous usurpation of parental rights. Is it any wonder parents are withdrawing their children from public schools in record numbers?

The ACLU, which cried like a banshee when the ten commandments were displayed in Judge Roy Moore’s Alabama courtroom and, we can safely assume, would threaten legal action at the teaching of Jesus’s ministry or Maimonides’s Code of Giving, has been tellingly tolerant of lesson plans designed around The Five Pillars of Islam, submission to Allah’s will, and taxpayer-funded trips to mosques by school officials. An Ohio teacher was fired simply for keeping a Bible on his desk.

An astounding 32 pages of the World history textbook are devoted to Muslim cavitation. Students in two Texas schools–Cross Timbers intermediate and Kenneth Davis–will be required to learn Arabic as a condition of passing, thanks to a 1.3 million grant from the Department of Education’s Foreign Language Assistantship program.

Sandra Stosky, a former senior assistant commissioner of the Massachusetts Dept. of Education from 1999-2003, was one of the formers of Common Core Standards but is now one of its fiercest opponents. She said, “Most of these materials have been prepared and/or funded by Islamic sources here and abroad, and are distributed or sold directly to schools or individual teachers, thereby bypassing public scrutiny.” (Source: The Stealth Curriculum)



Assuming the Advanced Placement US History texts are the “quality educational standards” the state was promised, why the secrecy? Why are parents and members of the public–whose taxes fund the schools–not allowed to see them?

The Palestine Authority, Saudis, and much of the Arab world have long used biased textbooks to foster ancient hatreds and keep their citizens ignorant. Parents and citizens of every state in the US must demand that our Commissioners withhold funding from all public schools using these biased, anti-American, anti-Semitic texts. At stake is nothing less than the hearts, minds, and souls of the next generation.

RELATED STORIES/VIDEOS:

american-parents-did-you-know-that-public-schools-are-indoctrinating-your-children-with-islamic-teachings

terrorism-sponsor-qatar-funded-common-core-approved-workshop-teaches-disdain-for-israel-america-and-sympathy-for-hamas

common-core-is-forcing-elementary-school-teachers-to-indoctrinate-students-with-islamic-propaganda