Bernie Sanders flies Eastern Airlines
Buy Photo The charter jet, a Boeing 737-800, dubbed 'The Bernie Express,' sits on the tarmac at Manchester airport in New Hampshire. The plane carried Bernie Sanders and journalists from Iowa to New Hampshire after the Iowa caucus, landing at 4:10 a.m. on Tuesday, Feb. 2, 2016. (Photo: Aki Soga/Free Press)Buy Photo

Bernie Sanders' campaign for the Democratic nomination took a big step up Monday.

Yes, almost beating Hillary Clinton in the Iowa caucus helped, but a more tangible sign was that the campaign had chartered a jet to make the trip from Des Moines to Manchester, New Hampshire for immediate deployment for the Granite State's primary on Feb. 9. Sanders famously travels coach on commercial airlines. Sightings of him stuffing his luggage into the overhead bins is a minor Internet meme.

The plane carried Sanders, his wife Jane, and campaign staff and their gear in the more spacious forward cabin, as well as a full compliment of journalists - referred to as the "Travelling Press" - in the economy seats. The flight took off shortly after 1 a.m. Tuesday, a few hours behind schedule but still ahead of the blizzard forecast for the Des Moines area Monday night.

Buy Photo Credentials issued by the Bernie Sanders campaign to journalists flying with the candidate from Iowa to New Hampshire on a chartered jet Monday, Feb. 1,2016. (Photo: Aki Soga/Free Press)

During the flight, Sanders wandered back to steerage to talk to reporter about the then-yet unresolved outcome of the Iowa primary.

CLOSE Flying from Des Moines to Manchester, N.H.,Bernie Sanders speaks about possible caucus issues surrounding a number of counties in Iowa that have didn't report their voting results. RYAN MERCER/FREE PRESS

The plane was a Boeing 737-800 with seating for about 150 passengers, from Eastern Airlines, a carrier that ceased operations in 1991. The Miami Herald reported on May 28, "The well-known carrier with the hockey stick logo — a resurrection of the airline that called Miami home for decades — lifted off for its first revenue flight on Thursday afternoon."

Some people might find Eastern to be an appropriate carrier for the Vermonter campaigning as a democratic socialist. The resurrected airline's first scheduled flight on May 28 was from Miami to Havana, Cuba.

Read or Share this story: http://bfpne.ws/1SWXw2z