American killed in Paris terror attacks
An American college student studying in Paris was one of the victims killed in the terror attacks that struck the French capital, the college announced.

Paris remains on lockdown after terror attacks

California State University Long Beach identified the American as one of its students, Nohemi Gonzalez, 23.

The school said in a statement that Gonzalez, of El Monte, California, was a senior studying design.

Gonzalez was attending a semester abroad program at Strate College of Design. She would have been returning home next month.

School officials said Saturday Gonzalez was in a restaurant with another Cal State Long Beach student when she was fatally shot. The friend reported that Gonzalez was carried out of the restaurant on a stretcher.

College President Jane Close Conoley said she was "deeply saddened" by the news.

"Our university stands with our nearly 80 foreign exchange students from France as they struggle with this tragedy," she said. 16 other Cal State Long Beach students studying in Paris have all been accounted for.

Gonzalez was described by faculty on Saturday as "buoyant, "joyous" and "energetic."

The university will hold a vigil at 4 p.m. Sunday to mourn Gonzalez's passing and other victims of the attacks.

Earlier, a State Department spokesman confirmed that Americans were among the injured in the attacks.

The department's deputy spokesman, Mark Toner, said Saturday that "the U.S. Embassy in Paris is working around the clock to assist American citizens affected by this tragedy."

Hollande: Paris attacks an "act of war"

A U.S. source said two Americans are known to have been injured in the attacks, CBS News senior investigative producer Pat Milton reports.

A male American suffered a leg injury that wasn't believed to be life-threatening, the source said. He was receiving medical care and has been in touch with his family in the U.S.

An American woman, Helen Jane Wilson, was undergoing surgery late Saturday after being shot in the leg.

Wilson told The Associated Press she was at the Bataclan concert hall to hear the Eagles of Death Metal band perform Friday night when gunmen burst into the venue, killing 89 people.

Wilson said she lived in New Orleans before moving to Paris, where she runs Rock en Bol, a catering company. According to her Facebook page, Wilson is originally from Los Angeles.

The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria has claimed responsibility for the attacks, considered the deadliest on France since World War II. At least 129 people died Friday night in shootings at cafes, suicide bombings near France's stadium and a massacre inside a concert hall.

French President Francois Holland has declared three days of mourning and raised the nation's security to the highest level.