National Center for Health Research - The Voice for Prevention, Treatment, and Policy
The National Center for Health Research conducts, analyzes, and explains the latest research and works with patients, consumers, and opinion leaders to use that information to improve their own health and to develop better programs, policies, and services.

We conduct research that has the potential to improve health care.

We translate research findings into free information and training that can be used to improve health and safety to individuals and communities nationwide.

We work with the media to help get the word out to those who will most benefit from it.

We educate policy makers, policy analysts, and opinion leaders through briefings, hearings, meetings, and written materials based on the information.

We share our publications and information with other organizations, researchers, and advocates.

We coordinate and strategize with them, working together to inform the public and be part of the public debate on policy issues.

We use that information effectively to improve the health of adults and children.

Events

Foremothers and Health Policy Heroes Awards Luncheon: May 17, 2019

The 2019 awards luncheon was held at the elegant Mayflower Hotel in Washington D.C. on Friday, May 17, celebrating the inspiring Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro (D-CT), best-selling author Deborah Tannen, and trailblazing Washington Post reporter Dorothy Butler Gilliam as Foremothers, and Dr. Marsha Griffin and Dr. Cristina Muñiz de la Peña as Health Policy Heroes. For more info see here.

News You Can Use

NCHR Report: Is TMS Proven Effective for Depression?

Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) devices have stimulated the brains of tens of thousands of patients in the U.S., often as a treatment for depression. TMS treatment typically costs $300 per session, usually 5 days/week for 4 to 6 weeks. And yet, there is no clear evidence that it works at all, or is more beneficial than the much less expensive and more convenient antidepressant medications. This report examines how TMS became a frequently used treatment for depression in the United States despite its very questionable effectiveness. This report could save you thousands of dollars and a very frustrating experience.

NCHR Report: Breast Implant Illnesses: What’s the Evidence?

Debate swirls over the risks of breast implants, and physicians and patients are justifiably confused by the conflicting information available. FDA warnings are limited to breast pain or hardness, implant rupture, and cosmetic problems caused by implants. And yet, more than 50,000 women with breast implants have reported that they have serious symptoms that they refer to as “breast implant illness.” Our new report finds clear evidence that implants increase the chances of those symptoms and removing implants usually improves’ their health. If you know a woman who is considering breast implants after mastectomy or for cosmetic reasons, share this report!