Top cop: U.N. has 'no jurisdiction' in Chicago
A day after Cook County Commissioner Richard Boykin called for United Nations intervention to stop what he called a “quiet genocide” in Chicago’s black community, the city’s top cop laughed at the proposal, saying the organization had “no jurisdiction” in Chicago.

“I appreciate the commissioner’s energy,” Chicago police Superintendent Eddie Johnson said at a Friday morning news conference. “But I think that, first of all, the U.N. has no jurisdiction in Chicago — none.”

Boykin’s energy, Johnson said, would be “better spent building bridges and relationships in the city, and with our local partners, state partners and federal partners here to address violence.”

Responding to Johnson’s comments Friday, Boykin, who has announced he is running for re-election, doubled down on his claim that genocide was indeed taking place in Chicago. And though he said he looked forward to working with Johnson to reduce gun violence, the commissioner also challenged the police chief to ensure that CPD is working to improve its “abyssmally low” clearance rate.

“If this was happening in a Third World country, we would be sending in peacekeepers,” Boykin said Friday. “The facts suggest that this is genocide,” he later added.

Those facts, he said, include not only the rate of gun violence affecting Chicago’s black community but the locations of food deserts, persistent health disparities, drug abuse crises and “Great Depression levels” of unemployment.

“The conditions have been set up in such a way that they cause the people who live in these communities to destroy each other,” Boykin said.

Chicago Teachers Union organizer Brandon Johnson, who is running for Boykin’s seat on the Cook County Board, said Boykin has called for “war on his constituents.”

“His call for U.N. intervention not only puts all citizens at risk, but also continues to pit law enforcement workers against the citizens they have sworn to serve and protect,” Johnson said in a statement Friday. “Our children are not terrorists.”

eolumhense@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @essayolumhense

Bring in the U.N. to solve Chicago 'genocide,' Boykin says »