Trump returns to Illinois after canceling Friday night Chicago rally
Republican front-runner Donald Trump on Sunday made his first return to Illinois since a protest-filled Chicago rally was canceled as candidates and their top surrogates fanned out across the state on a frenzied final weekend before Tuesday's primary elections.

On the Democratic side, former President Bill Clinton visited Chicago-area African-American churches in support of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, as did several supporting congressmen. Her rival, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, added a late night Monday rally in Chicago to his pre-primary day schedule.

Trump, meanwhile, found a more conducive location than Chicago for his brash and controversial rhetoric by going to the central Illinois community of Bloomington. Still, his airport-hangar rally was interrupted occasionally and the city's newspaper, The Pantagraph, urged Republicans to vote for anyone but Trump, even though the paper doesn't endorse candidates in primary elections.

Inside the rally, multiple pockets of protesters made themselves known, yelling "Dump Trump" as they were booed and escorted out by security. Some held colorful flags with peace signs, while others ripped up Trump signs and flashed T-shirts supporting Democrat Sanders.

"Get them out of here, please," said Trump, a reality show TV star. "You see where they place themselves? Right in front of the cameras. Disgusting."

The Downstate event came after Trump pulled the plug on a Friday night rally in Chicago as thousands of protesters gathered outside and hundreds more were in the arena after getting tickets online through his campaign. After Trump canceled, citing security concerns, there were scattered skirmishes between supporters and demonstrators inside and outside the University of Illinois at Chicago Pavilion.

Security in Bloomington was tight Sunday, with attendees told to leave bags and umbrellas in their vehicles, forcing some to don black trash bags to protect against the rain as they waited to pass through metal detectors. Hundreds of people didn't make it inside. Also outside was a group of about 100 protesters, who waved anti-Trump signs and chanted "Mr. Hate, leave our state."

CAPTION Warning: Graphic language. Raw video outside the UIC Pavilion after Donald Trump's rally was canceled. March 11, 2016. (Brian Nguyen / Chicago Tribune) Warning: Graphic language. Raw video outside the UIC Pavilion after Donald Trump's rally was canceled. March 11, 2016. (Brian Nguyen / Chicago Tribune) CAPTION Interim police Superintendent John Escalante says GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump did not consult them prior to cancelling a rally in Chicago on Friday evening. March 11, 2016. (Reuters) Interim police Superintendent John Escalante says GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump did not consult them prior to cancelling a rally in Chicago on Friday evening. March 11, 2016. (Reuters)

"We are quite a bit ahead in Illinois, but I don't want to tell you that," saying he still wanted attendees to get to the polls. "The more we win by … the more delegates we're going to get."

"I will never let you down," Trump said. "You will say it's the most important vote you ever cast."

Trump took multiple swipes at Democrats and Republicans alike. He accused Sanders of flailing, labeled Republican Texas Sen. Ted Cruz as "Lying Ted" and declared he would sweep GOP Gov. John Kasich in his home state of Ohio.

Cruz has scheduled a multicity fly-around of Illinois on Monday. Sen. Marco Rubio has remained in his home state of Florida, which also votes Tuesday and where he has staked the future of his campaign.

"Your taxes are through the roof, your companies are leaving you. You have nothing going," said Trump, who then went on to blast the Ohio economy and Kasich's vote as a congressman in favor of the North American Free Trade Agreement. Trump and Kasich are running close in Ohio ahead of Tuesday's election.

At one point, after again saying he would build a wall along the Mexican border to stop illegal immigration, Trump pulled a man up to the stage who was wearing a shirt that read "legal immigrant for Trump." As for building the wall, Trump said, "We'll insist on using Caterpillar, not Komatsu," a shoutout to the tractor maker and large employer headquartered 45 miles away in Peoria.

The Bloomington speech came after Trump appeared on NBC's "Meet the Press," where he said he doesn't condone violence at his rallies but also does not "take responsibility" for the tense atmosphere at his events that his rhetoric creates.

Trump said he has "instructed his people" to look into paying the legal fees of a 78-year-old man charged with assault after he sucker-punched a protester at a North Carolina rally. "He loves his country" and may have gotten "carried away," said Trump, who argued the supporter was provoked by the protester.

In Chicago and west suburban Maywood, the former Democratic president sought to position his wife as the candidate who can heal a nation.

"If you want to be able to say in four or eight years, we're better off than we were when she started, our children have a brighter future, it's wonderful that we've come together again instead of being ripped apart, you should vote for her on Tuesday," he told about 150 people at St. Luke's Missionary Baptist Church in the South Shore neighborhood.

Both the former secretary of state and opponent Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders have aggressively courted black voters in recent days. Sanders has sought to boost his chances by attacking Clinton ally Mayor Rahm Emanuel, whose approval rating has plummeted among the city's minority voters over the Laquan McDonald shooting controversy and the closing of nearly 50 schools mostly on Chicago's South and West sides.

The former president did not mention Trump by name but made reference to some of the businessman's more controversial proposals that have racial undertones, including a ban on Muslim immigrants and the border wall. Clinton also referenced efforts to stir up anger among voters frustrated with the lack of rising wages and opportunities after the country's emergence from the Great Recession.

"You're not happy. Let me tell you who to blame. Let's build a wall around the country. Let's blame the Mexicans. But there's a problem with blaming the Mexicans, they've been going home to Mexico since 2010 and we haven't had an increase in undocumented immigrants," Clinton told about 400 people at the Rock of Ages Baptist Church in Maywood.