When Chicago welcomed KKK
The scene that drew residents of Central Park Avenue just south of Foster Avenue to their front porches on Aug. 16, 1921, was eerily reminiscent of "The Birth of a Nation," the film that celebrated the night-riding vigilantes who restored white supremacy to the post-Civil War South: Thousands of men in white gowns and hoods exchanged ritual handshakes and piled into a long line of cars headed for a secret destination in the northern suburbs.

But while director D.W. Griffith's 1915 movie commemorated a Ku Klux Klan moribund for half a century, the procession that formed on an Albany Park neighborhood street marked its rebirth — and its expansion north. The original Klan had targeted African-Americans newly freed from bondage and became obsolete once Jim Crow laws established a segregated South. The new Klan enlarged the compass of its hatreds, preaching that immigrants, Catholics and Jews were undermining the American way of life. Chicago, the pre-eminent city of immigrants, was a natural recruiting ground for older-stock Protestant Americans fearful of losing their place at the top of the pecking order to Catholics and Jews.

"Our membership is limited to native born American gentiles," William Simmons, the Klan's imperial wizard, told the Tribune.

For the Klan, Chicago was the key to transforming the Southern organization into a national movement, so Simmons came from his Atlanta headquarters to personally lead the procession that assembled 94 years ago on Central Park Avenue. When the caravan had reached its destination, near U.S. 12 and Old Rand Road, new members of the Chicago Klan were put through a ritual called "naturalization," the next day's Tribune reported. "A huge bonfire had been lighted. Thousands of members of the order, each bearing aloft a torch, took position in the form of a blazing cross. The blindfolded initiates were herded inside," the paper reported. "Upon the weird assemblage the searchlights of the automobiles drawn about in a great assembly shone with white intensity. Pickets patrolled beyond the pale, terrifying the curious citizens of the countryside by their grotesque appearances."

The restored KKK's membership wasn't limited to the lower middle class, the traditional breeding ground of xenophobic political movements. That mass initiation ceremony was held on a farm near Lake Zurich owned by Charles Weeghman, whose string of cheap Loop restaurants had made him a millionaire. Weeghman built the North Side ballpark subsequently known as Wrigley Field and owned the Cubs from 1916 to 1918. Perhaps he was among the business leaders attracted to the KKK by its hostility to the union movement, which the Klan equated with the Bolsheviks who recently seized power in Russia, a powerful argument during a wave of bitter strikes in America.

A century ago, membership in the newly revived KKK was a steppingstone to political office. Unlike House Republican Whip Rep. Steve Scalise, who claimed recently he didn't realize a group he spoke to years ago was white supremacist, politicians who cuddled up to the Klan didn't need to make excuses. In the 1920s, not only many Southern politicians but also Indiana Gov. Edward Jackson, a governor and U.S. senator from Colorado and Los Angeles Mayor John Porter were Klansmen. So too was Hugo Black, a future U.S. Supreme Court justice. President Woodrow Wilson gave "Birth of a Nation," used as a recruiting tool by the revived KKK, the honor of being the first movie screened in the White House.

African-Americans were horrified at the revival of the KKK, which had conducted a reign of terror marked by lynchings and burnings of black churches and homes in the 1860s. The Chicago Defender, the city's black newspaper, editorialized: "The Ku Klux Klan has reached Chicago: Full page ads in the papers, followed by the announcement that 12,000 of them had met at Charlie Weeghman's farm thirty miles out of town, and in the pouring rain initiated nearly 3,000 more, ought to jar us off our do-nothing stools."

The Tribune also editorially decried the revived KKK's presence in Chicago — in a way. By the Tribune's logic, the new KKK besmirched the legacy of the original one: "The first Ku Klux Klan grew out of intolerable conditions in the south and passed away when the danger of Negro domination and the plague of the carpet bagger were lifted," the Tribune wrote. "It was born of an emergency and, while evils were committed in its name, it served an important end, while contributing one of the romantic episodes of our history."

Local clergy decried the arrival of the KKK, and the City Council passed a resolution saying that the group wasn't welcome in Chicago. The resolution said: "That it is not necessary to supplement the police force of the city of Chicago with a secret organization."

But the protests of aldermen and ministers hardly impeded the growth of the KKK's Chicago chapters. In 1922, the Klan initiated 4,650 new members in another ceremony in a field at 91st Street and Harlem Avenue. More than 25,000 supporters welcomed the initiates. For the first time, according to the Tribune, a Chicago reporter was allowed to witness the ritual: "Searching eyes inspected them (the candidates) to make certain at the last minute that none should enter 'not fit' for the ritual of the Klan. When the circular march was completed a torch was applied to the cotton covering of the cross, and as it burned the grand representative intoned the oath binding the new members to the Klan."

Two years later, the black community's fears appeared to be confirmed. A spectacular fire destroyed the Greater Bethel AME Church at 42nd and Grand Boulevard (now Martin Luther King Drive), which the Tribune noted was considered "the largest colored church in America." A church official told a Tribune reporter: "For the last two months the Ku Klux Klan has been sending threatening letters to the church." The Klan's involvement was never proved.

Yet the Klan was approaching its peak and would shortly begin to decline. Reborn in 1915, it grew to an estimated 2.5 million members in 1923. Northwestern University history professor Nancy MacLean in her study "Behind the Mask of Chivalry" attributes the rise and fall of the second Klan — it would rise a third time in the 1950s — to a common cause: a morbid fear that "Such things as the rise of divorce, feminism, black radicalism, white racial liberalism and the postwar strike wave were not isolated, random occurrences." When the apocalyptic future of the Klan's forecast didn't materialize, its justification vanished.