Obama to visit SXSW for party fundraiser

US President Barack Obama speaks on the economy at the Paramount Theatre in Austin, Texas, on July 10, 2014. Obama hailed new data showing the US economy churned out 288,000 jobs in June as a sign the long US recovery is gathering momentum. AFP PHOTO/Jewel SamadJEWEL SAMAD/AFP/Getty Images less US President Barack Obama speaks on the economy at the Paramount Theatre in Austin, Texas, on July 10, 2014. Obama hailed new data showing the US economy churned out 288,000 jobs in June as a sign the long US ... more Photo: JEWEL SAMAD, AFP/Getty Images

Keith Urban performs at the iTunes Festival during the SXSW Music Festival Saturday March 15, 2014, in Austin, Texas. (Photo by Jack Plunkett/Invision/AP) Keith Urban performs at the iTunes Festival during the SXSW Music Festival Saturday March 15, 2014, in Austin, Texas. (Photo by Jack Plunkett/Invision/AP) Photo: Jack Plunkett, INVL

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-3', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 3', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Photo: JEWEL SAMAD, AFP/Getty Images Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Obama to visit SXSW for party fundraiser 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

AUSTIN -- The South by Southwest conference crowds are about to grow by one: President Obama.

Officials with the Democratic National Committee said Obama will attend a party fundraiser at the Austin Music Hall on March 11, the first day of the music, film and interactive conference that attracts tens of thousands of people from around the world to Texas' capital city.

The party Web site describes the event a chance for Obama to highlight his vision for "an economy that lasts, an economy that lifts up all Americans" -- part of the party's continuing initiative to "advance issues like job creation, education, health care, and clean energy."

For SXSW attendees who think the admission fees for that conference are expensive, Obama's appearance will be much more pricey.

Tickets for the event are $250 and, if you want a picture with the President, the cost is $10,000, according to the sponsors. For $30,000 you can be a co-host.

Obama has visited Austin six time in recent years, both as a candidate and as president -- the last time was in August 2014 where he spoke at the Paramount Theatre on the economy and became one of the few people to cut in line at Franklin's Barbecue, a famous eastside restaurant.

"The President says he has a special place for Austin in heart," Vincent Harding, chair of the Travis County Democratic Party told KEYE, the CBS affiliate in Austin. "Every time he comes, he talks about the rally that was held at Auditorium Shores in 2007 where over 20,000 people showed up. It was at that place that Obama said he knew that he would be president."