20K cattle freeze to death in freak Texas blizzard

Photo: Mike Kane, Seattle Post-Intelligencer Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Estimates suggest more than 20,000 cattle died in a massive blizzard that hit the Texas Panhandle in late December.

PICTURED: a worker looks on a pile of dairy cows killed in floods near Curtis, Washington in 2007. less Estimates suggest more than 20,000 cattle died in a massive blizzard that hit the Texas Panhandle in late December.

PICTURED: a worker looks on a pile of dairy cows killed in floods near Curtis, Washington in ... more Photo: Mike Kane, Seattle Post-Intelligencer 20K cattle freeze to death in freak Texas blizzard 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

More than 20,000 cattle died in the monster blizzard that swept the Texas Panhandle in December, according to industry estimates.

The region is home to nearly 600,000 cattle, and is the state's hub for dairy farming.

"This is the first time that we've had such a loss happen in that region," said Texas Association of Dairymen spokeswoman Kirsten Voinis. "It's a huge hit for the industry."

She said an estimated 15,000 dairy cows, the most common Panhandle cattle, perished in the snow. Laramie Adams, spokesman for the Texas and Southwestern Cattle Raisers Association, said up to 7,000 beef cattle could also be among the bovine death toll.

RELATED: Texas cattle herd sees first rebound from drought

"There's still a lot of snow on the ground out there," Adams said. "We won't have the total impact until it all melts away."

More than one foot of snow on December 27 surprised ranchers and dairy farmers in a region accustomed to a few inches of precipitation each winter. Unlike their northern peers, Texas cattle raisers rarely own four-walled barns designed to keep cattle warn, often opting instead for open structures meant to keep Texas cattle cool during the long, hot summers.

Forecast warnings of a "historic blizzard" came too late. Voinis said some cattle raisers had tried to build shelters with hay bales and machinery, to little avail.

Some cattle were buried in snowdrifts formed by gale force winds. Others froze to death in the open, died of frostbite in later days or just disappeared. Initial loss estimates increased greatly in the days following the storm.

RELATED: Toxic cow farts? Finally – a solution, says Texas A&M

"It was something the farmers were not equipped to handle," Voinis said.

Now they face a new predicament: disposing of thousands of carcasses. Typically, dead cattle go to industrial rendering plants where they are turned into a myriad of other products. But the volume of lost cattle is too much for plants to handle, and the window for disposal is dwindling as bodies rot.

The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality is serving an advisory role in the process, said spokesman Terry Clawson. He pointed out Commission guidelines on carcass disposal, which include burial, composting, municipal landfills, renderers or commercial waste incineration.

Farmers and ranchers must notify TCEQ if they plan to bury a carcass on their land, and provide a map with the burial location, the guidelines say. Simultaneous burial of ten or more animals may face heightened restrictions.