What happens if I go to the hospital after being sexually assaulted?
Question: Should I seek medical help?

Answer: Experts recommend that you seek medical help as soon as possible, ideally within 96 hours of being attacked. An emergency room with a sexual assault nurse examiner, or SANE, is best. These specially trained nurses are available to help, even if you do not plan to report the attack to law enforcement. They also can conduct a forensic exam to collect evidence if you wish to prosecute. You can consent to parts of the exam and refuse others.

Question: How much time do I have after an assault for a nurse to collect evidence that may help in prosecuting my attacker?

Answer: Testable evidence can be recovered within 96 hours of an assault if you are an adult and within 72 hours if you are a child less than 13 years old. If you have not showered since the assault, that window of opportunity might be wider. You can still come in for medical care at any point.

Question: Can I still go to the hospital if I have changed my clothes and showered after an attack?

Answer: If possible, you should come to the hospital before showering and changing clothes. If you have changed clothes, bring the clothes you had been wearing in a bag to the hospital.

Question: What will I wear after giving my clothing to a nurse?

Answer: After the exam is complete, you will be given toiletries for washing and new clothing to wear home from the hospital. Nurses and other hospital staff often donate clothing for victims.

Question: How long does a sexual assault exam and evidence collection take?

Answer: It depends on your needs and which parts of the exam you decide to complete. A complete medical and forensic exam can take two to three hours.

Question: What kinds of questions will the nurse ask? Do I have to answer them?

Answer: A nurse will ask for general information about your medical history and for a detailed description of the assault. The questions may be difficult, but the answers will help the nurse collect evidence and ensure accuracy of lab testing. Some questions about your sexual history are meant to help a nurse accurately fill out a report and make lab staff aware of consensual partners who may have interacted with you before or after an attack. Again, you can opt out of any portion of the exam.

Question: Is the exam painful?

Answer: Nurses are trained to gently look for points of tenderness that may have been caused during an attack. Most of the evidence collection involves only the use of small cotton swabs to collect potential DNA. If you are in pain, nurses can opt not to use a speculum and can treat your pain.

Question: Are head and pubic hairs plucked during exams?

Answer: Many states, including Ohio, no longer pluck hair. That was done in the past because follicles were used for DNA profile purposes. Now hair is cut from the head and pubic area (if available) to be sent with the evidence collection kit.

Question: Will nurses take my blood?

Answer: Nurses used to take blood from all patients. Now they will decide, based on your report of the attack, whether they need to draw blood or collect urine for lab tests. For instance, if you passed out or show signs that you could have been drugged, urine may be collected for lab tests that can determine what, if any, date rape or other drugs might be in your system. Those tests can detect whether you were a victim of a Drug Facilitated Sexual Assault.

Question: What other kind of evidence do nurses collect?

Answer: Nurses could collect fingernail scrapings if you fought with or scratched your attacker. They also will collect a swab from the inside of your cheek so a lab can differentiate your DNA from that of your attacker. They also may examine your body with a special fluorescent lamp to detect evidence that cannot be seen with the naked eye and may swab areas that appear to contain saliva or other bodily fluids.

Question: Will the hospital offer me medications to prevent pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections?

Answer: You must be offered emergency contraception or be referred to a facility that offers it. You also will be offered medications to prevent a number of sexually transmitted infections. Ultimately, you make the choice of whether to take those medications.

Question: How much does the exam cost? Is it covered by insurance?

Answer: You cannot be billed for the medical exam, sexual assault evidence collection or preventative medications, as long as the crime is reported to law enforcement, even anonymously. You or your insurance company could be billed for treatment of other injuries. Some of those costs can be reimbursed by a state victims’ compensation fund.

Question: Will police show up at the hospital?

Answer: Nurses want to take care of your medical needs first. But if you believe you may be in immediate danger or that a dangerous person needs to be arrested right away, police can be called with your consent. Otherwise, police can be called after the treatment and examination, or you can make a report later at a police station. There is no requirement that you talk to police. However, a hospital must inform law enforcement that a probable crime has occurred. If you are an adult, the report can be made without providing your name.

Question: How long do I have to decide whether to report an assault to police?

Answer: Police prefer that a report be made as soon as possible so evidence can be collected and facts can be gathered quickly. Even after you make a report, you typically can decide not to go forward with a criminal case. Law enforcement has 20 years from the date of the crime, in most instances, to arrest a suspect or ask a grand jury for an indictment in a case. (Laws differ slightly for child sexual abuse cases.)

Question: I heard an advocate would be available for me? Why would I want one?

Answer: A trained advocate can help answer your questions about the process and lend support as you undergo an exam or make a police report. Advocates also can get you follow-up help, such as counseling or therapy. They can help you navigate the justice system and get you compensation from a state fund for crime victims.