Browns' Isaiah Crowell: 'I was very wrong in posting that image'
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Browns running back Isaiah Crowell learned a hard lesson after posting a graphic depiction of a police officer being stabbed in the neck by a hooded man in the aftermath of two black men being fatally shot by officers last week.

Crowell, the Browns' starting tailback, quickly deleted the post, which went up Wednesday afternoon on his Instagram account. But now, some fans are outraged and calling for the Browns to cut him.

The Browns are not believed to have any plans to do so. They believe that Crowell made a grave mistake, quickly deleted the post and has shown tremendous remorse.

Likewise, the NFL seems satisfied with Crowell's actions since the errant post.

"The image was inappropriate and insensitive,'' NFL spokesman Brian McCarthy said in an email response. "He realized this, took down the post and has since apologized.''

The post was in response to the two black men being killed by white police officers, Philando Castile in Minnesota and Alton Sterling in Louisiana, and was made when emotions were running high. It also went up a day before the fatal shootings of five police officers in Dallas and was not in response to the ambush.

The latest on the Isaiah Crowell story: The Browns don't plan to cut him, but apology is not enough

On Monday, Crowell issued the following apology through the club and on his Twitter account:

"Last week was an emotional and difficult week as we saw extreme acts of violence against black men across our country as well as against police officers in Dallas,'' he wrote. "I posted an image to Instagram in the midst of that emotion that I shouldn't have and immediately removed it. It was an extremely poor decision and I apologize for that mistake and for offending people.

"My values and beliefs do not match that image. I am outraged and upset by the deaths of Alton Sterling and Philando Castile along with so many others. I am also outraged and saddened by the attacks in Dallas and the deaths of the five honorable police officers (Lorne Ahrens, Michael Krol, Michael J. Smith, Brent Thompson and Patrick Zamarripa) who were providing protection while trying to keep peace.

"We have to be better as a society, it's not about color, it's about what's right and wrong. I was very wrong in posting that image. Every single life matters, every death as a result of violence should be treated with equal outrage and penalty.''

In the illustration posted by Crowell, the officer is being stabbed in the neck by a person in a black jacket and hood, with his face covered. He has an ankh pendant around his neck, which was an ancient Egyptian character that represented the concept of eternal life. He's also wearing black gloves and an American flag backpack.

Blood is spurting out of the officer's neck and mouth, which is covered by the murderer's hand.

Crowell's caption read, "They give police all types of weapons and they continually choose to kill us....#Weak."

The post, which received 33 likes, was taken down after about a minute, but was screen-shotted and circulated on social media.

Crowell, expected to get the bulk of the carries this season, led the Browns with 706 yards on 185 carries, including four touchdowns. He also caught 19 passes for 182 yards with one touchdown.

Should Isaiah Crowell be disciplined for his post?

Crowell was signed by the Browns as an undrafted free agent out of Alabama State in 2014.

Browns coach Hue Jackson was so impressed with Crowell and his counterpart Duke Johnson this offseason that he passed up an opportunity to draft a running back with his 14 picks.

"I really think Isaiah Crowell is a really good running back,'' Jackson said in May. "I think he's going to have a sensational season, I really do. Obviously Isaiah is very explosive," he said. "He's got quick feet, he's fast in the hole, he runs with good pad level.''

Based on his apology, Crowell hopes to leave the Instagram controversy in his wake.