Legal requirements for marriage
Please note that this document deals only with the legal requirements for the capacity to marry. If you are marrying through a religious or secular ceremony, you should discuss their requirements with the celebrant of your marriage.

Once you have fulfilled these conditions and are sure that you are entitled to marry, you should consider how you wish to marry. There are several different ways (religious, secular and civil) of solemnising a marriage so that it is legally binding.

Marriage is a legally binding contract that will affect both parties (and, to a certain extent, their children) for all of their lives. There are a number of strict rules and regulations governing marriage. The first set of rules specifies who may and may not marry each other and in what circumstances.

Rules

For a marriage to be legally valid marriage in Ireland the parties to the marriage must:

Have the capacity to marry each other

Freely consent to the marriage. Free consent may be absent if, at the time of the marriage, a person is suffering from intoxication, brain damage, mental disability, mental instability or insanity to the extent that they are not able to understand the implications of marriage. Additionally, if someone agrees to marry because of threats or intimidation, their apparent consent may also be invalid and the marriage may be void.

be absent if, at the time of the marriage, a person is suffering from intoxication, brain damage, mental disability, mental instability or insanity Additionally, if someone agrees to marry because of threats or intimidation, their apparent consent may also be invalid and the marriage may be void. Observe the necessary formalities

Capacity to marry

To be legally entitled to marry, both of you must fulfil all of the following requirements at the time the marriage takes place. Both parties must:

Be over 18 years of age. From 1 January 2019 under the Domestic Violence Act 2018, a person under the age of 18 can no longer apply to the courts for permission to marry. However, a person may get married if permission was granted before 1 January 2019 or an application was made before 1 January 2019 and permission was granted afterwards.

Have given the Registrar 3 months' notification of the marriage (or have a Court Exemption Order if this is not the case) and have been issued by the Registrar with a Marriage Registration Form. A couple whose civil partnership was registered in Ireland do not have to give the 3 months' notice.

Be either single, widowed, divorced, a former civil partner of a civil partnership that ended through death or dissolution, or have had a civil annulment of a marriage or civil partnership or a valid foreign divorce or dissolution. (If you are marrying your civil partner you do not need to have your civil partnership dissolved before marrying. It will be automatically dissolved when you marry.)

Have the mental capacity to understand the nature of marriage

Not be related by blood or marriage to a degree that prohibits you in law from marrying each other. If you are related to your proposed spouse by blood or by marriage, you should contact a solicitor to ensure that you do not fall within the prohibited degree of relationship. (See "Further information" below on prohibited degrees.

If either party doesn't fulfil even one of the above requirements, any subsequent marriage ceremony is legally void.

Age requirement

If you are ordinarily resident in the State, the minimum age at which you may marry is 18 years. This is the case even if you marry outside of Ireland. Even if you are not ordinarily resident in the State, you must be over 18 years of age if you wish to marry someone in Ireland.

There is no requirement for parental consent to a marriage, irrespective of the ages of the parties concerned.

A foreign divorce

Not all foreign divorces are recognised under Irish law. Under the Domicile and Recognition of Foreign Divorces Act 1986, a foreign divorce will only be recognised in Ireland if at least one spouse was domiciled in the state that granted the divorce when the proceedings started. You may have to provide good evidence that this was the case and, therefore, that the divorce is valid under Irish law. Under EU Regulation 2201/2003 (“the Brussels II bis”) it is the spouse’s habitual residence that determines a court’s right to grant a divorce.

Where the divorce comes within EU regulations, it is sufficient to confirm that both parties to the divorce were notified of the proceedings and had an opportunity to give evidence to the court which granted the divorce.

Where EU regulations do not apply, certain information as to place of birth, countries of residence and other relevant facts must be supplied on a questionnaire provided by the Registrar. The information is then forwarded to the General Register Office, whose consent is required before the marriage ceremony can take place.

If the General Registrar is of the opinion that the foreign divorce is valid, then the new marriage can go ahead. If not, you can provide additional information to prove validity or else you can apply for a hearing before the Circuit Court. The Court's decision on the validity of a foreign divorce in Irish law is final and binding, although you may appeal to a higher court. If the Court decides that your foreign divorce is not binding, your only option if you wish to remarry in Ireland may be to get a divorce under Irish law.

A foreign dissolution

If a legal dissolution of a civil partnership is granted outside Ireland, it will be recognised under Irish law if the Minister of Justice and Equality has made an order recognising the appropriate class of legal relationship in the country in which the dissolution was granted.