Bill will let the war wounded eat free

[SOUTH PINELLAS Edition]



Document Text

Wounded soldiers will no longer have to reimburse the government $8.10 per day if they eat hospital food.

Congress has reversed a federal law that required thousands of soldiers who receive a meal allowance to reimburse the government for food they ate while hospitalized. The new law, which applies to soldiers who were injured or became ill while in a combat zone, also requires the government to pay refunds to those who were billed for hospital meals since Sept. 11, 2001.

The prime sponsor was Rep. C.W. Bill Young, the Largo Republican who chairs the House Appropriations Committee. He and his wife, Beverly Young, learned of the bills from Marine Staff Sgt. Bill Murwin, who lost part of his foot after a grenade explosion in Iraq. Murwin was billed $243 for hospital food.

The government has required the reimbursement from enlisted personnel since 1981. The goal was to ensure that soldiers were not "double-dipping" by eating hospital food and then pocketing their $8.10 meal allowance.

"People were amazed this was actually in the law," Young said Friday. "It's an insult to ask (a soldier) to pay for his meals when he is in the hospital."

Congress moved with remarkable speed to fix the law. Young heard about the problem in the spring and found unanimous support for the change. Sen. Bob Graham, D-Fla., introduced the Senate version, and Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., proposed it be retroactive to Sept. 11.

In the House, Young made the change by attaching an amendment to the $87-billion bill that pays for Iraqi reconstruction. He said he normally does not like to make legal changes with that kind of tactic, but he said he wanted to pass it quickly.

"I wanted it done immediately, if not sooner. I used the first vehicle available to me," he said.

Young said he did not know the cost of the refunds but said that a procedure to administer them would be developed in the next few months.

Murwin, reached at his home in Nevada on Friday, said, "It astonished me how fast it's happened. . . . That's the right thing to do."

The Iraq bill passed the House and Senate on Friday. The proposal on the hospital bill that was part of it is a permanent change, unlike an earlier version that had passed the House earlier.

Graham ended up voting against the Iraq bill, even though he wrote the wounded soldier provision, because he said the costs of Iraq reconstruction should not be paid by Americans alone and he was disappointed with the Bush administration's efforts to get other nations to pay. But Young voted for it.

Senators and House members still must settle differences between the two versions of the bill. But Young said there is no disagreement about the wounded soldier law.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction or distribution is prohibited without permission.