Green Party Gains Ballot Access in Six More States as Signature Counts More than Double State Requirements
Voters will have a chance to cast their ballot for Green Party presumptive Presidential nominee Jill Stein, as well as several local- and state-level Green Party candidates, in six more states as of today. Green Party ballot-access signature drives in Kansas, Pennsylvania, Nebraska, New Jersey, Vermont, and Missouri easily surpassed, and in most cases more than doubled, the required number of signatures to secure a ballot line.

In Kansas, 10,908 signatures were submitted, double the required threshhold of 5,000 signatures. This is the first time the Green Party will be on the ballot in Kansas since 2000.

In Pennsylvania, around 22,000 signatures were submitted, several times over the current requirement of 5,000, which had been lowered through a successful court challenge last month.

In Nebraska, about 7,000 signatures were submitted, well over the requirement of 2,500.

In New Jersey, the 2,000 signatures submitted easily more than doubled the requirement of 800 signatures.

In Missouri, Greens also gained ballot access for the first time since 2000 with 25,000 signatures, two and a half times the 10,000-signature state requirement.

Ballot access was also achieved in Vermont for the first time ever. Over 1400 signatures were submitted that had already been certified as valid by town clerks across the state.

The Green Party now has ballot access in 23 states, are awaiting government certification for 9 more (including the six states mentioned here), and have active petition drives in 15 more states.

These ballot-access victories were achieved through the hard work of Green Party activists and ordinary citizens who organized throughout these states over the last 3 to 4 months. These campaigns were also given a boost by the recent surge in popularity and interest around presumptive Presidential nominee Jill Stein in the wake of the furor surrounding the Democratic National Convention, where news of leaked emails from the DNC revealing leaders conspired to sabotage Bernie Sanders' primary campaign spurred a delegate rebellion and "Demexit" of Sanders supporters.

"Having been involved in Green Party politics for over 20 years, it is encouraging to see the American people moved to action this year to make sure Jill is on the ballot," said Rick Lass, national ballot-access coordinator for the Jill Stein Campaign. "If Jill Stein and Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson are included in the televised Presidential debates, then everyday Americans will realize they do have a choice besides the corrupt, corporate funded, pro-war, anti-people agendas of the Democratic and Republican parties. These are tangible steps in creating the multi-party democracy that we Americans and our nation deserve."

Presumptive presidential nominee Jill Stein will be formally nominated by the Green Party at the party's national convention in Houston on Saturday, August 6th. The Green Party is actively petitioning to be on the ballot in at least 47 states for the general election in November, enough to potentially win an electoral college vote.