Woman gets prison time for Craigslist throat slashing
CLOSE

Jenessa Rosenbach (Photo: Courtesy of Loveland Police Department)

The woman accused of slashing a man's neck during a Craigslist encounter took a last minute plea deal this week and was sentenced to 16 years in prison, sidestepping a lengthy and potentially more damning jury trial.

Jenessa Rosenbach, now 21, was charged with first-degree attempted murder after deliberation and first-degree assault with a deadly weapon for slicing the 64-year-old man's neck July 5 in Loveland. Her April jury trial was reset for later this month, but Rosenbach on Monday pleaded guilty to a lesser charge of second-degree assault, court records show.

Eighth Judicial District Judge Devin Odell immediately sentenced her to the prison sentence. She could have faced a significantly longer prison sentence if a jury convicted her of the more serious charges that were dismissed as part of the plea.

Attorneys in a December preliminary hearing said Rosenbach, an Evans resident, met with Craig Janda earlier in the summer after he reached out to her through a Craigslist ad labeled, "Just wanna have a good ole time." The earlier meeting included an apparently pleasant conversation complete with wine on Janda's sun porch in the 1500 block of Caddoa Drive

A very different scene unfolded July 5 when Rosenbach and her co-conspirator, now-21-year-old Gabrielle Close, went to the man's Loveland home. Rosenbach reportedly massaged his shoulders and then pulled out a knife and dragged it across the man's throat, a police said previously.

The women fled the scene, and the man was hospitalized with life-threatening injuries.

Rosenbach and Close turned themselves in to police in the following days. Data on Rosenbach's cellphone revealed someone searched for punishments and jail sentences "related to crimes of murder and attempted murder," an investigator testified. Someone then apparently tried to wipe the search from the phone's memory.

Close pleaded guilty in April to being an accessory to a crime and tampering with evidence. She faces two to seven years in prison. Sentencing is scheduled for June 20.

Gabrielle Close, 21, will plead guilty to charges of accessory to crime and criminal tampering. (Photo: Courtesy of Loveland Police Department)

Reporter Jason Pohl covers courts for the Coloradoan. Follow him on Twitter: @pohl_jason.

Read or Share this story: http://noconow.co/271biX7