The real Papa John: Pizza entrepreneur John Schnatter makes no apologies for wealth, success, Obamacare remarks | Math whiz mixed pizza passion, finance
John H. Schnatter • Born: Nov. 22, 1961.

• Residence: Anchorage, Ky.

• Title: Founder, CEO and chairman, Papa John’s International.

• Siblings: Anne Schnatter Ackerson and Charles W. “Chuck” Schnatter, an attorney who formerly worked for Papa John’s and served on its board.

• Family: Wife, Annette; son Beau, 14, a high school freshmen; and daughters Danielle, 23, who was recently married, and Kristine, 26, who is in her third year at University of Louisville law school.

• Religion: Would not disclose

• Honors: Inducted into the Junior Achievement U.S. Business Hall of Fame, 2007. Named one of the Ten Outstanding Young Americans in 2000 by the National Jaycees Organization. Named 1998 National Ernst & Young Retail/Consumer Entrepreneur of The Year. Inducted into the Kentucky Entrepreneur Hall of Fame, 2010. John Schnatter on pizza • Eats pizza two to three times a week. “I eat it. I eat the heck out of it.”

• Doesn’t consider it junk food. “Pizza is actually very nutritious. It is great food because it covers all the food groups.”

• “You don’t want to sit and eat two pizzas, but if you eat two or three slices, two or three times a week, it is very good for you.”

• “People say they want a (healthy) product, but they don’t eat it.”

• “We have have tried whole-wheat crust. There just wasn’t enough demand.”

Sources: Interviews, Courier-Journal; ArabianBusiness.com What did he say? Papa John’s founder and CEO John Schnatter said his remarks on President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act, popularly known as Obamacare, were “misconstrued.” Judge for yourself at courier-journal.com, where we offer a transcript of his Aug. 1 comments on Obamacare to stock analysts, in which he said it would add 11 to 14 cents to the cost of a pizza, and his Nov. 7 remarks to students in Naples, Fla., where he said that he liked the fact that “100 percent of all Americans now will have health insurance” but added that some franchisees might cut workers’ hours to avoid having to provide coverage. Read about John Schnatter’s controversial comments on Obamacare at www.courier-journal.com

He lives with his family in the most expensive home in Louisville, a limestone mansion modeled after an Italian villa — a spread so grand that Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney extolled its virtues during a fundraiser there last May.

Reading this on a tablet? Check out our tablet presentation.

“What a home this is, what grounds these are, the pool, the golf course,” Romney said in surveying John H. Schnatter’s estate, which is assessed at $7.58 million.

“You know, if a Democrat were here he’d look around and say no one should live like this. Republicans come here and say everyone should live like this. This is a real tribute to America, to entrepreneurship.”

The founder and CEO of Papa John’s International, America’s third-largest pizza chain, Schnatter, 51, makes no apologies for the 24,000-square-foot residence on 15 acres in Anchorage, one of three homes he and his wife, Annette, own in Florida, Utah and Kentucky.

He said he and his company have given more than $30 million in charitable contributions to the community — “more than my house costs.” Besides, he said in a recent interview, “When you have built a $3 billion company out of a broom closet, I think you are entitled to a nice house.”

After Muhammad Ali, Schnatter may be Louisville’s most-recognized resident. But until he stepped into the politically charged health care debate by answering questions about President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act, he was known mostly for his energetic TV spots, in which he trades quips with quarterback Peyton Manning and effuses about “Better Ingredients, Better Pizza.”

Now he has been mocked and vilified by pundits and late-night comedians for saying the health care overhaul might add 14 cents to the cost of each pizza — and that some franchisees might cut workers’ hours to avoid paying insurance costs.

In his first extensive interview since his explosive remarks last summer and fall, Schnatter said his only regrets are that they were “misconstrued” by the media and that he didn’t respond to “false stories” quickly enough.

But he has begun to fight back, hiring the national crisis public-relations firm Sitrick and Co., whose CEO has been dubbed by Forbes “the flack for when you are under attack.”

They have placed op-ed pieces under Schnatter’s name in the Huffington Post and The Courier-Journal, highlighting what they say his critics left out — that he told students at Edison State College in Naples, Fla., the day after Obama’s re-election that it is “good news” that “100 percent of the population is going to get health insurance — I’m cool with that” and that “we’ve always wanted 100 percent of our employees on health care.”

In an interview at his office attended by two members of his outside public-relations team, Schnatter said that when he spoke at Edison State, “I was just trying to inspire and motivate our youth.

“The last thing I wanted to do,” he said, “was to further divide our country.”

A gift and a curse

So who is the real John Schnatter, the one off camera?

His neighbor in Deer Valley, Utah, CBS sportscaster Jim Nantz, who will soon join Schnatter on TV as a Papa John’s pitchman, said he is the same man in private as in his commercials.

“He has a ton of energy and is approachable and likable,” Nantz said. “He is just like the guy you see on TV — and I think that’s refreshing.”

But he is also a man driven and obsessed, say friends and former employees — with personal fitness, with himself and with the numbers that measure his company’s success.

His friend Terry Meiners said that when they play gin rummy, Schnatter recalculates the odds as each card is drawn.

“He is constantly stacking, counting and fretting over inventory, even if it is the inventory of minutes per day,” the radio personality said. “That is an amazing gift and a curse all rolled into one.”

Former and current employees say Schnatter truly believes in his company mantra and scours the country for better mushrooms, cheese and sausage.

“This is a guy who lives, eats and drinks pizza,” said marketing whiz Jack Trout, who came up with the “Better Ingredients” slogan and was the first to suggest that Schnatter tout his pizza on TV.

Schnatter is one of the two most effective CEO spokesmen in the country, according to Ace Metrix, which measures advertising impact, matched only by Samuel Adams’ brewery chief executive Jim Koch.

Trout, who advised Papa John’s from 1999 to 2008, said the reason Schnatter succeeds on TV is because “he believes in what he is saying.”

Meiners said that when Schnatter flew him on his jet to Denver about 10 years ago for a Broncos game, Schnatter and his wife, Annette, (herself a franchisee) insisted on stopping first at a Papa John’s store in Boulder, where they opened ovens, poked pizzas and repositioned boxes so it would be easier to grab them.

“It was all about quality control,” Meiners said.

Schnatter also insisted on paying when the store offered a free meal, Meiner said. “He didn’t want to kick the books out of balance.”

He is a rare entrepreneur with both the talent to found a company and to run it, says Steve Coomes, who has covered Schnatter for Nation’s Restaurant News and Pizza Today.

Schnatter relinquished day-to-day control twice, once surrendering his CEO title, but has come back both times — in part because he can’t let go.

“It is his life,” said retired chief financial officer David Flannery, who attributes Schnatter’s success to his intense curiosity about matters as minor as making the perfect dough ball. “He has huge hunger to understand how things tick, and to make them tick better.”

‘A big cat, stalking’

Some former executives, however, say he could be difficult to work for, and sometimes drove away talent.

“I told him once that he walked up and down the halls like a big cat, stalking,” Trout recalled. “I said, ‘John, you make people nervous.’ ”

Profiling five pizza company chief executives in 1998, The New York Times said Schnatter could be “counted on to pop into his restaurants without notice, checking on the cheese, the sauce, the shape and quality of the crust” — and to “ blow his stack if any aspect falls short.” The story noted that five executives, including his president, had quit over 18 months, all complaining about his management style.

In the interview in his office, where a subdued fire burned in the fireplace behind his marble horseshoe desk, Schnatter said his management style has “mellowed” with age and experience, and his current top executives have worked for the company for an average of 12 years.

Executives asked by the company to comment for this story described him as demanding but fair.

Danette Rhoads, senior director of human resources, said, “I like his energy and passion,” while chief development officer Tim O’Hern said in an email that Schnatter cares about employees, “whether they be janitors, restaurant team members, truck drivers, administrative assistants or executives.”

Steve Ritchie, senior president of North American and Latin American operations, said Schnatter has high expectations: “If you compromise the fundamentals, he will call you, and it will be a tough conversation.”

More than a dozen former executives, including former co-CEO Jude Thompson and ex-CEO Nigel Travis, declined to comment on Schnatter, while a few of those who did, including Syl Sosnowski, vice president of marketing from 1995 to 2001, said he sometimes turned on those who displeased him, or ignored them.

Joan Pohl, capital projects manager who left earlier this year, said Schnatter was a great leader with a “huge personality.”

“Most people who work for him feel his hand on their back, pushing all the time,” she said.

Coomes, the restaurant journalist who profiled Schnatter in August, said: “He can be overbearing and controlling, but it’s hard to argue with what he’s done.”

‘Passion’ for wealth

A sign in the soaring, three-story atrium at corporate headquarters off Blankenbaker Parkway illustrates the results. One day last month, it said:

• Franchise stores, 2,533

• Corporate, 646

• Total: 4,093 (Includes 914 in other countries)

• Countries, 32

The company that Schnatter started in the back of his father’s failing Jeffersonville tavern now has 16,500 employees and is expected to make nearly $100 million in profits this year on $3 billion in revenues.

It has made Schnatter fantastically wealthy, though not quite a billionaire, he says.

He has sold shares of Papa John’s (PZZA on the stock ticker) worth $330.9 million over the years, yet still owns or controls more than 6 million shares worth about $339 million — more than a quarter of the $1.3 billion company.

Schnatter says the size of his Anchorage home has been greatly exaggerated, including by the Wall Street Journal, which once reported it had a 22-car garage. It only holds four cars, Schnatter says, though he says he does own 16 bicycles.

“We have no chef, no butlers, no nannies,” he said.

He also owns parcels totaling 54 acres and worth $10.2 million scattered around Anchorage, where residents once joked he’d acquired so much land it might be renamed “Schnatterville.”

Preservationist Mildred Ewen complains he’s turned the city into an “artificial Anchorage” by adding a bank and restaurant that make it a destination for outsiders.

But city attorney John McGarvey says most residents seem to applaud Schnatter for rebuilding its downtown, and for building a path on his own property where the public can ride and stroll.

The Schnatter family — he has three children, two of them adults — can get away on his Citation 750, the world’s fastest civilian jet, to their 6,280-square-foot, $5.4 million penthouse apartment in Naples, Fla., that is attached to a Ritz Carlton Hotel.

Or they can jet off to their mountainside condos at the St. Regis hotel and resort in Deer Valley, Utah, which Schnatter bought in 2010 for $23 million. (In addition to skiing, Schnatter lifts weights, runs, bikes and takes yoga classes at corporate headquarters with his wife, he said.)

“He has a passion for being wealthy,” Sosnowski said.

But Meiners and others say that Schnatter is also generous, in big ways and small.

He was 34 when gave a $5 million contribution in 1996 that allowed construction of Papa John’s Cardinal Stadium.

Former University of Louisville stadium czar Mike Pollio, who persuaded Schnatter to make the lead sponsor donation, said the CEO negotiated a good deal for the company that gave it naming rights for 15 years and the exclusive right to sell its pizza there over that period.

“It wasn’t just a charity donation,” Pollio recalled. “He was too smart for that.”

Robert Boland, the chairman of sports business at New York University’s Tisch center, said Papa John’s got a “very good deal.”

The Schnatters have also given $1.5 million to the Louisville Zoo, $2 million for the 21st Century Parks proposed loop around Louisville, and $1 million to the University of Kentucky, in part to fund a basketball museum.

Schnatter also gave an unspecified amount for the sanctuary that opened in 1998 at Southeast Christian Church, which he says he attended a couple of times in the mid-1990s.

Friends say Schnatter is generous in private as well. Champion cyclist Curtis Tolson said that when a teenager threw a textbook at them while they were biking in 2004, causing a crash that left both seriously injured, Schnatter, who hurt his back, wouldn’t take a hospital room until he made sure Tolson had one first.

And Meiners recalled a time five years ago, when he visited a family whose son was at a local hospital and told him they didn’t have enough money for food.

“I called up John and asked him where I could get some Papa John’s coupons,” Meiners recalled. “He roared up to my house seven minutes later in some kind of batmobile that cost more than my house. We raced to the hospital, I took him to the room, and Schnatter took the father aside.

“I never asked him what he did,” Meiners said — and Schnatter declined to say. “But I know what when we left, something very good had happened to that family.”

Birth of a brand

His company started with nothing, but Schnatter’s own story is hardly rags to riches.

He grew up in what he describes as an upper-middle-class family. His mother, Mary Beth Ackerson, is a retired real-estate agent. Growing up, he said, she was demanding — she wouldn’t accept a “B” on his report card.

His father, Robert Schnatter, and maternal grandfather, Louis Ackerson, were lawyers and entrepreneurs.

Schnatter played shortstop at Jeffersonville High School. He excelled at math, mastering “analytics” that he would later use to build his company. He told the students in Naples that he got a 790 on his SAT in math (out of 800), but only a 200 on the verbal portion.

“I have a real problem with the English language,” he said.

His father founded solar heating, wine distribution and cable TV companies. All failed, and sometimes the family’s electricity and water got turned off; Schnatter told People magazine in a 1997 profile that he still worried the same might happen at his sprawling Anchorage home.

“I wake up scared every morning,” he said then.

In his interview with The Courier-Journal, he said he is no longer driven by failure, but still tries to be “prudent with my money.”

He said his father and grandfather were both huge influences. “Daddy was fun-loving and lighthearted — he lived life to the fullest and was not scared to take a risk,” he said. “Papaw was more frugal, conservative. I learned from him that if you take a risk, you had better make it work.”

Learning the business

The roots of his enterprise were planted when he was 15 and working two jobs — unloading stock at Cut-Rate Liquors in Jeffersonville by day and making pizzas down the road at Rocky’s Sub Pub by night.

He cast his fate with pizza because the profit margins were better, he said.

“At Rocky’s, they’d sell a pizza for $10, and it cost $2 to make it,” he told a conference of budding entrepreneurs many years later. “I liked that.”

Working his way through Ball State University in three years at another pizzeria in Muncie, Schnatter knew that pizza would be his game: He devised his recipes and plotted what ovens and mixes he would need, and a marketing student in his dorm came up with the logo and the name.

After Schnatter was rejected by U of L’s law school (“I took the LSAT twice and flunked it — I don’t do well on long tests”) and his father bought a failing Jeffersonville tavern, he jumped at the chance to run it.

He took over Mick’s Lounge on Sept. 29, 1983, and seven months later knocked out a broom closet to make way for a pizza oven, and in three months he’d paid off half the tavern’s debt and refinanced the rest.

He sold his 11-year-old Camaro for $2,900, got a wealthy uncle to co-sign at the bank for a $3,500 note and bought out the tavern’s namesake for $6,400.

“At 22, I had something I loved to do, make pizza, and something I was good at, running a business,” he said.

Papa John’s was born.

“I don’t know if it was instinct or God-given,” he said years later at a chamber of commerce seminar for entrepreneurs, when asked if he had any idea how successful the business would be. “I didn’t think it would be worth a billion, but I always thought it would be worth a hundred-million dollars.”

Keeping his focus solely on pizza, the company grew spectacularly, went public in 1993, opened its 500th store the next year and its 1,500th four years after that.

Business Week named it America’s fastest-growing company in 1994 and ranked it first on its list of the 100 best-run small businesses. Schnatter in 1999 landed on Fortune’s “40 richest under 40” list, estimating his wealth at $402.6 million.

And he won a legal victory against No. 1 Pizza Hut — dubbed the “pizza holy war” — over Papa John’s claim to sell better pizza.

A jury decided that Papa John’s claims were deceptive, awarding $467,619 to Pizza Hut in damages. But a federal appeals court reversed the verdict, finding that the better-ingredients slogan was so exaggerated that nobody was fooled by it.

It was hardly a ringing endorsement, but Schnatter was vindicated.

“Nothing sells like the truth,” Schnatter said during the Pizza Hut battle. “And the truth is, we do use better ingredients to make a better pizza.”

Bumps along the way

There have been difficulties along the way.

In 1999, a cellphone service saleswoman sued Schnatter and the company, alleging that he had sexually harassed her for months after they met, sending her roses, repeatedly stopping by her home and throwing rocks at her window, and kissing her and touching her breasts while they were in his pool and hot tub, according to her complaint.

Schnatter filed a counterclaim alleging that the woman, Lesli Workman, then 29, pursued him, telephoning and paging him dozens of times, asking him for loans and to pay her credit card bills, and ultimately trying to extort $5 million from him and his company.

The suit was ultimately dismissed; neither side would say if there was a settlement, and Workman didn’t respond to a letter sent to her home.

Schnatter wouldn’t discuss the suit, other than to confirm it was dismissed.

Papa John’s went through its own crisis in the early 2000s when sales began slumping and for the first time, revenues began to decline.

The company in 2004 laid off 45 people at its headquarters and even locked the door to its atrium lobby and turned off the heat to save money.

Schnatter lashed out at the time at “fat and happy” franchisees who weren’t making top-quality pizza, threatening to get rid of them.

“Our system was asleep,” he told PizzaMarketplace.com a few years later. “We were on our boats, on our yachts, on our golf club memberships, but we weren’t paying attention to the fundamentals of the business.”

He now calls the stretch from 2001-04 the toughest of his career. “When you let quality slip, you pay for it, and we paid for it.”

He said he straightened things out by boosting quality through a system of “mystery shoppers” that measures a cross-sample of 4 million pizzas a week.

After stepping down as CE0 in 2005 — he said he volunteered to do so to bring in “professional management from the outside” — Schnatter returned to lead the company three years later, and its stock price has more than tripled since.

Papa John’s worked out a deal to become official pizza of the National Football League and business seemed to be prospering.

Political hot seat

Then came the political firestorm — when Schnatter warned that Obama’s health care changes would raise pizza prices and could cost workers their jobs.

A blogger at the Los Angeles Times dubbed Schnatter “Papa John’s pizza cheapskate.” Another blogger at Inside Higher Ed called him a “moral monster.”

Most famously, Comedy Central’s Steven Colbert, responding to Schnatter’s claim that the insurance law could add as much as 14 cents to the cost of a pizza, said: “That’s three times the value of a Papa John’s pizza.”

Though conservatives cheered Schnatter for telling it like it is, Trout, the former consultant, said it was a horrible public-relations error.

“Why upset half your market?” Trout asked. “Why would you even go there?”

Schnatter said his remarks have had no impact on revenues, or the company’s stock price, which dipped 9 percent in the week after his post-election comments but have since then recovered and hit an all-time high.

One firm that measures public perception of companies — YouGov BrandIndex — reported that the perception of what was being said about the brand plummeted in the weeks following Schnatter's comments after Election Day, but the firm later acknowledged that the overall public perception of the Papa John’s brand improved.

Schnatter offers no apologies for his comments: “Everything I said is truthful.” But his friend Jordan Zimmerman, CEO of Papa John’s Fort Lauderdale-based advertising agency, said Schnatter has been hurt by the criticism.

“He’s a passionate guy,” he said. “He wants everybody to have health insurance.”

The future

Asked what he wants leave as his legacy, Schnatter he said he’s already achieved it: “Three kids who are hard-working and honest.”

As for the fate of his fortune, he said he doesn’t know if he’ll take investor-philanthropist Warren Buffet’s challenge — to give away half his fortune to charity.

“I would have to run it by my wife,” he said.

In his Courier-Journal interview, Schnatter said Annette, in addition to being the best franchise operator in the system, is “the finest human being I’ve ever met.”

Unlike former Godfather’s CEO and Republican presidential candidate Herman Cain, Schnatter says he has no desire “right now” to run for office, though he adds, “You never want to say never.”

In a previous foray into public service, he was the lone dissenter when the Louisville Arena Task Force voted 16-1 to put what became the KFC Yum! Center on the riverfront.

Schnatter said then that he thought the arena would cost too much there. And he says now that time has proved him right, though former arena authority chairman Jim Host says the arena came in on budget.

After the vote, Schnatter railed against the selection process, saying that it was fixed, that the four months he worked on it was “a waste of my time” and that then-Gov. Ernie Fletcher, who appointed him, used the task force to angle for re-election votes in Jefferson County.

Looking back, Schnatter says: “It was a great lesson on seeing how politics works in Kentucky. It was just a great education.”

Political leanings

Schnatter is a registered Republican but says he grew up in a staunch Democratic Southern Indiana family.

His father, who died in 1985 at age 51, ran for lieutenant governor in Indiana in 1968 as a Democrat.

Schnatter says his politics “are to support the best person to get the job done.”

He noted he has hosted fundraisers for Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear and Lt. Gov. Jerry Abramson, and records show that until last year, in state races he had given the same number of political contributions — 21 — to Democrats as Republicans.

He said he supported Romney — he and his wife gave $120,800 to Romney and the Republican National Committee last year — because of his support for balancing the budget.

Philosophically, Schnatter said he agrees with Thomas Jefferson — “the more government we have, the more we lose our liberty.” And he sounds very much like Romney when he talks about government bailouts.

The fate of struggling companies, Schnatter told The Courier-Journal in 2009, should be determined by the free market. “Put ’em in bankruptcy, chop ’em in pieces and get rid of ’em.”

Schnatter is likely to remain in the public eye for years. Zimmerman, his ad man, who came up with “Papa is in the house,” said he could be on TV until he’s 70.

“He finally looks like a Papa,” Zimmerman said. “He’s in his best years.”

Schnatter told Nation’s Restaurant News in 1997 that he will never retire.

“I’m not going anywhere,” he told stock analysts in the Aug. 1 conference call that thrust him into the national spotlight. “I love what I do.”