FAQs
1.- What are the construction costs of the crystal clear lagoons?

One of the big advantages that the Crystal Lagoons concept and technology carries is that it can be implemented at very low construction costs. As a point of comparison, the construction costs of our crystal clear lagoons can be ten times lower than that of a golf course, and even lower than a public park of the same dimensions.

2.- How can I acquire Crystal Lagoons technology?

The best way to acquire Crystal Lagoons technology is through a license given to each specific project, which includes a license to use the patented technology, along with the know-how that is necessary for its adequate implementation. Crystal Lagoons charges a royalty that corresponds to a small percentage of the real estate project sales, only a small portion of the enormous value that this concept and technology creates and adds to the project.

3.- Does Crystal Lagoons know-how include the design?

Yes, the know-how that Crystal Lagoons delivers includes consultation from the preliminary to final stages of the project. Our team of architects studies the applicability of the concept and technology in each project, delivering a conceptual design that shows how to add maximum value through the never before seen impact of a crystal clear lagoon, always maintaining the original idea and look of the project.

4.- Does Crystal Lagoons build the lagoon?

As part of the provided know-how, Crystal Lagoons, provides consultancy from the start of the project. It delivers the information needed (basic and detailed engineering plans and specifications) for any local professional contractor to be able to execute the project without any problem. It is important to mention that construction costs are paid to the local construction company, or the specific supplier of proprietary equipment, materials, or supplies for the construction and/or operation of the lagoon, not to Crystal Lagoons. To ensure quality, Crystal Lagoons specialized professionals provide supervision of the construction, filling and implementation of the lagoon. We also train maintenance personnel to ensure the quality standards are followed. Furthermore, it supplies Crystal Lagoons special equipment and additives and remotely controls the physicochemical variables of the water and the system’s operating valves. This is so that it can ensure permanent compliance with high quality standards for its clients.

5.- What are the operation costs of the lagoons and what do they include?

One of the great advantages of the Crystal Lagoons concept and technology is that it can be implemented at low construction and operational costs. Crystal Lagoons maintenance costs (including labor, energy and additives) are considerably lower when compared to other amenities, such as green areas and parks of the same size. The maintenance costs associated with this revolutionary technology are much lower due to the efficient use of resources that enable up to 100 times less additives to be used than for conventional pool and drinking water technologies and only 2% of the energy required by conventional filtration systems.

6.- What is the depth of the lagoons?

The lagoons can be built at practically any depth, but we do recommend that in certain sectors the minimum depth is 2.4 meters. The intense turquoise color can be increased with depths over 2.4 meters, and additionally this prevents the presence of bathers that can interfere with the safe practice of water sports. When it is difficult to build deeper lagoons, it is possible to use special proprietary color membranes that allow the creation of the Crystal Lagoons turquoise color with lower depths.

7.- How much electricity do crystal clear lagoons consume?

Crystal clear lagoons consume up to 2% of the energy used by traditional filtration systems of swimming pools, making this technology efficient and sustainable.

8.- How many additives does a crystal clear lagoon consume?

Our lagoons use up to 100 times less chemical products than conventional pools and drinking water treatment technologies. This allows for the Crystal Lagoons concept and technology to be ecological and safe.

9.- How much water do the lagoons consume?

This innovative technology has very low water consumption because our lagoons operate on a closed circuit, and are filled just once, so it is only necessary to compensate for the losses due to natural. So, using a concrete example, we can say that a 2.5 acre-sized lagoon consumes up to 50% less water than a park of the same size. Meanwhile, if we compare an average-sized lagoon with a golf course, our lagoons can consume up to 30 times less water. Additionally, the Crystal lagoons technology is continuously improved, with new associated patents and we have developed a new technology that reduces evaporation by up to 50% using a control film.

10.- Is it possible to use fresh water and seawater?

The Crystal Lagoons technology can operate equally well with freshwater, seawater or brackish water. Most of these types of water have no alternative use, so our technology provides a sustainable solution for the efficient use of these resources. We currently operate lagoons using all of these types of water.

11.- Does rain affect the quality of water in lagoons?

Direct rain does not have any negative effect on our lagoons. However, the lagoon location should be considered, as well as any adjacent constructions, in order to avoid rainwater runoff into the lagoon. These are factors considered in all projects and our Crystal Lagoons team has vast experience in dealing with them.

12.- What are the effects of organic compounds (leaves, cut grass, etc.), and also dirt and atmospheric dust blown by the wind into the lagoon?

With architectural, construction and scenic details, we avoid organic compounds, dirt and atmospheric dust entering the lagoon, whether from a nearby location or blown by the wind. However, this is not a requirement of our technology, but simply to avoid additional labor to remove this waste from the lagoon.

13.- What if my terrain has shallow ground water?

Crystal Lagoons has developed technical solutions that allow lagoons to be built under these conditions.

14.- What is used in the bottom of the lagoon?

Our lagoons use a membrane that has been developed according to our specifications and under our brand, made exclusively for our licensees in the United States. The membrane characteristics vary from project to project, and are defined by our interdisciplinary engineering team according to the particular geographic, geological and meteorological details of the area.

15.- What color is the membrane?

The membrane color plays an important role in the final water color. The membrane we normally use is a special white color, developed by our Research and Development department. However, different tonalities of membranes can be developed based on the specific requirements of each project and our clients’ needs.

16.- What is the membrane lifetime?

The membrane has an expected life of over 20 years, and is under a 10 year warranty with the supplier.

17.- What is the recommended size for a Crystal Lagoon?

Crystal Lagoons recommends building lagoons with a surface larger than 1.2 acres in order to allow sailing and practicing water sports, and therefore create a large body of water that is unique and impressive, and that adds incalculable value to the project. On top of that, these lagoons come at such low construction and maintenance costs, that making these massive crystal clear water bodies is economically viable. However, it is possible to develop smaller lagoons depending on the specifications of each project.

18.- How is the water quality of the lagoon controlled?

The hydraulic and mechanical systems are monitored, controlled, and operated remotely by Crystal Lagoons from our Control Center. This enables us to ensure that water quality is maintained within our established parameters, guaranteeing high quality regardless of the location of the lagoon.

19.- What is the area required for the installation of equipment like valves, pumps, filters and others necessary for the maintenance?