Halloween party to welcome 'Child Mummy'
Courtesy of St. Louis Science Center Scientists used computerized tomography to determine the age of the mummified Egyptian child on loan to the Evansville Museum.

SHARE

By Roger Mcbain

The Evansville Museum will throw a Halloween welcome party Saturday for its newest guest, a 2,000-year-old baby mummy.

A family public opening for the new show, "The Child Mummy," will run from noon to 2 p.m. in the museum, where the exhibition will remain through Nov. 29.

The display features the mummified remains of an Egyptian child who scientists believe was 7 to 8 months old when he died. They estimate he lived sometime between 40 B.C. and 130 A.D., and likely was the son of a wealthy or at least upper-middle-class family that could afford the expense of mummification.

The exhibition, on loan from the St. Louis Science Center, includes a video presentation and hands-on, touch-interactive components with more information.

In addition, the museum has displayed its own Egyptian collection, which includes a mummified cat, amulets to protect against demons, jars, ceremonial scarabs and carved shabti figures that accompanied the dead to serve them in the afterlife.

The museum encourages visitors to come to Saturday's public opening in costume. Admission is free, but reservations are requested.

In conjunction with the exhibition, the museum will host several other paid events.

They include Breakfast with the Mummy, from 8:30 to 10 a.m. Nov. 7, 14 and 21. Reservations are $7 for the events, which will include a tour of the exhibition, a special presentation on mummies and a Donut Bank breakfast.

Discovery Days for Children, featuring an Explore Egypt program focusing on Egyptian hieroglyphics and cartouches, will be from 3:30 to 5 p.m. Wednesday; a Mummy Madness session, explaining and demonstrating the mummification process, will be from 3:30 to 5 p.m. on Nov. 18.

Registration is $5 per child for each session.

For reservations or for more information, call the museum at (812) 425-2406.