Woman's headaches after hair weave from corpse was filled with maggots
Woman suffers terrible headaches after she is fitted with human hair weave 'taken from a CORPSE that was filled with flesh-eating maggots that burrowed into her skin'

Legal assistant Irene Myangoh bought hair piece from salon in Nairobi

She was forced to shave her hair and take antibiotics after her ordeal



Salon manager says she has fitted ten weaves from the same package

Gruesome: A woman suffered terrible headaches after unwittingly wearing a human hair weave reportedly filled with maggots that burrowed into her head (file picture of unconnected hair weave)

A woman claimed she was plagued with blinding headaches after she was fitted with a human hair weave reportedly filled with flesh-eating maggots that burrowed into her head.

Irene Myangoh, a personal assistant at a law firm in Nairobi, Kenya, paid a salon for the hair piece which doctors believe may have come from a corpse.

After two weeks, she started suffering from severe headaches which painkillers did little to ease.

When blood tests and a brain scan also came back negative, she went back to her doctor who examined her scalp and reportedly found maggots eating into her skull.

The doctor said the maggots had likely hatched from eggs contained in the hair which she believed came from a dead body, it was reported by African internet TV station iReportersTV.

No further details were given about the maggots and the doctor could not be reached for comment by the station.

The manager of the salon said she had fitted ten weaves from the package where Miss Myangoh's came from, adding that she had sold 150 pieces from the entire batch in less than two months.

The woman, who did not want to be named, said: 'I am shocked to hear this because this is the first time such a thing is happening to my clients.

'I will get more information from my supplier because we import these weaves from the UK, USA and India.'

She said the supplier may have sent her rejects from a factory and promised to compensate Miss Myangoh, who had to shave her hair and take antibiotics for two weeks after her ordeal.

Dr CK Musau, a surgeon at Nairobi hospital, told iReportersTV that he had dealt with ten similar cases in the last six months.

He added: 'It is unfortunate how the West has influenced Kenyan youth, especially ladies.