Bodybuilder turned Harley Street nutritionist fined for claiming he could CURE cancer with diet and fitness techniques

Dr Stephen Ferguson, 45, sold vitamin drinks that 'cured cancer patients'

The Natural Health Clinic in west London enjoyed £70,000 turnover last year

Products could also heal epilepsy and multiple sclerosis, website claimed

Fined £1,750 for violating Cancer Act, made to protect vulnerable sufferers

A Harley Street nutritionist has been fined after claiming his fitness regime could combat cancer.



Former bodybuilder Dr Stephen Ferguson, 45, provided a range of protein shakes and multivitamin drinks, which had 'cured' two of his clients.



The health food range could also heal epilepsy, motor neurone disease and multiple sclerosis, according to his website.



With 300 video testimonials from satisfied clients on the website, The Natural Health Clinic enjoyed a turnover of £70,000 in its first year of business.

The Harley Street nutritionist told the court he did not know how the word 'cured' came to appear on his website

But today, Dr Ferguson was fined £1,750 for violating the Cancer Act.

The act was designed to protect vulnerable people from unprofessional advice.

Sentencing, District Judge Adrian Turner told Hammersmith Magistrate's Court: 'The written material refers to cancer, with a link to the clinic.



'It is plainly implied this is someone who treats cancer.



'Any member of the public would believe this is someone who has treated and in two cases cured cancer.



'I’m satisfied Dr Ferguson was fully involved with everything that’s on his site and anyone reading this would have no doubt this was an offer of services for those seeking treatment for cancer.



'I’m in no doubt those YouTube testimonials are a major part of the company’s business in treating cancer and Dr Ferguson’s approach to the Cancer Act has been a head in the sand one.'

District Judge Adrian Turner at Hammersmith Magistrate's Court ruled that Dr Ferguson was 'fully involved'

Vitamin C capsules sold on Dr Ferguson's website were captioned with the testimonial: 'Many have said it helps them get rid of cancer.'

Other products included Multivitamin PH Balancer, Blood Cleanser & Energy Booster and a Tropical Fruit Whey Protein Powder, which were advertised as cures for the life-threatening disease, as well as for asthma, arthritis, and diabetes.

It was also implied the clinic was involved in the successful treatment of a patient with prostate cancer.



The business flourished between June 17 and October 2 last year, until the council received a complaint.

In a bid to distance himself from the website's content, and video adverts uploaded to YouTube, Dr Ferguson told the court a female employee was responsible.

'She was meant to stick to specific guidelines and not put on anything about treating cancer or anything like that,' he said.



'She was asked not to include her own personal views on there.



'I know it should not say anything that says we are treating cancer. It’s purely for diet and fitness and exercise and nothing else.'

Acknowledging a video strap line that included the word 'cured' for a Merkel cell tumour treatment, Dr Ferguson told the court: 'I don’t know how it got there.'



He denied uploading the YouTube content to a page owned by username ‘SFSTEVE100’, and claimed not to know who did.



'I don’t write on my website, I have other people update it for me. I was checking the website, but obviously not everything that went on there, there’s three thousand pages,' he added.

The judge also ordered Dr Ferguson to pay £2,500 costs and a £120 victim surcharge, telling him: 'You are not accused of quackery, no one is saying you are not a qualified nutritionist.