Dallas Police Chief David Brown is a private man in a most public job
Several weeks before he was named Dallas police chief, David Brown played a round of golf with his regular playing partners at a Lancaster club.

After they finished, Brown hung around in the parking lot for a few minutes, chatting with his pals, including Dallas Police Community Affairs Manager Levi Williams. Then the 49-year-old veteran cop got in his car and left.

A short time later, Williams spotted Brown at a Dallas seafood restaurant, eating by himself, reading a newspaper. He asked Brown why he didn't tell him where he was going.

"You know I'm a loner, man," Brown said. "I don't run with nobody."

It has long been that way for David O'Neal Brown, during his younger years growing up in south Oak Cliff apartments and throughout his steady rise through the Dallas Police Department. Few personally know the man who was sworn in as police chief this month.

What many do know is that Brown solidified a reputation as an introspective, intense and sometimes abrasive commander. What they don't know is that he is also a caring son to his 70-year-old mother, who lives in southern Dallas. He is a doting father to his 4-year-old daughter, with whom he watches cartoons on Nickelodeon. And he is a man who has endured deep pain with the violent murders of his former police partner and, later, his own brother.

Thrust into one of the most public and powerful jobs in the city, Brown now faces the challenge of maintaining his intensely private personal life, while meeting the demands of residents who desire a personal bond with their hometown chief.

"Frankly, I'd like to see him make sure he has a physical every six months," said Steve Wakefield, a Lake Highlands neighborhood activist who has known Brown for years. "I just think he puts so much pressure on himself. He is a serious guy. ... I do think he has a sense of humor, but I think he disguises it fairly well."

A natural calling

Brown chose a career with the police after noticing the striking deterioration of his south Oak Cliff neighborhood every time he visited home while attending college in Austin. Law enforcement seemed a natural calling.

But the path was laid years earlier.

Brown was the second of three sons to parents who dated from the age of 12. His mother managed the apartment complexes where the family lived. His father, who passed away in 1999 after suffering from a lung disease, worked in landscaping and other odd jobs.

His mother was the nurturer. She was one of several strong women in his family whom he credits for instilling strong values in him.

Brown initially went to private Catholic school, where he remembers strict nuns running the show. By second grade, he moved to public school, soon taking mostly honors classes.

"I didn't go to class with all the other kids," he said. He remembers "a handful of kids in small classrooms."

As a teenager, Brown interned for attorney Larry W. Baraka, later the first black district judge elected in Dallas County. Even then, Brown wasn't one to latch onto a group, Baraka said. He was in his own world.

"I used to love when he would smile because he didn't smile a lot," Baraka said. "I guess after he got used to me, we would joke and kid around and he got a little lighter. But he was always a very serious-minded young man."

Other people and places throughout Dallas also played a role in Brown's development.

There was the Cummings Recreation Center gym, where Brown got into his firstfight while in fifth grade. (It was a draw, Brown says.)

There was the Bullock Chapel, where Brown received his first Bible.

There was South Oak Cliff High School, where Brown was voted most intellectual and most likely to succeed. As the titles suggest, his 1979 senior class peers and others who knew him then say they are not surprised he reached the top of his profession.

Teacher Brenda Cox recalls Brown as an intense and serious student who was not afraid to voice his opinion.

"I see an inquisitive kid, a kid that was eager to just take in everything," said Cox, whose last name was Battle when she taught Brown. "It was as if 'you can't teach me enough.' "

Brown's peers respected him. Some felt something more.

"At one point in my life, I had a crush on him," said Priscilla Barnett Akamafula, 1979 class valedictorian. She never told him.

"He just always treated every female with utmost respect, and that's one thing I really admired about him," she said.

UT to police academy

With financial aid, grants and a scholarship, Brown left home for the first time to go to the University of Texas. He left school without graduating in 1983 to provide for his son and first wife, whom he met in high school.

He entered the Dallas Police Academy with the intention of eventually finishing his degree, going to law school and becoming a prosecutor. Instead, cop work grew on him.

But there were hard lessons along the way.

In 1987, Brown was suspended for 15 days and transferred out of the internal affairs unit after a chase in which his partner that morning drove the wrong way on a highway ramp. In addition to violating the department's chase policy, Brown initially gave a misleading verbal account of what happened.

Brown said he was naïve and inexperienced. He admits now that he shouldn't have been blindly loyal to the fellow officer involved in the incident.

"It is a lesson learned," Brown said. "The experience shaped a lot about what I did from there on out."

A more personally painful lesson came less than a year later.

More Dallas cops were shot to death in 1988 than in any other year in department history. For Brown, one case was particularly devastating.

It was Aug. 2. Brown was only weeks into his assignment in the physical evidence section when he responded to an officer-involved shooting in west Oak Cliff. The cop was reportedly in grave condition.

At the crime scene, on the ground, Brown soon spotted a familiar pair of eyeglasses. They were like the ones worn by his police academy classmate and former partner, Walter L. Williams.

His fear was soon confirmed.

Williams, a 47-year-old father of three, died at a hospital hours after the shooting. Brown left the crime scene and was with his friend's children when they got the news.

"When things like that happen and you're really close, you don't believe it for the longest time," Brown said. "I really relate to all of those in-the-line-of-duty deaths [on a] much more personal level ... you lose a partner, you just never get over it."

The pain lingers even in good times.

"David's risen through the ranks, he's chief now, he is the No. 1 guy on the department," said academy classmate Lt. Sally Lannom. "Yet it's always there that we lost Walter."

Three years after Williams' death, violence came even closer. His younger brother, Kelvin Brown, was killed in 1991 in the Phoenix area by drug dealers.

He resists speaking about his brother's death, in part because of his concerns that it might hurt the rest of his family.

"I can't deny that's a part of who I am," Brown said. "The families of victims, I know what they go through. My family had to go through that. But does it make me police in a different manner or lead in a different manner? I'm not sure.

"I really enjoyed catching bad guys before that happened," Brown said. "And I still really enjoy it."

Brown caught a lot of bad guys as a SWAT sergeant for most of the 1990s, before being promoted to lieutenant, deputy chief and, in 2005, the top deputy to Dallas Police Chief David Kunkle. Along the way, Brown finished college, getting a degree from Dallas Baptist University. He also divorced.

In 1996, he married Dallas police Sgt. Cedonia Brown. She left the Police Department when her husband became the chief and now works for the city water department. She declined to comment for this story.

In 2003, Brown faced another personal challenge when the son who shares his name was arrested on suspicion of selling marijuana in Waxahachie.

David O'Neal Brown Jr., now 26 and himself a father, accepted responsibility for his actions, pleading no contest. He was convicted of a misdemeanor drug charge.

The chief said he is proud of the way his son grew after his run-in with the law.

"I'm much more impressed when you make mistakes, how you respond to it," Brown said. "It speaks to the kind of man he is. He continued his education, he's gainfully employed in spite of some of the mistakes that he's made."

A serious reputation

Many in the Police Department know Brown by reputation from his time as Kunkle's top deputy. His charge over the last few years was to be the field general in the city's urgent effort to knock down crime.

True to form, Brown never set out to win popularity contests. He ruffled feathers, took many to task and hurt some feelings. Some questioned his methods or said he was too harsh. Kunkle says it was precisely what the department needed.

"He takes what we do very seriously and he holds people accountable," Kunkle said. "But I've never seen him do it in a demeaning, critical kind of way. I've always thought that he was very serious and he was very private, and that's largely a function of his personality."

It's a personality that doesn't always fit neatly into the very public job of police chief. Thus far, Brown appears to be striking a careful balance, including reaching out to officer unions and vowing increased transparency.

At his well-attended swearing-in ceremony at Dallas police headquarters this month, he joked that he would have preferred a more private gathering.

Baraka, the chief's longtime mentor, conducted the ceremony at Brown's request. Among family members in attendance were Brown's mother, brother and his wife. Perhaps the person least impressed with the festivities was Brown's 4-year-old daughter.

"She wants me to do some of the same things that I've been doing, which is basically spend time with her and play with her and be her father," Brown said. "I'm not a big deal to her other than her daddy."

It's a significant contrast from the sentiments of so many others who see Brown's rise as an inspirational story.

"The pride that we feel here is almost indescribable," said Cox, the high school teacher. "He's gone on and accomplished things for himself personally and professionally, and he's just a reflection of what one can do when you just focus and make a decision that, 'This is the road that I'm going to take.' "

Researcher Erin Amburgey-Sood and staff writer Jon Nielsen contributed to this report. BACKGROUND: DAVID BROWN

Age: 49

Career: Dallas police lieutenant, sergeant, senior corporal and officer, 1983-2004; deputy chief, first assistant chief, 2004-07; interim Dallas assistant city manager, 2007-08; first assistant chief, 2008-10

Accomplishments: Directed crime-fighting efforts at the Dallas Police Department during most of a historic six-year decline in overall crime. Oversaw Compstat, a program that uses constantly updated data to manage crime-fighting resources. Managed several high-profile police task force operations that targeted crime hot spots by flooding them with officers

Education: University of Texas at Austin, 1979-83; bachelor of arts and sciences, Dallas Baptist University, 1999; master of business administration, Amberton University, 2001

Personal: Married to Dallas police Sgt. Cedonia Brown. She now works for the water department. They have a 4-year-old daughter. Brown also has a 26-year-old son and a 30-year-old stepdaughter from a prior marriage. His 70-year-old mother lives in southern Dallas, and his older brother lives in Rockwall. Brown attends Oak Cliff Bible Fellowship Church.