Manchester bombing comes 2 months after Westminster terror
The Manchester bomber struck four years to the day after the murder of Lee Rigby by fanatics, raising questions about whether the timing was deliberate.

Fusilier Rigby, 25, from Middleton, Greater Manchester, was hacked to death by two Islamist extremists outside Woolwich Barracks in South-East London on May 22, 2013.

It was also two months to the date since the Westminster terror attack, which happened on March 22, 2017.

The Manchester bombing came four years to the day after Lee Rigby was murdered by Islamic extremists Michael Adebolajo, pictured, and Michael Adebowale

Security agencies are understood to be examining the possibility that the date – the 22nd of the month - is significant, although initial indications suggest there is no link.

Two suicide bombings, one at Brussels Airport and another in the city’s subway system took place on March 22, 2016.

On July 22, 2016, a teenager shot and killed nine people and wounded more than 15 at a shopping centre in Munich.

But other major attacks by jihadists, such as those in Paris and Nice, took place on different days.

The suicide bombing also came two months to the day after the Westminster attack, pictured, leading security services to investigate whether the date of the 22nd had any significance

Four years ago terrorists Michael Adebolajo and Michael Adebowale rammed Fusilier Rigby with their car before attacking him with knives and attempting to decapitate him.

Mr Rigby’s mother Lyn yesterday said the barbaric attack in Manchester had taken her back to the day her son died.

She said in a statement: ‘We must stand against terrorism. My heart goes out to all families affected by the terrorist attack.

This photo shows the aftermath of the suicide bomb which ripped through the foyer of the venue killing parents and children, which took place on May 22

‘On the fourth anniversary of Lee’s death I have been taken back to how we felt as a family as events unfolded via the media in front of our eyes.

‘Feeling out of control, helpless, panicked, every parent’s worst nightmare. Waiting for confirmation that Lee was involved.’

Speaking about the incident on Monday night, she added: ‘On an evening when families with children were out enjoying themselves, some parents find themselves now in the same situation.

‘Whole families affected forever. We must stand together against terrorism.’