CNN 'accidentally airs 30 minutes of hardcore porn in Boston area', Boston viewer claims
Review by RCN suggests Boston viewer was the only one affected

Said in a follow-up statement: 'RCN assures us that there was no interruption of CNN's programming in the Boston area last night'

CNN first told the DailyMail.com the cable operator 'aired inappropriate content for 30 minutes on CNN last night'

Posted photos of her TV screen showing explicit material in lieu of show

Tuned in expecting to watch Anthony Bourdain's Parts Unknown - but was surprised to see transsexual porn star Riley Quinn instead

A CNN viewer tuned in on Thanksgiving night expecting to watch Anthony Bourdain's 'Parts Unknown' - but was apparently met with a half hour of porn instead.

The viewer posted several photos of her screen on Twitter, showing how explicit images of porn star Riley Quinn appeared on her screen instead of Bourdain's travelogue. She also reached out to her cable provider, RCN, asking for explanations.

The porn movie, according to the user, went on for at least 30 minutes. She first saw it on CNN around 10.30 pm, watched something else, and kept checking periodically until the channel blacked out completely at 11pm.

A CNN spokesperson first appeared to confirmed there had been a mistake, before issuing a new statement suggesting the contrary. A review by RCN indicates that the Boston viewer was the only one affected.

Scroll down for video

A CNN viewer tuned in on Thanksgiving night expecting to watch Anthony Bourdain's 'Parts Unknown' - but was apparently met with a half hour of porn instead (pictured)

'The RCN cable operator in Boston aired inappropriate content for 30 minutes on CNN last night. CNN has asked for an explanation,' a CNN spokesperson told the DailyMail.com at 1.36pm.

Two hours later, the CNN spokesperson issued another statement, saying: 'Despite media reports to the contrary, RCN assures us that there was no interruption of CNN's programming in the Boston area last night.'

RCN has denied that its feed was compromised Thursday night in Boston.

Riley Quinn, the porn star featured in the viewer's photos of the movie, thanked CNN 'for the free airtime' in a humorous tweet after the claims surfaced

'Regarding the reported incident involving CNN in Boston, RCN has no evidence this occurrence took place on the CNN feed,' senior vice-president and general manager Jeff Carlson told the DailyMail.com.

'We have not had any other reports of this incident other than this single customer's tweet.

'Our review of network operations and our call center phone logs during the last evening show no indications that this impacted any other customer than the one single customer.

'Only a technical review of the individual's equipment involved could ascertain how this might have occurred. We've confirmed that this one customer's account is in proper working order.'

The Boston viewer, who has since switched her Twitter account to private saying she kept receiving inappropriate messages, initially complained to RCN, who operates on the east coast.

She said the company told her everything was 'working perfectly' and that it was unclear how many households were affected.

RCN told the viewer Friday morning on Twitter: 'We have not had any reports of the programming issue you mentioned on CNN in Boston.'

The Boston viewer later told BuzzFeed News: 'I initially posted because I wanted to see if anyone else in Boston had been affected.

'I think it was a broadcasting error that affected only my house.'

She defended herself against accusations of fabricating the story.

'I can tell you that it's real,' she added. 'People [accused] me of faking the story and creepy men sending me d*** pics and sexual messages.'

Screenshots of her own Twitter feeds, seen by the DailyMail.com, show several additional pictures of her screen with the pornographic movie playing. The pictures indicate she was watching CNN HD. They include a Tivo icon, but the viewer said she was watching a live broadcast, not a pre-taped show.

'I can't wait until @RCNConnects wakes up tmrw & realizes that hardcore porn was broadcast on @CNN instead of @PartsUnknownCNN tonight,' the viewer wrote.

She added in another tweet: 'Did anyone else with @RCNConnects in Boston see the hardcore porn that was broadcast on @CNN by mistake?'

CNN had planned to air six back-to-back episodes of 'Parts Unknown' in several states on Thanksgiving, including Massachusetts.

The Boston viewer later switched her Twitter account to private (pictured), saying she had received inappropriate messages after airing her claims

Cable provider RCN told the viewer Friday morning it hadn't received any other reports in the Boston area. The company said after later review that the Boston viewer appeared to be the only one affected

The viewer tweeted during the blunder: 'This wasn't scrambled channel porn, this was hilariously high def b**t sex.'

She lamented: 'OK but seriously, I'd really love to watch the @PartsUnkownCNN marathon.'

Twitter users saw the humor in the situation, with one of them writing after reports of the incident emerged: 'You won't believe what they aired instead of Mike Rowe's Dirty Jobs.'

Another Twitter user posted: 'Oops, I think those parts are known.'

CNN had planned to air six back-to-back episodes of 'Parts Unknown' in several states on Thanksgiving, including Massachusetts. Pictured is a previous episode during which Bourdain met President Barack Obama