Prosecutor: Evidence lacked to convict PETA workers
CLOSE Skip in Skip x Embed x Share A security camera captured footage of PETA workers taking an Accomack family's dog, police say. The chihuahua was euthanized, sparking outrage. A rally will take place Monday to protest a family pet's killing.

A Chihuahua named Maya was taken by two PETA workers. The workers were charged with larceny, but prosecutors have declined to take the case to court.

Buy Photo Wilbur Cerate holds a photograph of his family dog Maya on Wednesday, Nov. 19, 2014 on the porch of his home where he says two people in a van marked "PETA" stole his chihuahua recently. Cerate captured video of the incident on his home surveillance system. Cerate says the two returned days later with a basket of fruit and told him the pet had been euthanized. (Photo: Staff photo by Jay Diem)Buy Photo

Accomack County's commonwealth's attorney is speaking out about his decision not to prosecute a pair of animal activists accused of taking a family's pet dog and having it euthanized.

Prosecutors lack evidence that the two workers from Norfolk-based People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals had criminal intent at heart when they took the chihuahua, Gary Agar said in a statement issued to a local radio station.

"Indeed, it is more probable under this evidence that the two women associated with PETA that day believed they were gathering animals that posed health and/or livestock threat in the trailer park and adjacent community," Agar told WESR radio.

Agar's comments came as organizers finalized plans to march to his office Monday, demanding that he reconsider his decision to drop the case.

The abrupt euthanization of a Hopeton's family pet dog, named Maya, has triggered outcry well beyond the shores of the Eastern Shore of Virginia. The television show Inside Edition is expected to cover the event and there will be guest speakers, according to organizer Edward Armstrong.

The speakers' names were not announced. Hundreds are expected to protest.

Participants are to meet at 9 a.m. at St. James Episcopal Church on Drummondtown Road, where they will line up for a short march at 10 a.m. to the Commonwealth's Attorney office on Front Street.

The controversy dates to Nov. 5, when Jean Carey, 54, and Jennifer Lisa Woods, 52, of Virginia Beach were arrested and charged with larceny of a dog. Maya's owner Wilbur Cerate said they took his pet Chihuahua from his porch.

A security camera on the property captured footage of the incident.

Maya later was euthanized, and one of the women returned a couple of days later and gave the family a fruit basket by way of apology, Cerate said.

In his statement, Agar outlined the facts of the case against Carey and Woods, noting that an adjacent landowner called PETA to help after his cow was attacked by stray dogs from Dreamland 2, the trailer park where Cerate lives.

Agar said he would have needed evidence "that the taking was coupled with the intent of depriving the rightful owner of their property."

Managers of the trailer park told PETA that its leases forbid animals from roaming free, and they encouraged PETA to help with the problem, Agar said.

Three weeks before his dog was taken, Cerate asked PETA to help him trap feral cats that lived under his trailer, and the organization gave him traps. The group also gave him a dog house for two other dogs tethered outside his home, according to the statement.

On Oct. 18, a PETA van arrived to retrieve any stray dogs or cats in the trailer park. Since Maya had no identification and wasn't tethered, the dog was gathered up along with the rest of the strays, Agar said in his account.

The Chihuahua was seen wandering around the property's shed and porch and around the park before it was taken, he said.

"Whether one favors or disfavors PETA has little to do with the decision of criminality," Agar said. "The issue is whether there is evidence that the two people when taking the dog believed they were taking the dog of another or whether they were taking an abandoned and/or stray animal."

Here is Agar's statement in its entirety, per WESR:

Commonwealth's Attorneys cannot always make popular decisions, rather they are charged with making responsible decisions. Prosecutors must decide if evidence gathered provides proof beyond a reasonable doubt each element of the criminal offense. The criminal intent required to convict someone for theft or property (or dog) it must be shown that the defendant intended to steal the property (or dog) it must be shown that the taking was coupled with the intent of depriving the rightful owner of their property.

The facts appear be that PETA was asked to help when an adjacent landowner reported that they should see how his cow with her udders ripped up from abandoned and stray dogs in the trailer park area amounted to a menace not to be tolerated. He complained to PETA that the abandoned and stray dogs attacked his livestock, injured his milking cow, killed his goat and terrorized his rabbits. Abandoned and/or stray dogs and cats have appeared to have been considerable in what is known as Dreamland 2. PETA responded and the trailer park management encouraged their efforts in an attempt to gather stray/abandoned cats and dogs. Additionally the leases provided that no dogs were allowed to run free in the trailer park.

Approximately three weeks before Mr. Cerate's dog was taken by the women associated with PETA, Mr. Cerate asked if they would put traps under his trailer to catch some of the wild cats that were in the trailer park, and traps were provided to him as requested. Additionally, parties associated with PETA provided Mr. Cerate with a dog house for two other dogs that were tethered outside of Mr. Cerate's home.

On or about October 18 a van that was operated by the ladies associated with PETA arrived the at the trailer park. The van was clearly marked PETA and in broad daylight arrived gathering up what abandoned stray dogs and cats could be gathered. Among the animals gathered was the Chihuahua of Mr. Cerate. Unfortunately the Chihuahua wore no collar, no license, no rabies tag, nothing whatsoever to indicate the dog was other than a stray or abandoned dog. It was not tethered nor was it contained. Other animals were also gathered. Individuals living in the trailer park were present and the entire episode was without confrontation. Mr. Cerate was not at home and the dog was loose, sometimes entering the shed/porch or other times outside in the trailer park before he was put in the van and carried from the park. The dogs owned by Mr. Cerate that were tethered were not taken.

Whether one favors or disfavors PETA has little to do with the decision of criminality. The issue is whether there is evidence that the two people when taking the dog believed they were taking the dog of another or whether they were taking an abandoned and/or stray animal. There have been no complaints on the other animals taken on that same day, and, like the Chihuahua, had no collar or tag. From the request of the neighboring livestock owner and the endorsement by the trailer park owner/manager the decision as to the existence of criminal intent beyond a reasonable doubt must be made by the prosecutor. More clearly stated, with the evidence that is available to the Commonwealth, it is just as likely that the two women believed they were gathering abandoned and/or stray animals rather than stealing the property of another. Indeed, it is more probable under this evidence that the two women associated with PETA that day believed they were gathering animals that posed health and/or livestock threat in the trailer park and adjacent community. Without evidence supporting the requisite criminal intent, no criminal prosecution can occur.

The animals were not euthanized in Accomack County, so this jurisdiction makes no determination on those issues.

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/news/local/virginia/2014/11/23/peta-accomack-protest/19446725/