This message was self-deleted by its author
When I first met Sanders in person on Church Street, there were big streaks of dried mud on his shoes and dried blood on his neck from what looked to be a shaving mishap. His hair flew every which way in a gust of wind. At six feet tall, he is wiry, but he walks with shoulders hunched and elbows out, like a big, skulking bird. From a distance, he looked as if he could be homeless. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2015/04/30/your-online-guide-to-bernie-sanders/



A tall man is borne out when I see photos and videos of him standing next to other people. And his shoulders were not stooped then.



Of course, you tell height from a photo by judging how tall things or people are relative to other nearby things or people in a photo.



Everyone's hair is different, so I don't know that your hair or mine is a benchmark. Sanders' was extremely curly when he was younger and he wore it longer most of his life, until this campaign. I don't see a lot of resemblance in the face, either, but that is a more subjective judgment. Also, if this were Sanders, I think we would have seen this photo sooner.



All that said, he said he marched and I believe him. I don't really care if that is him in the photo or not.



A tall man is borne out when I see photos and videos of him standing next to other people. And his shoulders were not stooped then.Of course, you tell height from a photo by judging how tall things or people are relative to other nearby things or people in a photo.Everyone's hair is different, so I don't know that your hair or mine is a benchmark. Sanders' was extremely curly when he was younger and he wore it longer most of his life, until this campaign. I don't see a lot of resemblance in the face, either, but that is a more subjective judgment. Also, if this were Sanders, I think we would have seen this photo sooner.All that said, he said he marched and I believe him. I don't really care if that is him in the photo or not.