John Beilman's Fairport home searched by FBI the day before murder-suicide
CLOSE Fairport Police Chief Samuel Farina said it appears a father killed his daughter then killed himself. The department is working along with the Monroe County Sheriffs Department. (Oct. 4, 2017) Meghan Finnerty

Fairport Police Chief Sam Farina, left, and Monroe County Sheriff Patrick O'Flynn discussing a murder-suicide in Fairport on Wednesday, October 4, 2017. They say John Beilman shot and killed disabled daughter Nichole before killing himself. (Photo: Shawn Dowd)

Editor's note: If you are reading this because you think there's a link between John Beilman and the Las Vegas shooting, there is none.

READ: There's no Las Vegas link to Fairport murder-suicide

FBI agents searched the Fairport home of John Beilman the day before he shot his severely disabled daughter and himself, according to sources close to the investigation.

FBI agents executed the search warrant at Beilman's Williamsburg Drive home on Tuesday, the day before he took his daughter, Nicole, into the backyard and shot her and then himself with a 12-gauge shotgun.

Nicole Beilman, 27 had Rett Syndrome, a rare neurological disorder. Nicole Beilman relied upon a wheelchair and was dependent on her parents for care.

More: When caregivers kill: Beilman murder-suicide has no easy answers

More: Nicole Beilman, slain Fairport woman, loved family, music and nature

More: Police: Fairport man killed disabled daughter, self

John Beilman committed the murder-suicide shortly after 5:20 a.m., Fairport police say.

Fairport police said Beilman's wife, Donna Beilman, was inside the home and did not hear the shots that took the life of her husband and daughter.

Fairport Police Chief Samuel Farina said John Beilman left behind a "goodbye note" to his wife that indicated the circumstances of the shooting but not a motive.

A neighbor of Beilman reported that he saw two police cars near the home the day before the killings. Farina said this week that police had not responded to any calls at the home.

The FBI and federal prosecutors declined to comment.

A federal magistrate judge would have approved a search of the home. However, approval of a search does not ensure a crime was committed; instead, it is a search for evidence of a crime.

Records of federal searches are often filed under seal, and there was no public record available Friday of the search of the Fairport home.

GCRAIG@Gannett.com

Includes reporting by staff writers David Andreatta and Sean Lahman.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/2yMHdhs