This artist is pushing for recognition of vagina diversity
Imagine a space for women that celebrated vaginas of all shapes, colours and sizes. A place where a community of women could reflect on their bodies and celebrate the beauty of it all through a liberating, creative art form. “Raising the Skirt” by artist Nicola Canavan is exploring that in her series of portraits of everyday women, as they share the beauty of their bodies, while exploring their relationships with their vaginas and what they symbolise to them.

Canavan’s project aims to, quite simply, reclaim the cunt, with special focus on changing public perception on the female body and a need to educate others on diverse body types – a task that she strongly believes should be a priority in sex education. “The stale state of education doesn’t speak on these body changes and needs to be redefined from a completely new angle at a much earlier age,” she explains. Canavan’s interest in exploring the cunt stemmed from her own experiences, as she felt shame towards her own body during her youth. “Society told me I was too round as a child, sexual partners told me that my 'bits' were too large and not normal and not what they had seen in porn.” Such doubts led to a quest to discover the beauty of her body, and to share this ethos with a strong community of women who aim to feel the same through contributing to the “Raising the Skirt” project. “‘Raising the Skirt’ creates a safe space to for women to discover their inner warrior, and that freedom can be seen through the space that each woman creates in these images.”

Ahead of the Calm Down, Dear – an event which celebrates the work of feminist artists, and will also be exhibiting a new set of photos from Canavan's “Raising the Skirt” project – we caught up with the artist to discuss body diversity, social media censorship, and the best way to encourage our youth to celebrate their cunts.

What was your motivation behind the “Raising the Skirt” project?

Nicola Canavan: My project was motivated by a desire to reclaim the cunt as a place of power, while highlighting the parts of the female body which are repeatedly cut away – specifically the labia, which is often referred to as the vagina, which is incorrect. A women’s cunt continues to be incorrectly named, shamed and erased, and that really motivated me to create this project.

Your project aims to reclaim the vagina and your workshops really started that process. How did the workshops impact a change in these women's lives, and what is the process that you and those who participate, go through?

Nicola Canavan: Each woman is drawn to my project for many different reasons, however most want to work with me to create a positive change in their relationship with their own bodies. I can't speak for my participants, but I have seen many women feel joy and have opened themselves up to a new freedom. During our workshop we spend a great amount of time looking at the body. Whether it is looking through our own bodies and thinking back to a time where we felt confidence, or even sometimes a traumatic experience in life which caused shame and fear around our bodies. Whatever it is, we tend to look at our bodies, wishing for change, but that can only happen when you give yourself time to heal. “Raising the Skirt” really is a project which gives us time to reflect on our bodies, to be present and even give some tools to move forward.