Carrie Underwood shares her Christian faith in new song
It has been nearly 10 years since Carrie Underwood won "American Idol," but her newest song proves that fame has not managed to take away her faith.

Underwood released her newest single, “Something in the Water,” Monday morning, and “the water” she refers to is the water of baptism.

“It’s really kind of a joyous uplifting song about changing your life for the better,” Underwood told NBC’s TODAY. “And kind of having that ‘ah-ha’ moment, to waking up and your life being different from that moment forward.”

Underwood has a history of being unashamed of her faith that includes singing “How Great Thou Art” on national TV and talking openly with Oprah about prayer. In 2012, she responded to whether or not she worried about the success of her single, “Jesus Take the Wheel,” due to its religious message.

“It wasn’t a worry to me at all,” Underwood told Glamour. “Country music is different. You have that Bible Belt-ness about it. I’m not the first person to sing about God, Jesus, faith (or) any of that, and I won’t be the last. And it won’t be the last for me, either. If you don’t like it, change the channel.”

“Something in the Water” is a fulfillment of that promise as Underwood sings of Christian conversion.

“I couldn’t fight back the tears so I fell on my knees/Saying God if you’re there come and rescue me,” Underwood sings. “Felt love pouring down from above/Got washed in the water/Washed in the blood/And now I’m changed/And now I’m stronger/There must be something in the water.”

Fellow country singer Jana Kramer was one of the first to voice her support for the song.

Thank you @carrieunderwood for that awesome new song! Awesome! #SomethingInTheWater — Scotty McCreery (@ScottyMcCreery) September 29, 2014

The song concludes as a choir joins Underwood in singing the classic hymn “Amazing Grace.” Despite its spiritual message, Underwood hopes that all fans will enjoy the song regardless of their religious beliefs.

“The song is hopefully uplifting no matter where you are on your spiritual journey,” Underwood told radio DJ Cody Alan. “Hopefully, it can still just make you feel happy.”

Email: mjones@deseretdigital.com