Refugees and status holders in The Hague
The Municipality of The Hague is keen to help resolve the refugee problem. In the coming 2 years, in addition to the number of refugees assigned to the municipality by the government, The Hague will accommodate an extra 700 refugees who have a temporary residence permit. This will relieve the burden on the asylum seekers’ centres and, as the City of Peace and Justice, we will contribute to the nationwide reception of the refugees.

For many years, the municipality has accommodated refugees with a temporary residence permit and helped and assisted them in finding a place in the local community.



Locations



The Hague Municipal Executive announced the first 3 emergency housing locations on 13 October.



Frequently asked questions



On this page, you will find frequently asked questions and answers relating to refugees in The Hague. This information will be edited and supplemented when more questions are received.



1. How will safety be managed in the district?

The municipality attaches great importance to the personal safety of all its citizens. As the municipality, we pay a great deal of attention to this matter. The residents at the location will be subject to the same rules as anyone else living in the Netherlands. The municipality has made a number of agreements with the police to maintain public order and security in the area around the location.

The Central Agency for the Reception of Asylum Seekers (COA) will ensure the 24-hour presence of security personnel in the vicinity of the temporary emergency accommodation in the former Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment (until 1 January 2016). Security inside and outside the accommodation will be coordinated. In addition to the efforts of local police officers and surveillance patrols, extra personnel will also be mobilised during the initial phase of the emergency accommodation. The situation will be closely monitored and safety measures will be adapted if necessary. In case of any nuisance or unsafe situations you can contact the police by calling tel. 0900- 88 44.

2. Will the status holders be given priority when being allocated accommodation?

The government has determined that status holders will currently be given priority in getting housing. For years the policy is that status holders, including families, are allocated part of the public housing becoming available at various locations throughout The Hague. The accommodation of 700 extra status holders, however, should not result in other people missing out on housing opportunities. This is why the municipality is seeking creative solutions by, for example, using empty office buildings and nursing homes or by building temporary housing units. More information on housing for status holders can be found in Dutch: www.coa.nl/nl/keten-en-samenwerkingspartners/gemeenten/huisvesting.

3. How will the people in the emergency shelter spend their day?

The former Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment will serve as a temporary emergency accommodation until 1 January 2016. People can recover from their journey at this shelter. They will be provided with a bed, shower and 3 meals a day. They can also participate in activities (such as sports and games) organised in collaboration with volunteers or social organisations. These temporary residents are not yet allowed to work.

4. Will the children of the status holders go to school?

All children between the ages of 5 and 18 years are obliged to go to school. It is important that the children first learn Dutch. There are various schools throughout the city with special classes for these children where they will receive intensive language training so that they can ultimately stream into regular schools.

About the role of the Municipality of The Hague

1. What is the Municipality of The Hague doing to take in refugees?

The asylum seekers’ centres are currently overfull. Municipalities are being asked to provide extra or emergency accommodation. Furthermore, space must be created in existing centres by speeding up the process to accommodate 10,000 refugees who have been granted a residence permit (so-called status holders) and who are waiting in the centres for housing. The Municipality of The Hague has been asked in particular to contribute to the latter. This means that The Hague will try to accommodate an extra 700 status holders this year, on top of its statutory responsibility.

2. Why does the municipality want to cooperate?

Municipalities have a social and humanitarian duty to help resolve the urgent problem of housing refugees with a residence permit. The Hague, City of Peace and Justice, is naturally keen to play a role in this. With so many countries at war, the number of refugees being granted a residence permit has risen. They are not given this status without reason. These people cannot return to their homeland because it is unsafe. The municipality feels responsible for offering these people accommodation as quickly as possible.

3. Could status holders be housed in my area?

Yes, that is a possibility. The municipality is currently discussing with the housing corporations which houses are available and suitable for the current applications. The municipality is also investigating possible locations for housing larger groups of status holders. In consultation with the Municipal Council, the Municipal Executive will decide whether a location is suitable.

The municipality prefers to spread status holders over the city. Some status holders will be accommodated in social rented housing. This has been the case for years. With over 10,000 status holders in asylum seekers’ centres waiting for suitable accommodation, the municipality is now exploring other options. It may be possible to accommodate them in vacant buildings, such as office buildings and former nursing homes, or temporary housing units could be constructed.

2. Will the status holders be given priority when being allocated accommodation?

By housing status holders, the municipality does not want to put other people looking for homes at a disadvantage. With the increasing numbers of refugees and the fact that many extra status holders are waiting in centres for suitable homes, it is no longer possible to accommodate all these people in standard available housing. Some of the status holders will still be placed in social rented housing. In addition, The Hague is considering other options. It may be possible to create accommodation in vacant buildings, such as office buildings and former nursing homes, or temporary housing units could be constructed.

5. Why is emergency accommodation being created in The Hague?

The asylum seekers’ centres are full. New people are continuing to arrive each day. The Central Agency for the Reception of Asylum Seekers (COA) is urgently looking for temporary emergency housing locations. The government has asked the Municipality of The Hague to create temporary emergency accommodation in the former Ministry of Social Affiars and Employment on the Anna van Hannoverstraat because the number of refugees in the Netherlands is so big at the moment that there is a need for extra locations.

The municipality has decided to work together on this accommodation under 3 conditions:

- that it is a temporary accommodation until 1 January 2016

- that a maximum of 600 people are given housing

- and that the location will thereafter be adapted to house status holders.

6. How is the municipality supporting the status holders?

The municipality has years of experience providing housing as well as supporting the integration of status holders. Together with organisations like Vluchtelingenwerk it ensures that the status holders are given good support in arranging practical matters such as starting their civic integration track and finding a school for their children. They receive information on various subjects such as managing money, cultural rules in the Netherlands, the educational system and (volunteer) work. This support is a precondition for the optimal integration of this group of people.



7. How will residents of The Hague be informed about the locations of alternative housing?

The municipality will inform residents in a clear and timely manner using various media, such as meetings and letters to residents. You can also visit www.denhaag.nl. As soon as the locations are known, local residents will be notified. The municipality will discuss with them what needs to be done to ensure that the status holders quickly feel at home in the district. This may include additional measures relating to supervision and monitoring.

What can residents of The Hague do?

1. Can I offer a refugee a room in my home or help in some other way?

For more information about how you can help, please contact Vluchtelingenwerk: www.vluchtelingenwerk.nl. You can also register directly with the office of Vluchtelingenwerk Zuidvleugel by sending an email to infodenhaag@vwzuidvleugel.nl or by phoning tel. (070) 389 70 01. Vluchtelingenwerk is the first point of contact for newcomers who come to live in The Hague. It supports and advises status holders as they start life here. Many volunteers also work at the Central Agency for the Reception of Asylum Seekers (COA). Please read more about working as a volunteer at www.coa.nl.



2. Where can I ask questions about offering help and accommodation in The Hague?

You can go to Volunteer work with the refugees and status holders. You can also phone the general number for the Municipality of The Hague: 14070.

More information about refugees in the Netherlands

1. Which refugees stay in an asylum seekers’ centre?

In the Netherlands, refugees report to a central application centre. From there, they are accommodated in one of the asylum seekers’ centres, where they stay while their application is being processed. If asylum is granted and a (temporary) residence permit is issued, this person becomes a status holder linked to a municipality in the Netherlands. In that municipality, suitable accommodation must be offered as soon as possible. Refugees without a residence permit stay in the asylum seekers’ centre and prepare to leave the Netherlands.

2. Who is responsible for accommodating asylum seekers?

The Central Agency for the Reception of Asylum Seekers (COA) provides accommodation for refugees while their asylum application is being processed. This means that the COA houses them from the moment that the refugee applies for asylum in the Netherlands until the moment when that refugee has to leave the Netherlands or is granted a residence permit. The COA accommodates refugees in asylum seekers’ centres all over the country. Information about how the COA operates and the reception procedure in the Netherlands is available at www.coa.nl.

3. What is the difference between emergency accommodation and homes for status holders?

Emergency accommodation provides an initial roof over a refugee’s head in the Netherlands. People can stay here without a temporary residence permit. The COA is responsible for arranging emergency accommodation and support for this group of people. Once the application procedure is completed for a residence permit, there are 2 possibilities:

- either the permit is granted and the refugee becomes a status holder

- the application is declined.

If a residence permit is granted, the refugee will become a status holder and then becomes eligible for housing in a Dutch municipality. The municipality is obliged to provide housing and support. If the application is declined, the refugee goes to a deportation centre where he will be prepared and supported in returning to his country of origin.

4. How long is a residence permit granted for?

In principle, refugees are given a permit for 5 years. If the situation in their homeland improves in the meantime, a permit may be withdrawn. After 5 years, it can be decided to grant them a residence permit for an indefinite period. This is only the case if the refugee cannot return to their homeland, if they have integrated into society here and if they have no criminal record.

5. What is a status holder?

A status holder is a refugee who has been granted a temporary residence permit on the basis of an asylum application. He or she may stay in the Netherlands for the coming 5 years and must leave the asylum seekers’ centre as soon as possible to start building up a normal life in society.

6. How many status holders are waiting for a house in the Netherlands?

Refugees follow a legal procedure to be granted a residence permit. Refugees with such a residence permit are then status holders and may build up a life in the Netherlands. There are currently around 10,000 status holders in the Netherlands who are eligible to be housed. Once they are allocated a house in a municipality, they must attend an integration course, embark on a course of study and get a job.

7. Who decides how many status holders go to each municipality?