These 8 Conspiracy Theories About The Georgia Guidestones Will Make You Question Everything
If you’re from Georgia, you’ve most likely heard of the Georgia Guidestones. Located in Nuberg, these four granite slabs have been at the center of wild, and very intense conspiracy theories for the past 30 years. But have you asked yourself, why all the attention? Why all the mystery? To understand the conspiracies, we first must look at the facts.

In 1979, a man using the pseudonym “R.C. Christian” produced plans to build a monument. He made it very clear that money was no obstacle and that there needed to be the utmost discretion in the building process. The design took four granite slabs, each nearly 20 feet tall, and arranged them in a cluster. From there, they were to be topped with a smaller, horizontal slab. Sounds simple enough, right?

But then there’s the weird part—the inscription. “R.C. Christian” insisted that each of the vertical stones was to be inscribed with the same 10 axioms, or guidelines for humanity. Each of the guidelines were carved in eight languages.

The mystery is that nobody knows who “R.C. Christian” was. Nobody knows why these Guidestones are there. Nobody knows what they were meant for or their purpose. This is where the conspiracies come in. Take a look at eight of the top conspiracy theories surrounding the Georgia Guidestones.

1. The stones were meant to create a New World Order.

Flickr. Dina Eric

Some Conspiracy theorists concluded that these stones were intended to create a new, more enlightened and well-rounded society. One that wouldn't succumb to overpopulation and stifling regulation.

2. These stones are the workings of the Antichrist.

Flickr. Martin Willms

Many Christian groups have been noted as saying these Guidestones represent a call to genocide and that they are the Ten Commandments of the Antichrist. These conspiracies have led to at least three separate occasions of vandalism by religious groups.

3. The Guidestones were meant to survive a global apocalypse.

Flickr. Dina Eric

Some conspiracy theories had a date: October 3rd 2014. (It's worth noting that we are now a year and some months later, and we're still alive.) This was the date of the global apocalypse and the stones were intended to aid survivors in regulating a new world.

4. The stones call for a global government.

Flickr. Robert Bliwas

Many theorists have claimed that the Guidestones were a call to a global government— one that ruled collectively across the world, and handled any external issues in a world court.

5. The stones were designed for the worship of the sun and the devil.

Flickr. Dina Eric

A local minister believed that since the stones lured many UFO enthusiasts, New Age folk and modern Pagans, it must have been built as an intended gathering place to worship all things evil.

6. The monument was built on a “power-nexus”.

Flickr. Rahul Chhiber

This conspiracy theory claims that the Georgia Guidestones were built on top of a large center of power. This core power that's hidden from the rest of the world, is said to eventually be released at an unknown date, and tackle the mess that our current world is in.

7. The stones are intended to convey psychic messages.

Flickr. Dina Eric

This conspiracy tells visitors that they must point both arms at the monument---one palm up and one palm down---in order to receive psychic messages from the stones directly. Are you willing to give it a shot?

8. The monument was built on a sacred place to Native Americans, which means one very crucial thing.

Flickr. Ashley Van Haeften

The Hopi Indians and their ancient shamans say "signs" will foretell the time when the fifth world, a new age, will begin. This also means the end of our current world. Ancient prophecies noted that when stone tablets are returned to the center of the world, the new age will begin. Now the only question remains, is Georgia truly at the center of the world?

There you have a few of the conspiracy theories surrounding the Georgia Guidestones. It’s a fascinating mystery that still remains unsolved. Do you believe the conspiracies? Or better yet, do you have any of your own? Share in the comments below ( via onlyinyourstate.com )!