Election Identification Certificate (EIC)

For general information regarding voting in Texas please see VoteTexas.gov.

On August 10, 2016, identification requirements for voting in Texas changed. For information regarding required identification for voting in person please visit the Texas Secretary of State.

One form of identification that can be used for voting purposes is an Election Identification Certificate (EIC). You may apply for an EIC at no charge. However, if you already have any of the following forms of ID, you are not eligible for an EIC:

Texas driver license—unexpired

Texas personal identification card—unexpired

Concealed Handgun License (CHL) or License to Carry (LTC)—unexpired

U.S. passport book or card—unexpired

U.S. Military identification with photo— unexpired

U.S. Citizenship Certificate or Certificate of Naturalization with photo

Texans can obtain an EIC at:

Any of the more than 225 Texas driver license offices during regular business hours throughout the year

during regular business hours throughout the year Alternate approved locations issuing only EICs in select counties

How to Apply

To apply for an EIC, visit a driver license office and complete an Application for Texas Election Certificate (DL-14C) (PDF) | Application for Texas Election Certificate (Spanish) (DL-14CS) (PDF).

To qualify for an EIC, you must:

Bring documentation to the office to verify your U.S. Citizenship

to the office to verify your Bring documentation to the office to verify your Identity

to the office to verify your Be eligible to vote in Texas ( Bring your valid voter registration card to the office , or submit a voter registration application through the Texas Department of Public Safety at the office)

, or submit a voter registration application through the Texas Department of Public Safety at the office) Be a Texas resident

Be 17 years and 10 months or older

The information on the documents, such as name and date of birth, must all match. If the name is different on each document, then the individual must provide documents that verify a legal name change. If other information on the document is different, speak with a Customer Service Representative for assistance.

If you are using a name other than what is on your birth certificate, (example: married name), you will be required to show legal documentation of name change. Documents must be original or certified copy. No photocopies can be accepted.

Acceptable documents:

Marriage license Divorce decree Original or certified copy of a revised birth certificate Court ordered name change Department of State Health Services marriage verification letter

Fingerprints are not taken and warrant checks are not conducted on persons applying for an EIC.

Expiration and Use

An EIC is valid for six years. There is no expiration date for certificates issued to citizens 70 years of age or older.

Election Identification Certificates may only be used for voting purposes. An EIC will not be accepted to verify identity when applying for a Texas driver license or ID card.

For general information regarding voting in Texas please see VoteTexas.gov.