Italian eyewear company’s political effort easy to see in California
Slapped down by courts, an international corporate giant is spending a pile of money in Sacramento to change a state law so it can exert better control over its market — and you need not even buy its glasses to see it happening.

Some might say that Italy-based Luxottica — the world’s largest eyewear company, with almost 60,000 employees worldwide and net sales of almost $7.7 billion in 2010 — is making a spectacle of itself as it pushes for AB 778, which would change state laws governing the business relationships between doctors who test your eyes and the companies that make your glasses.

Luxottica has spent as much on lobbying in 2011’s first quarter — almost $61,000 — as it did in each of the four prior years. The company and its LensCrafters subsidiary also have stepped up their political contributions, including $35,000 to the California Democratic State Central Committee since October and $10,200 to Assembly Speaker John Perez, D-Los Angeles, in the past two years.

LensCrafters gave $1,500 last year to Assembly Health Committee Chairman Bill Monning, D-Carmel, whose committee voted 14-1 to pass the bill April 26, and gave $9,700 in the past three years to Assembly Business, Professions and Consumer Protection Committee Chairwoman Mary Hayashi, D-Castro Valley, whose committee voted 6-1 to pass the bill May 3. The bill goes next to the Assembly Appropriations Committee, where chairman Felipe Fuentes, D-Sylmar, has received $3,100 from LensCrafters in the past two years.

These sums are small amid all the money these lawmakers have raised, and Luxottica/LensCrafters has given to many other lawmakers as well.

But generally speaking, “corporations wouldn’t be giving money to politicians without the expectation that they were going to get something in return,” said MAPLight.org Executive Director Dan Newman, framing this situation as part of a much larger issue. “Our system as a whole is bought and biased in favor of industry. Legislators that have an industry-friendly philosophy are the ones who the most money flows to, so they’re the ones that get elected. Therefore, for the most part, we have a state legislature populated by lawmakers supporting deep-pocketed interests.”

Luxottica’s most renowned brands include Ray-Ban and Oakley, but it also makes sunglasses and prescription frames for designer brands such as Chanel, Prada, Burberry, Polo Ralph Lauren, Tiffany, Versace, Vogue, Donna Karan and many others. Besides LensCrafters, its retail subsidiaries include Sunglass Hut, Pearle Vision, Sears Optical, Target Optical, BJ’s Optical and Cole Vision Care.

Barry Lynn, director of the New America Foundation’s Markets, Enterprise and Resiliency Initiative, said if you define a monopolistic company as one “big enough to determine the terms of business within its industry,” then Luxottica qualifies. “The consumer is not protected when you have this kind of consolidation.”

Assemblywoman Toni Atkins, D-San Diego, who introduced AB 778, said she’s “excited” to be working on a bill that she says simply “clarifies an existing vagueness in the law” to allow the kind of business model and oversight that has been in place for many years. “I believe this legislation is important because this model has a strong history of quality care and provides millions of Californians access to eye care services they want and need.”

California laws bar optical companies — which make and sell eyeglasses and other corrective vision aids — from offering prescription eyewear at the same location in which eye exams are provided, and from advertising that eyewear and eye exams are available in the same location.

It’s meant is to keep optometrists and ophthalmologists from being unduly influenced by commercial interests — for example, writing prescriptions you don’t need just because they work for or benefit from a company that wants to sell you glasses. Supporters say it’s the same idea as not letting smog-check centers fix your car’s exhaust system: a means of keeping test results unbiased by potential commercial gain, essentially keeping the thumb off the scales.

“You can’t have lay control over a doctor; it’s bad for the patient,” said Terence McHale, lobbyist for the California Optometric Association, opposing AB 778.

Some companies found what they believed to be a loophole, creating vision health plans regulated by the Department of Managed Health Care that they then “co-located” with their retail optician businesses, regulated by the Medical Board of California. Four companies including Luxottica — which has its EYEXAM of California vision plans within its LensCrafters retail stores — run a few hundred such sites in California.

The state sued Pearle Vision in 2002, two years before Luxottica bought it, claiming such co-located arrangements violate the state’s laws. Although the California Supreme Court unanimously ruled in 2006 that the state’s case could proceed because Pearle’s business model wasn’t exempt from the state laws, the case ultimately was settled before there was a final ruling on the model’s legality.

Meanwhile, the National Association of Optometrists & Opticians — based at LensCrafters’ Ohio headquarters — sued in federal court in 2002 claiming the state laws unconstitutionally limit interstate commerce. They said opticians, more often are based out-of-state, are unfairly disadvantaged because they can’t offer “one-stop shopping” — both eye exams and filled eyewear prescriptions — as can private-practice optometrists and ophthalmologists, who are usually California-based. A federal judge initially agreed, but the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals overturned that ruling in 2009, deferring to California’s choice to protect its citizens.

“The pressures of co-ownership and profit-sharing prohibited by the statutes are more obvious, but potentially even a landlord-tenant relationship could undermine health care quality if the landlord required a certain level of performance to maintain the lease,” the appeals court found. “These subtle pressures would be difficult to regulate as violations of professional or ethical standards. Thus, the California laws in this case are health regulations designed to prevent health care providers from being unduly affected by commercial interests.”

The appeals court remanded the case to the trial judge, who ruled in the state’s favor in April 2010. It’s on appeal again now, but Californians for Healthy Vision hopes to make it moot with AB 778, introduced in February. That coalition’s roster includes several dozen optometrists, but Luxottica owns or controls seven of its 13 health care organizations and businesses.

Luxottica contributed no money to Atkins; however, the California Optometric PAC gave her $1,000 last October, while the Local Societies of the California Optometric Association PAC gave her $2,000 in June and $1,000 in October. McHale said although they oppose her bill, they have no regrets: “Toni is an incredibly conscientious legislator who takes the job very seriously. We disagree with her on this issue.”

Like Atkins, Californians for Healthy Vision spokeswoman Becky Warren said AB 778 merely resolves the “ambiguity” of existing state law to preserve the “heavily regulated” co-location model that has been in place for decades, in which optometrists are focused completely on patient care and derive no benefit from optical sales at the same sites. “They are very committed to their patients and don’t receive any financial incentive.”

She said co-located optometrists account for only about 10 percent of California’s optometric pool, but McHale — the California Optometric Association’s lobbyist — said that’s not the point. “They want us to feel sorry for Luxottica that they haven’t had a chance to dominate the whole world market?”

He said the state’s 2002 lawsuit was rooted in optometrists’ complaints that they were under undue commercial pressures, with the company dictating how much time doctors spend with “individuals who expect they’re going to receive real optometric care.” He also said there was evidence that LensCrafters employees were used both on the sales side and health care side, a breach of the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act’s patient privacy requirements.

Read the Political Blotter at IBAbuzz.com/politics. Follow Josh Richman at Twitter.com/josh_richman.