Chelsea Clinton warm, engaged in El Paso artists and their work
CLOSE Chelsea Clinton visits Trash to Treasure art show Sunday Rudy Gutierrez/El Paso Times

Buy Photo Chelsea Clinton talks to Matthew D. Sanchez about his artwork titled Francisco el Departed Wanderer during the opening of the “Metamorphosis: Trash to Treasure” art show Sunday at the International Museum of Art. (Photo: RUDY GUTIERREZ / EL PASO TIMES)Buy Photo Story Highlights Chelsea Clinton awed by colorful, creative works

Works made from trash, including cardboard, toilet paper rolls and even beans

Former first daughter Chelsea Clinton was inspired Sunday as she walked through the International Museum of Art meeting artists who transformed pieces of trash into colorful and engaging paintings and sculptures.

Clinton came to El Paso to see the "Metamorphosis: Trash to Treasure" exhibit, created by El Dorado High School art teacher Candie Printz and her students. The exhibit was part a year-long environmental project that started when Printz and her students adopted part of a highway to clean up.

Clinton said the local artists proved that items discarded in yards and streets could be used to create beautiful art.

"And you also used that metamorphosis to help educate yourselves, your families and your communities about the growing crisis of waste in our planet," Clinton said. "It is unconscionable that in a few years we will have more plastic in the ocean than fish."

The art exhibit was the third and final project for Printz, who won the Barnes & Noble national "Get Going Day with Chelsea Clinton" contest in April 2016. The contest was inspired by Clinton's book, "It's Your World: Get Informed, Get Inspired, and Get Going!"

Previous:Chelsea Clinton praises El Dorado students

Clinton took time to meet each of the artists, from elementary school students to adults. She posed in photos with them and asked about their art and the material they used. The artworks were colorful creations made with a variety of waste that ranged from soda tabs and toilet paper rolls to glass bottles and marbles.

Buy Photo Eveline Garcia, right, a senior at Bel Air High School poses for a picture with Chelsea Clinton Sunday at the International Museum of Art. (Photo: RUDY GUTIERREZ / EL PASO TIMES)

"Have you ever worked with beans before," Clinton asked longtime artist Carmen Navar, who had created a human figure out of metal and newspaper and covered it with pinto beans.

Navar quickly quipped, "We ate a lot of beans," as kids, causing Clinton to chuckle.

Sophie Phillips, 17, a Chapin High junior, was excited to meet Clinton as she came to her portrait of Bo and Scooby, her two beloved dogs who had passed away. The piece was made with cardboard, vinyl and encyclopedia pages.

"It was very cool because she was very sweet and it was nice to get to meet someone who definitely appreciated the art you were making," Phillips said. "This was interesting because we all did something similar. We weren't competing. It was more that we were all doing something to benefit the environment."

After meeting the artists of more than 100 artworks, Clinton addressed the artists, parents, educators and students in the crowd.

"When (Printz) invited me back, I immediately said yes because I knew that enthusiasm was going to produce great and extraordinary things and help close what I often think of as the imagination gap - when we often don't know what we can do until we start doing it," she said.

Clinton said such efforts make her hopeful.

"I'm so much more optimistic than I am worried today because you have teachers in your community like Printz who saw all this as an opportunity, not only to educate and illuminate but imagine what could be possible and were committed to empowering elementary, middle and high school students to be agents of your own creativity, but also stewards and citizens of our planet," Clinton said.

For Printz, the year-long project brings hope that more can be done to save the environment.

"I'm so overwhelmed with the positive response. I feel really happy," she said. "It would be great if we could start a movement and maybe really try to educate people and maybe even get engineers and science people on board to work together and go beyond picking the mess up. Maybe we could get it to not happen in the first place. That would be awesome."

María Cortés González may be reached at 546-6150; mcortes@elpasotimes.com; @EPTMaria on Twitter.

CLOSE Look closely and you'll see these works of art are made of trash. HUMANKIND

Read or Share this story: http://www.elpasotimes.com/story/news/local/2017/04/23/chelsea-clinton-warm-engaged-el-paso-artists-and-their-work/100822760/