On the trail
Add this article to your reading list by clicking this button

Positive mental attitude

“I've stopped reading the newspapers. You've got to keep your sanity somehow. I'm a survivor.”

Donald Rumsfeld in Iraq, May 13th

It's all the feminists' fault

“I particularly am upset about the way the feminists have taken really large strides in the military...the women had no business guarding Iraqi prisoners.”

Phyllis Schafly, the grand old woman of the right, on the real reason to be upset about the photos from Abu Ghraib. Capital Report, CNBC, May 13th

Peace, man

“We were denied in four days. We think that's a record. Now we plan to open a welcome centre staffed by punksters and anarchists and squatters. We just want to help out.”

John Penley of the Youth International (Yippie) Party, which planned to offer massages and medical marijuana during the Republican Convention in New York. It was denied a permit to camp on the Lower East Side. Washington Post, May 17th

A question of taste

“No matter how many times he comes down here...he's still a guy who drinks Perrier and Dom Perignon instead of Pepsi and Pabst Blue Ribbon.”

Mike Huckabee, Republican governor of Arkansas, on John Kerry's visits to the state. Boston Herald, May 13th

Christmas comes early

The White House's annual financial disclosure of gifts revealed that Vice-President Dick Cheney received $6,345 in gifts, including a set of designer earrings and necklace valued at $1,475.

Reuters, May 14th

Clueless in St James's

Last week we published a list that purported to show the IQs of states voting for George Bush and Al Gore in 2000. Alas, we were the victim of a hoax: no such data exists. By way of apology, here are two very crude ratings of states' intelligence—and how they voted.

Lock up your daughters (1)

“I think they may have some involvement in the campaign, which will be fun.”

Laura Bush on her daughters, who graduate from college this summer. Road to the White House, C-Span, May 16th

Lock up your daughters (2)

“It was a lovely photograph, but not a single vote is going to be cast based on the naked appearance of his daughter. Those people who care about that deeply are probably not Kerry voters.”

Tony Blankley, of the conservative Washington Times, snorts about Alexandra Kerry's see-through dress at the Cannes Film Festival. New York Daily News, May 18th

Common man

“For a few years I shared membership in the Teamsters, I was a Teamsters cardholder. I learned how to wheel one of those electric carts around with a pallet filled up to the top, and take those turns, and race with other people.”

John Kerry reveals that he was once a union member during a summer job between terms at Yale. New York Times, May 17th