SWEDEN'S 'NO-GO ZONE' CRISIS: Three police officers injured after being ATTACKED by thugs
Officers in Sweden’s capital were on patrol in the suburb of Rinkeby when they are set upon by a group of 20-30 thugs. Police spokeswoman Eva Nilsson said the sickening attack on her colleagues happened after they stopped to search an individual at around 11pm. Moments later the mob appeared and started hitting, kicking and throwing bottles and glass at the attending officers. Ms Nilsson said: “It is utterly unacceptable that this happened during normal service.

GOOGLE MAPS • GETTY The officers were attacked in the suburb of Rinkeby

“The trouble started after a [routine search of a person]. People came out from a place nearby, a restaurant or what it was. “Exactly how many people were involved is difficult to say, but the officers [assess] it to be between 20-30 people. All of them were not active, but they were observing the incident. “Bottles and glass was also thrown at the police.” Three police officers were taken to hospital for treatment after the brutal clash, and Ms Nilsson added: “Of course it’s serious when police officers on duty are attacked in this way.

Bottles and glass was also thrown at the police Police spokeswoman Eva Nilsson

“Unfortunately this is the reality… for officers.” The official also confirmed three people had been detained following the sickening incident. The shocking attack on the on-duty officers is just one of many incidents, as officials have placed more than 50 areas on a ‘no-go zone’ list where they admit they do not have control. Lawless thugs are wreaking havoc unchecked, and officers are often at personal risk when entering the crisis-hit areas.

Migrants clash with police across Europe Wed, February 15, 2017 Migrants clash with each other in over crowded camps across Europe. Play slideshow EPA 1 of 107 Moroccan Police look at immigrants trying to jump the six-meter-high fence in Ceuta, Spanish enclave on the north of Africa, 09 December 2016.