Hollywood Historic Trust in Hollywood, California (CA)
Checklist

2012 2013

Is the organization described in section 501(c)(3) or 4947(a)(1) (other than a private foundation)? Yes Yes

Is the organization required to complete Schedule B, Schedule of Contributors? Yes Yes

Did the organization engage in direct or indirect political campaign activities on behalf of or in opposition to candidates for public office? No No

Did the organization engage in lobbying activities, or have a section 501(h) election in effect during the tax year? No No

Is the organization a section 501(c)(4), 501(c)(5), or 501(c)(6) organization that receives membership dues, assessments, or similar amounts as defined in Revenue Procedure 98-19? No No

Did the organization maintain any donor advised funds or any similar funds or accounts for which donors have the right to provide advice on the distribution or investment of amounts in such funds or accounts? No No

Did the organization receive or hold a conservation easement, including easements to preserve open space, the environment, historic land areas, or historic structures? No No

Did the organization maintain collections of works of art, historical treasures, or other similar assets? No No

Did the organization report an amount for escrow or custodial account liability; serve as a custodian or provide credit counseling, debt management, credit repair, or debt negotiation services? No No

Did the organization, directly or through a related organization, hold assets in temporarily restricted endowments, permanent endowments, or quasi-endowments? No No

Did the organization report an amount for land, buildings, and equipment? No No

Did the organization report an amount for investments-other securities that is 5% or more of its total assets? No No

Did the organization report an amount for investments-program related that is 5% or more of its total assets? No No

Did the organization report an amount for other assets that is 5% or more of its total assets? No No

Did the organization report an amount for other liabilities? No No

Did the organization's separate or consolidated financial statements for the tax year include a footnote that addresses the organization's liability for uncertain tax positions under FIN 48 (ASC 740)? No No

Did the organization obtain separate, independent audited financial statements for the tax year? No No

Was the organization included in consolidated, independent audited financial statements for the tax year? No No

Is the organization a school described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii)? No No

Did the organization maintain an office, employees, or agents outside of the United States? No No

Did the organization have aggregate revenues or expenses of more than $10,000 from grantmaking, fundraising, business, investment, and program service activities outside the United States, or aggregate foreign investments valued at $100,000 or more? No No

Did the organization report more than $5,000 of grants or other assistance to or for any foreign organization? No No

Did the organization report more than $5,000 of aggregate grants or other assistance to or for foreign individuals? No No

Did the organization report a total of more than $15,000 of expenses for professional fundraising services? No No

Did the organization report more than $15,000 total of fundraising event gross income and contributions? No No

Did the organization report more than $15,000 of gross income from gaming activities? No No

Did the organization operate one or more hospital facilities? No No

Did the organization attach a copy of its audited financial statements? No No

Did the organization report more than $5,000 of grants or other assistance to any domestic organization or domestic government? No No

Did the organization report more than $5,000 of grants or other assistance to or for domestic individuals? No No

Did the organization answer 'Yes' about compensation of the organization's current and former officers, directors, trustees, key employees, and highest compensated employees? No No

Did the organization have a tax-exempt bond issue with an outstanding principal amount of more than $100,000 as of the last day of the year, that was issued after December 31, 2002? No No

Did the organization invest any proceeds of tax-exempt bonds beyond a temporary period exception? No No

Did the organization maintain an escrow account other than a refunding escrow at any time during the year to defease any tax-exempt bonds? No No

Did the organization act as an 'on behalf of' issuer for bonds outstanding at any time during the year? No No

Did the organization engage in an excess benefit transaction with a disqualified person during the year? No No

Is the organization aware that it engaged in an excess benefit transaction with a disqualified person in a prior year, and that the transaction has not been reported on any of the organization's prior Forms 990 or 990-EZ? No No

Did the organization report any amount for receivables from or payables to any current or former officers, directors, trustees, key employees, highest compensated employees, or disqualified persons? No No

Did the organization provide a grant or other assistance to an officer, director, trustee, key employee, substantial contributor or employee thereof, a grant selection committee member, or to a 35% controlled entity or family member of any of these persons? No No

Was the organization a party to a business transaction with one of the following parties

A current or former officer, director, trustee, or key employee? No No

A family member of a current or former officer, director, trustee, or key employee? No No

An entity of which a current or former officer, director, trustee, or key employee (or a family member thereof) was an officer, director, trustee, or direct or indirect owner? No No

Did the organization receive more than $25,000 in non-cash contributions? No No

Did the organization receive contributions of art, historical treasures, or other similar assets, or qualified conservation contributions? No No

Did the organization liquidate, terminate, or dissolve and cease operations? No No

Did the organization sell, exchange, dispose of, or transfer more than 25% of its net assets? No No

Did the organization own 100% of an entity disregarded as separate from the organization under Regulations sections 301.7701-2 and 301.7701-3? No No

Was the organization related to any tax-exempt or taxable entity? No No

Did the organization have a controlled entity within the meaning of section 512(b)(13)? No No

Did the organization make any transfers to an exempt non-charitable related organization? No No