Betsy DeVos Says It's 'Possible' Her Family Has Donated $200M To Republicans
Donald Trump’s pick for Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos said it was “possible” her family has donated $200 million to Republicans, after questioning from Senator Bernie Sanders (I-Vermont) during her confirmation hearing Tuesday night.

Sanders came out swinging as soon as he got the chance to speak. Here was his opening exchange with DeVos:

Sanders: “Mrs. DeVos, there is a growing fear, I think, in this country that we are moving toward what some would call an oligarchic form of society, where a small number of very, very wealthy billionaires control, to a significant degree, our economic and political life. Would you be so kind as to tell us how much your family has contributed to the Republican Party over the years?”

DeVos: “Senator, first of all thank you for that question. I again was pleased to meet you in your office last week. I wish I could give you that number. I don’t know.”

Sanders: “I have heard the number was $200 million. Does that sound in the ballpark?”

DeVos: “Collectively? Between my entire family?”

Sanders: “Yeah, over the years.”

DeVos: “That’s possible”

Sanders: “Okay. My question is, and I don’t mean to be rude. Do you think, if you were not a multi-billionaire, if your family has not made hundreds of millions of dollars of contributions to the Republican Party, that you would be sitting here today?”

DeVos: “Senator, as a matter of fact, I do think that there would be that possibility. I’ve worked very hard on behalf of parents and children for the last almost 30 years to be a voice for students and to empower parents to make decisions on behalf of their children, primarily low-income children.”

Senator Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) got his chance to speak afterwards and offered a veiled criticism of Sanders' line of questioning. “Unlike others here who may be interested in attacking your donations," Hatch said, "I know that you want to do right by all children, so I will stick to focusing on how we can work together on sound policy.”

Senator Susan Collins (R-Maine) also criticized Sanders. “I have no doubt that you care deeply about the education of all children," she told DeVos. "Given your lifelong work and commitment to education, any suggestion, such as was made earlier, that your nomination is linked to your political contributions is really unfair and unwarranted.”