Sarah Palin: “Thanksgiving is for Real Americans Not Indians”
Sarah Palin has put her foot in it again. You may recall back in 2008,when then Gov. Sarah Palin, fresh off her Vice Presidential bid loss, did what has become customary of many Governors. She went to a turkey farm to pardon one lucky bird. After the pardon she paused for a photo op in what has now been dubbed,” the greatest turkey-related disaster in political history”. Yes folks, she decided standing right in front of the machinery that grinds the heads off turkeys would be the perfect spot for the photo shoot. As bad as that moment was, she managed to out-do it this year. Appearing on a local morning talk show in Washington, Palin put her sparkling intellect on display once again. The segment started off well enough. It was really just a puff piece about the meaning of Thanksgiving in people’s lives.

Things derailed quickly however, when the interviewer asked Palin about the controversy surrounding the holiday. Palin sat dumbfounded unaware of any controversy. The host went on to fill her in on the fact that many Native American tribes do not celebrate the holiday. In fact, it is a day of mourning for them. And those that do celebrate the day do so because it is a reminder that they survived mass murder, forced relocation, the theft of their land and many other injustices.

Palin’s response was astounding, “Thanksgiving is for real Americans not Indians. We founded this Christian nation. Why if it wasn’t for the God-fearing pilgrims, the natives would still be running around in loin cloths shooting at things with their arrows.”

The gracious host tried to save her by stating, “Surely, you’re aware that the Indians were the native population of this country and were driven from their homes by the European settlers.

This further incited Palin and her rant continued, “I’ll tell ya what I know. I know that these tribes do a lot of whining. I mean they got special rights up the wazzoo. They have those casinos all over the place. Seems to me they got a great deal. If they would just put down the bottle and whatever they’re smoking in those peace pipes and get a job like the rest of us, they’d be alright. I see it all the time in Alaska with the Inuit. They just don’t want to join the rest of us. They’re still hunting whale for gosh sake.”

The station quickly went to commercial break and Palin was gone when the show resumed. The former Governor has not responded to our requests for comment.