Hillary Clinton for President?
Contest Directions: Senator Hillary Clinton officially declared her bid for presidency 2008.

Making her announcement Hillary said "I'm in". This is the phrase she rarely heard from Bill in their bedroom.

In this contest you are asked to photoshop anything connected to Senator Hillary Clinton running for president of United States. Examples may be photoshopping magazine covers, campaign photos, or future presidency achievements. Senator Hillary Clinton officially declared her bid for presidency 2008.Making her announcement Hillary saidThis is the phrase she rarely heard from Bill in their bedroom.

Contest Info Started: 1/21/2007 06:00 Ended: 1/23/2007 06:00

Level: advanced Entries: 23 Jackpot:

$5

$5 $3

$3 $2

23 image entries Pages

1

2

3

-

View All

Register to post comments and participate in contests.

This contest is fueled by the following news: For the 20 years, United States were run by the Bush and Clinton dynasties. This unbroken run may now extend even longer, after senator Hillary Clinton announced her bid for presidency 2008. Hillary posted the video announcement on her website where she declared "I am in." Clinton's announcement came just days after another Democratic senator Barack Obama announced his bid in presidential elections 2008 on his website, also through posted video. Ratings show that, so far, Hillary Rodham Clinton is favorite to win White House in 2008, much due to the fact that she would be the first woman president. Senator Barack Obama, who also shows promising chances of winning, would be the first black president if he wins, which also helps his ratings. If Hillary wins this race, she will return to the White House again, not as a wife of president Bill Clinton, but as a president herself. If this happens White House will be run just by two families for at least 24 years. George HW Bush started this run by winning the presidency in 1998. He handed in the White House to Bill Clinton who won the office in 1992 who then passed the White House to George W. Bush (the son of the first president "father Bush"). Can Hillary Clinton continue this presidential dynasty? United States is a country of 300 million people with different ethnic backgrounds and political views; nonetheless political dynasties have been known to give strong advantage to their candidates through connections with people of high power, and permanent campaign donors tied to the families. President Bush recently said that Bill Clinton became like a son to his father after they did a lot of joint work together to coordinate a help to Tsunami victims since 2004. But Hillary Clinton was clear in setting herself apart from Bush dynasty in her announcement saying that America needs a new president, and that she will do all in her power to heal the damage done to America by George W. Bush. Senator Clinton said her primary concerns will be war in Iraq, health care for all Americans, energy and environment, and growing budget deficit. "This is going to be a tough campaign," said Hillary, "and I am prepared to fight."