KKK fliers delivered to Gaston County driveways
Inside small Ziploc bags weighed down by rice, a recruitment flier purportedly from a white nationalist hate group greeted several Gaston County families this weekend.

The fliers, passed out to streets in Cherryville and Dallas, feature a drawing of a hooded man, with his arm outstretched and his finger pointing outward. Presumably representing a member of the Ku Klux Klan, the paper provides a phone number, along with a message stating that "The KKK wants you."

It was a sight that disappointed Robert Hord on Sunday. His wife found the delivery in the couple's Oak Grove Drive driveway in Cherryville.

"It was rather stunning, to say the least," Hord said. "I would've hoped the world would've been a bit further past that, but I think that's probably just the hope."

The fliers aren't unique to Gaston County. Similar ones have been reported in Fayetteville and Greensboro, as well as in Maine, New York and Canada over the past year. A chapter of the group showed up unannounced in Roxboro in December to hold a parade of cars throughout the town.

The deliveries also hit Dallas's Stonewood community, and Shiela Johnston's son happened to come across one while riding his bike in the neighborhood. Horrified that the fliers would make the subdivision's minority residents feel unsafe, Johnston immediately called Gaston County Police.

"It's just scary," Johnston said. "It's scary to look at. It's scary to think there are people like this skulking around our neighborhood."

Gaston County Police Capt. Curt Rosselle said the papers likely represented more of a recruitment effort than they did a threat. The KKK is America's oldest hate group, according to the Southern Poverty Law Center.

Curious to find out if the flier was legitimate, Johnston's teenage son called the number listed on the paper. After a series of unanswered rings, an expletive-laced message rails against African-Americans and refugees and directs callers to leave their name and address. The phone number has an Indiana area code.

Cherryville Police Capt. Cam Jenks said that while the sheets weren't passed out everywhere throughout the city, officers were sent out to collect a couple of them. What, if any, legal repercussions those responsible could face is unclear, but Jenks said the behavior is not indicative of the way Cherryville thinks.

"This is definitely not the character of Cherryville," Jenks said. "I hate that this has happened for society as a whole. This has not been what we as a society should be. But this definitely does not reflect upon the character of Cherryville."

For Hord, the signs were a letdown, an indicator that perhaps social progress isn't coming along as quickly as he thought. The 64-year-old could remember a time when the KKK was much bigger, and he said he hopes the fliers aren't a sign that they'll make a resurgence.

"I am disappointed that we as a people have not learned to be better people, more accepting and more understanding," Hord said.

The Southern Poverty Law Center estimates there are between 5,000 and 8,000 Klan members today, split among dozens of different groups.

You can reach Adam Lawson at 704-869-1842 or on Twitter @GazetteLawson.