Trump might have lost $1 billion, but Hillary lost way more at the State Department
News broke Sunday that Donald Trump lost nearly a billion dollars when he filed his 1995 federal income taxes. The losses were the result of the failures of three Atlantic City casinos, an airline, and a hotel in Manhattan. Trump may have used those losses to avoid paying federal income taxes for two decades, even though he denounced others, including low- and middle-income Americans, for doing the same thing.

And yet Hillary Clinton’s tenure at the State Department was far more costly for taxpayers than Trump’s failures.

In 2014, the Inspector General found that the State Department had, under Hillary Clinton’s watch, lost or misplaced at least $6 billion due to the improper filing of contracts, including some related to the war in Iraq.





RELATED: Donald Trump dipped into his foundation to pay for things that had nothing to do with his charity

From the Washington Free Beacon:

The State Department misplaced and lost some $6 billion due to the improper filing of contracts during the past six years, mainly during the tenure of former Secretary of State Hilary Clinton, according to a newly released Inspector General report. The $6 billion in unaccounted funds poses a “significant financial risk and demonstrates a lack of internal control over the Department’s contract actions,” according to the report. The alert, originally sent on March 20 and just released this week, warns that the missing contracting funds “could expose the department to substantial financial losses.” The report centered on State Department contracts worth “more than $6 billion in which contract files were incomplete or could not be located at all,” according to the alert.

According to the IG, the State Department could not produce 33 of the 115 request contract files related to the Iraq war. Those cost taxpayers $2.1 billion. In addition, 48 of the 82 other contract files did not have the required documentation, costing taxpayers another $2.1 billion. Other contracts that had missing and incomplete information were related to projects in Africa and others didn’t disclose conflicts of interest.

The IG concluded that the State Department’s poor bookkeeping “creates conditions conducive to fraud, as corrupt individuals may attempt to conceal evidence of illicit behavior by omitting key documents from the contract file.”

RELATED: Here’s how the Clinton Foundation measures up to history’s most corrupt political machine

The Clinton State Department had another cloud of controversy surrounding it: Clinton Foundation donors had access to Foggy Bottom while Hillary was secretary of state, creating potential conflicts of interest.

Rare reported in August 2015 that Clinton also failed to disclose a donation to the Clinton Foundation from a Russian company that took control of Uranium One, which was responsible for one fifth of all uranium production in the United States. Since uranium is a strategic asset, the takeover had to be approved by the State Department, and it was.