GLOW STICKS GLOW BRACELETS GLOW IN THE DARK FLASHING NOVELTIES UK WHOLESALE GLOWSTICKS
1. Are the chemical glow light products safe?

Yes. All our chemical glow light sticks and products come in a sealed plastic case. Even if the outer casing of the glow light stick or glow light product is somehow punctured or broken open, the chemical contents are non-toxic and non-flammable. Contact with eyes or ingesting of the fluid should be avoided because irritation will result. There is also the possibility of an allergic reaction. Please keep in mind however that under normal use you will never come into contact with the fluid inside the glow light stick. Glow light products are not recommended for children under the age of 5 without adult supervision.



2. How do glow light products work?

There are four components to most light sticks. The first is the plastic outer casing which holds everything in. The second is the fluid that you can see moving around in the light stick. The third is the glass ampoule which floats freely in the fluid. The fourth, and last component, is the fluid contained inside the glass ampoule. Now that you know how a light stick is made up, you can understand what happens to make it work.

To make a glow light product or glow light stick 'glow' you must bend the outer plastic casing enough so that the inner glass ampoule breaks. The two chemicals can then mix together creating the chemical reaction and the 'glow'.



3. Does temperature affect glow light sticks?

Yes, the warmer the temperature, the brighter the glow stick will glow. The heat will also shorten the chemical reaction time, which is of course the length of time that the light stick glows for. If it is colder, the glow stick will be dimmer and the reaction time will be longer which again, means that it will glow longer.

Here is a tip to get an extra half hour out of your glow light stick: To reactivate a "dead" glow light stick or glow light product you just put it into boiling water for about 30 seconds and it will glow again for up to half an hour.



4. Can you turn glow light products "off" once you have activated them?

No, once you have activated a glow light products it will glow until the chemical reaction is finished. You can however prolong the life of your glow light stick or glow light products after it has been activated. Stick it into the freezer. Freezing an activated glow light product will slow the chemical reaction. Once you take it back out of the freezer, the glow light stick or glow light product will start to glow again once it warms up. This technique does not stop the chemical reaction, but it slows the reaction enough that if you put it into the freezer one night and take it back out the next night, it should work fine.



5. Are glow light products waterproof?

Yes. Even Scuba Divers use them underwater to make themselves more visible.



6. What happens if I get the chemical from a glow light products on my cloths?

With normal use of glow light product this is not a issue, but if you happen to puncture a glow light product and get it on your clothing, simply rinse the area with warm soapy water. If the chemical dries on the clothing it may cause a stain.



7. How should I store un-activated glow light products?

Glow light products should be stored in a cool dry place in the original container or packaging that they came in. Heat and humidity will shorten the shelf life of glow light products.



8. How long is the shelf life of glow light products?

Depending on how they are packaged the shelf life is 1 to 4 years. Items in foil packaging will last for up to 4 years and bulk items (no foil packaging) have usually just over a 1 year shelf life.



9. How long do they glow?

Glow light products glow between 12 - 24 hours depending on the product and the ambient air temperature.



10. What chemicals are in a glow light?

The glow light is made of two parts which when mixed together create the chemical reaction which makes them glow.

4g sodium carbonate

0.2 g luminol

0.5 g ammonium carbonate

0.4 g copper sulfate pentahydrate approx. 1 litre of distilled water.

50 ml of 3% hydrogen peroxide approx. 1 litre of distilled water. 11. Do you have a question about glow sticks or light sticks that has not been answered here?

If you have a question about glow sticks or glow light sticks which you would like answered please E-mail to: sales@glow-sticks.org and we will answer your question via email. We may also include the answer to your question here on our "Frequently Asked Questions" page.