7 Theories on What Donald Trump Meant by “Covfefe”
The great mystery of our time, solved.

Last night, international punchline Donald Trump captured the world's imagination with seven nonsensical letters. C-O-V-F-E-F-E. Covfefe. What did it mean? Why was the tweet containing it left up for so long? What could possibly explain the president of the United States saying this?

Who shot JFK? What happened to the Lindbergh baby? Can jet fuel melt steel beams? And now this: What does covfefe mean? Well, luckily for you, dear reader, your trusted GQ detective here has been spending most of his free time looking into which celebrities are their real selves and which ones have been replaced by clones—Taylor Swift, I'm on to you—and now he's ready to apply that same sharp, investigative eye to the biggest scandal in all the land. Here are seven completely plausible theories:

1. Let's start with the obvious. He tweets from the toilet and dropped his phone between his legs mid-rant. Nothing takes the wind out of your "fuck the press" sails quite like fishing your iPhone from the murky abyss.

2. Covfefe is a safe word that Donald Trump has with Vladimir Putin. They started their elaborate psychosexual BDSM relationship years ago, surrounded by hookers and pee-pee, but now that their role-play scene has led Trump to being an undercover mole in the White House, things have just gotten way too intense for him. He's ready to tap out.

3. Covfefe isn't actually a word at all. It's a coded command. An acronym.

C- Crisis

O- Of

V- Very

F- Frightened

E- Energetic

F- Ferrets

E- Engage

This may seem outlandish now, but when our nation's great coastal cities are overrun by the terrified and rabid rodents, we'll see the evil genius of Donald Trump's ways.

4. Covfefe is the result of Ivanka physically removing the phone from her father's impish hands during the middle of an ill-advised tweetstorm. At almost 6 feet tall, Ivanka is not to be taken lightly in battle.

5. The real Donald Trump is no longer with us and was replaced by an imperfect clone. (Like all great noir stories, my two cases reveal themselves to actually be the same case.)

6. As Samantha Bee theorized, Donald Trump doesn't know how to read and actually just believes that's how you spell "coverage."

7. It doesn't matter what it means because while we're all making "covfefe" jokes (myself included), Trump is pulling out of the Paris climate agreement and actively doing all he can to destroy both our country and the world for future generations before the growing Russia scandal swallows him and his presidency whole.

Note: Let it be known that Donald Trump is never distracting us on purpose. He's not playing four-hundred-dimensional chess. He's just an idiot.

Watch Now: