BREAKING: Democrats Filing TREASON Charges Against Trump, McConnell, Guiliani, & Comey MONDAY MORNING
Following the news that the CIA has determined Russia was involved in swaying the election for Donald Trump, both Democratic and REPUBLICAN senators are calling for an investigation into the Russian cyber-attacks that interfered with the presidential election.

Four senators issued a statement,Chuck Schumer (D-New York), Jack Reed (D-Rhode Island), John McCain (R-Arizona), and Lindsey Graham (R-South Carolina), which read in part:

“For years, foreign adversaries have directed cyberattacks at America’s physical, economic, and military infrastructure while stealing our intellectual property. Now our democratic institutions have been targeted. Recent reports of Russian interference in our election should alarm every American.”

NEW: Bipartisan group of senators release joint statement calling for examination of reports of Russian interference in 2016 US election. pic.twitter.com/uGU7qP4kei — ABC News Politics (@ABCPolitics) December 11, 2016

Now a group of Democrats plans to file treason charges against Trump, and others that knew about Russia’s interference in the election.

The group, democraticcoalition.org announced their plan on Twitter.

The groups mission statement is:

The Democratic Coalition Against Trump (DCAT) is an arm of Keep America Great PAC. The coalition formed in the Spring of 2016, with the main goal of making sure that Donald Trump never became President. DCAT now exists to hold the Trump White House accountable, and is directly countering Donald Trump, along with Republican elected officials and candidates who support him, through aggressive digital and traditional advertising, grassroots action, in-depth opposition research, and a nationwide rapid-response team.

One of the politicians targeted for treason charges is Mitch McConnell, who apparently knew about Russia’s involvement, but kept quiet. His wife, Elaine Chao, has been nominated by Trump to be the Secretary of Transportation.