Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc.
Frequently Asked Questions Regarding Hillís Pet Nutrition Inc.ís Activities in Support of Itís Single Product Recall: Hillís Prescription Dietô m/dô Feline Dry Food

1. Why are you recalling Hill’s Prescription Diet™ m/d™ Feline Dry?

In accordance with its over-riding commitment to pet health and well-being, Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc. is voluntarily recalling Prescription Diet ™ m/d™ Feline Dry Food from the market. Hill’s is taking this precautionary action because during a two-month period in early 2007, wheat gluten for this product was provided by a company that also supplied wheat gluten to Menu Foods. U.S. Food and Drug Administration tests of wheat gluten samples from this period show the presence of a small amount of melamine.

Hill’s expects to resume shipments as soon as possible of a reformulated version of this highly beneficial product that will not contain wheat gluten.

2. What is the process I should follow to return my product?

Pet owners:

Hill’s Pet Nutrition Inc. has a 100% guarantee on all products. Simply return the product to the veterinary clinic where it was purchased for a refund and an alternative food recommendation.

Veterinary professionals:

All products returned by the client or in your inventory should be returned. The process is as follows:

Do not destroy the product. Remove products from your shelves and clearly mark them “Hold for Hill’s representative’s pick up.” Clinics supplied by Hill’s Delivery Service should follow normal returns procedures. Clinics supplied by distributors or warehouses – return all product to the distributor or warehouse for product retrieval and appropriate reimbursement.

3. Are there any other Hill’s products involved in this recall?

No. Hill’s Prescription Diet ™ m/d ™ Feline Dry Foods is the only product sold in the United States and Canada that contained wheat gluten from any supplier. No other Hill’s Prescription Diet® or Science Diet® products are affected by this voluntary recall. Hill’s Science Diet Savory Cuts Feline canned cat foods, manufactured by Menu Foods, were previously withdrawn from the market as a precaution.

A list of voluntarily recalled Hill’s products is available at www.HillsPet.com.

4. What should I feed in place of Hill’s Prescription Diet ™ m/d™ Feline Dry?

We recommend that any pet currently fed Hill’s Prescription Diet ™ m/d ™ Feline Dry Food be fed the canned version or an alternative Prescription Diet brand product as advised by the veterinarian.

Hill’s continues to fully cooperate with the FDA on its ongoing investigation. We deeply regret any concern that this has caused our valued customers.

We will provide future updates as information becomes available.

For more information, consumers can contact the company at 1-800-445-5777 or visit www.HillsPet.com for details.