Sanders Wins Vermont, Oklahoma, Minnesota, Colorado, Virtually Tying Clinton in Massachusetts
The story of Super Tuesday was not Donald Trump's dominance; that was expected. Nor was the story Hillary Clinton's wins in the South. They too were expected.

The story was Bernie Sanders, who managed to win four states to Clinton's seven, taking home victories in Oklahoma, Minnesota, Colorado as well as his home state of Vermont, where he won in landslide fashion: 86-percent to Clinton's 14-percent.

In Massachusetts, Sanders and Clinton virtually tied, as they did last month in Iowa.

Sanders is now the only presidential candidate besides Clinton and Trump to have won five states this election season. He may not be the Democratic frontrunner, but he's a close second, much closer to a nomination than either Rubio or Cruz.

Nevertheless, MSNBC covered Tuesday's results with a clear Clinton-bias, showing graphics of Clinton blowing away Sanders with the boost of her super delegates.

Google also included the totally-unofficial-super-delegates in its delegate graphic.

If you notice, in the image above, Sanders and Clinton have nearly the same amount of pledged delegates, which are represented by the lighter blue. But in the darker blue category, where super delegates are concerned, Clinton has the clear advantage.

The problem is, MSNBC and Google are including the super delegates (who haven't even voted yet) in their delegate count, making Clinton look like a shoo-in.

This is an easy way to conceal the viability of a Sanders' nomination. Factoring in the super delegates gives Clinton a whopping 1,034 to 408 delegate lead over Sanders. Without super delegates, however, Clinton's lead deteriorates significantly:

Clinton: 596

Sanders: 399

Including super delegates at this point is not only misleading, but downright dishonest because super delegates won't vote until the Democratic National Convention. As they did for Obama in 2008, super delegates can and will transfer their support to Sanders if the Senator continues to win in primaries and caucuses. To portray Clinton as the clear favorite this early on is a clear fallacy.

The reality is, the only delegates that are absolutely certain at this point in time are the pledged delegates, the ones that candidates win fair and square.