Raqqa: Isis completely driven out of Syria 'capital' by US-backed forces
US-backed militias have completely taken Isis' de facto capital, Raqqa, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights (SOHR) said on Tuesday, in a major symbolic blow to the jihadist group.

The fall of Raqqa, where Isis staged euphoric parades after its string of lightning victories in 2014, is a potent symbol of the movement's collapsing fortunes. The city was used as a base for the group to plan attacks abroad.

The Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), an alliance of Kurdish and Arab militias backed by a US-led international alliance, has been fighting Isis inside Raqqa since June.

We’ll tell you what’s true. You can form your own view. From 15p €0.18 $0.18 USD 0.27 a day, more exclusives, analysis and extras.

SOHR said 3,250 people were killed in the five-month battle, including 1,130 civilians.

A witness said fighting appeared to be almost at an end with only sporadic bursts of gunfire.

Militia fighters celebrated in the streets, chanted slogans from their vehicles and raised a flag inside Raqqa stadium.

An SDF spokesman said the alliance would capture the last Isis areas in the city within hours.

Save The Children has warned that the humanitarian crisis in northeast Syria is "rapidly escalating", with 270,000 people who have fled the fighting in "critical need" of aid and camps "bursting at the seams".

On Saturday a deal was brokered for the last remaining local fighters in Raqqa to leave the city.

SDF spokesman Talal Silo said then that any fighters who were not signed up to the deal would be left behind "to surrender or die”.

The jihadists' last bases in the city, a stadium and a hospital, were captured earlier on Tuesday, the SDF said.

A local field commander said no Isis fighters remained at the two central points where militants had been best entrenched and where the SDF said fighting on Monday night and early Tuesday was focused.

"We do still know there are still IEDs and booby traps in and amongst the areas that ISIS once held, so the SDF will continue to clear deliberately through areas," said Colonel Ryan Dillon, a spokesman for the coalition.

In a sign that the four-month battle for Raqqa was in its last stages, Col Dillon said there had been no coalition air strikes there on Monday.

Shape Created with Sketch. Syrian Democratic Forces take Raqqa from Isis – in pictures Show all 8 left Created with Sketch. right Created with Sketch. Shape Created with Sketch. Syrian Democratic Forces take Raqqa from Isis – in pictures 1/8 Syrian Democratic Forces fighters celebrate victory in Raqqa atop of military vehicles REUTERS 2/8 Fighters of Syrian Democratic Forces march past destroyed buildings as they celebrate victory REUTERS 3/8 Fighters of Syrian Democratic Forces gesture the "V" sign in Raqqa REUTERS 4/8 Fighters of Syrian Democratic Forces evacuate a civilian from the stadium REUTERS 5/8 A civilian prays after she was rescued by fighters of Syrian Democratic Forces from the stadium REUTERS 6/8 Syrian Democratic Forces fighters ride atop of military vehicles as they celebrate victory in Raqqa REUTERS 7/8 Syrian Democratic Forces fighters celebrate victory in Raqqa REUTERS 8/8 A fighter of Syrian Democratic Forces celebrates in Raqqa Reuters 1/8 Syrian Democratic Forces fighters celebrate victory in Raqqa atop of military vehicles REUTERS 2/8 Fighters of Syrian Democratic Forces march past destroyed buildings as they celebrate victory REUTERS 3/8 Fighters of Syrian Democratic Forces gesture the "V" sign in Raqqa REUTERS 4/8 Fighters of Syrian Democratic Forces evacuate a civilian from the stadium REUTERS 5/8 A civilian prays after she was rescued by fighters of Syrian Democratic Forces from the stadium REUTERS 6/8 Syrian Democratic Forces fighters ride atop of military vehicles as they celebrate victory in Raqqa REUTERS 7/8 Syrian Democratic Forces fighters celebrate victory in Raqqa REUTERS 8/8 A fighter of Syrian Democratic Forces celebrates in Raqqa Reuters

It is now hemmed in to a tiny bomb-cratered patch of the city around the stadium that was being pounded from the air by a US-led coalition and encircled by SDF fighters.

Isis has lost swathes of territory in Syria and Iraq this year, including its most prized possession, Mosul, and in Syria it has been forced back into a strip of the Euphrates valley and surrounding desert.