Tone Deaf: Dems Brush Off Uncertainty Caused By Job-Killing Policies
Washington Democrats still don’t get it. Two days after the President brushed off Republicans’ concerns that Democrats’ job-killing policies are causing great uncertainty for small businesses, the White House is now declaring in a new report that the trillion-dollar ‘stimulus’ will be one of history’s “great triumphs.” The very same report, however, notes that unemployment will average 10 percent for the rest of the year. The Obama Administration promised the trillion-dollar ‘stimulus’ would create jobs ‘immediately’ and keep joblessness below eight percent.



And while economists and small businesses are saying the latest ‘stimulus’ bill is “not likely to create many jobs,” all of the new Washington mandates and tax hikes Democrats are proposing would surely kill plenty of them.

What small businesses need is an end to the uncertainty created by Washington Democrats’ job-killing agenda. Republicans have proposed a “no-cost jobs plan” that gets Washington out of the way so small businesses can help get our economy moving again.



STILL NOT GETTING IT: DEMS DOUBLE DOWN ON DISCREDITED ‘STIMULUS’ SPIN, JOB-KILLING POLICIES

A jobs bill “not likely to create many jobs.” “Even the Obama administration acknowledges the legislation's centerpiece — a tax cut for businesses that hire unemployed workers — would work only on the margins. ‘We're skeptical that it's going to be a big job creator,’ said Bill Rys, tax counsel for the National Federation of Independent Business.” (Associated Press, 2/10/10) The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center has called the tax credit “a political ploy” and nothing more than “a jobs version of cash for clunkers.”

Refusing to rule out tax hikes on middle-class families. “President Barack Obama said he is 'agnostic' about raising taxes on households making less than $250,000... Obama repeatedly vowed during the 2008 presidential election campaign that he would not raise taxes on individuals making less than $200,000 and households earning less than $250,000 a year.” (Bloomberg, 2/11/09)

Brushing off uncertainty caused by job-killing policies. At a meeting at the White House this week, House Republican Leader John Boehner “set forth his belief that many of the nation's economic troubles flow from the uncertainty created by sweeping Obama administration proposals, ranging from health care to cap-and-trade and labor law. Absent those uncertainties, businesses would be more likely to create jobs. The GOP leader urged Mr. Obama to scale back his plans to reduce the uncertainty and pass proposals both parties could vote for. The president was having none of it.” (WSJ’s Political Diary, 2/10/09)

ECONOMISTS, SMALL BUSINESSES CITE UNCERTAINTY CAUSED BY DEMS’ JOB-KILLING POLICIES:

“John Silvia, chief economist at Wells Fargo Securities in Charlotte, N.C. … says a better way to create jobs would be for Obama to remove uncertainty among employers about the policy environment ahead. Areas of uncertainty for firms currently include tax policy, regulation, possible health care mandates, and a boost to energy costs if a ‘cap and trade’ system is imposed to curb US carbon-dioxide emissions.” (The Christian Science Monitor, 1/29/10)

“Will Newton, executive director of the National Federation of Independent Business' Texas chapter, said small businesses face too much uncertainty and the potential for increased government intervention in the form of increased taxes for health care, a cap-and-trade proposal that would increase energy costs by 45 percent and a bill that could increase union activity.” (Dallas Morning News, 2/3/10)

“Small-business owners remain fearful that health care reform could harm them. They also are leery of proposals for a cap-and-trade bill to reduce greenhouse gas emission. ‘If [Obama] can't make small-business owners believe that he's not going to pass policies that are going to hurt them, all the tax credits, all the bank loans that he can offer small-business owners are not going to get them to go hire more people," says [Jim Blasingame, small business expert.]” (US News & World Report, 1/28/10)