Southern Baptists Approve Submissive Wives Doctrine

Representatives of the 16 million-member denomination voted overwhelmingly to add four paragraphs about the nature of the family to the "Baptist Faith and Message," the central statement of the denomination's beliefs, which had not been amended for 35 years.

SALT LAKE CITY — A wife should "submit herself graciously" to her husband, the Southern Baptist Convention declared Tuesday, throwing the weight of the nation's second-largest religious organization behind a controversial belief of Christian conservatives.

The new article of faith declares that marriage is a lifelong covenant between one man and one woman, and that the husband "has the God-given responsibility to provide for, to protect and to lead his family."

"A wife is to submit herself graciously to the servant leadership of her husband even as the church willingly submits to the headship of Christ," the statement continues.

The injunction that a wife submit to her husband is taken from several New Testament passages, including Paul's Letter to the Ephesians and a Letter of Peter.

By placing a public focus on those verses, the Southern Baptists are joining the battle the Promise Keepers started early in the 1990s, when the non-denominational, evangelical men's group outraged some groups by preaching a similar message.

Feminists argued that focusing on submission implies that women are inferior to men, and could even offer a religious excuse for some men to abuse their wives. Proponents of Tuesday's Baptist declaration argue that without such a biblical structure in family life, civilized society is in jeopardy.

"It doesn't take a rocket scientist to see that the family is the issue right now," said Dorothy Patterson, one of the authors of the new article. "Children shooting their parents, the skyrocketing divorce rate--all of those things point back to a crisis in the family."

Patterson holds two doctorates, including a recent Ph.D. focusing on the "theology of womanhood." She is the wife of Rev. Paige Patterson, who helped start a conservative revolution in the Southern Baptist Convention in the 1980s and who was elected president of the denomination Tuesday.

He was unopposed, and unapologetic about the call for wives to submit to their husbands.

"It's only hot language to someone not real familiar with the Bible," Paige Patterson said at a news conference Tuesday evening.

The dominance of conservatives in Southern Baptist leadership helps explain why it took the convention just 20 minutes to approve the new statement, said one of the few dissenters at the Salt Palace convention center.

"Those Southern Baptists who do not agree with this policy simply do not come to this convention any more," said Rev. Tim Owings of the First Baptist Church of Augusta, Ga.--the town where the denomination was founded.