Patrick Halpin ‘fell to his death from London rooftop’
Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Tragic teenager Patrick Halpin slipped and fell to his death from a roof in London, police now believe.

London Metropolitan Police have confirmed they are not treating the Galway student’s death as suspicious and now believe he plunged from a height.

Cops are investigating if the 18-year-old was trying to get back into a nightclub he had earlier left to get food.

However, they are waiting for his postmortem results before confirming the cause of death.

Patrick’s devastated sister Regina Ni hAilpin and dad Paddy last night flew back from London to be with his mum Elsie at their home in Loughrea, Co Galway.

Speaking to the Irish Mirror, Ms Ni hAilpin said it has been a very difficult 24 hours.

She said: “It was a tragic accident. That’s all we really know at the moment.

“We are heartbroken. Patrick was very resourceful and very bright. He was a great brother and we got on so well.”

The 18-year-old DCU student left a club in in London’s Leicester Square on Tuesday night to go to a nearby Burger King.

(Image: Tolga Akmen/LNP)

A massive search, spearheaded online by his sister Regina and pals, captured the public’s attention in Ireland and the UK.

And his family thought he had been located safe and well when a mix-up at Gatwick airport led police to believe he had been located.

But tragically that was a false alarm and his body was found in an alley beside Zoo nightclub at around 8pm on Thursday.

A police source explained CCTV was crucial in tracking the movements of Patrick after he left the club.

The source said: “This CCTV was able to show police where he went and ultimately led them to look in the alleyway.

“This area is enclosed and not accessible to the public at all. At the moment it would appear the only way of accessing this area is from a height.

“This is leading police to believe that he fell to his death from a roof or a window.”

A postmortem will take place next week and Patrick’s remains will then be returned to his family in Galway.

Patrick’s parish team will play in the All Ireland Intermediate Final in Croke Park today and their manager has insisted the deceased student will be there in spirit.

Kilnadeema-Leitrim take on Kilkenny club side, Rower Inistioge and boss Pat Donoghue said news of Patrick’s death in London had numbed the small East Galway community.

He said: “It’s your worst nightmare to think one of your children is missing, away from home. And then you get the news they’ve been found you’re thrilled and then it’s snatched away again. It’s just numbness now.

“Patrick was on our minor team and even when he was in Dublin, he’d travel home every weekend. He had a job in the local shop.

“They were always around, between Elsie and Paddy bringing him up and down to training and Patrick himself coming to training.

“We’re heading to Croke Park with all the lads but I suppose we’ll have an advantage. We’re going to have 16 players playing for us with poor Patrick looking down on and giving every help he can.”