Governor Baker, Massachusetts Life Sciences Center and CASIS Announce Winners of Galactic Grant Competition
“I am delighted to accept this award and launch this pivotal partnership with the ISS to develop new ‘apps’ for our Gene-RADAR® technology,” said Dr. Anita Goel, Chairman and CEO of Nanobiosym. “We will leverage the microgravity environment on the ISS to accelerate the Precision Medicine revolution here on Earth. Our ability to anticipate drug-resistant mutations with Gene-RADAR® will lead to next generation antibiotics that are more precisely tailored to stop the spread of the world’s most dangerous pathogens.”



Zaiput Flow Technologies is a start-up company launched to bring innovative tools for continuous flow chemistry to the market. The company offers a wide variety of cutting-edge applications, including a microfluidic liquid-liquid separator used in continuous flow. The Galactic Grant project will explore the role that gravity currently has or may have on Zaiput’s small-scale separation device. Besides having significant scientific value, the information gained from this work will be critical to define in detail the physics of the process, and will enable Zaiput to scale up its systems to flow rates suitable for chemical production.



“This opportunity will allow us to bring our cutting edge liquid-liquid separation technology a step further while advancing flow chemistry and the environmental, drug development and manufacturing benefits associated with it,” said Dr. Andrea Adamo, Co-founder and CEO of Zaiput Flow Technologies. “We are really excited for this opportunity.”



“Congratulations to the awardees of the first-ever Galactic Grant Competition,” said Interim CEO of the MLSC, Mike Kennealy. “We created this competition to offer Massachusetts life sciences companies the opportunity to conduct breakthrough and novel research in an environment you can’t find anywhere on earth. We are thrilled to see the results of this collaboration with CASIS and look forward to supporting these two research projects on the ISS.”



”Through our collaboration with the MLSC, the International Space Station is opening doors to companies in the Massachusetts region to improve life on Earth,” said CASIS Director of Business Development Cynthia Bouthot. “CASIS congratulates both Nanobiosm and Zaiput on today’s announcement, and we look forward to working with each company to ensure their projects reach humankind’s most innovative learning platform.”



Through the competition, MLSC and CASIS encouraged life sciences companies to take advantage of the distinct attributes of a truly unique microgravity research platform. The microgravity environment on the ISS has profound and unique effects on biological phenomena and can enable discoveries with terrestrial applications, including drug discovery, development, delivery, and diagnostics. To date, CASIS has sponsored a variety of life science investigations destined for the ISS National Lab within the areas of non-embryonic stem cells, protein crystal growth, bone density and muscle loss.