FBI GUN CHECKS FULL OF GLITCHES
The system to speed up background checks on gun buyers was launched this week with great expectations that it would make firearms purchases nearly instantaneous while reliably keeping guns from dangerous criminals.

Instead, Rick Fitzpatrick, owner of a gun store in Nixa, Mo., found that when he began using the computerized FBI instant-check system, all he got was a busy signal. So many customers became fed up with waiting that in two or three days, he says he lost 20 to 25 customers--nearly his entire clientele for that period.

"That's a lot of business," Fitzpatrick said. "The really sad thing is they had five years to put in place a system that worked. To me, they don't care whether the system works or not."

Fitzpatrick's account is echoed by gun dealers and customers across the country, though the system's performance seemed to improve by midweek. The glitches highlighted the deeper criticism of the instant-check concept from both camps in the gun-control debate.

On Monday, the first day of operation, a malfunctioning telephone system at the FBI kept switching callers to a busy signal, leaving thousands of would-be buyers and sellers stranded during this busy gun-purchasing season.

Technical glitches forced the system to shut down for 90 minutes Monday and another 20 minutes Tuesday.

The FBI's customer service line, meanwhile, received 20,000 calls from angry or perplexed callers on the first day alone.

Atty. Gen. Janet Reno acknowledged the problems. "It's had some start-up difficulties, but they're working around the clock, and I think they are starting to solve them," she said Wednesday.

FBI spokesman Paul Bresson also promised improvement. "With time, we'll see that it runs smoothly. And the only people who will be frustrated with the system will be criminals and others who are prohibited by law from buying guns."

Despite the glitches, the new setup is plowing along. In the first three days, the system received 73,582 calls. About 65 percent of the purchases sailed right through, the FBI says, while roughly 0.5 percent were denied and the rest given a "delay" response, giving the FBI three days to make additional checks. After three days, with no response from the FBI, dealers are allowed to complete the sales.

It was five years ago that the Brady bill was signed into law, requiring all firearms dealers to check whether every would-be buyer had a criminal record or other disqualification, such as mental illness.

To placate gun enthusiasts, who feared a river of red tape and endless delays, Brady supporters agreed to an instant computerized system five years later--Nov. 30, 1998. The Justice Department predicted the new system would take less than two minutes for most purchases.

But now that the National Instant Check System, or NICS, is in operation, no one appears to be satisfied. The National Rifle Association sued Reno this week over the way her department is implementing the system.

The NRA charged that the Justice Department is violating the law by keeping a list of the gun buyers who go through the system. The Brady law, the lawsuit noted, specifically orders the department and the FBI to destroy all records of law-abiding gun buyers. NRA leaders warned this week that such recordkeeping reeks of Big Brother government and police-state tactics.

"It is anathema to our system of government to stand idly by while a federal police force illegally compiles a database of citizens who are demonstrably law-abiding," said NRA chief lobbyist James Jay Baker.

Justice Department officials said they are keeping the names only briefly for auditing purposes before destroying the records. "We're confident that our policy of keeping the records for a very limited time is fully consistent with federal law," said Gregory King, a Justice Department spokesman.

Some gun groups complain that the notion of background checks violates the Constitution because the right to bear arms cannot be compromised.

"We should have a bumper sticker that says: `Nix NICS,' " said Lawrence Pratt, executive director of Gun Owners of America, referring to the system's official acronym. "We're converting a right into a privilege, saying you have to get permission to exercise your 2nd Amendment rights. It's like a having to go through a government background check to be a journalist."

However, gun-control advocates say the criminal records in many parts of the country are abysmally incomplete, so a significant number of felons may go undetected by the instant system.

The new system relies on a vast database of all arrests maintained by the FBI at its high-tech center in Clarksburg, W.Va., as well as state records. But these records are spotty, especially when it comes to figuring out if someone was ultimately convicted or acquitted.

The records of an estimated one-third of all felonies across the nation are unreliable or not computerized. "There will be those who are not authorized to buy guns who will be able to do so," predicted Kent Markus, a former Justice Department official who was instrumental in developing the system.

What most concerns gun-control advocates is that because the new system is instantaneous, if a buyer's arrest isn't caught immediately, he gets the gun without delay. The way the Brady system has worked until now, police had five days to check out a would-be purchaser.

"It gave police time to conduct a thorough background check," said Dan Kotowski, executive director of the Illinois Council Against Handgun Violence. "The spin coming out on this nationally is that now gun owners will have to deal with insta-check and it's so onerous. When in fact, if nothing comes up instantly on a dangerous person, you and I have a problem on our hands."

Supporters note that if the instant-check system flags a problem in someone's past that requires further investigation, police get three days to check it out.

Illinois is largely unaffected by changes in national gun rules because the state's system is far tougher than anything on the federal level. Only Massachusetts has a gun-control system with a strictness that approaches that of Illinois.

A would-be gun owner in Illinois must apply for a Firearms Owner's Identification card that can take 30 days to be approved. An actual purchase requires an additional waiting period--72 hours for a handgun and 24 hours for a long gun.