Jetpix.com: Joe Oliva Aviation Photography
F-117 Stealth Fighter Gallery

NASA ER-2 (U-2) Operations

The Air National Guard in Action

Citizen Soldier: The Wisconsin Army National Guard in Action

I also do projects for Lockheed Martin's Code One magazine

Click on image for a larger view!

Click here to see all the current Picture Galleries!



All images on this website unless otherwise noted, are ©Copyright Joe Oliva.





Send me an email at: Joe@Jetpix.com

(Click on the address if your browser supports email)

He spends at least 60 hours a week analyzing statistics and watching Internet video of several games to try and decipher what situations put certain players in the best position to score. He looks for the hidden pattern on video or the obscure statistic on a spreadsheet that might provide an extra insight that other fantasy football analysts might have missed. That results in routine updates in e mailed newsletters and on the website of Seattle based Fantasy Football Index magazine, subscriptions to which cost $75 a season. The Collegiate LevelThough considered an amateur sport, college football earns billions of dollars in revenue and Division I teams have cheerleaders that function in the same way as cheerleaders in professional sports. Professional cheerleading coaches for cheap jerseys china college teams are well paid as evidenced by a June 2011 article for the Capstone Report. The article lists the salary of a former University of Alabama professional cheerleading coach at $85,000 a year. Proposal called for a pegged amount for the salary cap plus benefits starting at 141M in 2011 and increasing to 161M in 2014, regardless of NFL revenues. These amounts by themselves would have set the players back years, and were based on unrealistically low revenue projections. Your proposal also would have given the owners 100 percent of all revenues above the low projections, including the first year of new TV contracts in 2014. Your offer did NOT meet the players halfway when it would have given 100 percent of the additional revenues to the owners. Chris Johnson, ARI, at Pittsburgh: Johnson has been a revelation after once looking like his career was coming to an abrupt end. He's averaging 5.1 yards per carry as the Cardinals' primary ballcarrier, a productive streak that has thus far allowed him to fend off stiff competition for carries from Andre Ellington and rookie David Johnson. But Ellington is trending up after returning to the lineup from a knee injury last week, and David Johnson has made the most of limited touches. Chris Johnson is safe for now, but unlikely to get much going on the ground facing a Steelers defense that has allowed just one rushing touchdown this season. Johnson's production to date deserves applause, but his short and long term futures are getting cloudier. Happens and it happened before and I wasn the first to ever do it, he https://www.arizonadiamondbacksonline.com/curt-schilling-jersey-c_33.html said. could say that it was a rookie mistake. Centre Dan Clark (elbow) and defensive tackle Zach Minter (calf) were placed on the six game injured list Wednesday. Jones said both players cheap mlb jerseys would be out for a long period Clark injury contributed to the Riders shuffling the offensive line. Brendon LaBatte moved from left guard to centre. Bruce Campbell is the left tackle, bumping Derek Dennis to left guard. epaper, Digital Access, Subscriber Rewards), please input your Print oakley outlet Newspaper subscription phone number and postal code. Cleveland, Ohio Situated in northeastern Ohio, Cleveland resides along the banks of Lake Erie and the Cuyahoga River. The city includes three major sports teams (the NBA Cavaliers, the MLB Indians and the NFL Browns) with all cheap jerseys china three venues conveniently located in the downtown region. However, Cleveland is perhaps best known cheap china jerseys as the home to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, cheap jerseys an interactive museum featuring permanent and pandora bracelets temporary exhibits on some of A. J. Pollock Jersey music most influential figures. Other Cleveland based museums include the Cleveland Museum of Natural History and the Cleveland Museum of Art. As big of a win as this was for the 49ersas a team, it was almost over shadowed in the end by a small dust upbetween the head coaches after the game. Jim Harbaughwas surely excited his team came out with the W, and was jumping up and down as he found Jim Schwartz for the post game hand shake. Schwartz appeared to get agitated about something during the shake, and proceeded to run him down about 30 yards and bump him. That started another little something, but it all turned out to bemuch ado about cheap jerseys nothing. Afterwards Harbaughdownplayed theincident and took the blame by saying "That's totally on me, I shook his hand too hard.".