The Stairwell Project: Building a Modern Myth
Über uns

What's the project?

The most powerful aspects of myths are their ability to incite wonder and excitement. We're creating a myth that does these things while also challenging audiences to think.

The myth is that located in Rochester, NY, is the Escherian Stairwell, an architectural marvel that seems to violate the laws of physics and basic logic by looping back into itself. In order to lend credence to this myth, we're creating an episode for a family-friendly science show that demonstrates the staircase in action, various clips from a 1997 documentary with prominent thinkers grappling with the existence of this apparent contradiction and pontificating on its implications, and a whole slew of supplemental online materials for today's internet savvy audience to stumble across while trying to see if this thing is real (websites, scholarly articles, fan-pages, blogs, etc.). Help us build the myth!

Why create a myth?

Well, the short answer is that myths are awesome. Especially when done right. The slightly longer answer is that we are passionate about immersing audiences with a sense of wonder and surrounding them with a wealth of detail executed with such rigorous realism that they can choose to step into it, get lost in it, and believe in it. Films like Close Encounters and 2001 inspired us with awe, and even a hint of fear, when we first saw them. How do we capture that feeling again? The internet and the age of social media seem to be opening up doors to reinvent the medium and reignite those in-theater experiences that have gotten stale over the decades.

How will you launch the myth?

From the very beginning, we visualized this myth as a great tie-in with the Rochester Institute of Technology's annual Innovation & Creativity Festival, aka Imagine RIT. Since it's become a cultural event in Rochester, with 35,000 people expected to attend this year, the festival and the build-up surrounding it appear to be a perfect launching pad for the project.

What sort of help do you need?

We'd love for you to back us financially, but also, once we've reached our fundraising goal, to join us in spreading the myth.

You receive rewards when you become a backer! The perks increase based on your level of giving (see the sidebar on the right; we think our perks are pretty cool). So please pledge what you can and let others know that we need help with this.

How does Kickstarter work?

It's all-or-nothing. If we reach our $12,000 goal, the backers' credit cards are charged when the funding period ends. If we don't reach our goal by the deadline, no one is charged, and the project gets nothing.

What happens if you exceed the goal?

With more money, we will focus on expanding the myth: add websites, diversify articles and topics, create video evidence from different time periods, and hopefully give audiences a deeper experience with the amount of layers they'll be able to dig through.

What is the budget breakdown?

40% - Production expenses

20% - Web material

15% - Post-production and special effects

15% - Backer rewards

10% - Fees