These are the 10 jobs most likely to attract psychopaths

Spotting a psychopath isn’t as easy as the movies would make it out to be.

They aren’t axe-wielding maniacs obsessed with murdering everyone, but are often more manipulative and controlling types of people.

There are ways of telling whether someone you work with or are dating is a psychopath – and according to psychologist and writer, Kevin Dutton there are ten professions in the world that lend themselves greatly to psychopathic tendencies.

In his book The Wisdom of Psychopaths: What Saints, Spies and Serial Killers Can Teach Us About Success Dutton lists ten jobs that he believes are the top career choices for psychopaths.

Civil servant

Dutton ranks civil servants as the tenth most popular career choice for psychopaths as they are good in crises and can keep order.

In addition, they have little feeling for anyone else, do not possess a moral code, have a high intellect and are logical.

In 2014, Jane Hogg, a scientific officer in the UK Home Office said the police should consider hiring psychopaths to help restore order.

Chef

Psychopaths aren’t considered people that are likely to harm or hurt anyone but they can work in high-pressure and chaotic environments.

Chefs are exactly the type of people that thrive in said scenarios, therefore, they tend to have psychopathic characteristics.

Clergy

This one may surprise you as you would often associate members of the clergy to be peaceful and kind people.

Yet psychopaths often like to find means to control and exploit others and what better way to do this than preaching to a room full of people every week?

This would give legitimacy to their actions and also allow them to form strong alliances with people and gain access to personal information.

Police

As we’ve already detailed, members of the Home Office once believed that psychopaths make for good police officers and Kevin Dutton thinks the same.

He ranks them as the seventh most popular career choice for a psychopath due to their ability to in an intense and dangerous job and being able to stay calm in a crisis.

Journalist



Uh oh! Yes, us journalists are on the list too.

Dutton believes that journalists ability to be charming, focused, mindful and ruthless in order to get the story they want and file it on time is a key psychopathic trait.

Read on for the full article on The Indy 100.

Also featured on The Business Insider.