Some beards as dirty as toilets

Beards are big -- literally and figuratively.A handful of brave men allowed Action 7 News to swab their beards, and the results showed some beards are as dirty as toilets.Quest Diagnostics microbiologist John Golobic tested the swabs, and the results blew his mind.“I'm usually not surprised and I was surprised by this,” Golobic said.Several of the beards that were tested contained a lot of normal bacteria, but some were comparable to toilets.“Those are the types of things you'd find in (fecal matter),” Golobic said, referring to the tests.Even though some of the bacteria won’t lead to illness, Golobic said it’s still a little concerning.“There would be a degree of uncleanliness that would be somewhat disturbing,” Golobic said.Golobic recommends a thorough beard scrubbing and lots of hand-washing.“(Also), try to keep your hands away from your face, as much as possible,” he said.If the city were to find similar samples in the water system, Golobic said it would need to be shut down for disinfecting.RELATED: 7 ways to stop germs in their tracksMobile users: Tap for video

Beards are big -- literally and figuratively.

A handful of brave men allowed Action 7 News to swab their beards, and the results showed some beards are as dirty as toilets.

Advertisement Related Content 7 ways to stop germs in their tracks

Quest Diagnostics microbiologist John Golobic tested the swabs, and the results blew his mind.

“I'm usually not surprised and I was surprised by this,” Golobic said.

Several of the beards that were tested contained a lot of normal bacteria, but some were comparable to toilets.

“Those are the types of things you'd find in (fecal matter),” Golobic said, referring to the tests.

Even though some of the bacteria won’t lead to illness, Golobic said it’s still a little concerning.

“There would be a degree of uncleanliness that would be somewhat disturbing,” Golobic said.

Golobic recommends a thorough beard scrubbing and lots of hand-washing.

“(Also), try to keep your hands away from your face, as much as possible,” he said.

If the city were to find similar samples in the water system, Golobic said it would need to be shut down for disinfecting.

RELATED: 7 ways to stop germs in their tracks

Mobile users: Tap for video



AlertMe