Parents of Seth Rich saddened by murder of son
OMAHA, Neb. (KMTV) - The parents of a 27-year-old grieves as they find out their youngest son was shot and killed in Washington D.C. over the weekend.

Seth Rich was born and raised in Omaha and worked for the Democratic National Committee in D.C.

Rich’s parents said he had a passion for helping others and it showed in his work at the DNC.

But now, his parents are trying to figure out what exactly happened.

D.C’s Metro Police said Rich was shot twice in the Northwest quadrant of the city. Rich later died in the hospital.

“If it was a robbery-it failed because he still has his watch, he still has his money-he still has his credit cards, still had his phone so it was a wasted effort except we lost a life,” said Joel Rich, Seth’s father.

Rich said Seth was talking to his girlfriend on the phone outside when the incident happened.

“Asked him if he was home yet and he said just about, and then she heard some noise, he said he had to call her back-I don't know when that conversation ended but at 4:18 two shots were fired,” said Rich.

Rich’s parents said he was full of potential.

“The sad part are all the unfulfilled promises or possibilities that he could have had, that's what we'll miss,” said Rich.

Rich went to Central High School then studied political science at Creighton University and moved to D.C., Rich was the Voter Expansion Data Director for the DNC.

“Making sure everybody who wants to vote has the opportunity,” said Rich.

One of the things Rich’s parents said they will miss about Seth is his positivity.

“Our son may have had a short life but he had a very wonderful life that he smiled and enjoyed,” said Mary Rich, Seth’s mother.

Now through this pain, Seth’s parents said they have to find a way to get through this.

“I've just got to remember all of the good and the positive and that's what we will make Seth's life of value versus wasting it,” said Mary Rich.

DC Metro Police are still investigating what all happened and are looking through survelliance video to find clues for who the suspect is.

Rich’s funeral is planned for this Wednesday.