Bank Builds Minority Subprime Share
INSIDE FINANCE. Bank Builds Minority Subprime Share

At 4.4 percent, the Charlotte-based bank's subprime lender already was the largest refinance lender in Chicago's predominantly black communities, according to data released last week by the Woodstock Institute, an economic development think tank.

The unit of Bank of America Corp. that caters to people with poor credit histories became a much more prominent player in refinanced loans in Chicago's predominantly African-American neighborhoods in 1999. In one year, its market share leapt to 7.2 percent from 4.4 percent in 1998.

The unit, called Equicredit, was combined with NationsCredit through a merger in 1998. The market share figure for that year includes loans from both firms.

Some subprime lenders, including Equicredit, have been accused of making so-called "predatory loans," which carry such onerous rates and terms that borrowers cannot afford their payments and sometimes lose their homes.

Jerri Franz, a spokeswoman for Equicredit, denies that the company engages in predatory lending. She said that some of the market-share increase in Chicago's predominantly black neighborhoods might have stemmed from Equicredit's extensive purchases in 1999 of loan portfolios.

Bank of America signed a pledge to the City of Chicago last fall promising not to make loans the city considers predatory. Lenders who do not sign the pledge cannot do business with the city.

Before it signed the pledge, about 25 percent of the loans Equicredit made in the city fell under the Chicago definition of predatory lending, Franz said.

Don't bank on it: Michael Mayo, the former Credit Suisse First Boston analyst known for accurately turning bearish on bank stocks months ahead of his peers, is continuing his onslaught against much of the banking industry in his new post at Prudential Securities.

Last month, Mayo and colleague David Trone initiated coverage on large-cap and midsize banks, rating both industries a "sell."

"Earnings growth this decade should equal only about half the pace of the past decade (7 percent versus 16 percent)," they wrote. "Half of the earnings drivers from the last decade are gone (i.e., loan-quality improvement) or decelerating (i.e., efficiency gains)."

Mayo likes a handful of banks. He awarded Bank of America, for example, a "strong buy" rating, citing the effect that incoming Chief Executive Kenneth Lewis could have on the company. "The CEO-elect should help reverse the firm's value destruction of the past three years (worst in banking)," Mayo wrote. Lewis is scheduled to succeed longtime CEO Hugh McColl later this month.

Other "strong buys" among large caps went to New York-based Citigroup Inc. and Charlotte-based First Union Corp., which also has a new CEO.

Chicago-based Bank One Corp., also sporting a relatively new chief executive, was not so lucky on Mayo's list. Even with Jamie Dimon at the helm, it was rated a "sell."