Capri Sun FAQs
Frequently Asked Questions





According to leading nutritionists,



With 25% less sugar than leading regular juice drinks, Capri Sun is still a wholesome beverage option that you and your family can feel good about. Capri Sun is committed to bringing you and your families the flavor you enjoy, while minimizing the impact of rising commodity costs. To continue delivering the beverage you love, Capri Sun is changing ingredients in Capri Sun and Capri Sun Sunrise from sugar to high fructose corn syrup.According to leading nutritionists, American Dietetic Association, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the International Food Information Council, high fructose corn syrup is nutritionally equivalent to table sugar With 25% less sugar than leading regular juice drinks, Capri Sun is still a wholesome beverage option that you and your family can feel good about.

I’ve recently read about mold being found in Capri Sun. Is this true?



back to top Unfortunately, yes. While this is not a common occurrence, it does happen from time to time because the product is preservative free. That's why we recommend discarding leaking or damaged packages and have included a statement on our cartons for consumers.

What kind of mold is it?





Mold that forms on food and beverages is usually a common mold. It's generally much like common bread mold, though it may look different depending on where it forms. And yes, it can be ugly, gross and totally unappealing.



It would be great if foods stayed fresh forever. But the basic laws of science and nature dictate that most foods eventually spoil and get moldy.

back to top Without the opportunity to obtain the sample, we're unable to confirm the exact type of mold that was found. However in the past, when we've had the chance to have an independent lab analyze a sample, it was confirmed to be mold. They confirmed that the mold was similar to hundreds of other food-related molds and is relatively common.Mold that forms on food and beverages is usually a common mold. It's generally much like common bread mold, though it may look different depending on where it forms. And yes, it can be ugly, gross and totally unappealing.It would be great if foods stayed fresh forever. But the basic laws of science and nature dictate that most foods eventually spoil and get moldy.

How does Kraft Foods know the mold is not harmful?



back to top While unpleasant, it is more of a quality rather than a safety issue. However, we take consumer concerns very seriously. When we had the opportunity to look at a sample in the past, we have sent it to a leading, accredited lab for testing. They independently confirmed it was mold. Because this product contains no preservatives, the beverage can spoil and mold can grow. That's why discarding leaking or damaged packages is the right step. In fact, we include a message on the carton encouraging people to do this.

So, this is a common occurrence?



back to top No, but among the many, many millions of pouches we sell each year, it does happen from time to time because the product is preservative free. And that's exactly why we include a message on the carton that consumers should discard any leaking or damaged packages.

Other people have posted photos of mold in Capri Sun. What gives?





Since there are no preservatives in our drinks, mold can grow, especially in a leaking pouch. That's why we placed a statement on the carton recommending leaky pouches be discarded. Among the many, many millions of pouches we sell each year, It doesn't happen very often. But if it does, we want to hear about it.

back to top The reality is, mold spores are literally everywhere. That's why most foods, especially those without preservatives, eventually spoil and get moldy. Our quality controls are designed to minimize this exposure.Since there are no preservatives in our drinks, mold can grow, especially in a leaking pouch. That's why we placed a statement on the carton recommending leaky pouches be discarded. Among the many, many millions of pouches we sell each year, It doesn't happen very often. But if it does, we want to hear about it.

Does the mold form more often in warm weather?



back to top The weather or humidity has little or no effect on whether mold forms in this product. Given that there are no preservatives in the product, even a microscopic hole can introduce air and mold can begin to form.

What can you do to prevent this?



back to top Adding preservatives would be one option but we know that consumers appreciate that Capri Sun is preservative free. Through the years, we have made adjustments to minimize leaks. However, there's just no way to guarantee a pouch is never cut or punctured. That's why there's a statement on the carton, recommending consumers discard any leaky pouches.

Why are you not issuing a recall?





The reality is, mold spores are literally everywhere. That's why most foods, especially those without preservatives, eventually spoil and get moldy. Our quality controls are designed to minimize this exposure. Since there are no preservatives in our drinks, mold can grow, especially if there is a small hole or leak in the pouch.

back to top We checked our quality control records, product samples and recent consumer contacts for issues or patterns. Nothing unusual was found that would indicate there was a broader problem.The reality is, mold spores are literally everywhere. That's why most foods, especially those without preservatives, eventually spoil and get moldy. Our quality controls are designed to minimize this exposure. Since there are no preservatives in our drinks, mold can grow, especially if there is a small hole or leak in the pouch.

Was cost a consideration in not issuing a recall?



back to top Not at all. The safety of our products and the well-being of our consumers are our highest priorities. Based on some previous incidents, we're reasonably certain the problem was mold.

What if you have mold allergies?



back to top Typically, mold must be inhaled to cause allergic symptoms. When mold is found in Capri Sun, it is immersed in liquid which would prevent the spores from becoming airborne and inhaled.

Why should we believe Kraft Foods?





All of us with Capri Sun are sorry this happened and caused many of you concern.

back to top Even if you have concerns about large companies, you probably would agree that not being honest about this situation would have far greater consequences. If we expect you to buy our products, we must work hard every day to maintain your trust. That is why we have been open and honest in sharing information about this situation.All of us with Capri Sun are sorry this happened and caused many of you concern.

Does Kraft Foods understand why I am worried?



back to top Absolutely. We regret this situation and understand that it is unpleasant. Many of us are parents, too, so we care about what our kids and your kids drink. The safety of our food and the well being of our consumers are critically important to us. And we're doing everything we can to address concerns.

Why don't you use clear pouches?



back to top We tried that a while ago with Roarin' Waters. But, combining two different packaging materials - front and back - created manufacturing problems, so we returned to a full foil pouch. Still, we're always looking for ways to make our products better and really appreciate your thoughts.

I couldn't find any hole or leak in my pouch, how could mold grow?



back to top Occasionally, even the tiniest hole — one that wouldn’t even allow the beverage inside to leak out — will permit air to get in.

What's the shelf life of Capri Sun?



back to top We've done a lot of testing to identify the optimal shelf life for all Capri Sun products. Our beverages are heated to temperatures that exceed those for pasteurization. This helps maintain taste and quality for up to a year. Always check the "Best Used By" date stamped on the carton and discard any leaking or damaged products.

Where Can I Buy Capri Sun?



back to top Easy. You can find Capri Sun at most grocery retailers nationwide, including local grocery stores, mass merchandisers, and club stores.

What flavors does each Capri Sun variety come in?





Original Capri Sun comes in these flavors:

Fruit Punch, Red Berry, Grape, Orange, Splash Cooler, Strawberry Kiwi, Surfer Cooler, Mountain Cooler, Tropical Punch, Coastal Cooler, Strawberry, Wild Cherry, Pacific Cooler, and Lemonade.



Capri Sun Sunrise comes in these flavors:

Orange Wake Up, Tropical Morning and Berry Tangerine Morning.



Capri Sun Roarin' Waters comes in these flavors:

Strawberry Kiwi, Wild Cherry, Tropical Fruit, Grape, Berry and Fruit Punch.



Capri Sun 100% Juice comes in these flavors:

Berry, Grape, Apple, Citrus, and Fruit Punch.



Capri Sun Super V comes in these flavors:

Berry, Fruit Punch and Apple.

back to top Here are all our current varieties and their flavors:comes in these flavors:Fruit Punch, Red Berry, Grape, Orange, Splash Cooler, Strawberry Kiwi, Surfer Cooler, Mountain Cooler, Tropical Punch, Coastal Cooler, Strawberry, Wild Cherry, Pacific Cooler, and Lemonade.comes in these flavors:Orange Wake Up, Tropical Morning and Berry Tangerine Morning.comes in these flavors:Strawberry Kiwi, Wild Cherry, Tropical Fruit, Grape, Berry and Fruit Punch.comes in these flavors:Berry, Grape, Apple, Citrus, and Fruit Punch.comes in these flavors:Berry, Fruit Punch and Apple.

What's in Capri Sun?



back to top Capri Sun is a line of juice drink blends that have 7-10% fruit juice, 25% less sugar than leading regular juice drinks, and contain no artificial colors, flavors or preservatives. Capri Sun is available in 14 flavors and all varieties are caffeine free. For a full list of Capri Sun products and ingredients, visit www.kraftrecipes.com

Why did Capri Sun change its ingredients to include high fructose corn syrup?





Sugar prices have risen at unprecedented rates in the last 12 months and are at a 30-year high1. We made this change to help better manage costs for consumers in today's difficult economic environment while preserving the good taste families expect.

back to top Capri Sun is constantly evolving to bring consumers the best possible product. In the last 20 years, we've changed product ingredients based on consumer preferences and market trends, but we have maintained the same great quality that families expect.Sugar prices have risen at unprecedented rates in the last 12 months and are at a 30-year high. We made this change to help better manage costs for consumers in today's difficult economic environment while preserving the good taste families expect.

What is high fructose corn syrup?

2.



Generally recognized as safe by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) since 19763, high fructose corn syrup "is nutritionally equivalent to sucrose (table sugar)." According to the American Dietetic Association, "once absorbed into the blood stream, the two sweeteners are indistinguishable.4"

back to top High fructose corn syrup is corn sugar - or an added sugar in the diet. High fructose corn syrup is composed of the same two simple sugars (fructose and glucose) as table sugar, honey and maple syrupGenerally recognized as safe by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) since 1976, high fructose corn syrup "is nutritionally equivalent to sucrose (table sugar)." According to the American Dietetic Association, "once absorbed into the blood stream, the two sweeteners are indistinguishable.

Are there any risks associated with high fructose corn syrup?

3. For more questions on how this ingredient or product can fit into one's meal plan, consumers should consult with their physicians or health care providers.

back to top Processed sweeteners, like high fructose corn syrup, are generally recognized as safe by the FDA and are approved as general purpose sweeteners. For more questions on how this ingredient or product can fit into one's meal plan, consumers should consult with their physicians or health care providers.

Is high fructose corn syrup approved for children to consume?

3. If they have questions, parents and guardians should contact their physicians or health care providers to determine if high fructose corn syrup is appropriate for their child(ren).



Registered dietician Carolyn O'Neil said, "The last thing we want is for Americans to think that avoiding high fructose corn syrup is the answer. All added sugars should be consumed in moderation – corn sugar, table sugar, honey and fruit juice concentrates.5"

back to top The FDA has approved a number of sweeteners, including high fructose corn syrup, for use in foods. If they have questions, parents and guardians should contact their physicians or health care providers to determine if high fructose corn syrup is appropriate for their child(ren).Registered dietician Carolyn O'Neil said, "The last thing we want is for Americans to think that avoiding high fructose corn syrup is the answer. All added sugars should be consumed in moderation – corn sugar, table sugar, honey and fruit juice concentrates.

What exactly is the natural flavor in Capri Sun Drinks?



back to top A natural flavor is defined as an essential oil, essence or extract of a spice, fruit, or plant. The mixture of natural flavors used is a trade secret. Shhhh.

Do Capri Sun Drinks contain any artificial colors or dyes?





Giving you wholesome choices for your kids is our biggest priority. That's why we only use natural flavors and real fruit juice in Capri Sun Drinks.

back to top Nope! Capri Sun doesn't have any artificial colors, flavors, or preservatives.Giving you wholesome choices for your kids is our biggest priority. That's why we only use natural flavors and real fruit juice in Capri Sun Drinks.

Does Capri Sun offer a lower-calorie option?



back to top You bet. Our fruit-flavored water beverage, Capri Sun Roarin' Waters is low in calories and contains no artificial colors or flavors. Try it in Tropical Fruit, Strawberry Kiwi, Wild Cherry, Grape and Berry.

Does Capri Sun contain any caffeine?



back to top All Capri Sun drinks are caffeine-free.

How should Capri Sun be stored if it's not open?



back to top Store your Capri Sun in a cool, dry place, like your pantry or your refrigerator. Or you can even freeze it!

Can I freeze Capri Sun?



back to top You sure can. Actually, moms tell us they often put frozen Capri Sun in packed lunches, because it acts like a cold pack. It's completely thawed by lunch time (approximately 4 to 5 hours at room temperature to thaw).