Dentist pulls all of her ex's teeth. America, pass it on!
[For the record, 3:48 p.m. May 9: A report from MSNBC.com has found the story of the vengeful dentist to be a hoax. The Daily Mail, which was one of the first to run the story and which was a Times source, told MSNBC that it could not stand behind the report. Yahoo News, another Times source, has updated its story with MSNBC’s report of the hoax.]

For better or worse, you don't hear much news out of Poland these days. But one new, eyebrow-raising story from that country is making a splash on social media as well as headlines across the U.S. because it taps into men's nightmares and women's revenge fantasies.

A Polish dentist appears to have gotten the ultimate revenge on the man who dumped her for another woman by pulling out all of his teeth -- every last one.

Versions of the story have been tweeted and shared again and again on Facebook and via Google. A version of the story posted on Yahoo News already has 15,000 comments and counting. As is always the case with hot news stories, it tends to bring out the comics.

Here are just a few of the "biting" comments on the Yahoo story:

--At least he didn't go for a vasectomy.

--4 out of 5 dentists recommend not going to your recent ex for dental work.

--"He loves me..." Yank! "He loves me not!" Yank! "He loves me..." Yank! "He loves me not!" Yank!

The dentist, Anna Mackowiak, 34, is said to be facing all sorts of legal problems after the incident, according to the Daily Mail.

When her ex, Marek Olszewski, 45, came to her with a toothache, the dentist told the media, she "tried to be professional and detach myself from my emotions." But after she administered the anesthesia and took a look at him lying helpless in her dental chair, her emotions got the best of her, according to the report.

Olszewski said he never thought twice about visiting her with a toothache. "I didn’t have any reason to doubt her; I mean I thought she was a professional," according to the Daily Mail.

He was heavily bandaged after the encounter and still groggy, so he didn't immediately realize what had happened.

"But when I got home I looked in the mirror and couldn't [expletive] believe it. The [expletive] had emptied my mouth."

The dentist reportedly faces up to three years in prison and a medical malpractice investigation. As for the ex-boyfriend, he is going to need some implants or dentures or something. And he'll also need a new girlfriend.

His old girlfriend -- the one he dumped Mackowiak to be with -- has in turn dumped him. It seems she just couldn't date a guy without teeth.

ALSO:

Watch Lotte age 12 years in a little over 2 minutes

Chip could let smartphones see through walls--and clothes

Caine's Arcade: A boy creates a cardboard wonder and grown men cry

-- Rene Lynch

Join Rene Lynch on Google+, Facebook or Twitter