Exit poll meltdown flusters TV networks

Voter News Service, a consortium of the major networks and the Associated Press, pulled the plug on its exit polls after concluding that its computer analysis could not be trusted. The result was to greatly slow the usual drumbeat of television projections in a midterm election filled with tight races.

The polling service that humiliated the television networks on Election Day two years ago suffered a meltdown Tuesday, depriving news organizations of the crucial data used to project winners and analyze voting patterns.

"It's a very big disappointment," said Ted Savaglio, VNS's executive director.

Was the multimillion-dollar effort to revamp the computer system a failure? "I wouldn't like to use that word," Savaglio said.

VNS was under intense pressure from its members to avoid a repeat of the debacle during the 2000 presidential election, when the networks used its data to project first Al Gore and then George W. Bush the winner in Florida before pulling back in the middle of the night and declaring the contest too close to call.

Network executives tried to put the best face on the situation Tuesday night, saying they would use AP exit polls and other information to try to compensate for the loss of the VNS data. The consortium was providing only raw vote totals.

"We all like to have winners," said Marty Ryan, executive producer of political programming at Fox News. "We all obsess about who won. In the old days, we would have called at least half the 15 races when the polls close at 8 o'clock."

CNN political director Tom Hannon said the networks understood that the new system might not work until 2004.

"It does hamper us a little bit," Hannon said. "We're going back to the way we did in the '70s, with old-fashioned political reporting. The only entirely bad thing would be not to be up front and be wrong, two years after Florida."

Despite a series of warning signs during test runs in recent days, VNS held out hope that it would be able to provide its clients, including such newspapers as The Washington Post, with at least some of the traditional poll data based on questioning of voters as they left the polls.

Two years ago, a VNS investigation found the group underestimated by half the number of absentee ballots in Florida and dramatically underestimated the number of votes uncounted at 2 a.m. The fiasco led to congressional hearings at which lawmakers berated the network presidents.

The networks were largely unable to offer the usual breakdowns of how people voted by age, sex, education, income and political views. By 8 p.m. Tuesday, they had projected as winners eight Senate incumbents whose reelection had never been in doubt.

----------

For complete election results and the latest coverage, go to

chicagotribune.com