Brewer's success to leave Illinois flat

New Glarus eyes Wisconsin sales

The microbrewery, one of the fastest growing in the region, is leaving Illinois in February after two years of struggling to fill distributors' orders. New Glarus, which has been selling beer in this state for six years, has been trying to serve two masters--and not serving either well.

Illinois beer enthusiasts won't find Spotted Cow, Uff da Bock or any of the other dozen beers made by Wisconsin's New Glarus Brewing Co. anywhere in the state next year.

"We are growing as fast as we can, but we can't even meet the demand in Wisconsin," said the brewery's founder and president, Deb Carey, who owns the brewery with her husband, Dan.

By leaving Illinois, New Glarus will be able to get a tighter grip on the Wisconsin market, where it is the eighth-largest brewery, Carey said.

Illinois makes up 10 percent of the company's total sales, with most of the business coming from the Chicago area, Rockford and Peoria. About 65 percent of sales in Illinois come directly from Chicago and its suburbs.

Brian VanZandbergen, beer manager at Sam's Wine and Spirits on Chicago's North Side, said his business sells about 25 to 50 cases of New Glarus products each month, with the Wisconsin Belgian Red and Spotted Cow being the most popular.

Those sales are above average for a microbrewery of its size, he said. "It is just good, quality craft beer," VanZandbergen said.The brewery's overall sales this year are up an estimated 34 percent, and are projected to jump to roughly 40 percent by the end of the year. That's the highest sales number the brewery has seen since it opened in 1993 in the small, Swiss town of New Glarus, about 30 minutes south of Madison, Wis.

The microbrewery's growth has been steady, and its beer production has increased to 10,500 barrels in 2001 from about 9,500 in 2000. This year the brewery has produced roughly 13,000 barrels.

Although most companies would envy the microbrewery's growth rate, New Glarus is feeling serious growing pains.

New Glarus spent $500,000 this year to open a new bottling line, install four new lager tanks and build a 7,000-square-foot warehouse. Even with these enhancements, Carey said, the demand is too great.

Crossing the border

Illinois distributors also are feeling the pain, with some going as much as two weeks without any New Glarus beer.

Louis Glunz Beer, a distributor in Lincolnwood, has seen its orders received from the brewery reduced. Janet Bischoff, financial manager for the distributor, said they have received shipments that were cut to less than half of what they ordered.

Bischoff said the distributor will fill the void left by the departure of New Glarus with other regional beers, such as Edmund Fitzgerald Porter and Burning River Pale Ale from Great Lakes Brewing Co. in Cleveland. But she anticipates people in Illinois will cross the border into Wisconsin to find New Glarus beer.

"They make fine beers that beer people love," said Bischoff.

VanZandbergen said customers will be disappointed when the beer leaves the shelves, and he also thinks many will travel across the border.