Macomb County man falsely accused in Charlottesville car attack
Jerome Vangheluwe LINKED-IN PHOTO

A Macomb County businessman and his family are living in fear after his teenage son was falsely rumored to have been the driver who plowed a car into a crowd protesting a white supremacist rally in Virginia.

Jerome Vangheluwe of Bruce Township said his son was incorrectly identified by several right-wing websites as being the owner and driver of a Dodge Challenger that rammed through counter-protestors Saturday, killing a woman and wounding at least 19 others.

Vangheluwe says even though he sold the car years ago, the family was being targeted for death threats from people mistakenly believing the son, Joel, was responsible for the horrific act.

“I’m not the one, I’m from (profanity) Michigan, you idiots,” Joel Vangheluwe posted on Facebook Saturday afternoon. “I drive a 2009 Chevy Impala, not a Challenger, (profanity) the internet.”

Advertisement

Jerome Vangheluwe told WDIV-TV (Channel 4) that he sold the car to a dealership in 2012. It’s not clear how the car was linked back to him, but according to a variety of Twitter messages and other online sources, it appears someone looked up the vehicle identification number (VIN) for the car, based on the license plate number included in media photographs of the car hitting the crowd.

The family was attending a wedding Saturday afternoon when Jerome Vangheluwe began receiving dozens of calls on his cellphone. That’s when his son informed him about online accusations linking him to the Charlottesville incident.

People began flooding the younger Vangheluwe’s Facebook page with threats, images and even an animated cartoon of a man driving into a crowd of people.

A woman who identified herself as Joel’s sister responded via social media by defending her brother. “He is innocent and getting death threats,” she said in a Facebook post.

Jerome Vangheluwe said international media representatives called for a comment.

“It was the Canadian television news, a reporter from there asking if I wanted to comment on the fact that my son had been arrested for driving into a group of people in Charlottesville,” Vangheluwe told WDIV.

Vangheluwe, vice president of a health care firm, called Michigan State Police about the hostile reaction. “Honestly, I don’t feel safe in my home right now,” he said.

Michigan State Police tried to set the record state as it tweeted: “A Michigan resident that used to own the car used in attack in Virginia is now receiving death threats after false accusation by website.”

One of the online sites that incorrectly identified the driver, GotNews.com, later issued a retraction, misspelling Vangheluwe’s last name.

“Because police have not identified the suspect, GotNews has retracted the article. GotNews regrets the error and apologizes to Joel Vangeheluwe and his family. Unlike the fake news media, the new media is nimble and responsible to its audience, Unlike the fake news media, the new media lives not by lies,” the site wrote.

The Vangheluwes could not be reached Sunday.

According to the website Coed.com, Joel Vangheluwe graduated from Romeo High School in 2015. He attended the College for Creative Studies in Detroit and is pursuing a career in music and painting. The family formerly resided in St. Clair Shores.

Police in Virginia have charged James Alex Fields Jr., 20, of Maumee, Ohio, with second-degree murder and other crimes. He will be formally arraigned on Monday.

Fields was photographed hours earlier carrying the emblem of one of the hate groups that organized the “Take America Back” campaign in Charlottesville

The FBI announced the opening of a civil rights investigation into Saturday’s car attack. White nationalists were protesting the city’s decision to remove a statue of Confederate General Robert E. Lee, when they were confronted by counter-protestors.

-- Associated Press contributed to this report