New York is the latest state to scrap tampon tax
New York is on track to become the 11th U.S. state to drop the sales tax on menstrual products, with both houses of the state’s legislature passing versions of a bill that would put an end to the “tampon tax.”

Women are believed to spend up to $20 a year on the tampon tax, so the new law—which NY Gov. Andrew Cuomo has previously indicated support for—could mean up to about $800 in savings on sales tax alone for the average New York woman over her lifetime.

“New York is leading the way in the fight for menstrual equity in the U.S.,” said Jennifer Weiss-Wolf, vice president at the Brennan Center for Justice, a nonprofit based at New York University School of Law.

For Weiss-Wolf and her fellow activists, the activity in New York is “tremendous” but also just the first step, with 39 states remaining in which consumers pay taxes on tampons and pads but not on adult diapers, prescription drugs such as Viagra, Rogaine or even candy bars in vending machines, which are among the products deemed “medical necessities” and thus, tax-exempt.

The dollar savings for women won’t exactly knock your Thinx off, activists say, but that’s not what it’s about, exactly.

“From the perspective of women who already earn less and pay more as a result of their gender, paying this sales tax is a burden we should not have to shoulder,” said Weiss-Wolf.

Read more: 6 times it’s more expensive to be a woman

Weiss-Wolf, a self-described “menstrual equity activist,” is on the front lines of the movement to end the tampon tax, which has picked up steam in the last year.

See: It will take 118 years for women’s pay to catch up with men’s

The issue has made it onto the agenda in about 10 states, seven of which introduced the legislation, including New York (though Utah’s never made it out of committee) and three, South Carolina, Tennessee and Illinois, that recently debated it. It has also gone international, with France cutting the sales tax in late 2015 and the European Union taking a stance on the issue this year.

Sales-tax data is based on combined state and local rates on average in 2015, per the conservative-leaning think tank Tax Foundation. Of the states that don’t tax tampons, some simply don’t have sales tax, while several others made menstrual products tax-exempt.

Women have even taken the tax to court: Earlier this month, a group brought a class-action suit against New York to the tune of $28 million dollars, a calculation of less than $3 per person a year in sales tax.

But the tax’s cost to any one woman varies widely based on the person, amount and type of menstrual product used and, of course, a state’s sales tax.

(Weiss-Wolf’s calculation is about $8 of tampon tax a year per woman, which assumes women spend between $70 and $100 a year on menstrual products. If a woman spends between $100 and $225 on such products, as the Diva Cup—which manufactures an alternative menstrual product—estimates, she could relinquish up to $16 a year to the tampon tax.)

But in any case, it adds up: Assuming no interruptions, women spend about 40 years of their lives buying menstrual products. That translates to an up to $800 spend over the course of women’s lives on sales tax on period products alone.

The tampon revolution is now

The tampon tax is just one part of a transformation activists are calling for in how menstrual products are paid for, provided and seen in society.

‘I believe if men got periods we would not be having this conversation.’ Nancy Kramer, Free the Tampons

A big component is accessibility to menstrual products, something particularly hampered by the products’ cost.

See more: Here’s one way for women to stay out of poverty

On March 22, a New York City councilwoman proposed making menstrual products free in the city’s schools, homeless shelters and jails.

Tampon accessibility is something Nancy Kramer, founder of Free the Tampons, said needs to be expanded even more broadly.

Why don’t all women’s bathrooms have tampons and pads available? “I believe if men got periods we would not be having this conversation,” she said. “There’s not a woman I know who doesn’t have a story about what happens when they get caught without what they needed.”

It’s an issue of equality, Kramer said, but also one of productivity. She said she often hears anecdotes about women getting their periods right before “a big presentation with a [chief financial officer] and it’s just like, ‘Seriously? You have to be concerned about that?’”

“Why should a woman be subjected to being humiliated and losing her dignity because her body is functioning in the way it’s supposed to?”