Splenda fights back after study suggests cancer link
The makers of Splenda went on the offensive on Friday after a study linked the popular artificial sweetener to cancer in laboratory mice.

A recent study published in the International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health finds that mice fed high doses of sucralose, sold as Splenda, daily throughout their lives developed leukemia and other blood cancers. The doses administered by researchers at the Ramazzini Institute, an independent laboratory based in Italy, were equivalent to 10 cans of artificially sweetened soda.

In response to the findings, the Center for Science in the Public Interest - a nutrition watchdog group that assesses the safety of food additives - has formally recommended that consumers avoid the sweetener.

Tate & Lyle and Heartland Food Groups, makers of Splenda, called the study unscientific.

"Researchers have conducted more than 100 scientific studies on the safety of sucralose over the past 20 years - and they've all declared sucralose safe to enjoy," according to a statement on the product's Facebook page on Friday. "Sometimes, however, poorly conducted and unscientific studies make bold headlines and stir up safety fears."

They referred users to a Feb. 12 article by the International Food Council Foundation entitled "Sucralose & Health: A Close Look at the Latest Panic Study."

"One study does not make a scientific consensus. Global regulators don't rely on a single, unreplicated study to inform their stance, and neither should you," the article stated. "Instead, large bodies of research are required to make informed decisions."

The non-profit council is supported by the broad-based food, beverage, and agricultural industries.

Researchers: No risk-free level of Splenda, sucralose; study links it to risk of leukemia https://t.co/p0wIluKEWe pic.twitter.com/3ZQ5O67rnA -- UPI.com (@UPI) March 11, 2016

Thank You @Splenda ! Leukemia has never tasted sweeter, and I've lost 30 pounds :) -- Camden's Finest (@anbrll00) March 11, 2016