After Aaron Hernandez suicide, murder conviction in Odin Lloyd death legally considered 'as if it never occurred'
Former NFL player Aaron Hernandez's suicide early Wednesday ended his life and his legal saga, but according to Massachusetts law, Hernandez goes to his grave as an innocent man.

Under a legal doctrine in use in Massachusetts called abatement ab initio, if someone dies after a conviction but before the completion of their appeal, the person's legal records in that matter are wiped clean.

"It will be as if it never occurred," said Martin W. Healy, chief legal counsel for the Massachusetts Bar Association. "The indictment, the complaint, the trial, all of that, in the eyes of the law it is considered null and void."

Hernandez, a former New England Patriots tight end, was convicted and sentenced to life in prison with no chance of parole in 2015 for the murder in 2013 of Odin Lloyd. Last week, he was acquitted of murder in a separate trial in which he was charged with the 2012 killings of Daniel de Abreu and Safiro Furtado.

The not guilty finding in the de Abreu-Furtado case had no bearing on the conviction in the Lloyd case. Hernandez's team was seeking an appeal on the verdict in that conviction.

Healy said Hernandez's attorney must file a motion for abatement ab initio in court, followed by a judge ordering it.

Western New England University law professor Bridgette Baldwin said, "Most lay people think there's a conviction and that's it. But the process is not over until you have exhausted your appeals."

Baldwin and Healy each said the law is based on the idea that people are presumed innocent until they are found guilty. But a guilty verdict in the Superior Court can potentially be overturned on appeal. An appeals court can overturn a verdict or order a new trial if critical mistakes are found in the first trial.

Ironically, Hernandez, by taking his own life, is unable to continue with his appeal, and according to the courts, the conviction will be vacated.

Healy said the idea of abatement ab initio is always controversial in those instances when it comes to light. Usually, those cases involved highly prominent trials that generate great interest in the press, he said.

Abatement ab initio is a common law dating back to English law when Massachusetts was a British colony, Healy said. Massachusetts is one of six or seven states that recognize abatement ab initio. Several states have modified it or nullified it. In each of those instances, the change was made in recognition of victims' rights, he said.

"All of this is not going to give any closure or comfort to the Lloyd family," Healy said.

We've seen it before in multiple high-profile cases.

The closest parallel case is that of John C. Salvi III, who killed two employees and wounded five others in attacks on Boston-area abortion clinics in 1994. He was convicted of first-degree murder in July 1996, and his attorneys filed an appeal. But in November of that year, Salvi, like Hernandez, committed suicide in his jail cell.

In January 1997, Judge Barbara Dortch-Okara, who presided over his murder trial, ruled that Salvi's conviction was to be voided.

Salvi's lawyer, James Sultan, told the Boston Globe, "Mr. Salvi is no longer with us, so I think he has suffered the ultimate punishment. In our legal system, everybody is entitled to have the fairness of their conviction reviewed on appeal before it is considered legally final and binding. John Salvi never had that opportunity."

The same situation arose in the case of John Geoghan, a defrocked Boston area priest who was convicted in 2002 of sexually abusing a child. Hundreds of other cases against him were pending. In many ways, Geoghan was the face of the Boston clergy sex abuse scandal. The Boston archdiocese paid out $10 million to settle a lawsuit filed by 86 people who claimed Geoghan had sexually abused them as children.

Geoghan was murdered in prison in August 2003. Days after his death, it was announced that all charges against him were wiped clean and his status in the eyes of the law was restored to presumed innocent.

In 2006, the courts wiped away a conviction for fraud and conspiracy against Ken Lay in the Enron scandal. Lay was convicted, but he died of a heart attack before sentencing. With his death, the conviction was erased and so were efforts by prosecutors to seek $44 million in restitution to investors who got taken with bad Enron stock.

Abatement ab initio, which is Latin for "from the beginning," has traditionally been used to void all criminal proceedings from indictment to conviction in cases where a defendant has died before completion of an appeal.

According to a 2006 paper by the National Crime Victim Law Institute, the courts cite two rationales in such cases. One is that it is unfair to maintain a conviction against a deceased defendant which is untested by an appellate review. The other is that the primary justifications for pursuing criminal proceedings, namely punishment or rehabilitation, no longer apply after the victim's death.

The law institute's paper sees the statute as flawed, primarily because it fails to consider the legal rights of the victims injured by the defendant's conduct before death.

"The doctrine of abatement is outmoded and unjust. The death of a defendant, found guilty in a court of law, should not erase the rights of the victims left behind," the paper argues.

Abatement ab initio could have a major impact going forward in any civil cases filed against the Hernandez estate, Healy said, because the conviction is null and void, but so too is any evidence introduced at trial. A lawyer suing the estate will not be able reference the conviction, and will not be able to introduce any evidence from the trial, he said.

"The lawyer will have to establish Hernandez's guilt by clear and compelling evidence. He can't just point his finger at the conviction," Healy said.

Also, Healy said, Hernandez being considered innocent potentially opens up a number of legal avenues for his estate and family.

For example, he said, with a "creative lawyer," the family could file litigation against the Patriots and the NFL for voiding Hernandez' contract after his indictment.