19 TAC Chapter 115. Subchapter C
Chapter 115. Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills for Health Education

Subchapter C. High School

Statutory Authority: The provisions of this Subchapter C issued under the Texas Education Code, §7.102(c)(4) and §28.002, unless otherwise noted.

§115.31. Implementation of Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills for Health Education, High School.

The provisions of this subchapter shall supersede §75.65 of this title (relating to Health Education) beginning September 1, 1998.

Source: The provisions of this §115.31 adopted to be effective September 1, 1998, 22 TexReg 7740.

§115.32. Health 1, Grades 9-10 (One-Half Credit).

(a) Introduction.

(1) In health education, students acquire the health information and skills necessary to become healthy adults and learn about behaviors in which they should and should not participate. To achieve that goal, students will understand the following: students should first seek guidance in the area of health from their parents; personal behaviors can increase or reduce health risks throughout the lifespan; health is influenced by a variety of factors; students can recognize and utilize health information and products; and personal/interpersonal skills are needed to promote individual, family, and community health.

(2) In Health 1, students develop skills that will make them health-literate adults. Students gain a deeper understanding of the knowledge and behaviors they use to safeguard their health, particularly pertaining to health risks. Students are taught how to access accurate information that they can use to promote health for themselves and others. Students use problem-solving, research, goal-setting and communication skills to protect their health and that of the community.

(b) Knowledge and skills.

(1) Health information. The student analyzes health information and applies strategies for enhancing and maintaining personal health throughout the life span. The student is expected to:

(A) relate the nation's health goals and objectives to individual, family, and community health;

(B) examine the relationship among body composition, diet, and fitness;

(C) explain the relationship between nutrition, quality of life, and disease;

(D) describe the causes, symptoms, and treatment of eating disorders;

(E) examine issues related to death and grieving;

(F) discuss health-related social issues such as organ donation and homelessness;

(G) analyze strategies to prevent suicides;

(H) examine causes and effects of stress and develop strategies for managing stress and coping with anxiety and depression;

(I) describe the importance of taking responsibility for establishing and implementing health maintenance for individuals and family members of all ages;

(J) identify the categories of drugs and what they are used to treat; and

(K) examine examples of drug labels to determine the drug category and intended use.

(2) Health information. The student is health literate in disease prevention and health promotion throughout the life span. The student is expected to:

(A) analyze the relationship between health promotion and disease prevention;

(B) analyze the influence of laws, policies, and practices on health-related issues including those related to disease prevention;

(C) identify, describe, and assess available health-related services in the community that relate to disease prevention and health promotion;

(D) develop and analyze strategies related to the prevention of communicable and non-communicable diseases;

(E) explain why some medications require a prescription;

(F) explain the connection between the proper and safe use of prescription drugs and overall health;

(G) investigate the potential negative effects of combining drugs, including prescription and over-the-counter drugs; and

(H) analyze the consequences of substance misuse of prescription and over-the-counter drugs.

(3) Health information. The student recognizes the importance and significance of the reproductive process as it relates to the health of future generations. The student is expected to:

(A) explain fetal development from conception through pregnancy and birth;

(B) explain the importance of the role of prenatal care and proper nutrition in promoting optimal health for both the baby and the mother such as breast feeding;

(C) analyze the harmful effects of certain substances such as alcohol, tobacco, and prescription drugs and environmental hazards such as lead on the fetus; and

(D) explain the significance of genetics and its role in fetal development.

(4) Health information. The student investigates and evaluates the impact of media and technology on individual, family, community, and world health. The student is expected to:

(A) analyze the health messages delivered through media and technology;

(B) explain how technology has impacted the health status of individuals, families, communities, and the world; and

(C) examine social influences on drug-taking behaviors.

(5) Health information. The student understands how to evaluate health information for appropriateness. The student is expected to:

(A) develop evaluation criteria for health information;

(B) demonstrate ways to utilize criteria to evaluate health information for appropriateness;

(C) discuss the legal implications regarding sexual activity as it relates to minor persons; and

(D) demonstrate decision-making skills based on health information.

(6) Health behaviors. The student assesses the relationship between body structure and function and personal health throughout the life span. The student is expected to:

(A) examine the effects of health behaviors on body systems;

(B) relate the importance of early detection and warning signs that prompt individuals of all ages to seek health care; and

(C) appraise the significance of body changes occurring during adolescence.

(7) Health behaviors. The student analyzes the relationship between unsafe behaviors and personal health and develops strategies to promote resiliency throughout the life span. The student is expected to:

(A) identify and describe forms of prescription drug misuse such as combining drugs for another effect and administering a drug improperly and substance use disorders;

(B) analyze the harmful effects such as the physical, mental, social, and legal consequences of alcohol, tobacco, drugs, including prescription drugs, and other substances;

(C) explain the relationship between alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs and other substances used by adolescents and the role these substances play in unsafe situations such as Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/sexually transmitted disease (STD), unplanned pregnancies, and motor vehicle accidents;

(D) develop strategies for preventing use of tobacco, alcohol, and other addictive substances;

(E) develop strategies for preventing the misuse of prescription and over-the-counter drugs;

(F) analyze the importance of alternatives to drug and substance use;

(G) analyze and apply strategies for avoiding violence, gangs, weapons, and drugs; and

(H) analyze strategies for preventing and responding to deliberate and accidental injuries.

(8) Health behaviors. The student analyzes health information and applies decision-making skills to promote the development and practice of safe behaviors. The student is expected to:

(A) analyze the relationship between the use of refusal skills and the avoidance of unsafe situations such as sexual abstinence;

(B) analyze the importance and benefits of abstinence as it relates to emotional health and the prevention of pregnancy and sexually-transmitted diseases;

(C) analyze the effectiveness and ineffectiveness of barrier protection and other contraceptive methods, including the prevention of STDs, keeping in mind the effectiveness of remaining abstinent until marriage;

(D) analyze the importance of healthy strategies that prevent physical, sexual, and emotional abuse such as date rape;

(E) analyze the importance of abstinence from sexual activity as the preferred choice of behavior in relationship to all sexual activity for unmarried persons of school age; and

(F) discuss abstinence from sexual activity as the only method that is 100% effective in preventing pregnancy, STDs, and the sexual transmission of HIV or acquired immune deficiency syndrome and the emotional trauma associated with adolescent sexual activity.

(9) Influencing factors. The student analyzes the effect of relationships on health behaviors. The student is expected to:

(A) evaluate positive and negative effects of various relationships on physical and emotional health such as peers, family, and friends; and

(B) explain the benefits of positive relationships among community health professionals in promoting a healthy community.

(10) Influencing factors. The student differentiates between positive and negative family influences. The student is expected to:

(A) describe the roles of parents, grandparents, and other family members in promoting a healthy family; and

(B) analyze the dynamics of family roles and responsibilities relating to health behavior.

(11) Influencing factors. The student evaluates the effect of a variety of environmental factors on community and world health. The student is expected to:

(A) assess the impact of population and economy on community and world health;

(B) analyze the impact of the availability of health services in the community and the world; and

(C) describe a variety of community and world environmental protection programs.

(12) Influencing factors. The student understands how to access school and community health services for people of all ages. The student is expected to:

(A) describe ways to report the suspected abuse of drugs to a parent or school administrator, teacher, or other trusted adult;

(B) research various school and community health services for people of all ages such as vision and hearing screenings and immunization programs; and

(C) compare and analyze the cost, availability, and accessibility of health services for people of all ages.

(13) Influencing factors. The student understands situations in which people of all ages require professional health services. The student is expected to:

(A) identify support systems aimed at substance use disorders and substance misuse, including prescription drug misuse;

(B) identify situations requiring professional health services for people of all ages such as primary, preventive, and emergency care; and

(C) explain how to access health services for people of all ages.

(14) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student analyzes, designs, and evaluates communication skills for building and maintaining healthy relationships throughout the life span. The student is expected to:

(A) demonstrate communication skills in building and maintaining healthy relationships;

(B) distinguish between a dating relationship and a marriage;

(C) analyze behavior in a dating relationship that will enhance the dignity, respect, and responsibility relating to marriage;

(D) evaluate the effectiveness of conflict resolution techniques in various situations;

(E) demonstrate refusal strategies;

(F) explore methods for addressing critical-health issues; and

(G) evaluate the dynamics of social groups.

(15) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student analyzes, designs, and evaluates strategies for expressing needs, wants, and emotions in healthy ways. The student is expected to:

(A) demonstrate strategies for communicating needs, wants, and emotions;

(B) examine the legal and ethical ramifications of unacceptable behaviors such as harassment, acquaintance rape, and sexual abuse; and

(C) communicate the importance of practicing abstinence.

(16) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student appraises communication skills that show consideration and respect for self, family, friends, and others. The student is expected to:

(A) apply communication skills that demonstrate consideration and respect for self, family, and others;

(B) demonstrate empathy towards others; and

(C) analyze ways to show disapproval of inconsiderate and disrespectful behavior.

(17) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student synthesizes information and applies critical-thinking, decision-making, and problem-solving skills for making health-promoting decisions throughout the life span. The student is expected to:

(A) identify individual and community protective factors and skills that prevent substance misuse and substance use disorders such as refusing invitations to misuse prescription drugs, knowing the risks associated with substance misuse, and reporting the use of drugs to a parent or school administrator, teacher, or other trusted adult;

(B) identify decision-making skills that promote individual, family, and community health;

(C) summarize the advantages of seeking advice and feedback regarding the use of decision-making and problem-solving skills;

(D) classify forms of communication such as passive, aggressive, or assertive; and

(E) associate risk-taking with consequences such as drinking and driving.

(18) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student applies strategies for advocating and evaluating outcomes for health issues. The student is expected to:

(A) research information about a personal health concern;

(B) demonstrate knowledge about personal and family health concerns; and

(C) develop strategies to evaluate information relating to a variety of critical health issues.

Source: The provisions of this §115.32 adopted to be effective September 1, 1998, 22 TexReg 7740; amended to be effective August 28, 2017, 42 TexReg 3371.

§115.33. Advanced Health, Grades 11-12 (One-Half Credit).

(a) General requirements. The recommended prerequisite for this course is Health 1.

(b) Introduction.

(1) In health education, students acquire the health information and skills necessary to become healthy adults and learn about behaviors in which they should and should not participate. To achieve that goal, students will understand the following: students should first seek guidance in the area of health from their parents; personal behaviors can increase or reduce health risks throughout the lifespan; health is influenced by a variety of factors; students can recognize and utilize health information and products; and personal/interpersonal skills are needed to promote individual, family, and community health.

(2) In Advanced Health, students are provided opportunities for researching, discussing, and analyzing health issues. This higher level of involvement provides students with experiences designed to reinforce positive health behaviors. Students are given the opportunity to learn more about technology, how it affects health, and how to use electronic technology to gain health information. The emphasis in this course is less related to learning facts and more related to providing students with the skills necessary to access their own health information and services and become health literate.

(c) Knowledge and skills.

(1) Health information. The student applies technology to analyze and appraise personal health. The student is expected to:

(A) generate a personal-health profile using appropriate technology such as stress reduction, body fat composition, and nutritional analysis; and

(B) explain how technology can influence health.

(2) Health information. The student researches and analyzes information in the management of health promotion and disease prevention. The student is expected to:

(A) investigate various sources in the community that promote health and prevent disease; and

(B) design health promotion materials.

(3) Health information. The student investigates the importance and significance of the reproductive process as it relates to the health of future generations. The student is expected to:

(A) analyze problems during various stages of fetal development;

(B) investigate the role of prenatal care and proper nutrition in promoting optimal health for both the baby and the mother such as breast feeding;

(C) describe the harmful effects of certain substances on the fetus such as alcohol, tobacco, environmental hazards such as lead, and prescription and other drugs;

(D) analyze roles of relationships and responsibilities relating to marriage; and

(E) analyze behavior in romantic relationships that enhance dignity, respect, and responsibility.

(4) Health information. The student evaluates the validity of health information. The student is expected to:

(A) research current health-related standards related to health information and products from valid sources such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration;

(B) analyze health information based on health-related standards; and

(C) evaluate the impact of laws relating to prescription and over-the-counter drug misuse and the use of alcohol, tobacco, and other substances.

(5) Health information. The student describes the effect of marketing and advertising on health behavior. The student is expected to:

(A) analyze marketing and advertising techniques in health-product and service promotion; and

(B) apply marketing and advertising techniques to health promotion.

(6) Health information. The student evaluates and utilizes communication skills in building and maintaining healthy relationships. The student is expected to:

(A) apply effective communication skills for building and maintaining healthy relationships;

(B) design strategies for implementing effective conflict resolution/mediation strategies; and

(C) present a model for effective communication skills.

(7) Health behaviors. The student generates strategies that address health-risk behaviors. The student is expected to:

(A) analyze strategies that minimize health-risk behaviors, including the misuse of prescription drugs;

(B) participate in school-related efforts to address health-risk behaviors;

(C) develop a plan to participate in community efforts to address health-risk behaviors;

(D) develop educational-safety models for children and adults for use at home, school, and in the community;

(E) evaluate the impact of laws relating to tobacco, alcohol, drugs, including prescription drugs, and other substances;

(F) investigate treatment plans for drug addiction, including prescription drugs; and

(G) describe the interrelatedness of alcohol and other drugs to health problems such as drugs and date rape, Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/sexually transmitted disease (STD), and drinking and driving.

(8) Influencing factors. The student researches and evaluates a variety of environmental factors that impact personal and community health. The student is expected to:

(A) examine the influence of culture and society on the misuse and abuse of prescription drugs in school, sports, or entertainment;

(B) analyze the impact of environmental factors such as air, water, or noise on the health of the community such as air pollution affecting asthma and drought conditions affecting water supplies;

(C) formulate strategies for combating environmental factors that have a detrimental effect on the health of a community; and

(D) develop strategies for aiding in the implementation of a community environmental health plan.

(9) Influencing factors. The student assesses the impact of the economy on community and world health. The student is expected to:

(A) relate economic status to availability of health services within the community; and

(B) analyze health care costs of various health services in different countries.

(10) Influencing factors. The student recognizes the importance of personal contributions to the health of the community. The student is expected to:

(A) research and/or participate in community health programs that benefit various populations such as volunteering for teen health lines and volunteering in nursing homes; and

(B) participate in a presentation to educate others about a variety of health issues such as panel discussions and role plays or skits to inform younger students about the dangers of drug use, including the misuse of prescription drugs, or smoking.

(11) Influencing factors. The student understands issues related to community health services. The student is expected to:

(A) analyze how the cost, availability, and accessibility of health care services affects the community; and

(B) evaluate how the selection of health care services, products, and information affects the community.

(12) Influencing factors. The student investigates technological advances in the community that impact the health of individuals, families, and communities. The student is expected to:

(A) describe technological advances available in the community that treat health problems such as medical procedures at local hospitals for treating heart disease and cancer; and

(B) locate health care facilities at which members of the community can obtain medical care.

(13) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student analyzes, designs, and evaluates strategies for expressing needs, wants, and emotions in healthy ways. The student is expected to:

(A) create and apply strategies for communicating emotions, needs, and wants;

(B) demonstrate leadership skills for advocating health;

(C) investigate and summarize current laws relating to unacceptable behaviors such as harassment, acquaintance and statutory rape, and sexual abuse; and

(D) create strategies that promote the advantages of abstinence.

(14) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student evaluates communication skills that show consideration and respect for self, family, friends, and others. The student is expected to:

(A) appraise effective communication skills that demonstrate consideration and respect for self, family, and others;

(B) associate effective communication with success in school and the workplace;

(C) explain the detrimental effects of inconsiderate and disrespectful behavior;

(D) apply criteria for using passive, aggressive, and assertive communication in relationships;

(E) analyze the importance of abstinence from sexual activity as the preferred choice of behavior in relationship to all sexual activity for unmarried persons of school age; and

(F) discuss abstinence from sexual activity as the only method that is 100% effective in preventing pregnancy, STDs, and the sexual transmission of HIV or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and the emotional trauma associated with adolescent sexual activity.

(15) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student synthesizes information and applies strategies for making health-promoting decisions. The student is expected to:

(A) identify effective skills to resist and refuse invitations to misuse substances, including prescription drugs;

(B) apply decision-making skills to health-promoting decisions;

(C) interpret information provided by parents and other adults; and

(D) determine causal connections that promote health in relationships.

(16) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student applies strategies for advocating and evaluating outcomes for health issues. The student is expected to:

(A) research information regarding personal and family health concerns;

(B) design materials for health advocacy; and

(C) apply the concept of research and evaluation for determining health information for special populations.

Source: The provisions of this §115.33 adopted to be effective September 1, 1998, 22 TexReg 7740; amended to be effective August 28, 2017, 42 TexReg 3371.