High court upholds Mass. law requiring guns to be locked in homes
This is an 8:30 p.m. update of a story posted at 11:30 this morning.

BOSTON – The highest court in Massachusetts on Wednesday upheld the constitutionality of a state law that requires gun owners to lock weapons in their homes, a case closely watched by both gun-control and gun-rights proponents.



Massachusetts prosecutors argued that the law saves lives because it requires guns to be kept in a locked container or equipped with a trigger lock when not under the owner’s control. The Gun Owners’ Action League and the Second Amendment Foundation Inc., however, pointed to a 2008 U.S. Supreme Court ruling that said people have a constitutional right to keep weapons for self-defense.



The state Supreme Judicial Court, ruling in the case of a man charged with improperly storing a hunting rifle in his Billerica home, unanimously agreed that the Second Amendment does not overrule the state’s right to require owners to store guns safely.





“We conclude that the legal obligation safely to secure firearms (in the Massachusetts law) is not unconstitutional ... and that the defendant may face prosecution on this count,” Justice Ralph Gants wrote.The case involved Richard Runyan, whose mentally disabled son allegedly shot at a neighbor with a BB gun. The 18-year-old showed police where his father kept other guns, and the father was charged with improperly storing a hunting rifle under his bed.A Lowell District Court judge later dismissed the charges, citing the U.S. Supreme Court’s 2008 ruling that threw out a District of Columbia requirement that firearms be equipped with trigger locks or kept disassembled. In that case, the Supreme Court found that the Second Amendment gives people the right to keep and bear arms for self-defense in their homes.Massachusetts prosecutors argued that the state law requiring guns to be secured when not under an owner’s control is less restrictive than the D.C. law. The Massachusetts court agreed, finding that the state law allows gun owners to keep their guns unlocked when they are at home and the guns are under their control, but must keep them locked when they are not home.Gun proponents said the law makes it virtually impossible for homeowners to quickly access a gun for self-defense.In a prepared statement issued following the SJC ruling, Paul Helmke, president of the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, said the court appropriately rejected the argument that the Second Amendment gives gun owners the right to leave unsecured guns in their homes.“Courts must continue to reject efforts by the gun lobby and gun criminals to strike down common sense gun laws that save lives,” Helmke said.In Western Massachusetts, some area officials have run into trouble with the gun lock law. In 2005, then-Northampton Schools Superintendent Michael A. Cosgriff said the state needed to better educate people about gun storage when he pleaded guilty to improperly storing weapons in his home.Cosgriff admitted to three charges of unsecured storage of a firearm, rifle or shotgun and was sentenced to a year of probation after a June 2004 incident in his Southampton home in which two guns were found in a closet and one in a basement storage room. Cosgriff, who went on to become a superintendent in New Hampshire, told the judge at the time that there were a lot of people in the state who were unaware of the trigger lock law even though they were properly licensed to possess a gun.In 2002, then-Easthampton Police Chief Robert G. Redfern was given a probation sentence after 27 charges of unlawful storage of a firearm were continued without a finding for a year. The charges stemmed from an incident at his Easthampton home when he was on vacation and his 13-year-old daughter held a party with some other teen-agers.Some of the party guests stole Redfern’s cruiser and, after it was recovered, told police they had handled weapons at the house. When police went to the residence, they found six handguns in a dresser drawer and 21 rifles in the attic.Although there was no indication the guns were loaded, Redfern faced the charges because he had failed to secure them with a trigger lock.Redfern resigned from his position on June 30, 2002 after negotiating a settlement with the city.Nancy Gonter, a staff writer for The Republican, contributed to this report.