Free Tacos for America on Tuesday, October 28
IRVINE, Calif., Oct 27, 2008 (BUSINESS WIRE) -- Millions of baseball fans now have something else to cheer about in the 2008 World Series: free tacos.

Taco Bell(R) restaurants across the country are preparing for one of the biggest taco giveaways in the company's history. As the Official Quick Service Restaurant of Major League Baseball(R), Taco Bell(R) will serve up millions of Americans a free Crunchy Seasoned Beef Taco as part of its "Steal A Base, Steal A Taco" World Series promotion.

Baseball and taco fans alike can get their free taco by simply visiting a participating Taco Bell restaurant on Tuesday, October 28 from 2:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. (local time). No purchase is required; one taco per customer.

Tampa Bay Rays shortstop Jason Bartlett stole free tacos for America from Taco Bell, as he stole second base in the bottom of the 5th inning of Game 1 at the World Series.

"When I was running back out to the field for defense after the fifth inning, I was told that Taco Bell was going to give everyone in America a free taco," said Bartlett. "The first thing that crossed my mind was all of my buddies back home in California who are probably on their way to Taco Bell that very minute. It's pretty cool. I'm sure I'm going to get more than a few text messages from my friends thanking me for winning them a taco, I guess."

Taco Bell has a long history of "Think Outside the Bun(R)" promotions with Major League Baseball. In addition to last year's successful "Steal A Base, Steal A Taco" World Series promotion, the company has also placed its famous "Free Taco" target at multiple World Series games. Taco Bell is currently in its fifth year as an Official Sponsor of Major League Baseball.

No Purchase Necessary. Subject to Terms and Conditions available in-store and online at www.StealaBaseStealaTaco.com . If a base is stolen during regulation or extra innings play by any player for either MLB(R) team participating in the 2008 MLB(R) World Series(R), Taco Bell(R) will offer every person in the U.S. the opportunity to obtain one (1) free Crunchy Seasoned Beef Taco (Approximate Retail Value 91c, prices may vary) at participating Taco Bell(R) restaurants in the United States on the date designated herein. Eligible consumers can obtain their free Crunchy Seasoned Beef Taco on Tuesday, October 28, 2008 (if base is stolen in Games 1-4 on October 22, 23, 25 or October 26, 2008) OR Monday, November 3, 2008 (if base is stolen in Games 5-7, October 27, 29 or October 30, 2008) ("Redemption Date") only. To obtain the Free Taco, consumers must visit any participating Taco Bell(R) restaurant in one of the fifty (50) United States or the District of Columbia between 2:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. (local time) on the Redemption Date only and request a Free Crunchy Seasoned Beef Taco. Limit one (1) Free Crunchy Season Beef Taco per person. Void where prohibited. Offer valid at participating Taco Bell(R) locations. Portions (C)2008 Taco Bell Corp.

About Taco Bell Corp.

Taco Bell Corp. ("Taco Bell"), based in Irvine, California, is the nation's leading Mexican-style quick service restaurant chain. Taco Bell serves tacos, burritos, signature quesadillas, Grilled Stuft Burritos, nachos, and other specialty items such as Crunchwrap Supreme(R), in addition to the 79-89-99 Why Pay More(TM) Value Menu. Taco Bell serves more than 36.8 million consumers each week in nearly 5,600 restaurants in the U.S.

About Major League Baseball Properties

The Major League Baseball Clubs formed Major League Baseball Properties (MLBP) in 1966 as the Club's agent for marketing and trademark licensing and protection. Major League Baseball Properties is responsible for managing consumer licensing activities, developing national advertising campaigns, cultivating sponsorship opportunities with major consumer brands and corporations, growing the game and the business of baseball outside the United States and creating national marketing programs in conjunction with Clubs, broadcast rights holders and national sponsors. MLBP also operates a full-service video and audio production unit (Major League Baseball Productions), a publishing division and stock photo licensing agency, and manages logistics for the All-Star Game and World Series as well as all other special events. For more information on Major League Baseball, log on to www.MLB.com

About Major League Baseball Players Association

The Major League Baseball Players Association ( www.MLBPLAYERS.com ) is the collective bargaining representative for all professional baseball players of the thirty Major League Baseball teams and serves as the exclusive group licensing agent for commercial and licensing activities involving active Major League baseball players. On behalf of its members, it operates the Players Choice licensing program and Players Choice Awards, which benefit the needy through the Major League Baseball Players Trust, a charitable foundation established and run entirely by Major League baseball players.

SOURCE: Taco Bell Corp.

Taco Bell Corp. Rob Poetsch / Will Bortz, 949-863-3915 rob.poetsch@tacobell.com will.bortz@tacobell.com or MLB Matt Bourne, 212-931-7878 matt.bourne@mlb.com or Cohn & Wolfe Rick Rhodes, 310-967-2940 rick_rhodes@cohnwolfe.com

Copyright Business Wire 2008