Biography

Born on April 26, 1970 in Slovenia, Melania Knauss began her modeling career at the age of sixteen. At the age of eighteen, she signed with a modeling agency in Milan. After obtaining a degree in design and architecture at University in Slovenia, Melania was jetting between photo shoots in Paris and Milan, finally settling in New York in 1996. The Slovenian-born brunette has appeared in high profile ad campaigns, and has worked with some of the top photographers in the fashion industry, including Patrick Demarchelier, Helmut Newton, Arthur Elgort, Ellen Von Unwerth, Peter Arnell, Antoine Verglas and Mario Testino. At 5 feet 11 inches, Melania has a captivating presence in front of the camera. She has graced the covers of Vogue, Harper's Bazaar, British GQ, Ocean Drive, Avenue, In Style, New York Magazine. Her major layouts include the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue, Allure, Vogue, Self, Glamour, Vanity Fair, and Elle. In addition, Melania has appeared in numerous television commercials, most recently for Aflac, in which she stars with one of America's top icons, the Aflac duck. She has also co-hosted The View with Barbara Walters. Melania's style has been noted to be one of natural elegance. In the words of Manolo Blahnik, "She is a true beauty. She has it." With a penchant and passion for the arts, architecture, design, fashion and beauty, the aqua-eyed beauty has thrived on the cultural diversification of New York City. This passion can only be surpassed by her dedication to helping others, and her generosity has been noted. She was Honorary Chairwoman for Martha Graham Dance Company in April 2005, is an active member of the Police Athletic League which honored her with Woman of The Year 2006, has been an Honorary Chairwoman for The Boy's Club of New York for five consecutive years, and in 2005 The American Red Cross awarded her with Goodwill Ambassador which she has proudly served for four years. In April of 2008, she was asked by Love Our Children USA and NASDAQ to participate in the Fifth Annual National Love Our Children Day and the beginning of National Child Abuse Prevention month by ringing the closing bell at NASDAQ. Melania's philanthropic interests more and more represent her humanitarian side, and she remains an indefatigable and dedicated New Yorker. Melania married Donald Trump in January 2005. In March of 2006 they had their first child, Barron William Trump. In February 2010, Melania Trump announced the launch of her debut jewelry collection with QVC, "Melania™ Timepieces & Jewelry”. In March 2013, Melania has added to her already extensive resume her Skin Care Collection, "Melania™ Caviar Complexe C6".