Stephen Paddock: Who is the Las Vegas shooter?
His dad was a bank robber caught in the FBI’s cross hairs after escaping from federal prison. He had gambling in his blood and once hit a $40,000 jackpot on the slots. And he owned two planes and was a licensed pilot.

Related Articles Australia moves to jail social media executives, fine platforms failing to remove ‘abhorrent violent material’

Supreme Court declines to strike down bump stock ban

NRA officer reached out to Sandy Hook conspiracy theorist after Parkland shooting, emails show

Apparent suicides of Parkland teens, Sandy Hook father spark conversation about prevention, survivor’s guilt

Sandy Hook victim’s father found dead, apparently suicide What Stephen Paddock was not, however, was someone his family ever suspected capable of pulling off the worst mass shooting in recent US history.

The actions of 64-year-old Paddock, who killed himself as SWAT team members blew open the door of the hotel room that served as the 32-story perch for his horrific crimes Sunday evening in Las Vegas, came as a total surprise to his relatives.

“We have no idea how this happened,” said Eric Paddock, 55, of Orlando, Florida, who described his brother as “just a guy. We don’t get it. This is like someone else did this.”

Here’s some of the things we know about Paddock so far:

He was a retiree with no criminal history in the Nevada county where he lived, police said;

He had no connection to an international terrorist group, the FBI said Monday after the Islamic State group claimed responsibility for the attack without providing evidence;

He apparently acted alone;

He checked into the Mandalay Bay Hotel & Casino on Thursday; after he killed himself, he was found with more than 17 firearms, Lombardo said;

Court records show that Stephen Paddock does not have a criminal record in Las Vegas;

He owned a single-family home in Sun City Mesquite, a retirement community along the Nevada-Arizona border, Mesquite Police Chief Troy Tanner said’

He lived there with Marilou Danley, 62, police said. Authorities said they don’t believe she was involved and was out of the country at the time of the shooting;

His family

Though his brother Eric expressed shock that Paddock was behind such mayhem, he also described him as “not a normal guy.” Stephen Paddock was a multimillionaire with substantial real estate holdings, Eric told reporters: “He was a guy who had money. He went on cruises and gambled. … (Once, he) texted me a picture that he won $40,000 on a slot machine;”

Paddock had no strongly held ideology, his brother said: “No affiliation, no religion, no politics. He never cared about any of that stuff.”

Stephen Paddock was 7 and the oldest of four children when their father, Benjamin Hoskins Paddock — also known as Bruce Ericksen or Patrick Benjamin Paddock — was arrested for a string of Phoenix bank robberies;

The elder Paddock, who died in 1998, tried to run down an FBI agent with his car in Las Vegas in 1960 and was on the agency’s most wanted list after escaping from a federal prison in Texas in 1968;

An FBI poster issued after the escape said Benjamin Paddock had been “diagnosed as psychopathic” and should be considered “armed and very dangerous;”

Stephen Paddock was married at least twice. One marriage ended in 1980. The second marriage, from 1984 to 1990, was to a woman who now lives in Cerritos (Los Angeles County);

Homes in Reno and near Las Vegas

Stephen Paddock bought the one-story, three-bedroom home in Mesquite — about 80 miles north of Las Vegas — for about $369,000 in 2015, according to property records that list him as a single man;

FBI agents on Monday were also searching a house Paddock owned on Reno’s northwest edge, in the Del Webb Sierra Canyon development about two miles east of the California line;

The Reno Gazette Journal reported that Paddock had lived in the home on Del Webb Parkway with his girlfriend, Danley, who the paper said is a hostess for high-limit gaming tables at Reno’s Atlantis casino;

He bought the Reno home in 2013, property records show;

In December he sold another Reno property, a condo unit in the Montage high-rise downtown;

Authorities in Texas say he lived in a Dallas suburb, also called Mesquite, from 2004 to 2012;

Other details

In a statement, Lockheed Martin, the defense giant, said that Paddock worked for them for three years in the 1980s: “Stephen Paddock worked for a predecessor company of Lockheed Martin from 1985 until 1988. We’re cooperating with authorities to answer questions they may have about Mr. Paddock and his time with the company;”

Neighbors in Mesquite, Nevada, told the Washington Post that Paddock would be away from home for days at a time, frequenting casinos as a professional gambler with Danley. They said they interacted with Danley but not Paddock, whom they described as extremely standoffish;

Public records show Paddock was a licensed pilot who owned two planes. He also had a hunting license from Alaska;

In September 2012, a man identified as Stephen Paddock filed a negligence lawsuit in Clark County District Court against The Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas over a fall at the Strip resort. He claimed that he “slipped and fell on an obstruction on the floor” and suffered injuries as a result of the “dangerous condition.”

The lawsuit, however, was dismissed in October 2014 after both sides agreed to drop it.

The AP, the Las Vegas Review-Journal and the Washington Post also contributed to this story.