TAKIS Mini Rolled Corn Tortilla Chips by Barcel

TAKIS Snacks (Botanas Takis de Barcel) by Barcel are tortilla snacks that resemble rolled tacos; this crunchy snack is coated with salsa and seasoned with lemon powder. They come in four flavors with varying heat intensities: Fuego (Hot Chili Pepper & Lemon), Salsa Brava (Hot Sauce), Takis Nitro (Habanero & Lime) and Crunchy Fajita (Taco Flavored).

Takis (also known as Taquis) are owned by the Barcel company, who are manufacturers of tortilla snacks and potato chips, as well as other confectionary and snack foods. Barcel is a unit of the famous Grupo Bimbo Company, who are also owners of many other popular Mexican brands. Grupo Bimbo purchased a snack factory in Queretaro during the late 70s which later became known as Barcel when the famous title was born in February 9th, 1978. The brand?s popularity has spread ever since and many factories were inaugurated in Queretaro Norte, the State of Mexico, Mexicali Baja California, Merida Yucatan and Hidalgo.

Barcel is popularly known throughout Mexico because of their innovative products, they?ve been introducing the most unique snacks on the market with different flavors, textures and shapes to satisfy all palates. The efforts of Barcel have lasted for more then 32 years, establishing itself as a beloved brand of Mexico and a favorite worldwide.

Grupo Bimbo is highly conscious about the nutritional value of snack foods, which gave way to the creation of Barcel?s production presentations of 100 kcalories, which are smaller portions for consumption in order to moderate the calories ingested by their consumers. Barcel implemented this new initiative in their Takis & Toreadas products, to provide consumers with snacks that they can enjoy while moderating their calorie intake. This is especially directed towards the nutrition of children, so they can enjoy fun snacks without excess calories.

For more information about Takis visit: Barcel USA & Barcel Mexico or call: USA: 1-800-354-3372