Metropolitan Police: Warning to the public to be vigilant
MAKE LONDON A HOSTILE PLACE FOR TERRORISTS - AND SAVE LIVES



If you suspect it, report it

Don't touch, warn others, move away

and call 999 Click here for the radio ad (1,864 KB MP3) Everyone has a role to play in helping to make London a hostile place for terrorists - and in turn save lives, the Met said today. Ordinary men and women may have information that could prove to be a crucial piece of the investigative jigsaw. Today (22/3/04) the Met and City of London Police launched their "Life Savers" advertising campaign which urges the public to call the free, confidential Anti-Terrorist Hotline on 0800 789 321. David Veness, MPS Assistant Commissioner, Specialist Operations, said he understood that people might have reservations about contacting police - either because their friends or family may find out, or their suspicions may prove to have innocent explanations. "I would like to reassure people that all calls to the hotline are treated in the strictest confidence, " stressed AC Veness. If you suspect it, report it

Don't touch, warn others, move away

and call 999 Click here for the radio ad (1,864 KB MP3)



"We know that people who contact the hotline do so in good faith. All information received by the hotline is researched and investigated before any police action is taken. Please help us to decide if the information you have is valuable or not." He added: "We have massively increased the effort and resources we are devoting to security operations and counter-terrorist investigation, but we still very much need your help to reduce the danger posed by

terrorists. "We want to make London one of the most hostile environments for anyone committed to providing financial or logistical support to terrorists, or carrying out terrorist attacks themselves." DAC Peter Clarke, head of the Met's Anti-Terrorist Branch, added: "All communities have a role to play in tackling the terrorist threat. I would urge anyone - whether they live in London or elsewhere in the UK - who has information about suspicious behaviour to contact us on 0800 789 321. If you suspect it, report it

Don't touch, warn others, move away

and call 999



Click here for the radio ad (1,864 KB MP3



"Terrorists need: Places to live - experience shows that these types of places are often let on a short-term basis. If you are a landlord or hotelier have you got suspicions about your tenants or guests? To plan and prepare - terrorist attacks around the world have involved a great deal of planning and preparation. Have you seen someone paying an unusual amount of attention to security measures at a location eg a major institution, a shopping centre, part of the transport network? Vehicles - cars and lorries have been used to devastating effect in terrorist attacks around the world. Terrorists also need to move around. Are you a motor trader? Have you any suspicions about the person you sold a car, or van or lorry to? Did they pay in cash and over the odds? Is the purchaser secretive about their identity? Money - terrorists need money to live on and to fund their activities and often raise this by committing cheque and credit card fraud. Individuals may create identities to set up bogus bank accounts, then acquire cheque books to buy goods which are later returned to stores for cash refunds. Credit cards are also cloned and used to buy goods which can be later sold. Are you a retailer? Have you any cause to be suspicious?"

James Hart, Commissioner of Police for the City of London, said: "The public's role in the fight against terrorism cannot be underestimated and the City community is no exception. As well as remaining alert to suspicious objects or individuals during their daily routines, people who specifically work in the financial sector can also play a significant part by reporting suspicious financial activity. Terrorists require money - if we can cut off that supply we can seriously impede their activities." Links The Anti-Terrorist branch

Advice and Information about terrorism

London Prepared - government website showing how London is prepared for terrorist threats