Desperate Britain First sink to new low by linking London mayor Sadiq Khan to 9/11 in bizarre video
Get politics updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Right-wing party Britain First has sunk to a new low after claiming to have "exposed" mayor of London Sadiq Khan, publishing a video that tries desperately to link him to the 9/11 attacks.

In the lead up to the election, the party posted a video on its website which in titled in all caps: "SADIQ KHAN EXPOSED!".

It makes several claims about Mr Khan's past, claiming: " Sadiq Khan has a long and unbroken career of collaboration and involvement with Islamists, hate preachers, terrorist godfathers, sexists, homophobes and down right extremists."

As the video concludes, a narrator says that Mr Khan once shared a platform with Anwar al-Awlaki, an American and Yemeni imam and Islamic lecturer who it is claimed preached to three of the nine terrorists involved in carrying out the September 11 attacks on the United States.

(Photo: James Gourley/REX/Shutterstock)

The preacher was eventually killed by two CIA drones in Yemen.

Read more: Britain First candidate turns his back as Sadiq Khan becomes London's first Muslim mayor

The video then shows the World Trade Centre burning before collapse, and then goes on to continue Britain First's "biography" of Khan.

(Photo: PA)

Britain First describe the video as a "shocking report".

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

How Britain First reacted to Sadiq Khan winning the election

The party said in a statement today: "There is no point gauging our performance by looking at our vote in multicultural, heavily Muslim areas because there are hardly any Britons left in those areas.

"We must examine our performance in areas where the majority of the population is overwhelmingly British to see how well we polled – and to give an indication of how well we would poll in other British areas.

Read more: Kerber & Black on the London mayoral election, Leicester City and the weather

"Lastly, as became blatantly obvious with the election of Labour’s Islamist mayor, there is an increasingly shrinking number of Britons left in the capital overall and far too many Muslims.

"Britons make up less than 45% of the capital and at least half of those who remain will be the “trendy” leftwing chattering class types, the gormless liberals and bigoted white socialists in areas such as Camden, Islington etc.

Read more: 8 things that have taken less time than the official result for Mayor of London

"With such a small and rapidly declining pool of voters to appeal to we rightly said this election was London’s “Last Stand” and the prospects of major gains, even with major resources, were slim."