Water bill forgiveness? Lawsuit seeks to void Flint charges since April 2014
FLINT, MI -- Flint residents who have filed two new class-action lawsuits want water bills issued since April 2014 ruled null and void because customers got water that was "defective, dangerous and unfit" to drink.

"We are seeking for the court to declare that all the bills that have been issued for usage of water invalid because the water has not been fit for its intended purpose," said Trachelle Young, one of the attorneys representing four Flint families in separate lawsuits filed today in Genesee Circuit Court, last week in the Michigan Court of Claims, and in November in U.S. District Court.

"Essentially, the residents have been getting billed for water that they cannot use," Young said in a news conference today, Jan. 19. "Because of that, we do not feel that is a fair way to treat the residents."

The request for the preliminary injunction is part of the Circuit Court lawsuit filed today, naming the city of Flint, state Receivership Transition Advisory Board and individual city and state officials as defendants.

Gov. Rick Snyder, former emergency managers Jerry Ambrose and Darnell Earley and other agencies of state government are named as defendants in the Court of Claims lawsuit.

Each of the complaints are filed as class action lawsuits.

The families who have filed the lawsuits claim city and state officials supplied highly toxic water to Flint residents because it was cheaper than continuing to purchase Lake Huron water from the city .

Complaints say the city and state were grossly negligent in making or approving the decision to substitute a safe water supply for "highly corrosive and unsafe water from the Flint River."

Snyder Press Secretary Dave Murray said the Governor's Office has not received the lawsuits and declined to comment, saying it would "inappropriate for us to discuss pending litigation."

"We remain focused on the health and safety of the people of Flint, and tonight (Jan. 19), Gov. Snyder will discuss during his State of the State Address his plans to make the city stronger," the statement says.

Attorney Michael L. Pitt said the lawsuits will require Snyder to answer questions that have not been answered so far and turn over documents that have been shielded from release.

"We're going to get those emails" related to the Flint water crisis from the Governor's Office, Pitt said in today's news conference. "We are going to demand them as a part of discovery.

"There are going to be hard questions posed to these public officials," he said.

The lawsuits seek damages for the alleged personal injuries and physical damages suffered by residents during the city's water crisis, which began with the decision to use the Flint River as a temporary source of drinking water starting in April 2014, while the city was being run by a state-appointed emergency manager.

After the change in water source, Flint's water supply was hit with bacteria contamination and boil water advisories, elevated levels of total trihalomethanes (TTHM) and violations of the Safe Drinking Water Act, and increasing levels of lead.

Last week, Snyder announced that public health officials have also been investigating a possible connection between an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease in Genesee County and Flint River water.

The governor declared a state of emergency in Genesee County on Jan. 5, and last week President Barack Obama signed an emergency declaration opening the door for federal aid to deal with Flint's water crisis.