Alabama Senate results to be certified Thursday

CLOSE The crowd cheers as Democratic candidate Doug Jones is declared the projected winner of the U.S. Senate race against Republican Roy Moore on Tuesday, Dec. 12, 2017, in Birmingham. Shannon Heupel/Advertiser

The Alabama Secretary of State’s Office said in a statement Friday it will certify the results of Alabama's U.S. Senate election on Dec. 28.

Buy Photo U.S. Senate candidate Doug Jones votes in Mountain Brook, Ala. on Tuesday morning December 12, 2017. (Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)

The announcement came 10 days after Democratic Senate nominee Doug Jones edged out Republican nominee Roy Moore, and before any concession from Moore.

Jones, buoyed by strong African-American turnout and defections from suburban Republicans, defeated Moore on Dec. 12 by just under 21,000 votes – a 1.5 percent margin -- in a race where more than 1.3 million ballots were cast. Moore refused to concede, with his campaign saying they wanted to see where military and provisional ballots would land. But the Secretary of State’s Office this week said those numbers came in well below Jones’ margin.

Emails seeking comment were sent to the Moore and Jones campaigns Friday. Moore has solicited donations for a legal fund, though state Republican officials appear to have accepted the result of the race. Jones has set up a transition website, and has said he plans to hire a staff reflective of Alabama.

The State Canvassing Board — consisting of Gov. Kay Ivey; Attorney General Steve Marshall and Secretary of State John Merrill — will meet at 1 p.m. Thursday.

The 1.5 percent margin is not enough to trigger an automatic recount. State law does allow losing candidates to request a recount — if they pay for it — but it is not clear if state law allows that request to be made for federal elections.

Read or Share this story: http://www.montgomeryadvertiser.com/story/news/politics/southunionstreet/2017/12/22/alabama-senate-results-certified-thursday/977102001/