State’s consumer advocate urges FPL customers to file complaints
Do you have a concern about Florida Power & Light’s power restoration after Hurricane Irma? Was your power out for five days and you don’t know why? Did FPL’s website show that your power was restored when it wasn’t?

Consumers can file such complaints with the Florida Public Service Commission, Florida Public Counsel J.R. Kelly said Friday. His office represents all consumers on utility matters before the PSC which regulates FPL and Florida’s other investor-owned utilities.

FPL SUED OVER IRMA OUTAGES

“At the right time we are going to go through all these complaints, and we could possibly start talking to a lot of those customers. Tell us what happened? What was your experience? That could help us develop specific discovery questions or give us another line of questioning,” Kelly said.

PSC Chairman Julie Brown said this week the PSC plans to review Irma’s impacts on electric utility infrastructure and the utilities’ restoration performance as soon as is reasonably feasible.

READ WHAT HAPPENED IN NORTHWOOD VILLAGE THIS WEEK

FPL said Friday that service has been restored to essentially all of its 4.4 million customers affected by Hurricane Irma 10 days after the massive storm exited its service territory. With limited work left to clean up in the hardest-hit areas, FPL is releasing the majority of its utility and contract workers who responded from across the country and Canada.

Eric Silagy, FPL’s president and CEO, said, “Hurricane Irma was unprecedented by almost every measure – including its size and scope, destructive power and slow movement. Irma’s fierce winds, strong storm surge and flooding knocked out power to more than 4.4 million FPL customers, the largest ever in our history. But, we pulled together and completed the fastest restoration of the largest amount of people by any one utility in U.S. history.”

Even before Irma exited FPL’s service territory, the company had restored approximately 1 million customers, with 2 million customers restored by the end of the first full day of restoration. The vast majority of customers had their power back on within a week of Irma’s passing.

While a couple of Miami-Dade County municipalities have criticized the restoration process as too slow, Kelly said it’s too early for him to weigh in because no evidence has been gathered about what worked and what did not work.

“You can’t go pointing fingers right now because you just don’t know,” Kelly said. “That will be part of the process, to figure out who, what, where, when and why.

“If something did not work, why did it fail? Did it fail because it wasn’t implemented properly? Did it fail because a tree was uprooted, fell across a line and knocked it out? All those things will be vetted,” Kelly said.

Kelly said he has read accounts of FPL’s communications system failing in that customers were told their power was on when it had not been restored, and the issue needs to be looked into.

“That is all part of their smart grid, that they have, quite honestly, boasted about. Now we need to start confirming, why did it fail?” Kelly said.

The process is not expected to begin until next year and once it starts, could take several months. FPL will also be asked to show how they spent the $3 billion in storm-hardening costs they have collected from customers during the past decade.

“ At the end of the day, we might find out the utilities really messed up, and didn’t spend money where they should have. On the other hand, we might find out they did everything textbook perfect,” Kelly said.

Kelly said he would like to see the PSC conduct hearings throughout the state where customers could tell their stories. He also wants a full-fledged hearing where utility executives are put under oath to answer questions about what went wrong and what went right.

“The goal would be to improve the process so when another Irma hits next year, the state is better prepared,” Kelly said.

Ultimately, FPL customers will pay for Irma’s damage to the grid. Since 2006, the customer who uses 1,000 kilowatt hours a month has paid from $1 to $1.50 aa month to pay a $1.13 billion bond FPL was allowed to sell to cover the costs of the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes. Those payments end in 2019.

For 12 months beginning in March that typical customer is paying $3.36 a month for $318.5 million in damage and storm fund replenishment for 2016 Hurricanes Hermine and Matthew.