TRIGGER WARNING: Why precious college snowflakes will eliminate themselves from the human gene pool at the next natural selection event
Crybully snowflakes are an aberration of nature

Fragile liberal youngsters think competition is bad and adaptation is "bigotry"

Play-Doh, cry-ins and therapy dogs: This is how universities have become DAY CARE for sobbing crybully youth who are wetting their pants and screaming for mommy... WAAAAH!

When there is no competition and no natural selection, the entire population suffers as a whole

In effect, colleges are now indoctrinating a generation of LOSERS who exist in contradiction to the laws of nature

In contrast, people on the right are competitive, adaptive survivors

Mother Nature is crystal clear on the subject: WINNING is survival

Today's snowflake college students are tomorrow's self-eliminated losers in the human gene pool

The real world is raw, cruel and blunt... get used to it

(NaturalNews) In a society that teaches youth "everyone's a winner," no one learns how to lose. From this, we get a pampered, protected, hyper-triggered population of young, homogenized losers who all mistakenly think they are forever on the winning side of history. So when the power of the American Republic turns against their delusional fantasies and shatters their false beliefs by electing Donald Trump as President, they completely freak out, practically wetting themselves with horror as they desperately seek hugs, emotional trauma counseling, "primal scream" sessions or other expressions of lunacy that most U.S. adults outgrew before the age of ten.If you know any of these precious college snowflakes, please, because they need to come to their senses sooner rather than later.Since they believe in the false narrative of man-made climate change, college snowflake "crybullies" all believe they are close to nature. But they've never actually studied anything in nature, and they don't understand any real phenomena in the natural world, which is why reality is such a horrifying shock to them.Case in point: Ask any anthropologist or naturalist about the survival of any species in the real world of natural competition. They will describe to you the laws of "natural selection," which are sometimes called "Darwinism." Natural selection is a process by whichor denied reproductive partners. This weeds them out of the gene pool of the species, resulting in a stronger, more adaptive and more successful species that can survive a challenging, competitive world.This is true across populations of deer, songbirds, whales, squirrels, bacteria and even viruses. Everywhere you look in nature, these key principles are abundantly evident in the survival of any species:#1) COMPETITION: In competition, there are winners and losers. Winners get to live and pass their genes to the next generation. Losers die and are removed from the gene pool.#2) ADAPTATION: Successful organisms in any population show strong adaptive capabilities to handle challenging stresses that require alteration of the organism's goals or strategies to survive and thrive.#3) STRONG MALES = SUCCESSFUL OFFSPRING: In mammals and many other types of living organisms, those males which are the strongest at protecting their families and beating out other competing males for reproductive rights are rewarded with genetic influence over the next generation of youth to be born. Because reproduction involves, the most successful offspring will come from mothers who were able to mate with the males that were most adaptive and fit to survive.These principles are universal across the natural world. Yet even as today's college snowflake crybullies believe themselves to be informed about nature and evenof nature, in truthHere's why: In the liberal, leftist lunatic society we see today in cities and college campuses, the following dynamics are easily observed:#1) NO COMPETITION results in the pathetic, pussified, metrosexual "everybody's a winner" mentality that punishes achievers and rewards mediocrity. Children are taught to avoid standing out in a crowd. Conformity is more important than achievement, and achievement only really comes from "white privilege" anyway, children are taught, so achievement is bad.#2) NO ADAPTATION: Generation snowflake crybullies are taught to be "triggered" by any words, events or circumstances which do not fully conform to their extremely limited, narrow-minded "safe space" beliefs built on sheer delusion. As a result, college snowflake crybullies areand are therefore simply#3) FEMINIZED MALES = BACKWARDS EVOLUTION: When males of a species become weak, feminized, "it takes a village" pathetic wankers,. The role of the strong male in the population -- as defender, protector, hunter or warrior -- is not just diminished but. Gay men and gender-confused individuals become worshipped as "progressive" -- as if they are moving the human race forward -- but they actually induce a, producing weaker, less capable offspring who are less likely to survive in a competitive world.In conclusion, today's precious snowflake crybully pussified college youth actually represent. They are the very kind of individuals that Mother Nature has weeded out as failures for countless generations of natural selection. This explains why, when the rest of us adults witness these snowflake children blocking traffic and foolishly protesting against fair, democrat elections,to us. They ARE total failures!Listen to my favorite comediancomment on the hilarious libtard crybullies:From The NY Post As is obvious from observing recent history, natural selection has not played much of a role in the quality of the human gene pool for a very long time. Where our ancestors had to compete, achieve and adapt to survive and reproduce, today's college snowflakes just have to drink, party and f##k.There are no longer any obstacles they must overcome... not even academic grades, since liberal professors excuse "triggered" students from any academic accountability. Female college students don't even have to be selective in their choice of possible sex mates becauseto remove any child that might start to form in their wombs. Thus,, resulting in a kind of "backward evolution" force that drives humanity downward rather than forward.There are no longer exercises of adaptation for college snowflakes, either, since they have been torturously taught that, not the other way around. The very idea of "adapting" to a changing world makes college snowflakes pee themselves with fear. To them "adaptation" is inherently racism, or bigotry, or xenophobia or whatever other term they can fling out of their grab bag of ready-made leftist excuses. The real message from today's crybaby college students is that "The rest of the world must conform to OUR views! WHAAAAAH!"Not surprisingly, these college snowflakes shun any activity requiring adult maturity or accountability. The idea of showing up for work on time andis alien to them, because they see bosses who tell them to work as being "scary" or "intolerant." In the minds of the snowflakes, "jobs" are places that pay them to use "work time" to check in with their friends, update their social media, watch live sports broadcasts or other socially-important activities. The idea that a job is a place where an individual contributes a service of value to an employer that compensates that person in accordance with the value of their contribution isThe idea that a person must stand out above the crowd in order to do something meaningful with their life is deeply frightening to them as well. They've been taught that achievement is WRONG because it makes losers out of some people who are lazy or stupid. Thus, their answer to navigating the world is towhile erecting psychological shields of intolerance against the real world that exists outside campus.The upshot of all this is that generation snowflake losers will very likely beby Mother Nature herself at the next natural selection event.What sort of event might that be? A global debt collapse, international war, a grid down terror attack on the power infrastructure, a massive coordinated cyber attack on the banking infrastructure, a domestic civil war, a deadly viral pandemic, a collapse of the global food supply, and so on. In each of these possible scenarios, only those who are competitive and adaptive are the most likely to survive and reproduce. Those who are weak, pathetic and stupid -- just go visit the UT campus in Austin if you want a peek -- will find themselves obsolete and extinct.Just because they're dead, by the way, doesn't mean they can't still vote for democrats in the next election. But it does mean they can no longer produce living offspring, which effectively eliminates them from the human gene pool.Libtard leftists, in other words, are allWatch this video where Paul Joseph Watson explains it all with amazing clarity and hilarity:If you want to see more amazing videos on all this, look for anything by Milo Yiannopoulos, a brilliant young gay conservative to whom I gave the "Most Dangerous Faggot of the Year" award a few months ago.(Interestingly, Twitter BANNED Milo for challenging the stupidity of feminism, but Twitter refuses to ban libtards who are openly calling for the assassination of Donald Trump...)You want to know who represents the real future of the human race? Competitive, adaptive survivors.Donald Trump is a competitive, adaptive survivor. So am I, and so are tens of millions of gun owners, police officers, fire fighters, EMTs, paramedics, outdoorsmen, hunters, inventors and business entrepreneurs. These are the kind of people who are fighters and problem solvers. They don't curl up into pathetic sobbing balls of whimpering slobber when things don't go their way. Instead, they regroup, rethink the problem and start kicking ass in a new way to overcome and succeed.Political conservatives tend to be practical, real-world people, while political leftists tend to be delusional snowflakes living in artificial worlds that run on fragile, psycho-babble constructs that fall apart at the merest touch.But party affiliation is not important: It's thethat makes any man or woman a successful organism in a competitive world. That's why Donald Trump's insistence that he is going to make America WIN again was so universally welcomed and understood by people who live in the real world (i.e. people who have jobs or small businesses and who function like mature adults). At the same time, the "WIN" word was perceived as a threatening, bigoted assault on the psyche of the fragile left, composed of snowflake losers who have been taught from a very early age that "winning is bad." To the snowflakes, LOSING is their goal, which is whyIf you're wise enough to quietly observe the world around you, you'll find that Mother Nature teaches us a tremendous amount on this subject, showing us that, winning is good and adaptability is absolutely essential to the progress of a species.Simply and scientifically stated,, by definition, across every living ecosystem on the planet (including trees, grasses and microbes).Thus, when liberals teach their children to stop being winners, stop competing and stop being adaptive, they areas their genes are cleaned out of the gene pool. Call it "Mother Nature's eugenics," if you must, but it's a simple, scientifically valid phenomenon:Teaching your child liberalism is, then, a form ofagainst future generations, because when your pathetic, loser "snowflake" children are wiped out at the next natural selection event, your family tree gets cut off at the stump. Your genes are erased from the great canvas of humanity, and the laws of cause and effect grade your parenting efforts with an "F."In conclusion, when I look at the precious snowflakes wetting their pants across America's universities today, what I really see iswho have no real role in the future of humankind. They are not fit to survive and not qualified to participate in human reproduction over the long term.Sure, they may have a few children of their own in the years ahead, then raise them to be even more pussified and pathetic than their own generation, but that only makes their offspring even more likely to die off at the earliest fatal challenge to the human ecosystem.Or, put another way, do you REALLY think that pathetic college losers who have never fired a gun, never changed a car tire and never even planted a seed in a garden are going to have what it takes to feed themselves, defend themselves and cleverly adapt in a world of war or chaos? Not likely., and before the 90 days are up, they will be lining up, begging to prostitute their bodies to trade sex for canned soup or personal protection.Truly, we are only one natural selection event away from waking up in. And although I would never wish mass death upon anyone, Mother Nature tells us over and over again that the post-disaster population which survives the next great challenge will beinto the future.Mother Nature is cruel, folks. The real world is cruel. It's not all hugs and lovey dovey hugs and smoochey smoochey kisses. If you've never lived in nature, you may not know this.If you live in a university,. You live in a fantasy world that exists in total contradiction to nature. In the real world, animals compete. Predators hunt and kill. Innocents die. The strong survive. In today's universities, the weakest, most pathetic feminizes males get worshipped, the professors give everybody the same passing grades for "effort," and the archetype of the strong male protector and defender of society is vilified. Self-defense is condemned, and logic and reason are supplanted by "feel good" social conformity. Universities are nowThat's whyin modern society. I'll hire a gifted car mechanic over a propagandized college student, because the car mechanic has lived and worked in the real world.because farmers have to solve real problems in the real world, while PhDs can earn Nobel Prizes for dreaming up the most incredibly stupid economic theories that don't even work in the real world.Because of the influence of the libtard left, academia in America has almost become synonymous with STUPIDITY, weakness and failure.And that, my friends, is why today's generate snowflake crybullies are, quite literally, tomorrow's obsolete and extinct dead failures.