Precursory changes in seismic velocity for the spectrum of earthquake failure modes
Earthquake prediction was considered an attainable goal in the early 1970s, on the basis of laboratory and seismic observations showing complementary variations in elastic wave speed before rock failure and earthquakes1. While the excitement attendant with these predictions waned unfulfilled in the following decades, recent works provide accumulating evidence for changes in elastic wave speed associated with a range of fault slip behaviours, including earthquakes4,5, slow fault slip6, landslides7 and laboratory stick–slip failure events2,3. For the most part, these data document changes during and after failure, although in a few cases premonitory changes are known4.

The detection and characterization of the physical processes during earthquake nucleation8,9 via remote acoustic techniques could provide fundamental insights into fault weakening mechanisms that precede failure. Laboratory studies have related variations in seismic velocities to the magnitude of applied stress via the existence of networks of microcracks that alter the elastic properties of rocks10. Moreover, it has been shown that acoustic transmissivity of faults is intimately related with the evolution of shear strength via the load-bearing population of asperity contacts2,11, and laboratory studies show clear precursors to earthquake-like, frictional failure. However, the question of whether such changes in elastic properties can be imaged in the vicinity of earthquake fault and used to forecast failure remains unanswered.

Tectonic faults accommodate plate motion via a spectrum of slip behaviours ranging from steady aseismic creep, at millimetres per year, to quasi-dynamic transients such as slow earthquakes, with fault slip velocities of ∼10−7–10−3 m s−1, and dynamic rupture with slip velocities of ≥1 m s−1 during powerful earthquakes12,13. The wide range of environments within which these behaviours have been documented12,13,14,15,16,17 and the observation that large earthquakes are often preceded by slow slip16,18,19 suggest commonalities in the physical mechanisms of slow and fast rupture. Yet, we neither know if a given fault patch can host both slow slip and dynamic rupture20, nor do we understand the physical properties that dictate rupture speed for slow earthquakes.

Here, we use measurements of P-wave velocity linked with mechanical data to illuminate the physical processes that dictate fault weakening and stick–slip frictional failure. We evaluate changes in elastic wave speed during the seismic cycle of slow- and fast-slip events and find clear precursors to failure that extend across the whole spectrum of slip behaviours.

The mechanics of frictional stick–slip can be evaluated for a one-dimensional fault obeying rate-and-state friction21 by considering the elastic stiffness around the fault, k, and the fault frictional properties, which can be written in terms of a critical rheologic stiffness, k c (see Methods). In this context, the ratio K = k/k c describes the stability boundary between stable, K > 1, and unstable, K < 1, behaviour. Numerical studies21 and limited laboratory data22,23,24 suggest that the transition from stable to unstable behaviour involves a region of oscillatory, quasi-dynamic sliding, near K = 1. However, the implications of this region for tectonic faulting have not been explored.

We report on laboratory experiments designed to investigate the spectrum of fault slip modes from stable creep, slow slip to fast stick–slip (see Methods). We observe a spectrum of slip behaviours as a function of K (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Figs 1 and 2)21,23,24. Our experiments document an initial stage of stable sliding, followed by a spontaneous evolution to oscillatory stick–slip and creep-slip behaviour with accumulated strain (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1). We systematically vary K and document a transition from fast, dynamic stick–slip, accompanied by audible energy radiation, to silent slow-slip events (Supplementary Figs 1 and 2). For each event we measured the loading stiffness k, peak slip velocity, and stress drop duration (Fig. 1). Slow-slip events show peak slip velocity of ≤100 μm s−1 resulting in small stress drop events lasting up to 1–2 s (Fig. 1). At lower stiffness (K ∼ 0.6), dynamic stick–slip instabilities occurred with a larger stress drop (≥1 MPa), higher slip velocity (≥2 mm s−1) and shorter slip duration (≤0.2 s). The strong negative correlation between stress drop and event duration is consistent with observations from tectonic faults, where slow earthquakes have systematically lower stress drop than regular earthquakes12.

Figure 1: The spectrum of fault slip behaviour for laboratory faults. a, A representative experiment at σ n = 15 MPa. The left inset shows the double direct shear configuration. The right inset shows details for a slow-slip event (red) with associated recorded seismic waveforms (grey) and the corresponding variations in flight time (top). LVDT, linear variable displacement transformer. b–d, The stiffness ratio, K, controls the transition from slow to fast stick–slip as mapped in the stability phase diagram (b), the peak slip velocity (c), and the slip event duration (d). The inset in c shows the linear fit (red dashed line) to the shear stress-displacement curves (black) used to obtain k, and slip velocity (grey). i420 is the experiment number (see Supplementary Table 1). The inset in d shows a failure event and the duration of the stress drop. Full size image

The laboratory slip events exhibit a range of slip velocities that mimic those observed in nature13,19, with peak slip velocities during slow-slip events of ∼100 μm s−1 and much higher slip rates for fast stick–slip events. We note that our laboratory work focused on the slow end of the spectrum, and did not fully explore faster stick–slip velocities (≥1 m s−1) appropriate for regular earthquakes, resulting in a smaller range of slip velocities than that observed in nature.

Near the stability boundary, at K ∼ 1, we observe complex behaviour including period doubling and long-period modulation of the stress drop, consistent with theory21 (Supplementary Fig. 2). In this framework, the high slip velocity and large stress drop events represent laboratory analogues for regular earthquakes25, whereas the slow, long-duration, and small stress drop events are like slow earthquakes.

To shed light on the microphysical processes during slow and fast stick–slip events, we measured P-wave velocity (V p ), from the P-coda, throughout stick–slip cycles (Fig. 1a inset and Methods). Wave speed evolves systematically as the fault approaches failure, characterized by an initial increase during elastic loading, followed by a plateau, and a decrease before failure (Figs 2 and 3). The reduction in P-wave velocity during stick–slip events is coincident with layer compaction, indicating that wave speed is more sensitive to grain contact stiffness and coordination number than bulk layer density.

Figure 2: Mechanical and P-wave velocity measurements during slow-slip (top) and fast-slip cycles (bottom). Data showing the evolution of shear stress (black), layer thickness (blue) and changes in P-wave velocity (V p ) (red) during slow (top set of curves) and fast (lower curves) stick–slip events. The graph on the right shows a typical waveform with the P-wave arrival and the P-coda used to calculate V p (see Supplementary Fig. 4 and Methods for additional details). Note the consistency in the V p evolution during the slow and fast stick–slip cycles, mimicking the evolution of shear stress. i390 and i391 are the experiment numbers (see Supplementary Table 1). Full size image

Figure 3: Comparison between slow-slip and fast stick–slip cycles. Details of slow (left column) and fast (right column) stick–slip events. a–f, Representative slip events taken at shear displacement of 25 mm (a,b), and at displacement of 30 mm (c–f). The evolution of shear stress (black), slip velocity (blue) and P-wave velocity (red) is shown as a function of fault slip (a,b) and time (c–f). The grey shaded boxes indicate the three phases of the seismic cycle: (I) interseismic, (II) pre-seismic and (III) coseismic, as described in the main text. Full size image

The combination of frictional properties and acoustic data provide a comprehensive view of fault strength evolution during the seismic cycle (Fig. 3). We find that both slow and fast stick–slip events can be divided into three distinct phases: (I) interseismic, described by linear elastic loading; (II) pre-seismic, which begins at the onset of inelastic deformation; and (III) coseismic, defined by rapid slip acceleration and measured from the peak stress to the residual shear stress after failure. The coseismic phase can be further divided into a preparatory stage, where the shear stress decreases slowly and fault motion accelerates (IIIa) followed by a failure stage, where dynamic stress drop occurs (IIIb) (Fig. 3a, b).

For both slow- and fast-slip events, the interseismic phase (I) is associated with elastic loading, near-zero fault sliding velocity, and increasing V p (Fig. 3). In this phase, the fault is considered locked and the increase in V p represents contact ageing and particle interlocking, consistent with laboratory3 and seismological observations along natural faults26,27 (Fig. 4).

Figure 4: Comparison between laboratory and natural variation in seismic velocity. a–e, Seismic velocity changes during the earthquake cycle for fast (a) and slow (b) laboratory earthquakes and fault slip events in nature ranging from typical earthquakes (c,e) to slow-slip events (d). Grey shaded bands in b and d represent slow-slip events in the laboratory and in nature, respectively. i417 and i420 are the experiment numbers (see Supplementary Table 1). Full size image

In the pre-seismic phase (II), creep begins to accelerate and deformation is inelastic. Acceleration in slip velocity coincides with maximum V p , which generally plateaus during phase II (Fig. 3c, d). For fast stick–slip events, the fault slip velocity is still nearly zero in phase II. Shear stress decreases slowly at the beginning of phase III (Fig. 3) and in this preparatory stage of failure (phase IIIa) accelerated creep coincides with a reduction in V p of ∼1%, which is comparable to although larger than seismic observations before earthquake failure (Fig. 4). During phase IIIb, we observe an abrupt increase in slip velocity followed immediately by a rapid stress drop. The maximum slip velocity is attained during phase IIIb, as expected for dynamic rupture. The P-wave velocity shows a marked decrease of ∼2–3% coinciding with abrupt acceleration and stress drop (Fig. 3).

Our data show that accelerated creep marks the onset of nonlinear elastic deformation (that is, phase II in Fig. 3a, b) and a peak in V p . This transition is not attendant with macroscopic layer dilation (Fig. 2). Fault creep and the reduction in V p indicate that asperity contacts within the fault zone begin to fail before macroscopic frictional sliding. The onset of creep is likely to be accommodated by grain boundary sliding, particle rolling and microcracking, which lead to reduction of elastic wave speed before failure. Note that the onset of wave speed reduction and the onset of creep occur at similar stages of the loading cycle for slow and fast failure events (Fig. 3), suggesting that the microphysical processes of fault weakening may share key features for slow and fast earthquake rupture (Fig. 4).

Our data indicate that earthquake nucleation and slip is controlled by the interaction between fault frictional rheology and local elastic properties of the fault zone and wall rock. Previous works suggest that the major factors dictating the mode of fault slip are frictional properties, effective normal stress, and elastic stiffness of the fault zone14,15,28,29,30. Fault zone width and maturity may also play a role because they affect friction constitutive parameters, and elastic stiffness (Supplementary Fig. 3). Our observations suggest that the stiffness ratio K incorporates the key parameters for slip stability as applied to tectonic faults and may provide a general mechanism for the spectrum of tectonic fault slip behaviours24, possibly acting in concert with dilatancy hardening or other mechanisms to limit rupture speed3,28,29,30. The systematic relationship that we observe between shear stress, fault slip rate and V p during the seismic cycle for slow- and fast-slip events suggests commonalities in the nucleation and rupture processes for the observed spectrum of slip behaviours20. These data together with existing field observations4 suggest that seismic velocity precursors may occur during the preparatory phase preceding earthquakes, even if only within a limited region.

To address the question of how our data may apply to tectonic faults, we note that active seismic surveys and analysis of ambient seismic noise have documented systematic changes in elastic wave speed associated with earthquakes4,5,6,27. In both the laboratory and nature, seismic wave speed decreases during coseismic slip and increases during the interseismic period (Fig. 4). In nature, the most obvious changes occur after earthquake rupture; wave speed drops abruptly coseismically and then increases with log time, consistent with fault re-strengthening due to healing mechanisms26,27. A coseismic reduction in wave speed has been documented for a number of major earthquakes (M > 6)5. Additionally, in special cases where high-resolution monitoring was carried out, precursory changes in seismic wave speed have been observed before a M3 earthquake4 (Fig. 4c). Similar observations of velocity reduction have been reported during slow earthquakes6, where the maximum seismic velocity perturbation was observed at the time of maximum strain change (Fig. 4d). Although fault dimensions and wave frequencies in natural and laboratory studies differ, and a more comprehensive discussion is required, the similarities between natural observations and our results suggest the applicability of our findings to natural faults (Fig. 4).