All In With Chris Hayes- NBCNews.com
Show: ALL IN with CHRIS HAYES

Date: September 4, 2015

Guest: Roger Stone, Robert Reich, Alex Gibney, Mathew Staver







(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)



CHRIS HAYES, MSNBC HOST (voice-over): Tonight on ALL IN --



HILLARY CLINTON (D), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: He can, unfortunately,

do what he`s doing, which I think is a bad development for our American

political system.



HAYES: Democratic front-runner takes on the Republican front-runner

in an MSNBC exclusive as Donald Trump fails the so-called commander-in-

chief quiz.



HUGH HEWITT: Are you familiar with General Soleimani?



DONALD TRUMP (R), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Yes. Go ahead, give me a

little -- go ahead, tell me.



HAYES: And the standoff in Kentucky.



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: She`s not going to resign. She can`t sacrifice

her conscience.



HAYES: The lawyer for Kim Davis joins me live.



Plus, Robert Reich on Bernie-mentum and today`s jobs numbers.



And correcting the record on an American visionary.



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The whole structure of my life was changed forever

by going and working on the Mac.



HAYES: Alex Gibney on his amazing new documentary about Steve Jobs.



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: It`s certainly one of the most intense and

cherished experiences they will have in their life.



HAYES: ALL IN starts right now.



(END VIDEOTAPE)



HAYES: Good evening from New York, I`m Chris Hayes.



In an interview today with MSNBC`s Andrea Mitchell, Hillary Clinton

weighed in on the kind of campaign being run by her potential front-runner

opponent, Republican frontrunner Donald J. Trump.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



CLINTON: He`s great at innuendo and conspiracy theories and really

defaming people. That`s not what I want to do in my campaign and that`s

not how I`m going to conduct myself and I also believe the president of the

United States has to be careful about what he or she says. Loose talk,

threats, insults, they have consequences, so I`m going to conduct myself as

I believe is appropriate for someone seeking the highest office in our

country.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: While Trump`s insult comic shtick makes for good television,

it may not be what voters ultimately want from the person conducting our

foreign policy or controlling our nuclear arsenal. Clinton`s comments come

as Trump is embroiled in yet another feud, this time with Hugh Hewitt, a

conservative radio host. It started with an interview yesterday on

Hewitt`s show when Trump had trouble answering questions on foreign policy.



(BEGIN AUDIO CLIP)



HEWITT: Are you familiar with General Soleimani?



TRUMP: Yes. I -- but go ahead, give me a little -- go ahead, tell

me.



HEWITT: He runs the Quds Forces.



TRUMP: Yes, OK. Right.



HEWITT: Do you expect his behavior --



TRUMP: And I think the Kurds, by the way, have been horribly

mistreated by us.



HEWITT: No, not the Kurds, the Quds Forces, the Iranian Revolutionary

Guards` Quds Forces, the bad guys.



TRUMP: Yes, right.



HEWITT: Do you expect his behavior to change --



TRUMP: Oh, I thought you said Kurds, Kurds.



HEWITT: No, Quds.



TRUMP: Oh, I`m sorry. I thought you said Kurds.



HEWITT: On the front of Islamist terrorism, I`m looking for the next

commander-in-chief to know who Hassan Nasrallah is and al Zawahiri and al-

Julani, and al-Baghdadi. Do you know the players without a score card yet,

Donald Trump?



TRUMP: No, you know, I`ll tell you honestly. I think by the time we

get to office, they`ll all be changed, they`ll be gone. I knew you were

going to ask me things like this and there`s no reason because number one,

I`ll find -- I will hopefully find General Douglas MacArthur in the pack.



HEWITT: I don`t believe in gotcha questions, I`m not trying to quiz

you on --



TRUMP: Well, that is a gotcha question, though. I mean, you know,

when you`re asking me about who`s running this, this, this. That`s not --

that is -- I will be so good at the military your head will spin.



(END AUDIO CLIP)



HAYES: This morning, Trump lashed into Hewitt.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



TRUMP: I thought he said Kurds, this third-rate radio announcer that

I did his show. Got you, got you, got you. Every question was, do I know

this one and that one and, you know, it was like he worked hard on that.

But I thought he said Kurds.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: For his part, Hewitt told "The Huffington Post", "I think

yesterday`s question set was fair, obviously Donald Trump disagrees. That

said I hope he comes back on often."



The two will get their chance at a rematch as soon as September, when

Hewitt is said to co-moderate the next Republican debate.



Donald Trump is far from the only presidential candidate to stumble on

foreign policy. Ben Carson, another political outsider who`s surging in

GOP polls, simply flubbed a couple foreign policy questions on Hewitt`s

show in March. And while a number of candidates have had trouble with

basic foreign policy knowledge, sometimes the voters cared and sometimes

they didn`t.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Are you ready for the gotcha questions? They`re

coming from the media and others on foreign policy, who`s the president of

Uzbekistan, all of this stuff. It`s coming and how are you dealing with

that?



HERMAN CAIN (R), FORMER PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I`m ready for the

gotcha questions and they are already starting to come and when they ask me

who`s the president of Uzbeki-beki-beki-stan-stan, I`m going to say I don`t

know, do you know? And then, I`m going to say, "How does that create one

job?"



KATIE COURIC, TV ANCHOR: You`ve cited Alaska`s proximity to Russia as

part of your foreign policy experience. What do you mean by that?



SARAH PALIN (R), FORMER ALASKA GOVERNOR: That Alaska has a very

narrow maritime border between a foreign country, Russia, and on the other

side the land boundary we have with and Canada. It`s funny that a comment

like that was kind of made to -- I don`t know. You know.



GEORGE W. BUSH, FORMER PRESIDENT: The new Pakistani general has just

been elected -- not elected this, guy took over office. It appears he`s

going to bring stability to the country and I think that`s good news for

the --



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: You can name him?



BUSH: General, I can name the general.



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: It is?



BUSH: General.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: All right. Joining me now, Republican strategist Roger Stone,

former top advisor to Donald Trump, and MSNBC contributor Dorian Warren,

senior fellow at the Roosevelt Institute.



Roger, it`s great to have you here.



ROGER STONE, REPUBLICAN STRATEGIST: Good to be here.



HAYES: I know you are a devoted fan of Richard Nixon, yes.



STONE: Yes.



HAYES: Do you have a Nixon tattoo?



STONE: I do.



HAYES: You have a Nixon tattoo.



STONE: Right.



I admire him for his resilience. It`s an ideological or something.



HAYES: Right.



STONE: It`s the fact that when you come down in life, you get back

up.



HAYES: You come back up.



But I got to think, Richard Nixon, whatever you want to say of Richard

Nixon, across the ideological spectrum, that was a guy who would have been

fine on the foreign policy questions. I mean, does that make you cringe

when you listen to that?



STONE: No, not really because I think it`s about understanding the

big picture in foreign policy. Look, Hillary Clinton knew the name of

every of these foreign leaders. We lost control to enemies all across the

Middle East and she botched Benghazi, so how much good did that do her?

This is about larger policies.



HAYES: Well, but -- you don`t think it`s -- you actually don`t think

it`s a threshold issue?



STONE: No, I really don`t. This is why Trump`s voters are tired of

the elite media being in bed with the political establishment. These kind

of gotcha questions.



HAYES: You think Hugh Hewitt is part of the elite media?



STONE: I think Hugh Hewitt had just had his 15 minutes, and in a

year, you`ll never hear his name again.



HAYES: What do you think?



DORIAN WARREN, MSNBC CONTRIBUTOR: I refer back to the classic

political science text on this, the reasoning voter by Sam Popkin who

argues that voters are low information -- they exercise low information

rationality. So ultimately they take short cuts to assess personalities of

presidential candidates and then use those short cuts to make a decision.



Ultimately, this won`t matter for Donald Trump`s voters, particularly

in the Republican primary. If he made it to a general election, voters are

going to care much more about domestic issues and a general sense of his

foreign policy positions. The gotcha questions isn`t what -- it isn`t

going to move one voter in terms of -- especially Republican voters to

another candidate or not.



HAYES: That may be true. My question, though, is if he is going to

be -- let`s say -- I mean, let`s say he`s the nominee, right? Presumably

there`s going to be a point, right -- and there`s no reason. In the same

way I wouldn`t know very much about how the develop a hotel, right?



If you asked me right now, like, well, what`s the zoning? I`d be like

"I don`t know." But at a certain point if someone said, "You`re going to

develop a hotel." I`ve figure it out. Presumably he`s going to study this,

right?



STONE: I think presidential politics is about sweeping issues, it`s

not about getting down in the weeds. The truth is, Trump understands that

ISIS is going to start killing people in this country soon and they need to

be dealt with. He knows the Iran deal, for example, is a flawed deal and

not in the interest of the country. This is what people care about.



HAYES: The thing you just said there reminds me of a great Reagan

quote. He says the problem with our liberal friends is they know so many

things that aren`t true.



STONE: Right.



HAYES: What you just said, knowing things that aren`t true. That

ISIS is going to kill people here, that the Iranian deal doesn`t work. How

can we trust him on the Iranian deal if he doesn`t know who Qassem

Soleimani is?



STONE: Because a number of people in the intelligence and military

community who are in touch with him, who knows things about the Middle East

have told them --



HAYES: Aren`t those just the same experts, aren`t those just the same

pointy headed intellectuals we shouldn`t trust in the first place? How do

you sort out the experts you should trust and the experts you shouldn`t?



STONE: Most of the ones you trust are retired and knowledgeable.

Just invite me back in a year when ISIS kills the first American on

American soil.



HAYES: Look, they may do that, and God forbid I really hope they

don`t.



STONE: Everybody I respect in this area suggests that this is coming

based on intelligence.



WARREN: Chris, we`re going to continue this, this is actually

probably because he listened to you for so long, Roger, this is the

brilliance of Donald Trump`s campaign, right, because he is driving the

media narrative. We`re going to be talking about that for the next few

days and this is going to be the discussion leading up to the next debate.

Now, the next debate is automatically framed as this square off between him

and Hewitt.



HAYES: By the way, I love the idea of Donald Trump with thrash cards

to bust out when Hugh Hewitt asks him a series of gotcha questions.



STONE: I suspect he`ll be very well prepared.



HAYES: I would imagine he would. It struck me how much this phrase

"the silent majority" as figured in Donald Trump. That`s a callback to

Nixon. A Nixon coinage from a lilt after `68, I think. It was after the

`68 election.



But there`s something that strikes me about that, right? In 1968,

whites as a percentage of the population of voting age were 90 percent,

right? By 2013, it`s 63 percent.



So there`s this real question of that Nixon block, that Nixon

majority, does that Nixon majority exists in America?



STONE: Why do we assume they`re all white? Nixon made great inroads

into the African-American community. He got a third against John Kennedy.

He got 28 percent against Hubert Humphrey. He also put more money into the

African-American business community than any president in history.



HAYES: You also know what the trajectory, though, of Republican vote

totals and you know Donald Trump right now has an unfavorability rating of

79 percent among non-white voters according to ABC/"Washington Post".



STONE: Right. So, people have a choice. They can choose opportunity

and job growth and prosperity and future for the American dream, or they

can argue about immigration.



I`m arguing that at the end of the day, Trump, as someone who can

return the country to prosperity, will have appeal to all voters not just

white voters.



HAYES: You think those numbers will change? You think those if you

back here in a year?



STONE: They`ve already started to change.



WARREN: This is the last gasp of dog whistle politics in terms of

using racism strategically to recruit white voters to vote for Republican

Party principles that is arguably against most white Americans` interests

in terms of economic interests. And, in fact, Donald Trump isn`t even dog

whistling, he`s dog barking in this case.



This is the gasp because after this presidential election in 2016, the

Republican party will either die because they can`t use this strategy

anymore, this is the last chance they`ll get to use this strategically

racist strategy or they`ll have to come up with something else. They

might, though, push Latinos into -- and especially Latinos who vote for the

first time in 2016 and Asian Americans and those that identify as people of

color, they might push them permanently into the Democratic camp for a

lifetime.



HAYES: Let me ask you this --



STONE: Obviously, I don`t agree with that.



HAYES: Yes, I know you don`t agree with that.



But let me ask you think. I know who you think will get the

nomination. Who is the biggest threat to Donald Trump? Who is the -- who

has the pole position for number two?



STONE: Well, first of all, I think the nomination contest is still

wide open. Although Trump is in a strong position and he`s clearly the

front-runner, and he has the money necessary to get into a fire fight.

Otherwise the nomination is wide open.



I do think it`s interesting that the three candidates who have moved

up are all from outside the realm of politics. Dr. Ben Carson, Carly

Fiorina, and Trump. That says something about the American people`s view

of politics, politicians, government, political institutions, the media.



HAYES: I would say it`s particularly true of -- most of those polling

are Republican primary voters, likely Republican primary voters. I think

it`s particularly true of the Republican electorate at this moment who --

and Ted Cruz who has also polled well and fashioned himself as a kind of

enemy of the sort of traditionalist.



STONE: No, he`s playing the long game and I think very skillfully.

He raises substantial amount of money. He`s a very talented speaker. He`s

got a strategy and following it.



WARREN: And he hasn`t attacked Donald Trump. So that puts him in

line to be a V.P. pick potential.



STONE: Or to inherent anti-establishment votes.



HAYES: And they will appear together at a rally against the Iran

deal.



Roger Stone, thank you very much.



STONE: Good to be here.



HAYES: Dorian Warren, great to have you here as well.



WARREN: My pleasure, Chris.



HAYES: All right. Still to come, Bernie Sanders live from Iowa.

Robert Reich on what today`s job report means, plus same-sex couples get

marriage licenses as Kentucky county clerk Kim Davis is still in jail. Her

lawyer will join me live.



And later, we`ll have more from Andrea Mitchell`s exclusive interview

with Hillary Clinton. Both she and Donald Trump have weighed in on the

refugee crisis so we asked every presidential campaign to see where they

stand and we will have their responses ahead.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



JOSEPH BIDEN, VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: The most relevant

factor in my decision is whether my family and I have the emotional energy

to run. If I can reach that conclusion that we can do it in a fashion that

would still make it viable, I would not hesitate to do it.



But I have to be honest with you, and everyone who`s come to me, I

can`t look you straight in the eye and say now I know I can do that.

That`s as honest as I can be.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: Vice President Joe Biden speaking candidly at an Atlanta

synagogue about what it would take for him to run for president in 2016. A

recent Quinnipiac poll found that Biden polls better than frontrunner

Hillary Clinton against top Republicans. Among potential Democratic

voters, he`s pulling in third at 18 percent, just behind Bernie Sanders 22

percent. Right now, Bernie Sanders is on the stump as he has been plugging

away in Iowa holding a town hall at this moment. We will check in on that

live next.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



HAYES: Presidential candidate Bernie Sanders is speaking right now at

a town hall in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. And one thing we know for sure -- he

will focus on the economy.



The latest jobs report today offers more evidence the economy is still

growing, still rebounding into the Obama presidency. It`s one of the

longest post-war expansions ever recorded.



The latest jobs report also offers more evidence the economy still

could be doing better. The economy added 173,000 jobs in August and the

unemployment rate dropped further to 5.1 percent, lowest level since 2008.

Average hourly earnings rose by a better-than-expected 0.3 percent in

August.



Of course, that`s not the whole picture, since 2009, the poorest have

suffered the steepest decline in real wages despite a rebounding growing

economy. Despite today`s unemployment number. And for those still looking

for full time work, there`s plenty of talk from presidential candidates.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



TRUMP: I will be the greatest jobs president that God ever created.

I tell you that.



JEB BUSH (R), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Four percent growth and the 19

million new jobs that comes with it.



GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Because creating

jobs is our highest moral purpose and we will move to get that done.



SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: The American people

will create millions of better paying modern jobs.



GOV. SCOTT WALKER (R-WI), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: A plan that will

help people create more jobs and higher wages.



CLINTON: Now, that will create millions of jobs and countless new

businesses.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: And there`s senator sanders who has a concrete jobs plan. No

matter what political critics think of it, it`s a jobs plan written right

there on his Web site. It would involve investing a trillion dollars on

infrastructure products and creating, according to his campaign, 13 million

jobs. His focus, throughout his campaign, remains firmly on the poor and

middle class.



Joining me now, former secretary --



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (D-VT), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: I am tired of

seeing in the Vermont, seeing it here in Iowa and seeing all across this

country that the greed of a few who want it all who are at war against the

middle-class and working families our job is to tell them loudly and

clearly, their day has come and gone. They are not going to get it all.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: Joining me now, former Secretary of Labor Robert Reich, author

of the forthcoming book, "Saving Capitalism for the Many Not the Few", and

star of the film "Inequality for All."



Let`s start today, Robert, with this fundamental contradiction in the

economy. It`s growing. It`s one of the most enduring post-war expansions

we`ve ever seen, you know, in terms of the amount of months we`ve had

private sector job growth, et cetera. Wages are creeping up a little bit,

unemployment is down, but we have this problem of money getting into the

pockets of essentially working Americans.



ROBERT REICH, FORMER LABOR SECRETARY: That`s exactly right, Chris.

This has been -- in terms of wages, this is has been the most anemic

recovery on record -- in fact, it`s the first recovery since 1946 in which

the median household income actually dropped adjusted for inflation.



You know, people talk about average wages going up. Averages don`t

mean anything. The basketball player Shaquille O`Neal and I have an

average height of 6`2".



HAYES: Right.



REICH: I happen to be very short.



I mean, what you really want to look is at the median, look at the

people in the middle and below. They are not getting ahead. In fact, even

if they have jobs they`re getting -- they`re falling behind.



HAYES: So that`s -- that strikes me as one of the central challenges

of this, of anyone to be elected president, of the next president and the

presidential campaign.



So, let`s start with how to address that. What do you think of

Sanders`s idea which is just essentially direct infrastructure investment,

$200 billion a year, over five years, we have a multiplier effect, you hire

people to do stuff, build bridges, roads, green construction. Does that

work?



REICH: Well, I tell you why I think it`s a very good idea and a very

important idea, number one, because we can borrow a very, very low interest

rates right now. Number two, you still have a lot of people who are not

only out of work who are working part time and would rather be working full

time, a lot of people too discouraged to look for work, a lot of them are

young people who could take these kinds of construction jobs.



And number three, you have a crumbling infrastructure. You have roads

and bridges and pipes and rapid transit systems that are falling apart, all

over America. Put those three together and it`s logical this kind of plan

is necessary.



HAYES: So, the question becomes, does that address the central

problem, right? So, we have more jobs. What you expect is you get people

out there, and it tightens the labor market, right? Because we have more

jobs and more competition for those laborers we see wages go up but in some

ways a tightening labor market so far hasn`t done that. So, why do we

think this would help?



REICH: Well, a tightening labor market, we haven`t seen a very, very

tight labor market given the things I just said. We saw a tighter labor

market in the late 1990s, and that`s when the bottom 20 percent did better

in terms of wages, but there`s a -- as you`re suggesting, there`s much

larger problem here and it goes back to -- starts at the late 1970s. You

have productivity continues to increase, American workers are doing more

and more with less and less.



But their wages are going nowhere, adjusted for inflation, most people

in the United States today are no better than their counterparts were in

the middle-class or poorer 35 years ago. I mean, there has been a huge

movement of excess productivities with regard to wages, income, wealth, all

going to the very top.



HAYES: Well, what you said right there literally sounds like it could

be a Bernie Sanders stump speech which prompt this is question. Do you

have a favorite in this race? You`re close to the Clintons. You were a

Rhodes Scholar with Bill Clinton. You served in his administration.

You`ve known Hillary Clinton and bill Clinton for decades.



Obviously what you just articulated sounds like Bernie Sanders stump

speech. Do you have a preference here?



REICH: Are you trying to put me in a corner here, Chris?



HAYES: I`m not. I`m just asking an innocent question.



REICH: Is this a Donald Trump kind of gotcha question?



No, I -- look, I have known Hillary since she was 19 years old. I

have a great deal of respect for her. I think she`d make an excellent

president. I`ve known Bernie a long time, too. And I`m -- you know, in

terms of policies he is very much articulating the kinds of things that are

needed in this country.



I mean, I think that he`s allowing -- because he is kind of creating

territory for Hillary to move into. He`s allowing Hillary and the

Democratic candidate to be a little bit bolder than otherwise. But this

country right now needs boldness.



The reason that Donald Trump is coming from the right, that kind of

angry right wing populism and the reason that you have Bernie Sanders from

the left, a kind of progressive populism is because most people are just

fed up with the system as it is.



HAYES: Yes. All right. Robert Reich, thank you very much. Have a

great weekend.



REICH: You, too.



HAYES: Still ahead, a look at how the Benghazi select committee has

taken a familiar left turn into scandal-chasing territory.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



ANDREA MITCHELL, MSNBC ANCHOR: You said recently using your person e-

mail while you were secretary of state was not the best choice and that

that you take responsibility. Are you sorry?



CLINTON: Well, I certainly wish I had made a different choice and I

know why the American people have questions about it and I want to make

sure that I answer those questions starting with the fact that my personal

e-mail use was fully above board. It was allowed by the State Department

as they have confirmed.



But in retrospect, it certainly would have been better. I think

responsibility. I should have had two accounts, one for personal and one

for work related and I`ve been as transparent as I could asking that all

55,000 pages be released to the public, turning over my server, looking for

opportunities to testify before Congress.



I`ve offered for nearly a year finally the committee will give me a

chance to testify in public if the -- toward the end of October.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: The committee that Clinton is referring to, the House Select

Committee on Benghazi. By the time she testifies before that committee, it

will have been around for more than 500 days. That`s longer than the

congressional inquiries into Hurricane Katrina, the attack on Pearl Harbor,

the assassination of President Kennedy, Iran Contra and Watergate.



As Democratic congressman and committee member Adam Schiff notes, when

the Benghazi committee was first formed last may, eight standing committees

had already investigated the Benghazi attacks, as had the independent

accountability review board. But House Speaker John Boehner insisted --

with a straight face that there was still legitimate work to be done.



Well, today the committee heard testimony from Jake Sullivan,

Clinton`s top policy advisor when she was secretary of state. Yesterday

heard more than eight hours of testimony from long time Clinton advisor

Cheryl Mills who had asked for her full testimony to be made public. Her

request -- perhaps somewhat oddly -- was turned down by the committee

chairman Republican Trey Gowdy.



And you can see why Mills might want the whole transcript out there.

Elijah Cummings, the top Democrat on the committee, has accused Republicans

of selectively leaking doctored and misleading information designed to hurt

Clinton.



And then there`s Brian Pagliano, who set up the server that housed

Clinton`s private email account and who was subpoenaed to testify before

the committee. Pagliano said Wednesday he would plead the fifth prompting

some to question what Pagliano has to hide.



But I think the better question is what exactly does the IT guy who

set up

Clinton`s email server have to do with the four Americans tragically killed

in Benghazi?



The answer would seem to be, well, not a whole lot. But then again,

the Benghazi committee at this point doesn`t really seem to be about

Benghazi.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



REP. ELIJAH CUMMINGS, (D) MARYLADN: This investigation has turned

into a derail Hillary Clinton nomination by any means necessary.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: Indeed, the Benghazi committee should probably just be called

what it is -- the House committee to destroy Hillary Clinton`s chances at

being president.



Remember, we have seen this sort of thing before. Ken Starr, remember

him, special prosecutor, was initially appointed to investigate the

Whitewater land

deal -- not whether President Clinton had had an affair.



But this is the GOP playbook against the Clintons, find a reason to

investigate, then fish for something, anything you can use against them,

even if has nothing do with the original investigation. And something

tells me that before it`s finally disbanded this Benghazi committee is

going to break all kinds of records for longevity.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Here`s your receipt. Here your license.

Congratulations.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: William Smith, Jr., and James Yates were the first same-sex

couple today to get a marriage license in Rowan County clerk Kim Davis`

office. A short time later, three more same-sex couples followed. That`s

because Davis herself remains in jail for defying a federal court order to

issue marriage licenses.



This morning, Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee seemed

to imply that Kim Davis is being punished more severely than some of

America`s most notorious serial killers.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



MIKE HUCKABEE, 2016 REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: She`s being

held without bail. I want you to think about this. Jeffrey Dahmer got

bail. Albert Desalvo, the Boston strangler, got bail, John Wayne Gacy got

bail.



Kim Davis, because she follow her convictions, is put in jail and is

not given bail.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: According to her lawyer, Mathew Staver, Davis is prepared to

stay in jail rather than, quote, "violate her conscience" which in this

case means her religious believes that marriage is a union of one man and

one woman.



In a press conference this afternoon, Staver said the licenses were

void

because they lacked the signature of Kim Davis and he compared his client

to Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



MATHEW STAVER, KIM DAVIS` ATTORNEY: So, she`s now stuck with a

decision,

do I resign as an elected official when the people want me there in Rowan

County, where I`ve been doing a good job or do I sacrifice my conscience?

She`s not going to resign. She can`t sacrifice her conscience, so she is

willing, as Martin Luther King, Jr. wrote in "Letter from the Birmingham

Jail" to pay the consequences of that decision and that`s why she`s here,

although she shouldn`t be.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: Joining me now, Mathew Staver, founder and chairman of the

Liberty Council, the legal group representing Kim Davis.



Mr. Staver, there`s no victory here. There`s no path to victory. I

mean, how do you understand the end game here?



STAVER: Well, there certainly is no victory when Kim Davis, an

innocent person, is actually incarcerated. In fact, one of the marshals

even said that never before had he arrested someone who committed no crime.

She`s committed no crime.



HAYES: She`s been found in contempt of court. People do occasionally

get put in jail for being in contempt of court. I`ve reported on people

that that`s happened to.



STAVER: You know, as far as the end game is concerned, that`s going

to be in part up to the judgment, it`s also going to in part up to

appellate court because there`s so much due process that has been violated

in this case. Kim Davis I know this, will do two things, as I mentioned,

she will not resign unless the people want her to be removed and they put

her there and they want her to stay there. And

number two, she`s going to not sacrifice her conscience. She can`t violate

her conscience. It`s a line she can`t cross.



HAYES: What`s the limited principle on that conscience? If there

were -- she did not want to give marriage licenses to interracial couples,

would that be okay?



STAVER: Well, we`ve got expressed constitutional amendments to that

effect.



HAYES: No, no, but...



STAVER: ...is there a reasonable accommodation...



HAYES: I`m sorry, let`s just be clear here. The express

constitutional amendments to that were only found in 1967 in Loving V.

Virginia, right, it wasn`t actually spelled out, that was a Supreme Court

decision that found that and the

question is post-Loving V. Virginia, 1967, if someone had done this, should

they also have the right to carry on their duties and not give marriage

licenses to interracial couples?



STAVER: The difference is before and after the Supreme Court decision

marriage was always and still remained the union of a man and a woman...



HAYES: No, no. I`m just asking you to answer the question.



STAVER: There was expressed constitutional amendments against racial

discrimination. They injected race into a marriage between a man and

woman. It didn`t change the essence of marriage before or after Loving, it

got away racism that was injected into it.



HAYES: That`s just defining away the question. If really the issue

here, as you say, is conscience, right, then that sort of jurisprudential

argument doesn`t seem to me to apply. I mean, the question is what does

her Christian conscience tell her? If someone`s Christian conscience

didn`t allow them to, for instance, issue divorce certificates -- I mean,

Jesus himself condemned divorce, let`s be

clear, should they be able to do that?



STAVER: Well, let`s be very clear. Throughout the Millennia of human

history we`ve never had same-sex marriage.



HAYES: No no. But Jesus -- answer the divorce question.



STAVER: It wasn`t her job duty when she ran for office in 2014 and it

was changed by five people two months ago and as a result of that she stays

in jail.



HAYES: Answer the question about divorce. I really do want to know

the

limited principle here.



STAVER: But marriage is still -- the essence of marriage has always

been the unit of a man and women. When it`s fundamentally changed, not

whether you can or not get married because of divorce or not divorce, that

doesn`t fundamentally change marriage...



HAYES: Mr. Staver. Mr. Staver?



STAVER: ...but when you change it to something that`s never been in

the history of America or millennia, that`s fundamentally different.



HAYES: Mr. Staver, no-fault divorce is perhaps the most radical

change to marriage that has happened in centuries and there were many

people, including the pope, who said so when it was introduced. So my

question is...



STAVER: But what does that have to do with a clerk? A clerk doesn`t

have anything to do with that, but when a clerk authorizes under their name

and the authority a marriage that has never been in the existence of the

history of millennia, that`s fundamentally different resent and that

collides with her conscience. The only thing she`s asking for is this,

remove her name and her authority from the certificate and she can file,

she can issue it. That`s a simple accommodation for conscience. And

that`s very easy to do.



HAYES: Let me ask you this, how is your organization doing in terms

of fundraising right now?



STAVER: Why don`t you ask that question of the ACLU?



HAYES: Well, they`re not standing in front in front of me, but I`d be

happy to. I think they do quite well.



STAVER: But you`ve never asked that question of the ACLU, have you?



HAYES: How are you doing?



STAVER: Why don`t you ask that to the ACLU when they represent their

people. Why don`t you ask that of the people who represented O.J. Simpson.

Where were they getting their money? That is absolutely irrelevant to the

issue. The issue here...



HAYES: No, the issue is that there`s a woman who is in prison...



STAVER: Accommodate her conscience and religious freedom. It`s very

easy to do. You may not want to address that, but that`s the simple

issue here.



HAYES: Mr. Staver, there are allies of yours who have been talking to

reporters saying they think you`re taking Kim Davis for a ride and

basically raising money off her plate so I`m just asking you the question.

How are you doing on fund raising this week?



STAVER: Anyone who asks that question does not know Kim Davis, Kim

Davis has a strong conviction and conscience. She contacted us for

representation. We are

representing her. I can tell you, we`re putting a whole lot more money

into the cost and expenses than we would ever get from this case. This has

never been about

fund-raising. This is about protecting someone`s conscience. If you can`t

get that simple idea that we`ve got freedom of religion and conscience

rights and the

question is not whether she`s sincere, not whether there a collision, but

is there a reasonable way to accommodate her convictions? And yes there

is.



HAYES: With all due respect, the question is is there a limiting

condition? You failed to give me one in this interview.



Mr. Staver, thank you very much.



STAVER: No, no, no, the question is whether there is a reasonable

accommodation.



Still to come, as the world reacts to the overwhelming crisis in

Europe, I want to know exactly where each of the presidential candidates

stand on taking the refugees. I`ll tell you what we found ahead.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



HAYES: The 1990s brought the world the personal computer revolution,

a revolution that was defined by an epic corporate battle: Steve Jobs

versus Bill Gates, Apple versus Microsoft fighting for the hearts and minds

of the American consumer. And the man who had ultimately emerge the winner

and the most consequential was at that time the loser and he was not happy

about it.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



STEVE JOBS, CO-FOUNDER APPLE COMPUTER: The only problem with

Microsoft is they just have no taste. They have absolutely no taste. And

what that means is -- I don`t mean that in a small way, I mean in a big way

-- in the sense that they -- they don`t think of original ideas and they

don`t bring much culture into their product.



And you say, well, why is that important? Well, proportionally spaced

fonts come from typesetting and beautiful books, that`s where one gets the

idea. If it weren`t for the Mac, they would never have that in their

products. And so I guess I am saddened not by Microsoft`s success, I have

no problem with their success, they`ve earned their success for the most

part. I have a problem with the fact

that they just make really third rate products.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: My interview with the director after the new fantastic Steve

Jobs documentary ahead.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



HAYES: I got to say, I have been absolutely glued to Twitter and to

television today as this incredible scene is unfolding in Hungary.



Desperate refugees and migrants took it upon themselves to leave

Budapest and march on foot towards Germany, a 300-mile journey in a public

act of defiance against a government that tried to keep them there, perhaps

helped force an offer today from that same right-wing Hungarian government

to bus people the Austrian border.



Austria and Germany have since agreed to take those people in. And

this comes as a tense standoff with a trainful of refugees and migrants

came to an end. A freight train brought in to block the view of cameras

while many boarded buses bound for camps.



And some of those brought to camps in the southern part of the country

attempted to break down a fence. Police retaliated with tear gas.



Meanwhile, the 3-year-old Syrian boy whose death sparked global outcry

was buried today in his hometown of Kobani, Syria, alongside his mother and

5-year-old brother. Their bodies returned to the very place they were so

desperately trying to escape.



Back in this country, what seemed like a distant crisis just a few

days is now a presidential campaign issue. Today, Democratic presidential

candidate Martin O`Malley urged the U.S. to accept at least 65,000 Syrian

refugees next year. The State Department officials have said the U.S.

would accept between just 5,000 and 8,000 refugees from Syria by the end of

2016, but as TIME magazine reports today, officials would not confirm those

figures.



In an interview with MSNBC`s Andrea Mitchell, former secretary of

state and current Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton weighed in on the

situation but did not give a number as to how many refugees should the U.S.

accept.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



ANDREA MITCHELL, MSNBC: Should the United States raise its quotas and

permit more people from Syria to come in?



HILLARY CLINTON, FRM. SECRETARY OF STATE: Well, the pictures -- well,

the stories we`ve been watching this terrible assault on the Syrian people

now for years are just heartbreaking and I think the entire world has to

come together. It should not be just one or two countries or not just

Europe and the United States, we should do our part as should the

Europeans, but this is a broader global crisis.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: On the Republican side, when asked if the U.S. should take in

refugees Donald Trump said possibly yes but added Europe is, quote,

"handling it" while Rand Paul noted the U.S. has already taken in Syrian

refugees, about 1,500 by the State Department`s count since 2011. And keep

in mind Germany is taking 800,000, and Paul warned against taking in too

many people.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



SEN. RAND PAUL, (R) KENTUCKY: So, I think we do have to be careful

with this and we should have a warm and welcoming heart but we also just

can`t accept the whole world to come here either.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: So, mostly this is just vague claptrap, and that`s from

Hillary Clinton, from the State Department and from Rand Paul.



Now, we`ve reached out to the other presidential hopefuls for their

position on the situation. The campaigns of Jim Gilmore, Lincoln Chafee

said they are

still formulating a policy proposal. We have yet hear back from the other

candidates. When we can -- right now, let`s just be clear about this, with

tremendous efficacy and a system we already have in place to take in

refugees, we can relieve a massive amount of pressing human suffering if we

as a nation and a body politic choose to do so.



And the American public should know where every single candidate

stands on

this and we will keep asking each and every one of them until their

positions are clear.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



HAYES: He`s one of the most revered, influential Americans of the

last 100 years, arguably the most influential person of the computer age.

Steve Jobs was also a very complicated and at times quite flawed human

being.



Director Alex Gibney`s latest documentary out in theaters today

captures that complexity, including the sometimes-difficult relationship

Jobs had with his employees, pushing them the edge to create the first Mac.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



JOBS: They will tell you it was the hardest they`ve ever worked in

their life, some of them will tell you it was the happiest they`ve ever

been in their life, but I think all of them will tell you that is certainly

one of the most intense and cherished experiences they will ever have in

their life.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



HAYES: Joining me now, Alex Gibney, a brilliant documentarian whose

latest film "Steve Jobs: The Man in the Machine" opens today in U.S.

theaters.



Great to have you here, Alex.



ALEX GIBNEY, FILMMAKER: Great to be here, Chris.



HAYES: OK. Why -- this is not a life, the life of Steve Jobs, that

has gone

underchronicled, I think it`s fair to say.



GIBNEY: I think that`s fair to say.



HAYES: This is someone who has been in the public eye since he was 24

or 25, there`s a variety of documentaries about him. Why make this?



GIBNEY: I think -- it hasn`t gone unchronicled, but I think what

Steve Jobs` life has done is gone unanalyzed. And this was an attempt to

kind of make sense of who he was, what he wrought and also what he means to

us.



I mean, I guess I was interested in making this because I was kind of

surprised when he died that so many people around the world, millions of

people around the world who didn`t know him from Adam, were weeping and

that, you know, you wouldn`t see that for Lloyd Blankfein.



HAYES: Well, fair.



GIBNEY: So I thought what is this about that? And it was that

investigation

that I thought was worth doing, not a kind of cradle-to-grave biography of

Steve Jobs but a sort of -- a look at what he means to us all.



HAYES: So what -- and what did you find? What does he mean to us?



GIGNEY: I think one of the interesting things about Jobs is that he

was the guy, the personification of the idea that your computer can be more

than a tool, it can be an extension of you. He called it the bicycle of

the mind.



And because he so singularly cast himself in the role as Apple and

wrote that role very well and performed it very well, we grew up with him,

with these devices kind of charting that progress. So he is our guide to

this world where the computer is an extension of us.



HAYES: The -- what comes across in the film which, by the way, is

excellent, and it`s a gripping piece of visual story telling, there`s

archival footage and one of the advantages of course is making this movie

is this is a guy that was in the public eye in various times. You have got

these great interviews that are kind of coming in and out...



GIBNEY: And he`s kind of a de facto narrator of the story.



HAYES: He ends up being that.



One of the things that comes across is this guy really was a

psychopath in some ways.



GIBNEY; I might not go that far.



HAYES: Well, he was -- his psychological settings in terms of drive,

ambition, focus, single mindedness. The degree to which normal concerns

about other people`s feelings and social norms and disruption weigh on all

of us just did not on him in the way it does for all of us -- for better

and for worse.



GIBNEY: I agree.



I think because he had that focus it allowed him to do extraordinary

things and to make or to preside over the making of extraordinary devices.



But I think more than just not being a nice guy, he went out of his

way in many instances to be cruel in ways that he didn`t have to. I mean,

did he really have to park his Mercedes in the handicapped section of the

lot everyday? Those kinds of things -- well, it doesn`t matter that much

in terms of the history of Apple, it matters in terms of values.



And I think one of the reasons I wanted to make this film was to talk

about values, not only the values of Apple and Jobs, but the values of

Silicon Valley and

also as corporations become ever more powerful in our lives, and

governments seem to whither either because everybody is too fractious or

because they`re losing some kind of fundamental grip, we have to wonder

about these values and we have to question them.



HAYES: But here`s -- let me make the case for Jobs. Until I started

working at a big corporation I don`t think I realized just how powerful

herd mentality and inertia are in the highest ranks of the supposedly

hypercompetive private sector.



I mean, mostly it`s people who are following other people. There`s a

huge pack and there is this unbelievable path dependence and inertia and

people just do the thing they saw other people do and it takes someone of a

very specific caliber to run away from that or to march straight -- take

that head on.



And it seems like he was that.



GIBNEY: He was. And more power to him. I mean, he -- he really

charted

a new path.



But you can be tough, you don`t know necessarily have to be cruel. He

encouraged us all to think different, emblazoned on that advertising

campaign were the images of Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Rosa Parks, but he

didn`t seem to transmit those values to the workers in China who were being

paid so little and whose working conditions were so bad.



So, those are the issues I think that we have to reckon with. And

also I think the other interesting thing about Jobs was he really did

connect us to our

machines in a very powerful way and he connected those machines to each

other so that we`re all more interconnected. I think you have to give him

tremendous credit for that.



Yet at the same time, the guy had difficulty himself with human

connection. I think he viewed it as transactional, and I think we can also

look at these devices and wonder how much they`re connecting us and how

much they`re also isolating us.



So in a way the story of Jobs was also an opportunity to look at what

he had wrought with these devices.



HAYES: Finally, what did Apple make of this film? How cooperative

were they? How much do they see themselves as kind of guarantors of his

legacy and

reputation?



GIBNEY: I think they do see themselves as guarantors as his legacy of

a saint, he wasn`t that. And they gave us no cooperation. In fact, I was

amused when they said "sorry, we don`t have the resources to help you on

this project."



I was wondering, if they don`t have the resources, who does?



HAYES: Yeah.



GIBNEY; So they didn`t cooperate, but that`s all right. Sometimes

that allows you or forces you to go in more interesting directions.



HAYES: All right. Alex Gibney, documentary on Steve Jobs, excellent

work. Thank you very much.



GIBNEY: Thanks so much.



HAYES: All right, that is All In for this evening. The Rachel Maddow

show with much more of Andrea Mitchell`s exclusive interview with Hillary

Clinton starts right now.



THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY

BE UPDATED.

END



<Copy: Content and programming copyright 2015 NBC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

Copyright 2015 CQ-Roll Call, Inc. All materials herein are protected by

United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed,

transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written

permission of CQ-Roll Call. You may not alter or remove any trademark,

copyright or other notice from copies of the content.>