R.I.P. Broadway Bank

FDIC shuts down struggling financial institution

Federal regulators showed up at closing time on Friday and took over the 30-year-old institution founded by Giannoulias' late father, Alexis. The family wasn't able to meet the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.'s deadline for raising up to $85 million in capital, and the FDIC rejected bank CEO Demetris Giannoulias' plea for more time to turn things around. It's over.

Time has run out for Broadway Bank, the troubled family business that threatens to take Alexi Giannoulias' U.S. Senate campaign down with it.

But the political fallout won't fade until the election is past, despite Alexi Giannoulias' determined attempts to change the subject. Like it or not, he'll spend the next six months explaining over and over why the 34-year-old scion of a failed family business belongs in the U.S. Senate.

For better or worse, Giannoulias' political ambitions have been intertwined with Broadway's fortunes. It's a situation he invited when he ran for treasurer in 2006. The bank was thriving, and Giannoulias capitalized on that success. At 29, he could boast of being senior loan officer at the most profitable bank in Illinois.

Those campaign ads have come back to haunt him in his Senate bid. Broadway's heavy reliance on construction and development loans — an aggressive, high-growth strategy — sent the bank into a nose dive when the real estate market collapsed. Giannoulias sought to distance himself from those risky practices by pointing out that he left the bank in 2006, before things got ugly, and by backpedaling about how much influence he'd wielded in the first place.

He clung to that position to deflect questions about the bank's dealings with questionable characters, including two organized crime figures who borrowed $20 million from Broadway from 2004 to 2006.

It's all easy pickings for his Republican rival, Mark Kirk, whose campaign has hammered Giannoulias for reckless lending and consorting with mobsters.

The gentler, though no less damning, impression is that Giannoulias claimed credit when the bank was flying high and ducked blame when it crashed.

Giannoulias and his brother maintain that Broadway's business strategy was sound and that the bank simply couldn't weather the unprecedented 40 percent drop in the real estate market. It's true that thousands of banks are struggling; last year, 140 failed nationwide. It's also true that Broadway was far more heavily invested than most of its peers in construction and development, and far more reliant on volatile brokered deposits.

Broadway's failure raises fair questions about Giannoulias' experience and judgment. Those questions won't go away, no matter how many times he answers (or ducks) them.

"Just about every sentence that Congressman Kirk utters these days is a noun, a verb and Broadway Bank," Giannoulias complained to the City Club of Chicago, and yes, the bank's troubles are a godsend for the Kirk campaign. But the questions resonate with voters because the answers don't. That's what happens when your best qualification for office becomes a big question mark.