The Future of Japan's Health System — Sustaining Good Health with Equity at Low Cost — NEJM
Four years ago, Japan celebrated 50 years of achievement of good health at low cost and increasing equity for its population.1 In 1961, at the beginning of a period of rapid economic development, while the country was still relatively poor (with a gross domestic product [GDP] half the size of Britain's), Japan reached full health insurance coverage of its population. In the next half-century, it continued to develop its health system and improve equity, even applying this principle of universal health coverage in its global health diplomacy.1 Now, however, Japan faces serious fiscal pressure due to a sluggish economy and the rapid aging and low birth rate of its population — but it is striving to sustain its health system in the face of these challenges.

Japan followed a nonlinear path to universal coverage. Previous Japanese policymakers were sometimes motivated to develop the health system for reasons of political economy that were unrelated to health. For example, Japan's first national policy for health insurance was introduced in 1923, motivated in part by imperial visions and the desire for a strong and healthy workforce for war. During World War II, Japan achieved nearly 70% health insurance coverage. Then, in the post-war period, political competition among the major parties promoted government efforts to expand coverage, as the conservative Liberal Democratic Party sought to provide benefits to its rural constituents and to weaken the agendas of the Socialist and Communist parties by redistributing social resources to industrial workers. Japan was not unique in this regard: in countries such as Britain and Germany, the process of attaining universal health coverage also stretched over long periods and was advanced by various political motivations.2 Though such mixed origins don't diminish the value of Japan's health policy accomplishments, they do highlight the importance of viewing the process from historical and political perspectives.

Japan's achievements in health status are well known (see table Selected Characteristics of the Health Care System and Health Outcomes in Japan. and case histories; to compare this country with others, see the interactive graphic). Since 1986, Japan has ranked first in the world in women's life expectancy at birth, which reached 87 years in 2014. Life expectancy for Japanese men surpassed 80 years in 2013. Japan's infant mortality rate, reported as 2.1 per 1000 live births in 2013, is the lowest in the world. But a continuing decline in birth rate means that the country's population is shrinking, even as it ages more rapidly than in other societies. The proportion of people older than 65 years increased from around 12% in 1990 to 25% in 2013, and the proportion of older people has exceeded the proportion of young people (0 to 14 years of age) since 1997. This demographic transition has created huge fiscal and health care challenges.

In addition to improving health outcomes, Japan's social insurance system has made incremental improvements in equity through cross-subsidies and tax transfers, which contributed to income redistribution in addition to risk pooling. As many countries have done, Japan expanded health coverage population group by population group, through policies designed for different groups with differing levels of coverage (both in terms of benefits and funding) — thereby creating disparities and problems of fairness. Government action and new social policy were required in order to reduce these inequities. Japan's single reimbursement fee schedule (for all physicians and patients) and single benefit package for all social insurance programs created a foundation for equity in access. The government then increased equity by changing the copayment policies for the various insurance programs, reducing benefits for employees of private companies (by increasing their copayment rates), and increasing benefits for the elderly and non–employment-based insurance plans (by reducing their copayment rates). Policymakers thus made the overall health system more equitable over time, reflecting the value that Japanese society places on egalitarianism.

Those achievements in equity are now at risk. Japan still has about 3500 insurance plans, with varying premium levels, so some private companies or municipalities provide better financial benefits than others. The fragmented insurance plans are differentially affected by the increasing number of elderly people in Japan. As people age and retire, they move from employment-based plans to non–employment-based plans, whose costs per person increase as older enrollees are added. As a result, non–employment-based plans increasingly have financial problems, especially as compared with Japan's employment-based plans. In an effort to reduce the financial problems for these plans and address the needs of the aging population, Japan introduced a national policy for long-term care insurance in 2000, and in 2008, it created a new health insurance program for people over 75 years of age.

Rising health care costs are a serious concern in Japan today: if the country takes no action, health expenditures could increase from the current 8% of GDP to around 11% by 2025.4 Rising costs are a result of structural problems in the health system, especially the rapidly aging population and the frequent use of high-cost technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging and relatively high-priced generic medicines (which cost 60% of brand-name prices in Japan). Two decades of economic stagnation during the 1990s and 2000s (the “lost decades”) also mean that health care costs have been taking a proportionately greater bite out of the GDP.

A final major challenge involves improving the quality of care in the Japanese system. Quality and efficiency have often been ignored by Japan's health policies. Existing government programs tend to focus on quantifying inputs and structures rather than on creating incentives to improve quality or addressing problems in outcomes. Some studies have suggested that postsurgical mortality rates in large hospitals in Japan are as low as those reported in other countries but that the quality of primary care and inpatient chronic care services may be problematic.3 Japanese hospitals and clinics are poorly differentiated by level of services, and there is no standardized benchmarking to assess hospital performance.

The Japanese government is acutely aware of these challenges and the intersecting crises of rapid aging and fiscal sustainability, which are further confounded by the health system's complex governance, including the mechanism for defining the fee schedule, as well as people's changing expectations about both medical and nonmedical aspects of health care.1 The government is trying to find ways to ensure fiscal sustainability, in response to the commitment made by Prime Minister Shinz̄o Abe to eliminate deficits by 2020. Recent laws seek to promote both the differentiation of hospitals by function and the community-level integration of medical treatment, long-term care, and preventive care by 2025. Japan is also considering a proposal to consolidate insurance plans at the prefectural level. In 2014, the Abe cabinet endorsed a government health care strategy that aims to facilitate the development of innovative technologies through a new Agency for Medical Research and Development. But these changes are not likely to be sufficient to address the profound fiscal and demographic problems facing the country. Maintaining Japan's current system by increasing premiums or taxes while cutting benefits, as was done in the past, might buy some time — but it would be very costly politically and would not resolve fundamental structural problems. Incremental changes at the margins will no longer suffice.

Instead, we believe that Japan needs a new vision of health care and health systems for the future. In June 2015, an advisory panel of young experts, appointed by Health Minister Yasuhisa Shiozaki, presented its vision of health care for Japan in 2035.5 The panel's report proposes a paradigm shift for Japan's health system, to redirect its focus from inputs to outcomes, from the quantity of services provided to patients' concerns about quality, from governmental regulation to professional self-regulation, from cure to care and well-being, and from specialization of services to integrated approaches across medical and social service sectors. The new health system would continue to emphasize fairness and solidarity, while building on individual patient values and desires and emphasizing global health perspectives.5 The government, recognizing that Japan needs new solutions for its profound problems, has explicitly called on the younger generation to produce innovative ideas for improving the health system.

The hope is that Japan will be able to mobilize new ideas, systems, and technologies to assist its growing elderly population and conform to changing social values and growing structural constraints and that the Japanese government will be able to jump-start the economy and get it growing again (using Prime Minister Shinz̄o Abe's strategies of government spending, monetary easing, and structural reforms, known as “Abenomics”), even as the population continues to age and shrink. More and more countries are confronting similar challenges, but Japan is first in line. Accomplishing these multiple and sometimes conflicting goals will not be easy, but that's the challenge that Japan's health system and society must tackle.

Myocardial Infarction A 55-year-old man with no serious health conditions has a moderately severe myocardial infarction.

In his suburban Tokyo home, Tanaka-san wakes up one day with chest pain. When the pain continues for 30 minutes, his family becomes worried and calls an ambulance, which arrives in 5 minutes. The emergency medicine team contacts the dispatcher, who asks a neighborhood general hospital whether there is room for an admission but is told that the coronary care unit is full. After 30 minutes of calls, the dispatcher finally finds a private hospital (with 150 beds) 20 minutes away that is willing to accept the patient.

This hospital has heart catheterization, MRI, and other equipment, and the emergency doctor in charge obtains an electrocardiogram and serum enzyme test to diagnose a myocardial infarction. A cardiologist is called to perform a cardiac catheterization, which reveals an infarction of a high lateral branch of the left anterior descending artery. A stent is immediately inserted, and reperfusion is established. The patient then stays in the hospital for 2 weeks.

The total hospitalization fee reaches ¥1.5 million (U.S. $12,000, including two heart stents for $6,700 and facility fees of $2,500). Coverage from Japan's High-Cost Medical Care Benefit System allows Tanaka-san to pay only $1,300, to cover the fee for a single-bed room for a few nights, insurance copayments, and some extra meal fees.

The day before discharge, Tanaka-san receives instructions on medication and lifestyle counseling. He is instructed to visit the outpatient clinic 2 weeks later. Because the hospital is far from his home, the patient asks for an introduction to a nearby general practitioner. Eight months later, however, follow-up angiography to see whether any restenosis has occurred has still not been done.

Hideki Hashimoto, Masayo Matsuzaki, and Mikko Kanda contributed to this case study.