The Redesigned $10 Note
The redesigned $10 bill includes subtle shades of orange, yellow and red, along with images of the Statue of Liberty's torch and the words We the People from the United States Constitution. The redesigned $10 bill entered circulation on March 2, 2006.

Security Features

The redesigned $10 bill retains three important security features that were first introduced in the 1990s and are easy to check: color-shifting ink, watermark and security thread.

Color-Shifting Ink

Tilt the bill to check that the numeral 10 in the lower right-hand corner on the front of the bill changes color from copper to green. The color shift is more dramatic on the redesigned currency, making it even easier for people to check their money.

Watermark

Hold the bill to light to see a faint image of Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton to the right of his large portrait. It can be seen from both sides of the bill. On the redesigned $10 bill, a blank oval has been incorporated into the design to highlight the watermark's location.

Security Thread

Hold the bill to light to make sure there's a small thread embedded in the paper. The words USA TEN and a small flag are visible in tiny print. It runs vertically to the right of the portrait and can be seen from both sides of the bill. This thread glows orange when illuminated by ultraviolet light.

Additional Design and Security Features

The redesigned currency remains the same size and uses the same, but enhanced portraits and historical images as the older-design bills, and importantly, continues to be recognized around the world as quintessentially American.

Symbols of Freedom

A symbol of freedom representing an icon of Americana has been added to the redesigned $10 bill. Two images of the torch carried by the Statue of Liberty are printed in red on the front of the redesigned bill. A large image of the torch is printed in the background to the left of the portrait of Secretary Hamilton, while a second, smaller metallic red image of the torch can be found on the lower right side of the portrait. The symbols of freedom differ for each denomination.

Color

The most noticeable difference in the redesigned $10 bill is the addition of subtle background colors of orange, yellow and red. The words We the People from the United States Constitution have been printed in red in the background to the right of the portrait. Also, small yellow 10s have been printed in the background to the left of the portrait on the front of the bill and to the right of the vignette on the back of the bill. The background colors add complexity to the bills and differ with each denomination to help distinguish them. Because color can be duplicated by potential counterfeiters, it should not be used to verify the authenticity of the bill.

Updated Portrait and Vignette

The oval borders and fine lines surrounding the portrait of Secretary Hamilton on the front, and the United States Treasury Building vignette on the back, have been removed. The portrait has been moved up and shoulders have been extended into the border. Additional engraving details have been added to the vignette background.

Microprinting

Because they are so small, microprinted words are hard to replicate. The redesigned $10 bill features microprinting on the front of the bill in three areas: the word USA and the numeral 10 can be found repeated beneath the large printed torch and the words THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and TEN DOLLARS can be found below the portrait, as well as vertically inside the left and right borders of the bill.

Low-Vision Feature

The numeral 10 in the lower corner on the back of the bill is enlarged to help those with visual impairments distinguish the denomination.

Federal Reserve Indicators

A universal seal to the left of the portrait represents the entire Federal Reserve System. A letter and number beneath the left serial number identifies the issuing Federal Reserve Bank. There are 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks and 24 branches located in major cities throughout the United States.

Serial Numbers

The unique combination of eleven numbers and letters appears twice on the front of the bill. On the redesigned $10 bill, the left serial number has shifted slightly to the right, compared with previous designs. Because they are unique identifiers, serial numbers help law enforcement identify counterfeit notes, and they also help the Bureau of Engraving and Printing track quality standards for the notes they produce.