Induced Abortion and the Risk of Breast Cancer
Our study of a population-based cohort uncovered no overall increased risk of breast cancer among women with a history of induced abortion. This result is very much in line with the results of previous retrospective cohort studies,9,10,15,16 two of which actually suggested a decreased risk.10,15 However, all previously published retrospective cohort studies lack detailed information on the week of gestation at the time of abortion. The results of case–control studies have been inconsistent,6-8,11-14,17-24 but several groups have reported an increased risk of breast cancer among women with a history of induced abortion.7,8,13,21-24

A recent meta-analysis found an overall increased risk of breast cancer among women with a history of induced abortion of 1.3 (95 percent confidence interval, 1.2 to 1.4).24 The authors concluded that “such a broad base of statistical agreement rules out any reasonable possibility that the association is the result of bias or any other confounding variable.” However, since almost all 23 studies included in the analysis were case–control studies, it is not unreasonable to assume that many of them were inherently biased, making the pooled conclusions biased as well. Furthermore, the authors based their results on a crude analysis of published odds ratios and relative risks with no attempt to incorporate the original raw data into a more sophisticated statistical analysis.

Almost inevitably, case–control studies arouse concern about the potential problem of differential misclassification. Even after its legalization, abortion remains a sensitive issue. It is possible that women with breast cancer might be more willing to report induced abortions than healthy women. A Swedish study that compared registry information with interview data regarding induced abortion attributed an increase in the risk of breast cancer of between 16 and 50 percent to differential misclassification in interview data.7,29 The problem of misclassification based on reporting led Newcomb et al. to conclude that studies that do not rely on interviews with case and control subjects are necessary to resolve whether there is a link between induced abortion and breast cancer.8 In our study, all the information on dates and the number of induced abortions, reproductive history, and cancer diagnosis was obtained from national registries, which are compiled through a system of mandatory reporting for the entire population. Follow-up included complete information on death and emigration and was performed through computerized linkage of registry information by means of individually identifiable registration numbers. These measures, we believe, allowed us to avoid some of the major methodologic problems of previous studies.

A limitation of our research data base was that information on induced abortions has been computerized only since 1973. Therefore, we might have obtained an incomplete history of induced abortions for some of the oldest women in the cohort. However, we found that the risk of breast cancer among women with a history of induced abortion was no different from that among women without such a history, nor did we find that the number of induced abortions influenced the risk of breast cancer. Therefore, it is unlikely that missing information about abortions before 1973 affected the results of our analysis.

Induced abortion had no overall effect on the risk of breast cancer, but we found a statistically significant increase in risk among women with a history of second-trimester abortion. The fact that such an increase did not affect the overall result clearly indicates that it is based on small numbers and therefore requires cautious interpretation. The increased risk among women who had had second-trimester abortions finds biologic support in experiments in rats and is in line with the hypothesis of Russo and Russo.3

We were concerned that women whose breast cancer was diagnosed during pregnancy might have been advised to have induced abortions, a situation that would not be equally distributed according to the week of gestation at the time of the abortion. Since the time at risk was calculated only up to the diagnosis of breast cancer, only late abortions that were misclassified as occurring before the diagnosis of cancer could represent a problem. However, a stratified analysis of the risk of breast cancer according to the length of time since an induced abortion showed no differential risk and, in particular, no increased risk within the first year after abortion. Abortions induced at gestational ages of more than 12 weeks were performed primarily for medical or social reasons. The women who had such abortions could have had a relatively high risk of breast cancer, but we could not identify any medical condition associated with both a high risk and late induced abortion. Women with drinking problems might delay the interruption of their unwanted pregnancies, but the association between alcohol and breast cancer is weak and inconsistent.30

We cannot explain why a very early induced abortion was associated with a slight, although insignificant, decrease in risk. Nulliparous women with a history of induced abortion did not differ from parous women in their risk of breast cancer. Among nulliparous women, the possible effects of lactation and later births are irrelevant. We are therefore confident that neither of these variables had any confounding effect on our overall result.