'Shock jock' Hal Turner says government will hear his 'wrath' in new radio show
Your weather is set to . You can change the location at any time.

Please contact us for help or if you believe you have received this message in error.

NORTH BERGEN-- After more than two years in prison and several unsuccessful bids to have his conviction overturned, 'shock jock' Hal Turner is returning to radio with the promise to unleash his 'wrath' on the federal government.

Turner plans to launch the "Hal Turner Show" on Oct. 7 on WBCQ, an international shortwave radio station based out of Monticello, Maine. The station carried Turner's show prior to his arrest in 2009, and Turner promises to tear into the U.S. government for how he was treated.

"There will be a reckoning of what was done to me," he told NJ Advance Media on Wednesday. "They will hear my wrath."

In 2009, authorities accused the North Bergen talk show host of threatening to kill three Chicago federal judges who upheld a handgun ban. Turner "expressly threatened" the judges when he wrote on his website that they "deserved to be killed," and bragged in an earlier post that he knew how to "get it done," according to authorities. After two trials ended with hung juries, he was convicted and spent 28 months in prison and four and a half months in a halfway house.

Leading up to his arrest, Turner's radio show was popular with white supremacists, neo-Nazis and other racist groups. According to a Supreme Court brief filed by the U.S. Department of Justice in 2013, his popularity with extremists prompted the FBI to enlist Turner as an informant from 2003 to 2007 to report on any planned acts of violence.

Before news of his double life as an FBI informant surfaced, various news organizations described Turner as a xenophobe and hate-monger. The Southern Poverty Law Center's website describes Turner as a "white supremacist true believer," and has a full page dedicated to explaining the designation. But Turner said on Wednesday that he isn't a white supremacist and never was, that he only learned about the demographics of his audience when the FBI approached him. He described himself as a conservative-republican, who specializes in "robust talk radio" that flouts political correctness.

Turner has criticized authorities for arresting him for the kind of writing that closely mirrored stories he said were encouraged by the FBI to further stoke his supremacist fan-base. Though, the 2013 brief states that the FBI warned Turner about his own violent writing.

He has repeatedly challenged his 2010 conviction, to no avail. In October, the Supreme Court declined to hear his petition, which claimed that the statements he made on the website were protected by the First Amendment. Now he's taking his fight back to the radio waves.

"Our republic is being flushed down the toilet," he said. "When a man like me gets sent to prison for expressing his opinion, the country certainly cannot continue to say that freedom of speech exists."

His return to radio coincides with the end of his supervised release, which banned him from owning a website or working on radio. The show will return to his original call-in talk show format, but will not feature the "violent racism" he adopted after being hired as an FBI informant, Turner said. This kind of rhetoric was used to "flush out crazies to thwart acts of violence," he said.

Allan Weiner, owner of WBCQ, said Turner contacted him one year ago to discuss returning to the station. When asked if he had any reservations about bringing Turner back in light of his conviction, Weiner stressed that the radio station is "free speech radio." He said that he hasn't always agreed with Turner's opinions, but he said the "shock jock" has always been a responsible broadcaster.

"Hal always had a controversial program," he said. "And controversy can be good because it gets people thinking and talking."

The show will air from 9 to 11 p.m. on Wednesdays.

Kathryn Brenzel may be reached at kbrenzel@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @katiebrenzel. Find NJ.com on Facebook