George W. Bush never recovered politically from Katrina
WASHINGTON - George W. Bush never recovered politically from the perception that the federal government's failure to respond adequately to Hurricane Katrina extended the misery for tens of thousands of New Orleans area residents. In large part, he said, he deserved it.

Writing in his 2010 memoir, "Decision Points," the 43rd president said "in a national catastrophe the easiest person to blame is the president," and "Katrina presented a political opportunity that some critics exploited for years." He said the poor Katrina response, combined with the "drumbeat of violence in Iraq," made "the fall of 2005 a damaging period in my presidency."

The fallout from Katrina also dusted his Democratic successor, Barack Obama. A 2013 poll by Public Policy Polling found 29 percent of Louisiana Republicans blamed Obama for the government's failed response -- even though he didn't take office until 31/2 years after the hurricane struck. Whenever there was a problem - whether the BP oil spill, the Ebola crisis or even his decision not to attend a memorial march for victims of the terrorist killings at the Charlie Hebdo satirical magazine in Paris - his critics suggested it could be "Obama's Katrina."

Bush, whose brother, Jeb, is now running for the 2016 GOP presidential nomination and whose father, George H.W. Bush also served as president, plans to visit New Orleans on Friday (Aug. 28) with his wife, Laura. They will observe the 10th anniversary of Katrina at the Warren Easton Charter School, which benefited from the Gulf Coast School Library Recovery Initiative, established by the Laura Bush Foundation for American libraries. Obama visited New Orleans on Thursday, and former President Bill Clinton, whose wife, Hillary, is seeking the Democratic presidential nomination, arrives Saturday.

For his part, Bush acknowledged he should have acted more decisively after Katrina struck and the levees failed. But he said charges that he didn't care enough were flat out wrong and that he helped bring unprecedented resources to the Gulf Coast to deal with the unprecedented disaster. Some Louisiana officials say his support for robust federal funding for recovery, and his frequent visits to the city after the hurricane, helped improve his image in the region, though certainly not entirely.

But Bush admits he should have acted sooner. "I should have recognized the deficiencies sooner and intervened faster," Bush wrote in his 481-page memoir on his two-term presidency. "The problem was not that I made the wrong decisions; it was that I took too long to decide."

Some asserted that Bush didn't care about the tragedy. But he said the truth is "my heart broke at the sight of helpless people trapped on their rooftops waiting to be rescued."

Bush was criticized for remaining on vacation in Texas as Katrina struck the Gulf Coast. He later returned to Washington, flying over New Orleans on Air Force One as photographers snapped away.

"I barely noticed them (the photographers) at the time. I couldn't take my eyes off the devastation below. But when the pictures were released, I realized I had made a serious mistake. The photo of me hovering over the damage suggested I was detached from the suffering on the ground," he wrote.

Bush said delays in the federal government's response, particularly in sending federal troops, convinced "many of our citizens, particularly in the African-American community," that their president didn't care about them. "Just as Katrina was more than a hurricane, its impact was more than physical destruction. It eroded citizens' trust in their government. It exacerbated divisions in our society and politics. And it cast a cloud over my second term."

It was four days after Katrina that Bush uttered the eight words that might go down among the most recognized of his presidency: "'Brownie, you're doing a heck of a job." His statement was seen endorsing the roundly panned work of FEMA Director Michael Brown.

In his book, he explained what prompted the public praise. Bush wrote that he had asked Alabama Gov. Bob Riley and Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour whether they were getting the federal support they needed, and both said they were. "That Mike Brown is doing a heck of a job," Bush quotes Riley as telling him.

"I knew Mike was under pressure, and I wanted to boost his morale. When I spoke to the press a few minutes later, I repeated the praise: 'Brownie,' I said, 'you're doing a heck of a job.'

"I never imagined those words would become an infamous entry in the political lexicon. As complaints about Mike Brown's performance mounted, especially in New Orleans, critics turned my words of encouragement into a club to bludgeon me."

Obama has followed up the work and commitments of the Bush administration to rebuild the New Orleans area by continuing to funnel billions of dollars into the region. By 2015, total federal spending in Louisiana for Katrina-related expenses had exceeded $76 billion.

Both presidents have spoken optimistically about New Orleans' future.

"There's no need to dwell on what you experienced and what the world witnessed," Obama said in New Orleans on the fifth anniversary of Hurricane Katrina. "We all remember it keenly: water pouring through broken levees, mothers holding their children above the waterline, people stranded on rooftops begging for help, bodies lying in the streets of a great American city. It was a natural disaster but also a manmade catastrophe -- a shameful breakdown in government that left countless men, and women, and children abandoned and alone.

"In the years that followed, New Orleans could have remained a symbol of destruction and decay, of a storm that came and the inadequate response that followed. It was not hard to imagine a day when we'd tell our children that a once vibrant and wonderful city had been laid low by indifference and neglect. ... It's not what happened across New Orleans and across the Gulf Coast. Instead this city has become a symbol of resilience and of community and of the fundamental responsibility that we have to one another."

Bush offered up similar sentiments, writing about the resilience of New Orleans, all the people who returned to the city, the new levees with "100-year-flood protection," the opening of new charter schools and the new Interstate 10 twin bridges between New Orleans and Slidell.

And the victories on the football field. "The Superdome that once housed thousands of Katrina victims became the proud home of the Super Bowl champion New Orleans Saints," Bush wrote.