Louisiana House sends $28 billion budget with deep cuts to governor's desk
The Louisiana House of Representatives left intact the spending priorities their Senate counterparts set when its members voted Thursday (May 17) to approve a state budget exceeding more than $28 billion for the fiscal year that starts July 1. House Bill 1 was advanced to Gov. John Bel Edwards on a 61-37 vote.

Lawmakers are expected to end their regular session as soon as Friday, and then reconvene Tuesday for a special tax session. They are tasked with finding ways to close a $648 million hole in the state budget that would open July 1 unless expiring tax revenue is replaced.

State Rep. Cameron Henry, R-Metairie, leads the House Appropriation Committee that crafted the original version of the spending plan. He told House members before the vote that the special session will allow lawmakers to revisit the budget through supplemental appropriations once they agree on how much revenue they need to generate. Republicans and Democrats couldn't find common ground on which taxes to approve in a special session held in February.

The version that came from the Senate, and now has House approval, establishes priorities for any revenue created in the second special session, Henry said.

Gov. John Bel Edwards has suggested the Legislature wait until the special session to create the budget. He hasn't indicated whether he will veto the bill approved Thursday.

Edwards' allies in the House were also reluctant to approve a budget in the regular session. "We will not solve a real problem with pretend budgets or pretend solutions, because we represent real people," said Rep. Robert Johnson of Marksville, who leads the House Democratic Caucus. "... We must end the political game of chicken."

Republicans also argued against approving a spending plan before addressing the so-called "fiscal cliff," with Rep. Kenny Havard of St. Francisville calling the current version a "fake budget."

In its current form, the budget provides Medicaid money for nursing home residents and the disabled. The first version of the bill to emerge from the House appropriated no money for those programs. To find it, the Senate made a 24.2 percent cut the general fund allocation of every other state agency.

The reductions include a $96 million cut for higher education and an $80 million cut to the TOPS college scholarship program, which would be 70 percent funded under the bill the House approved Thursday. District attorneys, law enforcement and several other state services also saw their budgets trimmed by nearly a quarter from fiscal year 2017-18 levels.

Correction: This story was updated to indicate the general fund allocation for nearly every department was cut in the Senate's version of the budget bill.