No, nobody booed God or Jerusalem
BY JOSH GREENMAN



Before this goes any further, I just want to clear something up. People are already repeating the fiction that today, delegates on the floor of the Democratic convention booed God and Jerusalem. No, no, no.

Here's what happened, and you can watch the video yourself to see it clearly. The Democratic leadership was inserting two changes into the platform unveiled this week: One to assert that Jerusalem is the capital of Israel, one to put the words "God-given" back into the opening of the document.

Think what you want of these omissions and corrections. My inclination is that they were worth making; the original changes were unforced errors that allowed easy caricaturing of Democrats. But a party platform is not the Constitution. It's a general statement of values.

If it says "God-given" or doesn't say "God-given," that communicates next to nothing about the way a Democratic President would govern. Indeed, this DNC has been filled with opening and closing prayers and plenty of invocations of God. Faith-based organizations continue to get government funding in America. And though this one reference had been removed, the platform still mentions "faith" 11 times and "religion" or "religious" 9 times.

As for Jerusalem, it's complicated, like everything regarding the Mideast. President Bush signed a law declaring Jerusalem to be Israel's capital, but he refused to enforce it. For decades, U.S. governments both Republican and Democratic have declined to officially embrace Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, awaiting negotiations. Read more background here and here.

But back to what happened. The chair, Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa, asked whether the changes — which, it should be noted, had the strong support of the President — should be adopted. He listened for the required two-thirds "Aye" voice vote from the floor. What he heard was much closer to a fifty-fifty split. He asked for another voice voice and heard the same split. (Reporting by Buzzfeed includes quotes by some delegates who voted yes and some who voted no.)

Then, disregarding these votes, he announced, in the opinion of the chair, the "Aye"s had the two-thirds majority — clearly untrue to anyone watching and listening.

And so, the "Nay"s booed the procedure, which asked them for their opinion and then ignored it.

They did not boo Jerusalem. They did not boo God.