Trump Org. removes presidential seals amid claims they're illegal
President Trump's namesake company has removed presidential seal replicas from one of its golf courses in Florida amid complaints that displaying them could violate federal law.

"The plaques were presented to the club by a small group of members, who are incredible fans of the President, in honor of President's Day weekend," a Trump Organization spokeswoman told the Daily News Tuesday. "They were temporary and have since been removed."

President Trump walks with U.S. Coast Guard Chief Warrant Officer Gene Gibson at the Trump International Golf Course in Palm Beach, Fla. (NICHOLAS KAMM/AFP/Getty Images)

It was first reported by ProPublica this week that the Trump Organization ordered dozens of presidential seal replicas to use as tee markers on the Trump International Golf Course in Palm Beach, Fla., over President's Day weekend.

Trump spent the federal holiday weekend at his nearby private Mar-a-Lago estate.

Trump use of President's seal for golf courses may be illegal

Non-government entities are prohibited by federal law from using or displaying the presidential seal in any way that endorses the government. People or companies who manufacture the seal without approval can face fines and even prison time.

Eagle Sign & Design, the Indiana-based company that the Trump Organization ordered the seals from, have dodged requests for comment from numerous media organizations.

Donald Trump in the White House

As news of the presidential seals spread, government watchdog groups excoriated the Trump Organization.

"There does not appear to be any legal interpretation that says it's okay to violate the law if it's only for a holiday weekend," the Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington said in a statement. "If anything, it raises more questions as to whether they knew they were violating the law, so intentionally tried to do it for a short time to see if it would get noticed."

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!