A Marriage, When the Spirit Moves Them
IT'S 10 p.m. and the wedding is in full swing in a ground-floor apartment in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. The groom, wearing a crisp white dress, is writhing belly-down on the floor and hissing fiercely. Soon he is going to look into his bride's eyes and pledge his everlasting love to her. But instead of the clink of champagne glasses, she cracks a hard-boiled egg for him, which he swallows whole -- like a snake. Because he is a snake. His name is Dambalah and he is a voodoo spirit about to marry a New Yorker.

Like all spirits, Dambalah has no physical form. So when the woman to whom he has proposed is ready to be his bride, an elaborate voodoo ritual must take place to coax him to materialize -- as he does this evening in the body of a female wedding guest -- and marry her. Hence, the singing, the dancing, the praying and the rum as the wedding guests prepared for his arrival.

This elaborate voodoo ritual, which took place on a recent Saturday night, may seem utterly bizarre to outsiders. But spiritual marriages are not uncommon among New York's 200,000 Haitian immigrants. The marriages are the heart of voodoo, a centuries-old Afro-Caribbean custom that itself marries animistic rites with the Catholic concept of saintly patronage. The tradition, brought to the city in the 1960's by Haitians fleeing François Duvalier's dictatorship, promotes mating with unseen forces, called lwa, as a path to spiritual health and material well-being.

Many immigrants believe that joining hearts with a voodoo spirit is like signing a contract with an invisible protector to bring good luck, dispel loneliness and ease financial woes.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Cathleen Doucet, a Haitian-American in her 30's who lives in Bellerose, Queens, says her spiritual marriage to Kouzen, the lwa of work, has had a tangible effect on her life. "I was looking for employment when Kouzen asked me to marry him, and I told him, 'If you give me a job, I will marry you,' " says Ms. Doucet, an executive assistant at a software company. "A week later, I had a temp assignment that lasted three years."