Latest News: Ferguson Police Shooting, Human Trafficking Bill, Girl Scouts’ Birthday
Photo Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Good morning.









Here’s what you need to know:

• Officers shot in Ferguson, Mo.

Two police officers who were shot early today outside the Ferguson police station were released from the hospital.

The shootings followed overnight protests, which included occasional clashes with the police and a few arrests. Earlier, the city’s police chief agreed to resign.

U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder this morning called the shootings a “heinous assault” that threatens reforms there.

• More troubles for the Secret Service.

Senior agents are under investigation today for allegations that they crashed a government-issued car into a White House barricade after a night of drinking last week.

Continue reading the main story Get This Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox. Monday – Friday.

Several top agency officials, including the director, have been forced out amid serious presidential security breaches over the last six months.

• Utah’s anti-discrimination bill.

With the backing of Mormon Church leaders, the Republican-dominated Utah legislature passed a bill late Wednesday that bans discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.

The legislation also protects religious institutions that object to homosexuality, like the Mormon Church.

• Four years of war in Syria.

More than 20 international aid groups chastised the U.N. Security Council in a report today, saying it failed to fulfill resolutions passed last year to increase humanitarian assistance to Syrians.

The report says at least 76,000 civilians were killed in 2014 and more than 200,000 since fighting began four years ago this week.

• On Capitol Hill.

A bipartisan Senate bill on human trafficking, which would increase the penalties for pimps and johns, could fall apart today over an anti-abortion provision.

• Travel day.

President Obama meets this morning with John Kerry before the secretary of state heads to Egypt for an economic development conference and talks with the country’s leaders.

Mr. Obama then flies to Los Angeles to tape an appearance on “Jimmy Kimmel Live” (11:35 p.m. Eastern, ABC) and attend a Democratic fund-raiser in Santa Monica.

MARKETS

• Wall Street stocks are ahead strongly. European indexes ended little changed, and Asian shares closed mostly higher.

• Alibaba, the Chinese online retailer, is making a $200 million investment in Snapchat that gives the start-up a value of $15 billion, media reports say.

• Bank of America plans a stock buyback even though it passed the Federal Reserve’s stress tests only provisionally.

The Fed cleared the other big U.S. banks, but flunked the American arms of two foreign banks.

• Ukraine will see a fast infusion of cash this year after the International Monetary Fund approved $10 billion in aid.

After a year of political upheaval and war, Ukraine’s central bank has reserves of just $6.4 billion, barely enough to cover five weeks of imports.

NOTEWORTHY

• Only in England.

Kate Middleton, Duchess of Cambridge, is visiting the set of “Downton Abbey” and meeting the cast and crew of the Emmy-winning series in London today. She’ll watch a scene being filmed in the servants’ quarters.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And a vial of Winston Churchill’s blood is scheduled to be auctioned today. The market value “is a very difficult thing to estimate,” an expert appraiser said.

• Critics’ choice.

Claudia Rankine’s “Citizen: An American Lyric” is a finalist in both the poetry and criticism categories for the National Book Critics Circle Awards, to be announced tonight in New York.

It’s the first time in the awards’ history that a single book has received two nominations. The list of finalists honors more than two dozen other books from 2014.

• Harper Lee’s condition.

Alabama officials interviewed the “To Kill a Mockingbird” author, who is 88, in response to a complaint of potential elder abuse. The investigation is continuing.

Concerns followed the announcement that Ms. Lee, famously resistant to producing a follow-up, would do so.

• Help for satellites.

A NASA mission to be launched tonight aims to make the first detailed measurements of colliding magnetic fields about 38,000 miles above the Earth.

The magnetic collisions, which can potentially disrupt satellites and power grids, are not well understood.

• Booming art market.

Higher art prices and a greater number of transactions led global art market sales to rise 7 percent last year to a new peak of about $68 billion, a report says.

• Look who’s No. 1.

Kelly Clarkson — the first winner of “American Idol,” back in 2002 — scored her third Billboard chart-topping album with “Piece by Piece.”

BACK STORY

The Girl Scouts were founded on this day in 1912 in Savannah, Ga., with a small group of girls who hiked, played sports and went on camping trips in which they learned to tell time by the stars.

Since then, it has grown into a worldwide organization with about two million members. But there are critics who think they’re up to more than selling cookies and empowering girls.

In recent years, conservative groups have challenged the organization — even held “cookiecotts” — over critics’ claims that it supports abortion. One Indiana lawmaker in 2012 went so far as to say the Girl Scouts were “quickly becoming a tactical arm of Planned Parenthood.”

The Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. does have a legislative agenda. Reducing bullying and increasing girls’ involvement in science, technology, engineering and math are among issues on its website.

Not on the list: abortion, or any social issues.

Anna Maria Chávez, the chief executive of the national group, responded to critics last year, denying any relationship with Planned Parenthood.

“A box of Girl Scout cookies is not a political statement,” she said.

Rick Rojas and Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.

Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.