Call From the I.R.S.? Hang Up. It’s a Fraud.
Garrett Gregory, a former senior lawyer with the I.R.S. who now has a tax practice in Dallas, said the calls were pervasive and that his office heard once or twice a week from clients who were concerned about getting such calls. Most people know to “laugh and hang up,” he said, but the calls still can be unnerving. His own father received such a call a month ago, he said.

The crooks aren’t particularly discriminating in their choice of targets: The Connecticut state tax commissioner received a call this month, according to a report in The Hartford Courant. And a lawyer for the Federal Trade Commission wrote this month on the agency’s blog that she had received such a call on her home answering machine. “Hello, we have been trying to reach you,” the message said. “This call is officially a final notice from the I.R.S., Internal Revenue Service. The reason of this call is to inform you that I.R.S. is filing a lawsuit against you.”

The callers strive to appear authentic; they may use robocalling technology that shows “I.R.S.” on your caller identification screen. They may know part or all of your Social Security number and they may provide a fake I.R.S. “badge” number. In some cases, follow-up calls may come, supposedly from local police or prosecutors.

But the telephone call itself, experts say, is the first tipoff that the call is bogus. The I.R.S. does not initiate contact through phone or email, but rather sends written correspondence through the United States mail. “The I.R.S. does not call people,” Mr. Gregory said.

Here are some questions about tax fraud schemes:

■ What should I do if a caller says they are with the I.R.S?

Don’t provide any personal information and don’t engage with the caller (other than, perhaps, to ask their name, the F.T.C. advises, so you can include it in a complaint). Then, hang up. You can report the incident to the Treasury inspector general for tax administration by filling out an online form.