As Americans Look North to Flee Donald Trump, Canada Peers Back in Worry
Mark Warner, a trade lawyer in Toronto, said that while it was unclear what Mr. Trump had in mind for Nafta, he feared that a Trump administration would rekindle old trade battles with Canada.

“We’re going to get sideswiped by some of this stuff,” Mr. Warner said. In particular, he said he expected Mr. Trump to promote “Buy America” clauses in government infrastructure projects that would shut out Canadian companies — a violation of Nafta.

Not every Canadian, of course, was displeased by the election result.

“As a gay, liberal, health care-loving Canadian, most of my friends thought I was crazy to be supporting Trump,” Ashley MacIsaac, who is perhaps Canada’s most famous fiddle player, said in an email. “But I suggested he had to win to offer a chance for world peace by preventing WWIII with Russia and for his stance on radical Islam.”

In Cape Breton, Nova Scotia — Mr. MacIsaac’s home — the life of Rob Calabrese, a radio disc jockey, has been unexpectedly upended by a tongue-in-cheek website he set up in February: Cape Breton If Trump Wins. Despite a surge in election night traffic, the site did not crash. And the election result, Mr. Calabrese said, generated about 200 emails overnight.

“It was all very playful before, but now there seems to be a sense of urgency to them,” he said of the emails.

Andrew Griffith, a former director general of the citizenship and multiculturalism branch of Canada’s immigration department, said most of those suggesting they would leave because of Mr. Trump would not qualify as refugees and would have to go through a system that rates them based on factors such as education and job skills.

Having a firm offer for a skilled job in Canada can make getting a visa a relatively fast process, Mr. Griffith said. But in general the process can be protracted, expensive and without guarantees. And for almost everyone, he added, starting life over in a new country, even one next door, would be disruptive.

“It’s not an automatic process despite the Twitter posts saying ‘You’re all welcome here,’ ” Mr. Griffith said. “Well, you’re not all welcome.”