Dr. Phil on OWN - About the Show
The Dr. Phil show is on OWN! Catch Dr. Phil weekdays at 8am/7c, 7pm/6c and 11pm/10c.

the hit syndicated, daily one-hour talk show, and Dr. Phil McGraw, its namesake star and America's most popular psychologist and lifestyle strategist, are now on OWN: Oprah Winfrey Network.Originally launched in the fall of 2002 to the highest ratings of any new syndicated show since the launch of16 years prior,is enjoyed by millions of viewers nationally.McGraw's success stems from his signature "get real" approach to helping his guests solve their problems, stripping through their emotional clutter, getting down to the bare bones of their issues and giving them the challenge they need to move ahead. McGraw champions those who suffer from such silent epidemics as domestic violence, child abuse, depression, racism, substance abuse and other health issues that are prevalent in society, but go largely undiscussed by their victims. Dr. Phil literally looks into the lives of several groups of people who will periodically come to reside at the "Dr. Phil House," an actual home fitted with cameras and television screens. These willing subjects will be observed 24/7 to investigate their dysfunctional behaviors and they will receive the benefits of McGraw's counsel at appropriate moments when he will pop up on a monitor to talk with them, or show up in person. McGraw will be able to access the house's happenings at any time from his own private home, his office and even his car.In addition,will go behind the headlines and delve into newsworthy segments and interviews. The series continues with its groundbreaking themes from prior seasons, such as the Dr. Phil Families, the Ultimate Weight Loss Challenge and drug interventions. During its first three seasons, Dr. Phil introduced several signature themes such as The Ultimate Weight Loss Challenge, theFamilies, the Relationship Rescue Retreat series, the Intervention of Brandon, Dr. Phil's Real Desperate Housewives, The Anatomy of a Divorce and Help Me Get My Kids Back.In season four,focused on empowering women on topics such as leaving an abusive husband, how to find the right man and even how to buy a car.Executive Producer Carla Pennington-Stewart has been with theshow since its inception, as have Supervising Producers Angie Kraus Bell, Kandi Amelon Sawyer and Kathy Giaconia and Director Paul Casey.was created by Harpo Productions, is produced by Peteski Productions in association with CBS Paramount Domestic Television and distributed by King World Productions.