Latest from the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM), based on information received as of 19:30, 23 July 2017
This report is for the media and the general public.

Between the evenings of 21 and 22 July the SMM recorded fewer ceasefire violations in Donetsk region and more in Luhansk region, compared with the previous reporting period. Between the evenings of 22 and 23 July the Mission recorded more ceasefire violations in Donetsk region and fewer in Luhansk region compared with the previous 24 hours. The Mission continued monitoring the disengagement areas; it recorded ceasefire violations in the Zolote disengagement area. Its access remained restricted there and elsewhere, including in Staromykhailivka and again in Novoazovsk, where military-type vehicles were seen travelling from the Novoazovsk area towards the border with the Russian Federation and vice versa. The SMM observed weapons in violation of withdrawal lines on both sides of the contact line. It continued to observe fresh craters and recent excavations in the area of Kruta Balka and in Olenivka. The SMM visited four border areas not under government control in Luhansk and Donetsk regions. The Mission monitored a strike at a coal mine in Pryvillia and a public gathering near Kharkiv.

The SMM recorded fewer ceasefire violations[1] in Donetsk region between the evenings of 21 and 22 July, including a similar number of explosions (about 75), compared with the previous reporting period (about 70 explosions). It recorded more ceasefire violations, though a similar number of explosions (about 70), between the evenings of 22 and 23 July compared with the previous 24 hours.

On the evening of 21 July, while in “DPR”-controlled Horlivka (39km north-east of Donetsk), in about one hour, the SMM heard six undetermined explosions and at least 18 shots and bursts of small-arms, heavy-machine-gun and anti-aircraft cannon (ZU-23, 23mm) fire 5-6km south and south-west. On the evening of 22 July, in about two hours, the SMM heard eight undetermined explosions 8-10km north-west and 11 bursts of small-arms and heavy-machine-gun fire 5-8km west and south-west.

On the evening and night of 21-22 July, while in government-controlled Svitlodarsk (57km north-east of Donetsk), in about five hours, the SMM heard 66 undetermined explosions and about 70 bursts of heavy-machine-gun and small-arms fire, all 5-9km south-east. On the evening of 22 July, in about two hours, the SMM heard about 40 undetermined explosions and about 60 bursts of small-arms and heavy-machine-gun fire, all 3-7km south-east.

On the evening and night of 21-22 July the SMM camera in Shyrokyne (20km east of Mariupol) recorded, in sequence, two undetermined explosions, 74 tracer rounds in flight from east to west, one rocket-assisted projectile in flight from south-west to north-east, six tracer rounds in flight from east to west, three tracer rounds from west to east, followed by aggregated totals of 20 tracer rounds (11 from east to west and nine from west to east), one undetermined explosion and four rocket-assisted projectiles in flight (three from east to west and one from south-east to north-west), all at unknown distances north and north-east. On the evening and night of 22-23 July, the same camera recorded, in sequence, three tracer rounds in flight from east to west, two undetermined explosions, eight tracer rounds in flight from east to west, two tracer rounds in flight from west to east, followed by aggregated totals of 250 tracer rounds in flight (169 from east to west and 81 from west to east), 15 rocket-assisted projectiles in flight (eight from east to west and seven from west to east) and five undetermined explosions, all at unknown distances north.

On 22 July, positioned in “DPR”-controlled Yasynuvata (16km north-east of Donetsk), the SMM heard five undetermined explosions and four bursts of small-arms fire 3-7km west and south-west. On 23 July, the SMM heard four undetermined explosions and 29 bursts and shots of heavy-machine-gun and small-arms fire 2-4km west, and two undetermined explosions 2-3km north.

On the evening of 21 July the SMM camera in government-controlled Avdiivka (17km north of Donetsk) recorded one illumination flare in flight from east to west and one illumination flare in flight from west to east 3-4km east-south-east. On the evening and night of 22-23 July, the same camera recorded, in sequence, three explosions assessed as impacts, ten projectiles in flight from north to south, 16 projectiles in flight from south to north, two airbursts, two projectiles in vertical flight, two illumination flares in vertical flight, 27 projectiles in flight from south to north, ten projectiles in flight from north to south, two explosions assessed as impacts, two illumination flares in vertical flight and two projectiles in flight from west to east, all 4-5km east-south-east.

In Luhansk region the SMM recorded more ceasefire violations between the evenings of 21 and 22 July, all in government-controlled Popasna (69km west of Luhansk), including more explosions (about 70), compared with the previous reporting period (17 explosions). Between the evenings of 22 and 23 July, it recorded fewer ceasefire violations, including two explosions, compared with the previous 24 hours.

On the evening of 21 July, positioned in Popasna, in about one hour and a half the SMM heard about 60 explosions assessed as outgoing mortar rounds and recoilless-gun (SPG-9, 73mm) fire, about 90 shots of infantry fighting vehicle (IFV) (BMP-2) cannon (30mm) and automatic-grenade-launcher (type unknown) fire and about 1,200 bursts of heavy-machine-gun and small-arms fire, all 3-4km south-east. On the night of 22-23 July, the SMM heard 29 shots of small-arms fire 3-5km north and one burst of small-arms fire 3km east.

On 23 July, positioned 1.5km north-west of government-controlled Troitske (69km west of Luhansk), the SMM heard two undetermined explosions 5-8km south-east.

The SMM continued to monitor the disengagement process and to pursue full access to the disengagement areas of Stanytsia Luhanska (16km north-east of Luhansk), Zolote (60km west of Luhansk) and Petrivske (41km south of Donetsk), as foreseen in the Framework Decision of the Trilateral Contact Group relating to disengagement of forces and hardware of 21 September 2016. The SMM’s access remained restricted but the Mission was able to partially monitor them.*

On the evening of 21 July, the SMM camera in government-controlled Zolote recorded one projectile in flight from south to north 3-5km south-east, assessed as inside the disengagement area.

On 22 and 23 July, while in the disengagement areas near Zolote and Stanytsia Luhanska, and on 23 July while in government-controlled Bohdanivka (41km south-west of Donetsk), west of the Petrivske disengagement area, the SMM observed a calm situation. The SMM remained unable to access its camera in “DPR”-controlled Petrivske due to security considerations.

The SMM continued to monitor the withdrawal of weapons, in implementation of the Memorandum, the Package of Measures and its Addendum.

In violation of withdrawal lines, in non-government controlled areas on 20 July, the SMM saw an “LPR” member carrying a rocket-propelled-grenade launcher (RPG-29, 105mm) at a checkpoint in Vesela Hora (17km north of Luhansk).

In government-controlled areas on 23 July, the SMM saw 22 stationary self-propelled howitzers (ten 2S3 Akatsiya, 152mm and 12 2S1 Gvozdika, 122mm) loaded on four cargo trains facing north at a railway station in Bakhmut (formerly Artemivsk, 67km north-east of Donetsk).

Beyond withdrawal lines but outside designated storage sites, in government-controlled areas on 23 July, the SMM saw 19 stationary tanks (T-64) loaded on four cargo trains facing north at the same railway station in Bakhmut.

The SMM observed armoured combat vehicles[2] in the security zone. On 22 July, in government-controlled areas, the SMM saw: two stationary armoured personnel carriers (APC) (MT-LB) in Myrna Dolyna (67km north-west of Luhansk); ten IFVs (BMP-2) 1.5km north-east of Oleksandropillia (71km west of Luhansk); one APC (BRDM-2) and one IFV (BMP variant) 3km south-west of Komyshuvakha (68km west of Luhansk) travelling north; two IFVs (BMP-2) in a dug out position at a checkpoint 3km north-east of Popasna; eight stationary IFVs (three BMP-2 and five BMP-1), five IFVs (BMP-1) travelling north-east, including one that was being towed by an armoured recovery vehicle, and one armoured recovery vehicle (BMP-1KSh) travelling south-west, in the southern outskirts of Popasna; and two stationary IFVs (BMP-2) near Zolote-2 (60km west of Luhansk). On 23 July, the SMM saw one IFV (BMP-2) travelling east and fresh tracks assessed as those of IFV (BMP-variant) and APC (MT-LB) on road T-1316, in the western outskirts of Zolote.

On 22 July, the SMM saw multiple military-type vehicles travelling across a “DPR”-controlled checkpoint on road E-58 north of Novoazovsk (40km east of Mariupol) while it was positioned there for about three hours due to a denial of access*. The SMM saw, in sequence: one APC (BTR-80) travelling in the direction of Novoazovsk; a convoy of four police-type cars, two black sport utility vehicles with flashing lights, nine vans and five military-type trucks (many of which had the inscription “ТБГ” and appeared to be transporting men in military-style attire) travelling in the direction of the border with the Russian Federation; one empty military-type truck travelling in the direction of Novoazovsk; two black sport utility vehicles with flashing lights travelling in the direction of the border with the Russian Federation; five previously observed empty military-type trucks travelling in the direction of Novoazovsk; two empty military-type trucks travelling in the direction of the border with the Russian Federation; and two empty military-type trucks travelling in the direction of Novoazovsk.

The SMM continued to observe fresh craters and recent excavations. On 21 July in “DPR”-controlled Kruta Balka (16km north of Donetsk), an SMM mini unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) spotted: 15 fresh craters assessed as caused by mortar (82mm) rounds, one of which was 30m from a civilian property; two-three freshly dug trenches on the north-western outskirts of Yasynuvata and at least 20 fresh craters assessed as caused by mortar (82mm and 120mm) rounds; over one hundred fresh craters in a forested area and amongst agricultural fields 3-4km north of Kruta Balka, including those assessed as caused by mortar (82mm and 120mm) and the impacts of artillery (122mm and 152mm) rounds; three-four probable impact craters assessed as caused by mortar (82mm) rounds in the area of Donetsk Water Filtration Station and multiple newly dug trenches and bunkers, two of which were covered with camouflage netting, on both sides of road H-20, about 1km north of the Donetsk Water Filtration Station.

On 22 July, the SMM observed recent excavations – a mound of fresh earth and an excavator – 50m north of a checkpoint in “DPR”-controlled in Olenivka (23km south-west of Donetsk).

The SMM continued to monitor the situation of civilians living near the contact line. On 22 July, the SMM saw a group of about 50 people (mostly women in their fifties) form a human barrier across a road in government-controlled Nyzhnie (56km north-west of Luhansk) in order to prevent the SMM from travelling west towards government-controlled Toshkivka (60km north-west of Luhansk). They told the SMM that they have been without gas for two months and that they will continue to block SMM vehicles from travelling in the area until gas has been restored to the surrounding villages. Following the conversation, the SMM was able to proceed. Earlier that day, while in Myrna Dolyna, the SMM spoke to four residents from nearby government-controlled Svitlychne (54km north-west of Luhansk) who said that the area around Nyzhnie has been without gas since 6 June.

The SMM followed up on reports from residents that the central and eastern part of “LPR” controlled Zolote-5 (61km north-west of Luhansk) had been without water for ten days and on 23 July, the SMM checked a communal tap where residents have been previously seen filling up containers and saw that no water came out of it.

The SMM monitored border areas currently not under government control in Luhansk and Donetsk regions. On 22 July at the border crossing point in Marynivka (78km east of Donetsk), in about 45 minutes, the SMM saw 48 cars (ten with Russian Federation and 35 with Ukrainian licence plates, and two with “DPR” plates and one white plate with black numbers), one covered cargo truck (with a white plate with black numbers) and three passenger buses (two with Ukrainian and one with Russian Federation licence plates) in a queue to exit Ukraine.

On 22 July at the Uspenka border crossing point (73km south-east of Donetsk), in about 45 minutes, the SMM observed 22 cars (seven with Russian Federation, 11 with Ukrainian and one with Georgian licence plates, and three with “DPR” plates) and seven covered cargo trucks (one with Russian Federation, five with Ukrainian and one with Belarusian licence plates) in a queue to exit Ukraine.

On 22 July, at the pedestrian border crossing point in Verkhnoharasymivka (57km south-east of Luhansk) the SMM observed that it was unstaffed and, in about 50 minutes, the SMM saw 16 people exiting Ukraine and 18 people enter.

On 22 July, at the border crossing point in Voznesenivka (formerly Chervonopartyzansk, 65km south-east of Luhansk), in about one hour the SMM observed 14 cars (nine with Ukrainian and three with Russian Federation licence plates, and two with “LPR” plates) in a queue to exit Ukraine and three cars (with Ukrainian licence plates) enter Ukraine. The SMM also saw six people (three men and three women in their twenties) exit Ukraine and seven people (three women in their forties and four teenage boys) enter Ukraine.

On 21 July, the SMM followed up on an ongoing miners’ protest in government-controlled Pryvillia (90km north-west of Luhansk) related to unpaid salaries. (See SMM Daily Report 17 July.) The SMM observed a gathering of around 50 people (mostly men, aged between 30 and 50) in front of a coal mine and heard a Member of Parliament assuring those gathered that assistance would be provided and asking for the miners to come out of the pit. Eight men (aged between 30 and 50) who introduced themselves as coal miners told the SMM said that 34 miners still remained in the pit and that they would not come out until their salaries had been paid.

On 22 July, in Popasna the SMM monitored a gathering of 200 people (men, women and children of mixed ages), including civil servants, police and Ukrainian Armed Forces personnel, and saw posters indicating that the event was to mark “the day of liberation” of Popasna. The gathering ended peacefully.

On 22 July, in the centre of Kolomak (90km south-west of Kharkiv), the SMM monitored a gathering to mark the inauguration of a monument dedicated to Ivan Mazepa, who had been elected as the Hetman of Zaporizhzhian Host 330 years ago. The SMM saw about 3,000 people (men and women of different ages), many of whom were wearing traditional Ukrainian clothes, as well as regional government officials and religious representatives attend the ceremony. Some participants were holding Cossack flags. About 230 police officers were present. The event ended peacefully.

The SMM continued monitoring in Kherson, Odessa, Lviv, Ivano-Frankivsk, Dnipro, Chernivtsi and Kyiv.

*Restrictions of SMM’s freedom of movement or other impediments to fulfilment of its mandate

The SMM’s monitoring and freedom of movement are restricted by security hazards and threats, including risks posed by mines, unexploded ordnance (UXO) and other impediments – which vary from day to day. The SMM’s mandate provides for safe and secure access throughout Ukraine. All signatories of the Package of Measures have agreed on the need for this safe and secure access, that restriction of the SMM’s freedom of movement constitutes a violation, and on the need for rapid response to these violations. They have also agreed that the JCCC should contribute to such response and co-ordinate mine clearance. The SMM’s operations in Donetsk and Luhansk regions remained restricted following the fatal incident of 23 April near Pryshyb; these restrictions continued to limit the Mission’s observations, including at the disengagement area near Petrivske.

Denial of access:

On 22 July the SMM was again prevented from crossing a “DPR”-controlled checkpoint on road E-58 north of Novoazovsk – an area close to the border with the Russian Federation. (See SMM Daily Report 18 July.) Access was denied by two armed “DPR” members who cited instructions from their superiors, and another armed “DPR” member in military attire with badges in Russian language reading “Regiment of the Special Forces” and “Novorossiya”. The Russian Federation chief of staff of the JCCC arrived at the checkpoint and the SMM waited for a total of three hours, during which time other civilian and military-type vehicles passed through the checkpoint, though the SMM was still denied access.

On 23 July, three “DPR” members at a checkpoint in Staromykhailivka (15km west of Donetsk) stopped the SMM from proceeding and shouted that it must move back. The SMM left the checkpoint and informed the JCCC.

Related to disengagement areas and mines/UXO:

On 22 and 23 July, a Ukrainian officer of the JCCC told the SMM that no demining activities had taken place during the previous 24 hours in the Stanytsia Luhanska disengagement area and that, with the exception of the main road, the SMM’s safety could not be guaranteed in the surrounding areas due to the possible presence of mines and UXO. The SMM did not consider it safe to proceed and informed the JCCC.

On 22 and 23 July, at a checkpoint on the northern edge of the Zolote disengagement area a Ukrainian Armed Forces officer of the JCCC told the SMM that no de-mining had taken place over the previous 24 hours and that, due to the possible presence of mines and/or UXO, they could not guarantee the SMM’s safety. The SMM did not consider it safe to proceed and informed the JCCC.

On 22 and 23 July, armed “LPR” members positioned on the southern side of the Zolote disengagement area (3km north of Pervomaisk) told the SMM that they could not guarantee the safety of the Mission on side roads due to the possible presence of mines and UXO. The SMM did not consider it safe to proceed and informed the JCCC.

On 22 and 23 July, the SMM could not travel across the bridge in Shchastia as Ukrainian Armed Forces personnel said there were mines on the road south of the bridge. The SMM informed the JCCC.

On 22 July, at a government-controlled checkpoint 2.5km north-west of Vodiane (19km north-east of Mariupol), the SMM was unable to proceed on road T-0519 between Mariupol and “DPR”-controlled Pikuzy (formerly Kominternove, 23km north-east of Mariupol) as the JCCC had still not co-ordinated the removal of mines and the sides had not cleared the route. The SMM informed the JCCC.

[1] Please see the annexed table for complete breakdown of the ceasefire violations as well as map of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions marked with locations featured in this report

[2] This hardware is not proscribed by the provisions of the Minsk agreements on the withdrawal of weapons.