Turkey legs are emu? We don't think so, Zachary Levi
It’s an old, well-worn theme-park rumor: Those jumbo turkey legs are actually emu meat. It may get new life now that actor Zachary Levi announced it as inside information on Conan O’Brien’s talk show on Thursday night.

His source? “Friends that have worked for Disneyland.” He didn’t say if they were bus drivers.

Levi is a self-described longtime Disney fan and the voice of Flynn in Disney’s “Tangled” and in the new TV movie “Tangled: Before Ever After.”

O’Brien had his doubts about this emu claim, calling it an urban myth.

“It would explain all the emus I’ve seen in wheelchairs at Disneyland,” O’Brien said.

Later, Levi, who grew up near Disneyland, said he hoped his sources were good.

“They might just be throwing shade,” he said.

Richard Shotwell / AP Zachary Levi ('Tangled') talked turkey legs with Conan O'Brien on Thursday. Zachary Levi ('Tangled') talked turkey legs with Conan O'Brien on Thursday. (Richard Shotwell / AP)

I wrote a turkey leg story five years ago that disputed the lingering emu claim. Among my vivid memories from that:

• A emu leg is eight times larger than a turkey leg, said Tim Williams of Gatorland, which had emu at its attraction. "If you're going to walk around with an emu leg in a theme park and chew on it, you'd have to get a cart with wheels to push that thing around. They're huge," Williams said.

• Theme park legs don’t taste like emu, said Andrew Zimmern, the “Bizarre Foods” guy. “The meat would be a little more beefy,” he said. “Emu has the consistency of turkey leg but the flavor of roasted veal. It's got mild beefiness to it and a little more metallic.”

• But why are they so dang big then? The size can be attributed to a worldwide increase in turkey demand, said Disney’s Robert Adams, who five years ago was executive chef at Magic Kingdom. Consumers mostly want white breast meat, so growers are raising bigger turkeys, he said.

So, we can't have bigger turkey breasts without bigger turkey legs.

Oh, and for the record, the legs are definitely turkey, Adams said.

dbevil@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5477