Wasserman Schultz to lead DNC
Wasserman Schultz will be the first female DNC chief in 15 years and the third in history. Wasserman Schultz to lead DNC

President Barack Obama has chosen Florida Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz as the incoming chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, the party announced late Tuesday.

Wasserman Schultz, 44, was chosen for her strength as a fundraiser and as a television messenger and for her clout in the crucial swing state of Florida, the sources said.

Story Continued Below

She will succeed Tim Kaine, who announced earlier Tuesday that he will run for U.S. Senate from Virginia.

The committee announced the choice in an email to members from Vice President Joe Biden.

“In selecting Debbie to lead our party, President Obama noted her tenacity, her strength, her fighting spirit and her ability to overcome adversity,” Biden wrote.

“President Obama expressed great admiration for her as a leader, and he was honored that she accepted this important challenge on behalf of the Democratic Party.”

Wasserman Schultz becomes the first female DNC chief in 15 years and the third in history.

The congresswoman is beloved by the Democratic rank and file for her aggressive, outspoken advocacy for liberal points of view. She’s frequently deployed as a surrogate, particularly to groups of women and Jewish voters.

“Since she was first elected to Congress in 2004, Debbie Wasserman Schultz has emerged as one of the most outspoken leaders in the Democratic Party,” Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley, chairman of the Democratic Governors Association, said in a statement.

“A strong voice for ordinary people who didn’t cause the recession but are too often asked to pay the price, Wasserman Schultz will be a great advocate for President Obama and for Democrats across the country who are fighting to grow the economy and create jobs for middle-class families.”

Democratic consultant Karen Finney, a former DNC communications director, called Wasserman Schultz “a fantastic choice.”

“She will be great, particularly as we head into the reelect, because she is a smart, tough woman and both an effective advocate and fundraiser for the Democratic Party,” Finney said.

A four-term member from the Fort Lauderdale area, Wasserman Schultz has moved aggressively to rise in the party ranks.

The final choice came down to Wasserman Schultz and former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland, Democratic sources said.

The choice of Wasserman Schultz over Strickland presents a party head whose strength will be in rallying the base rather than reaching out to Heartland swing voters.

It also heads off the possibility of a revolt by the party’s base over abortion issues: Wasserman Schultz is a strong supporter of abortion rights, whereas Strickland’s record on the issue is mixed.