Trump's growing pains
Donald Trump’s candidacy is trying to get real.

Having proven the durability of his lead in the polls, Trump’s political organization is now working to put together a ready-for-prime-time operation that can withstand the rigors of a campaign waged beyond the realm of stage-managed rallies, television screens and Twitter feeds — and suffering some stumbles along the way.

Story Continued Below

In South Carolina, the campaign has just landed a sought-after activist, and in Iowa it’s building a 99-county infrastructure, even as Republicans in New Hampshire says its ground presence there pales next to those of its rivals.

A pro-Trump super PAC is preparing to make its first online ad buys even as news of its cooperation with the candidate raises questions about the financial independence he’s made a central rationale of his campaign.

Trump pulled off the largest rally of any Republican candidate on Friday, even as his campaign lost the expectations game by predicting a bigger turnout than it could deliver.

The campaign issued a detailed immigration policy proposal that’s set the tone of Republican debate even as it took two days to clarify Trump’s initial, dismissive response to the news that the alleged perpetrator of a hate crime against a Hispanic man in Boston was apparently inspired by his rhetoric.

“There’s a lot of turmoil going on in the campaign,” said a person who has advised Trump in the past.

The turmoil began in earnest earlier this month with the departure of Trump’s longtime political adviser Roger Stone under disputed circumstances. Following Stone’s departure, campaign manager Corey Lewandowski announced he would travel around the country to interview operatives for a hiring spree that would expand Trump’s organization across the country. More than two weeks later, the campaign has not announced major new hires.

A spokeswoman for the Trump campaign declined to comment for this story.

Trump’s operation in key early states continues apace, meanwhile.

His South Carolina operation — led by well-respected veteran operatives Ed McMullen and Jim Merrill, a former House majority leader in the state — is in the process of bringing on Nancy Mace, the first female graduate of the Citadel, as a coalitions director, according to a person with knowledge of the hiring.

Mace, a sought-after activist with anti-establishment bona fides earned during her unsuccessful 2014 primary challenge to Sen. Lindsey Graham, had been courted for her support by Rand Paul’s campaign earlier this year, according to a Republican operative with knowledge of those conversations.

In New Hampshire, the Trump operation is racing to keep up with the demand. His most recent event in the state, a town hall in Derry scheduled to coincide with, and outshine, a nearby Jeb Bush rally, drew over 1,000 boisterous fans. “We picked up hundreds and hundreds of endorsements,” said New Hampshire co-chairman Stephen Stepanek. “We’re still going through them, and I haven’t been in touch with them yet.”

But outside of Trump events, the New Hampshire operation has yet to channel that enthusiasm into a ground presence that matches rival campaigns.

“He has some sort of a ground game, not a great deal,” said Grafton County Republican Party Chairman Bruce Perlo, adding that Trump himself has stuck to the more easily accessible southern half of the state. “We have not seen him come north at all.”

Even Chris Christie’s struggling campaign has a more robust presence in that part of the state. Perlo said he recently heard from the New Jersey governor’s campaign representative for the region. “The ones who are going to be serious are beginning to staff up and get people out locating their supporters,” he said.

“It doesn’t seem like they’re putting together a ground game right now, and I don’t know what they’re getting from their events down here,” said an adviser to a rival New Hampshire campaign, who cited Bush, Rand Paul and Carly Fiorina as candidates with robust presences. Of Trump’s operation, he said, “It’s more of a curiosity than an organization.”

Earlier this month, Trump issued a detailed immigration proposal that won over some skeptics. “I’m pleasantly surprised that his policy paper is as sophisticated as it is,” said Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, which advocates cracking down on illegal immigration.

Of a series of policy papers the campaign pledged to issue over a matter of weeks, only the immigration proposal has been forthcoming so far.

And Trump, who recently conceded that he relies on television programs to guide his views on military matters, may find it difficult to line up a real-life cast of experts to advise his campaign.

“I think not a lot of people want to say that they’ve talked to Trump,” said one conservative policy wonk who is sympathetic to some of Trump’s views. “Not a lot of people are willing to admit that they’ve had conversations with Trump, for fear that they’ll be ridiculed and locked out of conversations with other campaigns and the eventual nominee. If one of his guys called me up and said, ‘What do you think about so-and-so?’ I wouldn’t get off the phone and call you. Whereas if the Bush campaign called, I’d be happy to tell you.”

The campaign also showed the limits of its rapid response capabilities last week. Earlier this month, when Bush provoked a firestorm for saying, “I’m not sure we need half a billion dollars for women’s health issues,” his campaign issued a clarification in a matter of hours.

But when Trump was confronted last Wednesday in New Hampshire with the news that the alleged perpetrator of a hate crime against a Hispanic man in Boston had apparently been influenced by his rhetoric, the mogul praised the passion of his supporters.

“It would be a shame, but I haven’t heard about that,” he said. “I will say that people who are following me are very passionate. They love this country and they want this country to be great again. They are passionate.” It wasn’t until two days later, facing mounting condemnation, that Trump tweeted that he does not condone violence.

“The organization doesn’t react independently of the candidate,” said Republican consultant Bruce Haynes, president of Purple Strategies. “You can’t campaign this way and you can’t govern this way for any sustainable period of time.”

The campaign stumbled again in setting expectations for a megarally in Mobile, Alabama on Friday, predicting a turnout of 36,000 supporters. Media outlets estimated an attendance of about 15,000 to 20,000, and city officials put the number at 30,000.

It’s not just Trump’s ability to draw thousands that has its limits.

Trump’s supporters often cite his perceived ability to self-fund a campaign as core to his appeal. But while Trump claims to be worth $10 billion and has said he will spend “whatever it took” to get elected, Forbes pegs his net worth at $4 billion, and he has only $300 million in liquid assets in a campaign cycle in which the total tab for a winning campaign is expected to exceed $1 billion.

As they come to terms with the realities of a protracted primary fight, Trump and his supporters are already bowing to the limits of his own fortune.

To help finance Trump’s run, his supporters have formed a super PAC, Make America Great Again PAC, which is creating designs and gathering price quotes for its first online ad buy, according to spokeswoman Stephanie Cegielski. She said the group is actively soliciting contributions.

Trump himself has begun flirting with the possibility that he will take large contributions from moneyed interests. At the Alabama rally, he said a lobbyist recently offered him $5 million but that he turned the man down. “Maybe I’ll rethink it. Should I rethink it?”

The crowd shouted, “no!”

“Can I take it, please?” he pleaded.

Cate Martel and Daniel Strauss contributed to this report.