The 2005 military base-closing round known as BRAC cost more money and saved less than estimated. That includes projects in Hampton Roads.
Cost more, saved less, than estimated 2005 BRAC

Before sequestration there was BRAC, the base closing and realignment commission that last hit Virginia in 2005. It closed Fort Monroe in Hampton and merged some common functions at four bases that resulted in the creation of Joint Base Langley-Eustis on the Peninsula and Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek-Fort Story in South Hampton Roads.

Sequestration is the newest scary word to enter the military vocabulary of Hampton Roads, a Beltway term for deep cuts in defense and non-defense spending that will take effect in January unless Washington decides otherwise.

As Congress debates sequestration, BRAC continues to be in the undercurrent of conversation. The Obama administration has proposed BRAC rounds for 2013 and 2015, and while next year's prospects appear all but dead, a former Navy secretary said recently that 2015 seems more likely as the military continues to downsize, shift focus and try to save money.

But the 2005 BRAC round has fallen fall short of its original billing – at least as far as taxpayer savings are concerned.

Overall, one-time construction costs related to BRAC jumped by 67 percent, from a $21 billion estimate to $35.1 billion in 2011.

Five projects had one-time cost increases that skyrocketed beyond 1,000 percent of what Congress was originally told. Two were tied to Fort Lee in Prince George County.

Due primarily to those one-time cost increases, the expected 20-year net present value of BRAC 2005 – a measure of costs and savings over time – has plummeted by 72 percent.

GAO report

These figures are from the Government Accountability Office, which has published a series of analyses on the 2005 BRAC, the most recent one released last month.

GAO's Brian Lapore noted that 2005 BRAC differed from previous rounds. It was the biggest and most complex round ever, involving 800 defense locations and relocating more than 125,000 people. While previous BRAC efforts focused on shedding waste, the military saw the 2005 BRAC as a way to realign its forces to meet defense needs 20 years in the future.

Functions were combined and realigned. Missions were transferred from base to base. To make it all fit, the military had to construct or retool at a myriad of locations.

Rep. Randy Forbes, R-Chesapeake, said he gets that part.

"That is a fair analysis," he said. "The BRAC rounds in 2005 were not just force reductions. They were designed with multiple-purpose approach. But having said that, it is vitally important when you sell these programs, you do not do a bait and switch.

"They were giving these cost figures early on, and that's what led Congress to make those decisions. When you make these policy decisions, you need to be making them on a reasonable basis."