Real Police: Law Enforcement,Police Officer,Criminal Justice,Background Checks website...
Police Officer Preparation & Law Enforcement Resource - Archive

The REAL POLICE FORUM is a leading community of police officers and law enforcement professionals. The forum includes police chat and restricted areas for police officers only. The ask-a-cop area allows you to ask questions to real police officers and only verified police are allowed to respond. REALPOLICE.com also features law enforcement jobs, news, training materials and expert articles.





The REAL POLICE FORUM is a leading community of police officers and law enforcement professionals. The forum includes police chat and restricted areas for police officers only. The ask-a-cop area allows you to ask questions to real police officers and only verified police are allowed to respond. REALPOLICE.com also features law enforcement jobs, news, training materials and expert articles.

View Full Version : Car Idling?

SARDOG Ok guys, so this article that was just posted about the drug dog dying from heat exhaustion got me thinking.



I leave Jonah in the car all the time with the A/C running when we're called out, at training etc. I had never thought about it before, but sometimes I leave it running for extended periods at idle. I'm just wondering if you guys know how this effects the engine in terms of longivity and reliability? Is the 4.6 in the crown vics designed for this? Have they put anything in place that protects the engine from damage in extended idling conditions?



Just curious.

Twelve Volt Man I'm not qualified to comment regarding an engine's capability, but I will tell you what I (and other handlers at my department) do. I always keep the rear windows rolled down, so that if the air conditioning goes out, the heat inside the vehicle won't build up as much. Also, it helps to raise the hood to keep the vehicle from overheating. Gadgets like interior heat warnings are great if you can get the brass to go for it.

chewy I'm not qualified to comment regarding an engine's capability, but I will tell you what I (and other handlers at my department) do. I always keep the rear windows rolled down, so that if the air conditioning goes out, the heat inside the vehicle won't build up as much. Also, it helps to raise the hood to keep the vehicle from overheating. Gadgets like interior heat warnings are great if you can get the brass to go for it.





I see a LOT of our local departments doing that this summer. They will be stopped with the road blocked off for an accident or what have you and they all have thier hoods open. I know that it helps some but it must help a lot because I've seen at least four or five departments doing it. I haven't seen Detroit PD or the State doing it but a lot of smaller departments (Dearborn Heights, Redford etc) have. They have those window fans now too that you put in the window then roll the window up onto it. It plugs into a lighter plug and when the temperature gets to a certain degree the fan kicks on and starts blowing air in. The exchange of air is enough to cool the car down several degrees I understand. Our CBP dogs have the back seat cages so when they park thier cars they open all the windows and usually the back gate (they all have explorers or SUV's). If you don't have a cage this could prove problematic I would guess :p





I've decided that WHEN I get a K-9 (hopefully in the next two to twenty years :D) I'm going to buy a full size motor home that has a seperate generator and air conditioning. That way my dog will always be cool AND have several beds to lay on. Then when I'm not running him/her I can watch movies...I mean training videos and better myself as a CBP Officer. I wonder if anyone would move aside for a Winnebago with red and blue lights?

K9Gunner Always pop the hood, and invest in a temp alarm. Just remember the alarm can fail, same as the A/C. I leave my dog in the car with the AC on and windows up, but never go more than 10 min without checking on him. Usually you can see frost on the windows, so you can check with a glance.



The crown vic has a heavy motor designed to idle, and I trust it. When I had an expedition, I kinda trusted it. The guys I train with impalas and other small cars, or alumimum head engines.... I would not trust.

K-9MALY I have a Crown Vic, and I leave the AC on sparingly. Popping the hood allows the engine to get rid of heat, and prevents it from malfunctioning. We have to leave our front window cracked open so someone can get an arm in and open the door if they had to. The locked doors are only supposed to slow down someone who is intent on getting in.

We had a handler (Senior Handler too) kill 4 dogs in one day in the heat of Laredo Texas in 1994. This handler put the dogs in the conversion van and was transporting them from the kennels to the vet. On the way back, he went inside for chow with other officers and left the van running in his sight. An hour later, he returned and found out that the AC had quit working. One dog was alive out of the four, and it later died from shock at the vets. Lesson learned and is taught to us at our K-9 Academy in Front Royal.

mcsap Popping the hood is a good idea, just the "first" pop should be enough without fully opening the hood. Our 2 K9 officers ( CV and a Jeep) let there cars run constantly in the warmer months and have never had a problem. I notice the Jeep idles up and down a LOT though.

Ranger__101 Leaving a car idol for long periods of time does take it's wear on the engine but that's a "cost of doing business".



There is not too much in the case of K-9 or patrol cars in winter that can be changed. The only way to keep the damage to a minimum is change the oil regularly and keep the car maintained so it doesn't die before it's in service time is up.

steelcityk9cop Police Fleet Magazine said recently that an hour of idle is equivalent to 30 miles of drive time on the motor.



Ford also recently commented on the raised hood issue. Ford said that raising the hood does dissipate heat BUT it defeats the cooling design of the car and breaks the vacuum that draws air across the radiator to cool the motor. They suggested leaving the hood down and pointed to Las Vegas PD who puts a set of louvers in the hood of each K9 car to help with heat build-up.



I like leaving the windows down in the back as often as possible to help acclimate my dog to temperature changes.

parttimer I leave my back windows down with the AC on full blast. I usually pop the hood to keep it cool but have wondered about the "vacuum" idea. I know a SO in our state has the hood louvers on the hood. Nothing is fool proof though. I leave my car run year around, in the winter I can't see out the damn windows if it has been sitting due to the breathing machine in the back. I do of course catch heat about it, Chief last asked, "what, thin coat??" I replied I like to see out of the windows to drive.

Group9 If extended idling damages a car engine, we would't have ten cars still running in my agency. One of the things we do is surveillance where we may sit with an engine idling all day, with the air conditioner on full.



The only mechanical problem I ever had was with a 1992 Mustang 5.0 that I did a lot of static, idling surveillance with. One day, after sitting with it idling for about forty hours straight (sleeping in the car), it started getting like 4 miles to a gallon, although it still had plenty of power.



I took it to the dealership and they said that wax in the fuel had clogged up everything in the fuel injection system, etc., and after I mentioned the extensive idling, they thought that was a likely culprit. Once they de-waxed everything (about $400) it ran fine again.

k9dan I also have a CV which idles a lot. I was out on a track today, which turned into a search warrant. I had to secure the house and wait three hours for the warrant. I usually park in the shade, windows up, AC on high and hood up.

Qcon Does anyone have any good photos of the CHP or LVPD hood louvers? I'm working on a CHP K9 model car and would appreciate any reference material. The links below are photos I found online of the CHP car. Thanks!



http://www.sspmustang.org/police/pl_photo383.htm

http://www.sspmustang.org/police/pl_photo385.htm



Q

mcsap My June 2005 Police Fleet Manager magazine has a good article on idling. They say every hour of idling is worth 32 miles of driving.

Clint Ok guys, so this article that was just posted about the drug dog dying from heat exhaustion got me thinking.



I leave Jonah in the car all the time with the A/C running when we're called out, at training etc. I had never thought about it before, but sometimes I leave it running for extended periods at idle. I'm just wondering if you guys know how this effects the engine in terms of longivity and reliability? Is the 4.6 in the crown vics designed for this? Have they put anything in place that protects the engine from damage in extended idling conditions?



Just curious.



I would "SUGGEST", always, always, always, pop the hood, maximum hood elevation. Depending on your location attempt to place your vehcile under a tree, over-hang, or some sort of shade. If you have to use "AC", keep the windows down, just in case the engine stops running..... I would also suggest you obtain a "RAY ALLEN", or other K-9 Catalog and obtain information about a heat warning sensor in your vehicle, their not cheap, but neither is your K-9, most Departments would rather pay a few hundred dollars than loose a valuable assett. Perhaps a battery operated window fan, with an independent power source. In hot climates, remember to check on your

K-9, and keep him/her hydrated.... :cool:

SARDOG WOW! This is great info. I didn't expect to see so many replies when I came to check on this thread. Thank you very much.



I do have a Ray Allen cage so I am familiar with them, and the heat sensors. I am going to start leaving the windows down in the back just in case. That's a good idea. I can imagine the car will get hot very quickly in 95 degree heat. The windows are tinted to almost black but even that only helps for a couple of minutes when sitting somewhere. That's mostly so people can't see the dog and bother him. Thanks again everyone.

qpd158 I don't have a dog, but the other night I had my CV idleing for 30 - 45 min got a hit on the vehicle being stolen, search and inventory. In 10 minutes time, my alternator went bad, no lights no AC and the suspect handcuffed in my back seat. Not sure how long the AC was out, but my quess is about 5 minutes. Even have the battery saver on it, and I believe they are a waste of money. This was at 9 in the evening as well. Love this midwest humidity.

Danny_Boy Also keep in mind that most Police package cars/trucks are equipted with Tranny,oil,and power steering coolers in addition with a already HD Cooling system (larger fan/s) Caprices,Impalas,Crown Vics,and Tahoes have been known to idel for houres apon end with little to no damage at all ;) That is a nother reason why i buy and drive ex-police cars.

lepdford Definitely open your hood, when you can. This does allow alot of heat to escape the motor compartment. I drive a 2003 C.V. in north Texas. When the motor begins to get hot, the AC compressor shuts down and the AC blows hot air to save the motor. This does not favor my partner inside the car. We purchased a heat alarm from Ace K-9, which makes me feels a little better, but I don't trust the car or alarm entirely. Though the alarms are a little pricey, if your department was to protect a $10,000.00 investment that can generate 10 times that in seizures, in a short time, they really aren't that expensive. Local buisnesses are a good resource for funding the purchase of a heat alarm system.

lepdford Also.....Ford Motor Engineer's told my department that even though my car only has 47,000 miles on it, because the car idles all the time (to keep the dog cool), they believe the condition of the motor would be the same as a car (that doesn't idle non-stop) with over 120,000 miles on it. I don't know!