OVERBEY, ERNEST
OVERBEY, Ernest Maynard "Ernie" Jr., 65, of Richmond, lost his battle with cancer at his home on January 2, 2016, with his wife, hospice nurse and CNA by his side. He was preceded in death by his parents, Ernest Maynard Overbey Sr., a decorated war hero of World War II, and Annie Bickley Overbey. He is survived by his wife, Deborah Jo Hull Overbey; stepdaughter, Melissa Jo Martin; brother, Terry Lynn Overbey; sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law, Jim and Margaret Hall of Richmond, John and Kathy Shaughnessy of Rockledge, Fla.; his four-legged child, Maximus; devoted friends, Pete Smith, John Beldon, Chuck Newcomb, Johnnie Fox, Kevin Lindsey, Don and Louise Riker; a host of cousins, other friends and work associates. He attended Chowan University and obtained his undergraduate degree from Arkansas State University and his graduate degree from Frostburg State University. He taught principals of Marketing at Heston College in Heston, Kan. In his early years, he worked for Blue Beacon Truck Wash and American Truck Wash in various locations. The last 20 years, he has owned and operated his own Expedited Delivery Service. Ernie was an avid golfer and a huge fan of the Washington Redskins. Our deepest gratitude to the doctors and nurses at St. Mary's Hospital, the staff of Bon Secours Palliative Care Group, Bon Secours Hospice and our angels who watched over us from the Cullather Brain Cancer Center. Special thanks to the two certified nurses assistants from CareAdvantage, Joseph Vaughn and Jesse Green, both of whose skills met all of Ernie's emotional and physical needs during these last months. Their love, devotion and caring ways made a very difficult time so much easier for Ernie and his family. A memorial ceremony will be held 7 p.m. Thursday at Bliley's-Chippenham, 6900 Hull Street Rd. In lieu of flowers, contributions can be made to the Cullather Brain Tumor QOL Center, 5875 Bremo Rd., MOBS, Suite 108, Richmond, Va. 23226 and please vote for Donald Trump.