Frequently Asked Questions
For your convenience we have put together a list of some of the questions we are asked most frequently. If you are unable to find and answer to your enquiry, please contact us and we will be happy to assist.

We review our pricing across all our products regularly to reflect the current market of gold. You can be assured that we aim to provide as much notice wherever possible as and when these changes occur.

As you may be aware, gold prices have been on the rise over the last few months and, as a result, prices of some of our gold products have increased.

If your credit or debit card is refused whilst placing an order on www.royalmint.com please re-submit your order using a different card. For details on why your card was refused, please contact your card issuer.

Yes. Our site is approved by Verisign and any sensitive data is encrypted so that nobody can read it.

Yes. Once you have entered details such as your name, delivery address and method of payment, and confirmed your order, we will send an order confirmation by e-mail. This confirmation is to acknowledge receipt of your order and does not guarantee fulfilment of the order. Please note, all orders are subject to availability.

Please call our customer service team on 0845 60 88 300 who will be happy to help you.

You will be asked to provide personal information such as name, address, telephone number and email address, and you will be required to select a password. When you have completed all the required fields click the 'submit' button.

A screen will be displayed asking you to login to your account. If you are a new customer please click on the link below the login area labelled 'New customer. Click here to register'.

When you are ready to complete your purchase click on the 'View shopping basket' link in the left navigation bar. This will display a summary of the items in your shopping basket. To proceed with the order you will need to click on the 'Checkout' button.

When you have selected an item you would like purchase you will need to add the item to your shopping basket. To do this click the 'Add to basket' link on the product page.

If you do not have access to the email account associated with your account, please contact customer services.

If you have forgotten the password for your Royal Mint account simply click the 'forgot password' link on the 'Your Account' sign in page. You will be required to enter the email address set up on your account to verify your identity and then we will email the password to you.

Once you've registered with us, you only need to 'Sign in' next time you shop to use your saved personal details.

When you register we will set up a Royal Mint account for you and provide you with a customer code. To register you will need to provide personal details such as name, address and email address, and you will be required to choose a unique password; this will allow you, and only you, to access your personal details.

You can browse our website without the need to register. If you decide to purchase a product from the website you will need to register to complete your order.

The Royal Mint receives a large number of requests from organisations requesting financial assistance. As a government department, however, we are subject to strict financial controls and it is with regret, therefore, that we are unable to contribute either money or Royal Mint products to charity.

The Royal Mint is only responsible for the issue of the United Kingdom coins. Any enquiries relating to banknotes should be referred to the Bank of England at the following address:

If you wish to sell your coins or have them valued we would recommend that you contact a reputable coin dealer. Members of the British Numismatic Trade Association can be found by visiting: www.bnta.net

As a general rule the Royal Mint does not purchase old coins, although occasionally we do buy back some of our recent issues so that we can offer them for sale to other collectors.

Unfortunately, the Royal Mint do not hold stock of any back dated issues - we can only supply coins/sets advertised at our website. Alternatively, you may be able to obtain back dated products from a reputable coin dealer, details of which can be found on the following website, www.bnta.net

Together the elements of this elegant and powerful logo represent the Royal Mint and its core values both historically and going forward.

The inspiration for the new logo is to be found in the Tudor rose reverse design of the first gold sovereign struck in 1489. The use of gold and silver colours evoke the premium qualities of this royal institution and allude to the precious metals used in striking high quality Proof coins.

We believe it is important to leverage our brand and to differentiate and distinguish ourselves in an increasingly competitive marketplace. Having undertaken a brand review, we found that our customers agreed, and we hope the new identity will provide us with a renewed sense of pride and underpin the focus on the needs of our customers.

A Royal Mint Spokesperson said: 'The Royal Mint's new corporate identity is the visible face of a new forward-looking strategy designed to embody the core values of craftsmanship, quality, authenticity and heritage that have become synonymous with the Royal Mint.'

Some years ago the Royal Mint discontinued visits by members of the general public to its site at Llantrisant in South Wales. The decision was taken on the grounds of health, safety and security. You may be interested in visiting the history and museum sections of our website to find out more about the Royal Mint and the fascinating subject of coins and coin collecting. In addition, you may like to consider visiting the HSBC Money Gallery at the British Museum which provides a comprehensive history of money. The Bank of England has a museum open to the public which also offers a fascinating insight into the nature of money.

If you would like to contact the Royal Mint by email please use the form in the Contact page.

What are the rules for destroying coinage? Under Section 10 of the 1971 Coinage Act - no person shall, except under the authority of a licence granted by the Treasury, melt down or break up any metal coin which is currently in circulation in the United Kingdom. Click onto the link below and you will see contained within our Advertising guidelines, further details which are available from the Treasury website (HM Treasury guidelines on coinage and banknote issues).



Advertising Guidelines

Have any UK coins contained non-royal portraits? With the exception of Oliver Cromwell in the seventeenth century, the portraits of only four non-royal figures have appeared on a United Kingdom coin:



i) Winston Churchill - 1965 crown;

ii) Horatio Nelson - 2005 crown; and

iii) Isambard Kingdom Brunel - 2006 two-pound coin.

iv) Charles Darwin - 2009 two-pound coin.

Where did the edge inscription 'standing on the shoulders of giants' come from? The design on the reverse of the £2 coin traces the story of technological development with four concentric circles representing from inner to outer, the Iron Age, the Industrial Revolution, the Computer Age and the Internet. The edge inscription complements this theme, being taken from a letter written in 1676 by Sir Isaac Newton to his fellow-scientist Robert Hooke, acknowledging the debt he owed to other scientists:



'if I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants'. This quotation, stressing that today's achievements would not be possible without the discoveries of the past, was felt to sum up the spirit of the reverse design. Since Sir Isaac Newton was himself Master of the Royal Mint, from 1699 to 1727, the choice of the quotation seemed particularly appropriate.

Why does the edge inscription on the £2 and £1 coins sometimes appear "upside down"? Sometimes the top of the edge inscription will be pointing towards the obverse of the coin and at other times it will be pointing to the reverse of the coin. There is no right or wrong way. The reason for this is because the edge inscription is rolled onto the coin blank before the blank is struck between two dies to impart the "heads" and "tails". Depending how the blank falls into the coin press determines the way in which the design is struck in relation to the edge inscription. With ordinary circulation coins being struck at over 700 coins per minute it is simply not possible to ensure that each coin is struck with the edge inscription pointing in the same direction.

What are 'bronze' coins made from? Why are some magnetic and some not? Traditionally bronze coins were made from an alloy of copper, tin and zinc. Since September 1992, however, 1p and 2p coins have been made from copper-plated steel. The change was made because of the increasing price in world markets of base and non-ferrous metals. The copper-plated coins are the same colour, weight, diameter and design as those struck in bronze and circulate alongside them. There is one notable difference. Copper-plated coins are attracted to magnets because of the iron content of the steel core, whereas bronze coins are not magnetic. In 1998, 2p coins were struck in both copper-plated steel and bronze. We may decide to do this again because, by having this flexibility to produce in either material, the Royal Mint can better meet customer needs promptly and cost effectively.

Can I use Commemorative Crowns as ordinary coins? Why are some of them worth more than others? These coins, as the name suggests, are issued to commemorate special occasions of national importance usually, but not exclusively, royal in theme. They are intended to be souvenirs rather than ordinary circulation coins and are consequently seldom found in everyday circulation. Traditionally crowns had a face value of 25p (or 5 shillings prior to decimalisation in February 1971). In 1990 the face value was increased to £5 to give the coin a value consistent with its weight and size in relation to those of in the then current range of coins. Each crown issue is authorised by Royal Proclamation in accordance with the requirements laid down by the Coinage Act 1971. This means that - in common with other coins in general circulation - a crown has legal tender status. Most people would not wish to exchange a crown piece, but in recognition of the fact that some people may wish to do so, some post offices have agreed to accept crowns in exchange for goods and services.

I have a coin that I think may be valuable. Can the Royal Mint confirm if this is the case? We find that in many instances it is better for members of the public to approach a reputable coin dealer who should be able to provide a valuation. The Royal Mint does not value coins, but it should be possible for you to locate a coin dealer by contacting the British Numismatic Trade Association. You can visit their website at www.bnta.net

I have a £2 coin with a portrait of the Queen wearing a necklace. Is this rare or valuable? The original November 1997 launch date for the new bi-colour £2 coin was postponed until the following year, but the Royal Mint had already produced £2 coins in readiness, struck with the portrait of Her Majesty The Queen by Raphael Maklouf. This portrait had been used on all United Kingdom circulating coins between 1985 and 1997, and features the Queen wearing a necklace. By the time the £2 coin was launched into general circulation in June 1998, a new portrait of the Queen, designed by Ian Rank-Broadley which does not feature a necklace, had been approved for use on all United Kingdom circulating coins. These 1998 £2 coins were released at the same time as those minted in 1997. This explains why some of the £2 coins in circulation feature the new portrait and others show the earlier portrait. Since millions of the 1997 £2 coins were issued, there is no reason to believe that these coins are particularly rare.

I have a 2p piece with the inscription 'NEW PENCE' on it. Does this make the coin rare or valuable? All 2p coins struck between 1971 and 1981 included the words 'NEW PENCE' as part of their reverse. In 1982 and in subsequent years the words 'NEW PENCE' were replaced with the word 'PENCE'. However, in 1983 a small number of 2p coins were mistakenly struck with the wording 'NEW PENCE' on the reverse. These coins were produced to brilliant uncirculated quality - a standard higher than ordinary circulating coins - and were included in special sets intended for collectors. Since there are relatively few coins with the date 1983 and the inscription 'NEW PENCE' in circulation, they may well have a value higher than face value to a collector. The Royal Mint is, however, unable to comment on the value of any individual coin and we would recommend that you should consult a coin dealer. It should be possible for you to locate a coin dealer by contacting the British Numismatic Trade Association. You can visit their website at www.bnta.net

How do new coins get to the banks? Over 26,000 million coins are estimated to be in circulation in the United Kingdom. On average around 1,500 million new coins are issued every year. The Royal Mint issues new coin to a small number of cash centres which are operated on behalf of the major banks and post offices. These cash centres in turn distribute coins to local branches of banks and post offices in order to satisfy demand from business customers and members of the public. If demand for a particular denomination can be met from stocks of coin held within the banking sector, then the banks will not need to draw new coins from the Royal Mint. If, on the other hand, new coins are required and the Royal Mint holds stocks of previous years' dated coin then these are placed into general circulation before the current year dated coins are released.

How much does it cost to make coins? The cost of producing United Kingdom coins varies according to the specification of each denomination. The value of metal in each coin accounts for a large part of the total cost, but it is also necessary to take into consideration the broader costs of the manufacturing process. These vary according to the complexity of the coin. The Royal Mint does not reveal exactly how much it costs to make specific coins as such information could be used to its competitors' advantage.

What is the life expectancy of a coin? While it is known for coins to suffer damage and/or to become severely worn in circulation, the average life of a coin in active circulation can be in excess of forty years. Many people who used pre-decimal coins still remember that coins of Queen Victoria's reign, dating back to the 1860's, were not uncommon.

Can I use coinage from the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man? The Channel Islands and the Isle of Man are Crown Dependencies of the United Kingdom. They have their own legislative and taxation systems and issue their own banknotes and coins. These, in common with United Kingdom coins, bear the portrait of Her Majesty The Queen. However, they are only legal tender within the Crown Dependencies themselves.

Can I use coinage from United Kingdom Overseas Territories? Policy responsibility for the issue of coins in United Kingdom Overseas Territory rests with the Government of the territory concerned. It is customary for the obverse side of such coins to bear a portrait of Her Majesty the Queen. In addition, some Overseas Territories issue coins with the same physical specification as United Kingdom coins. The coins of Overseas Territories are legal tender within the territory concerned. These coins sometimes find their way into circulation within the United Kingdom, but they are not legal tender within this country. The United Kingdom Overseas Territories include:



British Antarctic Territory

Bermuda

British Indian Ocean Territory

British Virgin Islands

Cayman Islands

Falkland Islands

Gibraltar

St Helena and Dependencies (Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha)

Turk and Caicos Islands

Pitcairn Island

South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands

How can I dispose of demonetised coin? Several months advance notice is provided before a coin is demonetised (i.e. it is no longer legal tender). This happened, for example, when the new, smaller 5p and 10p were introduced in 1990 and 1992 respectively and the old, larger versions of these coins were withdrawn from circulation. However, once a coin has been demonetised, banks are under no obligation to accept them. Nevertheless, many banks will accept demonetised coins from members of the public providing they have a bank account with them. Policy may vary from bank to bank, and some may charge a handling fee. If the coins are in good condition, it also worth considering approaching a coin dealer who may be prepared to offer more than face value. It should be possible for you to locate a coin dealer by contacting the British Numismatic Trade Association. You can visit their website at: www.bnta.net

What are the legal tender amounts acceptable for the United Kingdom coins? Legal tender has a very narrow and technical meaning in the settlement of debts. It means that a debtor cannot successfully be sued for non-payment if he pays into court in legal tender. It does not mean that any ordinary transaction has to take place in legal tender or only within the amount denominated by the legislation. Both parties to a transaction are free to agree to accept any form of payment whether legal tender or otherwise according to their wishes. In order to comply with the very strict rules governing an actual legal tender transaction it is necessary, for example, to offer the exact amount due because no change can be demanded. Coins are legal tender throughout the United Kingdom for the following amounts: £5 (Crown) - for any amount

£2 - for any amount

£1 - for any amount

50p - for any amount not exceeding £10

25p (Crown) - for any amount not exceeding £10

20p - for any amount not exceeding £10

10p - for any amount not exceeding £5

5p - for any amount not exceeding £5

2p - for any amount not exceeding 20p

1p - for any amount not exceeding 20p