FAQs
How can I contact Sandy Hook Promise?

Online: http://www.sandyhookpromise.org/contact_us

Phone: (203) 304-9780

Mail: Sandy Hook Promise, PO Box 3489, Newtown, CT 06470

In Person: Sandy Hook Promise, 14 Church Hill Road, Newtown, CT 06470

What is the mission of Sandy Hook Promise?

The mission of Sandy Hook Promise is twofold.

Reduce the causes of gun violence by bringing together, in local and national dialogue, the great majority of Americans who agree that we must find and implement common sense solutions to address the causes of gun violence in order to save lives in our communities and our country. Help our community through this tragedy by providing immediate and long-term financial, in-kind and other aid, on request, to families who lost loved ones, those wounded and others in our community impacted by this tragedy. We will also identify and support other non-profit organizations that can provide best in class services, treatment and support to help our community.

How is Sandy Hook Promise organized? How can I donate?

Sandy Hook Promise (SHP) is comprised of two nonprofit corporations – SHP Foundation and SHP Action Fund. Two organizations allow us to fulfill our overall mission of researching and implementing common sense solutions to deal with the causes of gun violence as well as influencing legislators and engaging constituents in the legislative process and helping our community heal. This website refers to the two organizations collectively under our name, Sandy Hook Promise.

Because of legal requirements, there is some overlap in the work done within each organization in order to achieve our goals, but certain activities can only be done by one organization and not the other. A specific example of this is lobbying, which can only be done by the Sandy Hook Promise Action Fund.

You can make a donation to any or all of the Sandy Hook Promise organizations. Sandy Hook Promise does not endorse or provide funding for candidates running for public office.

Details of each organization:

Sandy Hook Promise Foundation is a 501(C)(3) organization. Contributions to the Foundation are tax deductible. Contributions will be used to: Raise awareness and educate Americans on the causes of gun violence – with a specific focus on mental well-being and gun safety. Build a national network of Promise Communities committed to implementing local, state and national change via non-policy programs (programs that do not require legislative changes / laws). Bring experts together in real and virtual roundtables to identify sensible community based solutions, programs and best practices. Promote and disseminate these programs through our Promise Communities allowing them to take action within family, community (churches, other organizations) and schools. SHP will offer: Existing, evidence-based regional and national programs Short videos and webinars Simple tips and introduction to experts (via web or live) Offset costs associated with developing and implementing the above programs and standard administrative costs All actions and programs will begin to be implemented in late 2013 and early 2014. Programs will build and change over time based on learning and feedback. Sandy Hook Promise Community Fund: Within the Sandy Hook Promise Foundation, we have also created a restricted fund called the Sandy Hook Promise Community Fund. The SHP Community Fund is dedicated to providing immediate and long-term financial, in-kind and other aid to family members who lost loved ones, those wounded and others in our community impacted by this tragedy. To designate 100% of your tax-deductible donation the Sandy Hook Promise Community Fund to support victims' families and the community, please click here. Sandy Hook Promise Action Fund is a 501(C)(4) organization. Contributions to the Action Fund are not tax deductible. Contributions will be used to: Help influence legislation (lobby) for state and federal policy changes, via Promise Communities and individuals who "make the promise", in the areas of mental well-being and gun safety. Examples of actions / costs that would be incurred include (not limited to) raising awareness, educating, engaging, meeting with legislators and/or constituents, research and preparation, advertising, paid-media, events, campaigns, social media and/or standard administrative costs.

Sandy Hook Promise (SHP) Foundation and Action Fund have overlapping, though not identical, Board of Directors and Officers. SHP Foundation and the Action Fund will observe appropriate corporate formalities (for example, separate accounts, reporting, by-laws and charter) and any allocation of shared assets or staff will be performed accordance with a formally set Cost-Sharing Agreement, which ensures that the Foundation does not subsidize any of the activities of the Action Fund or vice versa.



I have heard about the "Sandy Hook Promise" statement or pledge. What is it?

We are asking all Americans to join us in pledging to honor all victims of gun violence by doing everything we can to encourage and support common sense solutions to the causes of gun violence that will save lives in our communities and country. Read the full Sandy Hook Promise here: http://www.sandyhookpromise.org/the_promise

Why and what happens when I "make the promise"? What will you do with the names of those who "make the Promise?"

If you "make the promise," you will join hundreds of thousands of others who have pledged to honor all lives lost to gun violence and to help implement common sense solutions to the causes of gun violence. In making this pledge:

You will receive accomplishments, news, activities within the Newtown community and across the United States. You will be invited to participate in events and/or campaigns geared toward common sense legislative solutions in your state and/or at a federal level. You will be invited to participate in the local promotion and support of non-legislative solutions (family, community, mental well-being and/or gun safety) that can immediately begin to influence change and help eliminate the causes of gun violence in your community (late 2013 – 2014). You will help ensure the Sandy Hook Promise Foundation and Action Fund organizations have the resources they need to achieve their short and long-term goals and overall mission.

[Note: SHP has a strict privacy policy. Your name or contact information will not be shared with any outside groups or third parties.]

What are some of Sandy Hook's achievements? Where have donations been used?

Every dollar you've donated, conversation you've had and action you've taken helps Sandy Hook Promise achieve our mission: to reduce the causes of gun violence in our country and help our community to heal.

As of October 2013, we have achieved and used donations to:

Advocate for Mental Health Care & Gun Safety We've been lobbying in D.C. in support of common-sense solutions like background checks. Though this hasn't passed in the Senate yet, we are unwavering in our commitment to see this simple step forward take place.

We've also worked to strengthen responsible gun legislation in Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and others.

We helped draft new mental health legislation in Connecticut to improve access for those who most need it.

We're currently working hard with senators in D.C. to help pass proposed new mental health legislation at a federal level. Build a National Community In order to deliver the needed changes in our country, we are building a new national community. Your donations are helping us to build the infrastructure and programs for this nationwide initiative – Promise Communities.

Promise Communities will be made of people like you – people who care about open dialogue, awareness and education – as a way to influence attitudes and behaviors and create positive change.

Promise Communities will promote community-based programs and tools that parents across America can start using immediately and begin to reduce the causes of gun violence, including mental health, gun safety and community connectivity.

We're building these programs right now, thanks to your generous support. We'll tell you all about them in the next few months! Raise Awareness We've been busy promoting the Sandy Hook Promise mission and vision across the country. You can see some of the media coverage we've generated to help spread the word at this link: www.sandyhookpromise.tumblr.com.

As part of our research, we spoke to gun-owning parents in different states in order to find the right way to engage them in finding sensible solutions to gun violence without infringing on constitutional rights. Whether we are Democrat or Republican, own a gun or not, we all want to reduce the causes of gun violence and need to join together to make this happen. Help the Newtown Community We continue our efforts to help the Newtown community "move through" this tragedy by providing financial support and services.

Your donations have: Provided direct financial support for affected families who requested assistance. Brought specialists to town to help with specific mental and physical issues. Provided advocacy support to Sandy Hook community members. Resourced, via grants, other C3 organizations that provide needed healing support and services to our community. SHP has also been able to raise, via angel donors, significant financial aid that was delivered directly from the donor to families (per IRS regulations) who requested assistance. Nearly all of this funded came during the first 90-120 days after 12/14/12.



Who are the leaders of Sandy Hook Promise?

Sandy Hook Promise (SHP) was organized by a group of friends and neighbors in Newtown in the days immediately following the tragedy at Sandy Hook Elementary School.

SHP is led by a committed Board of Directors as well as a dedicated Executive Director and staff. Working with the staff is a volunteer team that is dedicating every free moment to the mission of helping heal our community and making our communities safer.

We are currently developing our Board of Directors and Advisory Council members. If you have an interest in a role, please email tim.makris@sandyhookpromise.org.

SHP Foundation Board of Directors

Rob Cox – Co-Founder

James Belden – Co-Founder

Tom Bittman – Co-Founder

Tim Makris – Executive Director

SHP Foundation Staff

Timothy Makris – Executive Director

Nicole Hockley – Communications Director

James Belden – Operations & Finance Director

Mark Barden – Advocacy Director

Jessica Lazarus – Development Manager

Betsy Gaier – Volunteer and Office Coordinator

Arielle Reich – Senior Policy Advisor

Alexa Tomassi – Social Media Manager

SHP has established an overlapping, but not identical, Board of Directors and Officers for both the SHP Foundation and the SHP Action Fund.

SHP Action Fund Board of Directors

James Belden – Co-Founder

Nicole Hockley – Communications Director

Tim Makris – Executive Director

Are the families most impacted by the Sandy Hook School tragedy working with or are employees of Sandy Hook Promise? What role do they play?

Sandy Hook Promise (SHP) is currently working with many of the families most impacted by the tragedy. We have also assisted teachers and staff of Sandy Hook School.

Two victims family members are employed at SHP: Nicole Hockley, mother of Dylan who was killed, is Communications Director and Mark Barden, father of Daniel who was killed, is Advocacy Director.

SHP does not represent any family, first responder, teacher, staff or the Newtown / Sandy Hook community at large. SHP sets, with input and direction from employed and participating family and community members, its mission, views, positions and beliefs.

Is Sandy Hook Promise a political organization?

No. SHP is a non-partisan grassroots group with supporters from across the political spectrum. We are united by a commitment to help our community and nation by saving more lives and are determined not to be divided by politics.

SHP is comprised of two nonprofit corporations – SHP Foundation and SHP Action Fund. Two organizations allow us to fulfill our overall mission of:

Helping our community through this horrific tragedy

Researching and implementing common sense solutions to eliminate the causes of gun violence

Promoting and mobilizing change within our communities and across our nation

Influencing legislators and engaging constituents in the legislative process.

What are the priorities of Sandy Hook Promise?

SHP is committed to playing a major role in a national dialogue designed to identify and implement common sense solutions to reduce the causes of gun violence in our communities and our country.

SHP will also continue to be providing aid and relief to family members who lost loved ones, those wounded and others in our community who were impacted by the tragedy.

How does Sandy Hook Promise and its initiatives to reduce the causes of gun violence affect children?

SHP has chosen to focus on stopping gun violence against children, the most vulnerable victims. And it is bringing others to the table through the power of their love for their children as parents – that is a bridge between gun owners and non-gun owners: a parent's love.

When the affected family members who are involved with SHP first got together to talk about what they wanted to do, they had several concerns around advocacy and awareness. Their top two concerns were mental health and community, followed by the need to do something on gun safety. In terms of their own community and healing, their strongest concerns were for their surviving children.

How can I support Sandy Hook Promise?

"Make the Promise" at www.sandyhookpromise.org. As a member of our national Promise Community, commit yourself to doing all you can to make our communities safer from violence. We'll help you with actions and tools to make a difference in your own local community. Encourage your friends and neighbors to "Make the Promise". Visit us on Facebook at facebook.com/sandyhookpromise, or follow us on Twitter at twitter.com/sandyhook. Support our mission. Make donations online at www.sandyhookpromise.org.

Will donations to Sandy Hook Promise be used to help the victims' families?

Yes – If you donate to the Sandy Hook Promise Community Fund. The Community Fund is a restricted fund of the Sandy Hook Promise Foundation, which is a 501(C)(3) tax-exempt public charity. This fund was specifically set up to help the families who lost loved ones, those wounded and others within our community impacted by this tragedy.

Financial assistance is provided on a need basis (requested by an individual, family and/or non-profit organization) and as a result of 12/14. Examples of some assistance provided to date and anticipated in the future: reimbursement due to loss of wages, mental and physical health treatment assistance, payment of bills (mortgage, utilities) due to loss of wages, funeral / grave site expenses, helping families establish foundations in honor of a child or spouse killed, legal/professional assistance and sleep therapists.

To designate 100% of your tax-deductible donation the Sandy Hook Promise Community Fund to support victims' families and the community, please click here.

SHP will support our community as long as funds are available. We do not "hold" funds for years to come. We will raise funds annually to support ongoing needs.

In addition to the SHP Community Fund, there are two additional ways to make financial donations to Sandy Hook Promise.

Sandy Hook Promise Foundation is a 501(C)(3) organization. Contributions to the Foundation are tax deductible. Contributions will be used to: Raise awareness and educate Americans on the causes of gun violence – with a specific focus on mental well-being and gun safety. Build a national network of Promise Communities committed to implementing local, state and national change via non-policy programs (programs that do not require legislative changes / laws). Bring experts together in real and virtual roundtables to identify sensible community based solutions, programs and best practices. Promote and disseminate these programs through our Promise Communities allowing them to take action within family, community (churches, other organizations) and schools. SHP will offer: Existing, evidence-based regional and national programs Short videos and webinars Simple tips and introduction to experts (via web or live) Offset costs associated with developing and implementing the above programs and standard administrative costs All actions and programs will begin to be implemented in late 2013 and early 2014. Programs will build and change over time based on learning and feedback. Sandy Hook Promise Community Fund: Within the Sandy Hook Promise Foundation, we have also created a restricted fund called the Sandy Hook Promise Community Fund. The SHP Community Fund is dedicated to providing immediate and long-term financial, in-kind and other aid to family members who lost loved ones, those wounded and others in our community impacted by this tragedy. To designate 100% of your tax-deductible donation the Sandy Hook Promise Community Fund to support victims' families and the community, please click here. Sandy Hook Promise Action Fund is a 501(C)(4) organization. Contributions to the Action Fund are not tax deductible. Contributions will be used to: Help influence legislation (lobby) for state and federal policy changes, via Promise Communities and individuals who "make the promise", in the areas of mental well-being and gun safety. Examples of actions / costs that would be incurred include (not limited to) raising awareness, educating, engaging, meeting with legislators and/or constituents, research and preparation, advertising, paid-media, events, campaigns, social media and/or standard administrative costs.

Are donations to Sandy Hook Promise tax deductible?

Sandy Hook Promise (SHP) is comprised of two nonprofit corporations – SHP Foundation and SHP Action Fund. SHP Foundation is a 501(C)(3) organization. Contributions to the SHP Foundation are tax deductible. SHP Action Fund is a 501(C)(4) organization. Contributions to the SHP Action Fund are not tax deductible.

How can I help? How can I volunteer?

While Sandy Hook Promise was founded by citizens of Newtown, we are a national grassroots organization, and we welcome your active participation no matter where you live. We would like to encourage discussions in communities around the country, focusing on what we all can do to put an end to these violent tragedies.

If you're interested in helping or starting a dialogue in your community, please contact us at info@sandyhookpromise.org or by phone at (203) 304-9780. We would welcome your help.

What is Sandy Hook Promise's position on current gun purchase and ownership Constitutional rights and laws?

We support the 2nd Amendment. We recognize an individual's right to bear arms and support millions of law-abiding citizens in the United States who own firearms. We believe with rights come responsibilities that we all bear to ensure the safety of individuals, communities and our nation. Current laws need to be enforced and need to have loopholes closed. Where applicable, new laws should be considered where public safety and reduction in violence can be achieved without eroding 2nd Amendment rights.

Sandy Hook Promise has been supporting gun safety and responsibility policy changes at a federal and state level – what exactly do you stand for with regard to policy?

Gun safety and responsibility alone will NOT solve gun violence. SHP believes in comprehensive common sense solutions to reduce the causes of gun violence. Equal attention should be paid to issues of mental health, school safety, family and community. Again, there is no single fix; some changes require new laws, many are changes we need to make in our communities and in ourselves.

Below are current gun safety and responsibility policy changes SHP supports:

Background check should be required for every gun sale

Every individual, regardless of where or from whom they purchase a firearm, should undergo a background check to ensure that the purchaser is not a risk for perpetrating gun violence. The background check requirement for private sales should be enforceable, and States should ensure that the data they provide for the system is complete and up to date. 90% of Americans stated they support background checks; we believe Congress and state legislators should too.

Reduce capacity of ammunition magazines to 10 bullets or lower

Within four minutes, the shooter at Sandy Hook Elementary fired 154 bullets, killing 20 first grade children and six educators – our loved ones. The killer used magazines with a capacity of 30 bullets. We now know that he left less lethal, lower-capacity magazines at home. Reducing magazines to a capacity of 10 bullets or less can save innocent lives. Many of the children who escaped from one of the classrooms at Sandy Hook Elementary reportedly did so when the shooter stopped to reload. We are left to wonder how many victims – maybe our children – also might have escaped if the killer had to reload more frequently.

Firearms trafficking and straw purchases should be federal crimes

Congress should support law enforcement's efforts to get guns out of the hands of dangerous criminals by making it a crime to buy a gun for another person and by stiffening penalties for those purchasing a gun to give to a person who is prohibited by law from having a gun. The cost of continuing our willful ignorance of these evasions of our gun laws is simply too high.

SHP believes that existing laws should be better enforced, and that government needs to allocate the resources necessary to ensure that those laws are effectively implemented.