Boxer Mayweather due to begin Vegas jail sentence
Free time is about to run out for Floyd Mayweather Jr., who is due to begin a three-month jail sentence in Las Vegas stemming from a hair-pulling, arm-twisting attack in September 2010 on the mother of three of his children.

The unbeaten five-division champion's legal and ring advisers weren't immediately commenting Thursday about Mayweather's scheduled Friday morning surrender before Las Vegas Justice of the Peace Melissa Saragosa.

The judge sentenced him Dec. 22 for his guilty plea to reduced charges in the domestic battery case.

Mayweather's lawyers, Karen Winckler and Richard Wright, said previously they didn't plan to seek another postponement or delay.

Mayweather, now 35, was initially due to begin his sentence Jan. 6. But Saragosa agreed at the last minute to let him remain free long enough to fight Miguel Cotto on May 5 in Las Vegas. The fighter who goes by the nickname "Money" won the bout and a guaranteed $32 million. Cotto was paid $8 million.

Mayweather's stint in the high-rise Clark County Detention Center in Las Vegas is expected to limit his ability to train for another fight.

At least for the first week, Mayweather will be segregated for his protection from the other 3,200 inmates, Las Vegas police Officer Bill Cassell said. He'll get one hour of exercise time a day outside his cell.

Saragosa said when she sentenced Mayweather that she was particularly troubled that he threatened and hit ex-girlfriend Josie Harris while their two sons watched. The boys were 10 and 8 at the time. The older boy ran out a back door to fetch a security guard in the gated community.

However, the judge accepted the plea deal that avoided trial on felony and misdemeanor charges that could have gotten Mayweather 34 years in state prison if he had been convicted on all counts.

Mayweather's pending jail term will be capped at 87 days. Saragosa gave him credit for three days previously served.

Mayweather also was ordered to complete a yearlong domestic violence counseling program, 100 hours of community service and pay a $2,500 fine.

It was not immediately clear Thursday if those requirements had been met.

Harris's lawyer, Charles Kelly, declined to comment on Mayweather's scheduled surrender. Harris and the three children now live in Southern California.