SMO:News and Trends 04
News and Trends By Michael A. Gips In this issue:

NFPA to Revisit Standards Issue

A Few Good Women

Fraud Hits a New Key

Did You Know That...?

Home on the Page NFPA to Revisit Standards Issue Four years after scrapping a controversial plan to establish voluntary standards for premises security, the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) is revisiting the issue at a meeting this month. In anticipation of the meeting, the NFPA recently sent a mailing to those who made comments in 1995, when the issue first came up. At press time, only a handful of these players had responded, says Casey Grant, secretary of the NFPA's Standards Council. The establishment of standards for commercial establishments is being considered at the behest of the insurance industry, which was also behind the 1995 effort. Insurers say standards would help private property owners strengthen security at such places as shopping centers and hotels. But opposition from business groups that would have been affected by the standards derailed the earlier attempt. It is unclear whether battle lines will change this time around. Grant says that although some groups have been entrenched in their positions, others appear to have become open to discussion. In general, consumer groups have sided with the insurance industry, arguing that standards will reduce crime and payments on insurance claims. Advocates also contend that standards would clarify the legal landscape and help small business owners who are not well-versed in security. Allan Apo, a manager in the Insurance Services Office of the American Insurance Services Group and a major proponent of standards, compares the standards issue to the struggle that has greeted the efforts of OSHA to set security guidelines in late-night establishments, where some opponents questioned the scientific basis for the specific measures put forth. In addition, of course, "business owners are opposed to this because they have to spend money," he says. Apo will recommend that the NFPA focus on security for parking lots and garages. "I think it would be a lot less contentious than going against apartment buildings or hotels," he says. He adds that Pittsburgh and Minneapolis/St. Paul have parking lot security ordinances that could be used as a baseline. "It would be good to build on what those ordinances require right now," says Apo. The overall goal, he says, would be to "get a scientific basis for some requirements, like lighting requirements." Lining up against the standards have been the shopping center and hotel industries, real estate management organizations, and other groups on which the standards would be imposed. They argue that standards could never hope to address the particularized concerns of individual properties and would expose properties to more liability. Until the Standards Council meets on April 27 and 28, the NFPA will be in the opinion-gathering stage. "The Standards Council recognizes that this is a contentious issue," says Grant, "and it wants to solicit as much feedback as it can." Comments can be mailed to: Casey Grant, NFPA, 1 Battery March Park, Quincy, MA 02269. A Few Good Women While a few women have risen to the top of the security industry, it's still a man's world. A joint project by organizations in England, France, and Germany, however, is looking for a few good women. The goal is to make security staff distaff by encouraging women to choose careers in security and providing training to that end. The English partner in the project is SITO, a training organization whose program, Women into Security Employment (WISE), was launched at the beginning of last year. One of its first accomplishments was the publication of a guide depicting success stories of females in security, about 10,000 copies of which were sent to employment offices, colleges, security service end users, and potential employers of security personnel. According to Stefan Hay, who coordinates the program for SITO, the guide has attracted the interest of many women, and as of mid-January, 38 of 100 "beneficiaries" (specially selected women who work towards various management, supervision, and training qualifications) had been selected. Hay says that most interest in the program has come from small and medium-sized organizations with in-house staff, but that some larger companies "have used their involvement with the [program] to promote their commitment to women in the workplace." While the U.K., France, and Germany are each coordinating the project through a national training organization, those three countries have formed ten common training modules and are looking into creating joint certification. The project is scheduled to run through June 2000. @ For more details on WISE, contact Hay via Security Management Online. Fraud Hits a New Key It never fails. Emptying your pockets after a vacation or business trip, you fish out the hotel key you've forgotten to return. In fact, hotel key cards are unwittingly taken so often that thieves are taking advantage of public and industry complacency on the issue by storing stolen credit card information on the cards and using them like debit or credit cards. It works like this: a thief gets his hands on a supply of key cards, either by having a hotel employee steal a batch or by buying them. The thief then uses a commercially available decoder/ encoder to read information off a stolen credit card and transfer it to an innocent-looking hotel key card. Because the new generation of key cards is the same size as credit and debit cards, the key cards can then be used at ATMs and at point-of-sale swipe readers, where store clerks frequently do not watch patrons performing the transactions. The scam recently came to light in southern California when police searched the hideouts of Armenian gang members and found a cache of key cards from a specific hotel. According to Larry Hanna, a detective in the Las Vegas Police Department's intelligence unit who works closely with Southern California police, authorities decided to read what was encoded on the cards. They came up with credit, ATM, and debit card numbers, but no room information. Blair Abbott, a Phoenix-area detective who has been investigating this type of crime, notes that a few key cards found on a suspect will not raise the same suspicion as would several credit cards bearing different names. Having multiple hotel keys is neither illegal nor uncommon. Abbott also believes that the scheme is causing a resurgence in the use of readers that steal information from bank and credit cards at ATM machines. His firm investigated a criminal group that devised a credit card reader that could be placed over the normal credit card slot in ATMs and other card readers. The device has all the appearances of a regular card reader, but it is distinguished by protruding from the face of the ATM by several inches. Abbott adds that clever criminals have even created their own bogus ATM machines. When the card information is lifted and placed on hotel key cards, it can be used not only at point of sale and at ATMs but also in association with accomplices working at stores, banks, and credit card companies. Worse yet, the victim continues to use his or her credit card and will attest to having it when contacted by the credit card company, which delays detection of the fraud. Law enforcement has had to rely on the laziness of criminals to spot the scheme, Abbott says. Carrying several cards from the same hotel arouses suspicion, says Abbott, as does punching holes in cards and attaching them to a key chain. It is unclear how widespread the scam is, but Hanna points out that it is so well known in Glendale, California, that the police keep a reader at the booking desk to scan all confiscated hotel key cards. Abbott says that the ploy is making the rounds in New York and Chicago as well. Abbott is confident that the scam is still only in its infancy. While it started out within only a few crime rings, recently "organized crime has gotten into this in a huge way," he says. Did You Know That...? The risk of workplace violence is not being assessed at many companies, according to a survey conducted jointly by the Risk Management/Insurance Division of the American Society of Safety Engineers and the Risk and Insurance Management Society. The survey found that 70 percent of respondents have not undertaken a formal risk assessment of the potential for violence in the workplace. In addition, only 4 percent of respondents performed a psychological test on all employees as a standard part of the hiring process.

Preliminary findings of a project underway by the International Association of Chiefs of Police indicate that the rate of police use of force is 4.19 per 10,000 (or about .04 percent) responded-to calls for service. This contrasts with a 1996 estimate by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) that police used or threatened force 1 percent of the time. The BJS is currently conducting a much larger survey to reexamine the issue.

According to statistics provided by the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command, cases of information theft have spiraled from 35,000 in 1992 to 550,000 in 1998. An estimated 2 billion cases are projected for 2005.

The number of U.S. jurisdictions reporting active youth gangs decreased from 53 percent in 1996 to 51 percent in 1997, according to the latest gang survey conducted by the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention's National Youth Gang Center. The number of gang members increased in small cities and rural counties, however. Home on the Page A review of the most frequently requested reports on Security Management Online shows that readers are flocking to items about terrorism, school security, airport security, and public key infrastructure. Be sure to check not only this column but also the Web site's "Hot Topics" board to find the latest studies, reports, testimony, and other information. And look for the @ symbol throughout the magazine for mention of other online resources, all of which can be reached by going to the "Beyond Print" section of the SM Online. Here's a hint of what's in store for April. Drug control.

In the skies and on the seas, the Department of Defense (DoD) has lead responsibility for detecting illegal drug shipments to the United States. According to testimony before the House Subcommittee on Criminal Justice, Drug Policy, and Human Resources, Committee on Government Reform, DoD's efforts in Central and South America and the Caribbean have "significantly declined" since 1992. For example, an official from the General Accounting Office (GAO) recently testified that flight hours devoted to counterdrug missions fell 62 percent from 1992 through 1999. Such a dropoff has led to gaps in detection areas. The DoD attributes the drop to a budget reduction as well as a decrease in priority of counterdrug efforts vis-à-vis war, peacekeeping, and training. Finally, the GAO noted, DoD lacks a set of performance measures to evaluate counterdrug operations. SM Online has the full testimony. Bomb detection.

Thermo-redox detectors. Chemilluminescence. Field ion spectrometry. Computed tomography. These are a few of the sophisticated bomb detection technologies available, but when is a particular technology well suited for a specific use? A report by the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) evaluates technologies in terms of cost, portability, throughput, and other factors. For example, chemilluminescence detectors must be combined with a (costly) front-end gas chromatograph to identify specific explosives, and they can only detect nitro-based explosives. Field ion spectrometry, for its part, is cheap and easy to maintain, but it relies on radioactive materials. The 116-page guide(pages 1-23, pages 24-116) is on SM Online. Gangs.

A slew of Web sites contain information about gang membership, gang insignia, and other gang facts. The National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Center links to many good ones, including the Gang Resources Library (information on Aryan Nation, Mexican Mafia, and Hong Kong triads), Austin Police Department Gang Suppression Unit (basic gang facts), and Online Guide to Gangs and Graffiti (directory of gang signs and graffiti). The page of links can be reached via SM Online. Sentencing.

"You do the crime, you do the time." Catchy, yes, but do such factors as the type of sentence (confinement or noncustodial), location of confinement, length of maximum sentence imposed, and time actually confined have any effect on crime control aims such as reducing the rate of recidivism? A recent NIJ report concludes that the answer is a qualified no. Studying whether judicial sentencing decisions in New Jersey affected the criminal careers of 962 felons, the researchers found "no evidence to justify the belief that the addition of jail time to a probation sentence has a specific deterrent effect." The length of time a person served seemed only to slightly influence their tendency to return to a life of crime once back on the streets. Read the full report

online. Bank robbery.

Of the many crime reduction stories across the United States in the late 1990s, one of the most dramatic has been the plunge in violent bank robberies in Los Angeles. In 1992, Los Angeles was the site of a staggering 2,641 bank robberies. By 1998, that number had fallen to 656, the lowest since the late 1960s. At the same time, the number of violent "takeover-style" robberies decreased by two-thirds. Cooperation between law enforcement and financial institutions has been a key factor, contends William J. Rehder in a recent issue of the FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin. That cooperation served as the impetus for the widespread use of two successful antirobbery measures: bandit barriers and access control units, or mantraps. Another important factor in the decline in robberies, he argues, has been stricter sentencing, such as mandatory minimum sentences for felonies involving firearms. SM Online has the link to the article. Construction equipment.

A recent publication from the Policing and Crime Reducing Unit of the Home Office (the government department responsible for internal affairs in England and Wales) indicates that there is little security of construction equipment in the United Kingdom. According to a survey, fewer than two-thirds of respondents recorded the serial numbers on equipment, and only 22 percent used a padlock and chain to secure equipment. Site security was also weak: 20 percent of sites where equipment was stolen in 1997 used no security measures. Forty percent of these respondents fenced in their sites, but only 23 percent used lockable gates. Depot security was much stronger, according to the survey. About one-quarter of depots reported using CCTV, security lighting, and alarms, while 18 percent used guard patrols. Most equipment was likely to disappear from building and construction sites, depots, or company parking areas. The survey results are on SM Online. Hospital security.

The Protective Services Department at Grant Riverside and Methodist Hospitals in Columbus, Ohio, offers members of the community tips on preventing carjackings, sexual assaults, and other crimes. Security at the University of Utah Health Sciences Center explains its user card access policies. And the University of Oklahoma 's Health Science Campus Police and Public Safety Department details how someone should respond to a bomb threat and how to identify a mail or package bomb. Hospital security and police departments abound on the Web, using their electronic presence to spread the word about programs and prevention techniques. The site of Paoli Memorial Hospital Safety and Security (in Williston Township, Pennsylvania), reachable through SM Online, gathers links to about 30 of these departments in one place. back to Security Management Online