Sara Jane Moore, who tried to kill Ford in '75, freed on parole

Pres. Gerald Ford Assination Attempt by Sara Jane Moore at the St. Francis Hotel, Post St. entrance. Secret Service Agents hear a shot and grab Pres. Ford to push him in the armor protected limo. Photo by Gary Fong / The Chronicle. less Pres. Gerald Ford Assination Attempt by Sara Jane Moore at the St. Francis Hotel, Post St. entrance. Secret Service Agents hear a shot and grab Pres. Ford to push him in the armor protected limo. Photo by ... more Photo: Gary Fong, The Chronicle Photo: Gary Fong, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 5 Caption Close Sara Jane Moore, who tried to kill Ford in '75, freed on parole 1 / 5 Back to Gallery

Sara Jane Moore, the self-styled radical who earned an infamous role in the parlous politics of 1970s America by trying to assassinate President Gerald Ford in San Francisco, was paroled Monday from a Bay Area federal prison after serving more than 30 years, a spokesman for the federal Bureau of Prisons said.

Moore, 77, who was serving a life sentence, was released from the Federal Correctional Institution in Dublin, and it was not immediately known where she went, bureau spokesman Mike Truman said. She will be under supervised parole for at least five years, federal authorities said.

Her attempt on Ford's life came less than three weeks after Lynette "Squeaky" Fromme, a devotee of Charles Manson, mastermind of the 1969 Tate-LaBianca murders in Los Angeles, also tried to kill Ford, pulling out a handgun but failing to get off a shot when he made an appearance in Sacramento.

Moore was released under a federal law that makes parole mandatory for inmates who have served at least 30 years of a life sentence without getting into trouble, according to Thomas Hutchison, chief of staff of the U.S. Parole Commission.

Fromme, now 59, is serving a life sentence at the Federal Medical Center in Carswell, Texas. Hutchison said he had no knowledge of any parole hearing for Fromme.

Under legislation enacted more than two decades ago, federal prisoners who committed offenses after Oct. 31, 1987, are no longer paroled. That was more than 12 years after Moore secured a spot in California's Rogues' Gallery with her attempt to kill Ford.

On Sept. 22, 1975, she fired a shot at the president from a .38-caliber handgun outside the Post Street door of the St. Francis Hotel, but her aim was deflected by Oliver Sipple, a bystander who grabbed her arm.

Sipple, a disabled ex-Marine, was widely credited with saving Ford's life. Sipple's life took its own twist when news reports mentioned that he was gay. He sued for invasion of privacy and lost. Sipple died in 1989.

Ford died of natural causes at age 93 on Dec. 26, 2006.

When Ford appeared in San Francisco only 17 days after Fromme had tried to kill him, security was tight.

"The Secret Service was not allowing any (reporters and photographers) close to him because of the Sacramento attempt," Gary Fong, a former Chronicle photographer who was waiting that day to take pictures of Ford outside the hotel, said Monday.

Fong said he was trying to look like a tourist in order to get closer to the presidential entourage.

"When the president started to come out of the hotel, he headed to his car and I heard a shot or two," Fong said. "I thought it was firecrackers. The Secret Service man nearest me opened up his coat and grabbed his weapon, but he didn't draw. A lady in front of me stood up, and I couldn't see the president. I raised the camera above my head and fired off three frames."

By then, Fong said, "the president was taken up by the Secret Service and thrown in the car. They jumped on him and took off." Fong's photos, one of which clearly shows Ford ducking the bullet, were later published in Life magazine.

Moore's attempt to kill Ford was part of a string of bizarre crimes in Northern California.

On Feb. 4, 1974, a group of revolutionaries called the Symbionese Liberation Army kidnapped newspaper heiress Patricia Hearst, who morphed into a machine-gun-wielding terrorist and joined her captors for more than 19 months on the run. (The Hearst Corp. now owns The Chronicle.)

When the SLA demanded that Hearst's father, Randolph Hearst, feed poor people, a $2 million food giveaway program called "People In Need" was created.

Moore, an accountant who was already steeped in the Bay Area's radical politics, volunteered to be the group's bookkeeper. At the time, she was also an FBI informant, but apparently never rose far in the bureau's arsenal of snitches. That was in early 1974.

On Sept. 5, 1975, Fromme made the first assassination attempt on Ford. Thirteen days later, Hearst and the remaining SLA members were captured in San Francisco. Four days later, Moore tried to shoot Ford.

She eventually pleaded guilty in federal court to attempting to assassinate Ford and in January 1976 was sentenced to life in prison. She spent the next 31 years in obscurity, her existence punctuated occasionally by reminders of her erstwhile notoriety.

According to the Los Angeles Times, she asked rhetorically at her sentencing: "Am I sorry I tried? Yes and no. Yes, because it accomplished little except to throw away the rest of my life. And, no, I'm not sorry I tried, because at the time it seemed a correct expression of my anger."

In trying to describe Moore's thinking, one of her public defenders, Frank Bell, told the Times that "her conduct was sort of a shopping list: 'Take my son to school, shoot the president, pick up my son from school."

Today, she looks like a kind, doting grandmother and would probably blend in at a library social.

Asked a year ago about her attempt to kill Ford, Moore told KGO-TV, "I am very glad I did not succeed. I know now that I was wrong to try."