Concord Molest Victim Confronts `Powder' Director / Actor protests at Disney screening

'Powder," a new drama from Walt Disney's Hollywood Pictures, is creating an uproar because of the criminal record of the film's writer-director, Victor Salva. In 1988, Salva was convicted of molesting Concord actor Nathan Forrest Winters over a four-year period starting when the boy was 8 years old.

On Monday, Winters flew to Los Angeles to picket an advance screening of "Powder," which the studio plans to release in 1,200 theaters on Friday.

Accompanied by five friends, who held signs saying "Victor Salva: Writer, Director, Child Molester" and "Support the Victim, not the Victimizer," Winters passed out leaflets and spoke to the crowd as it exited the theater.

"Please don't spend your money on this movie," the leaflets urged. "It would just go to line the pockets of this child molester."

"I needed to face this," Winters said in an interview yesterday. "I've lived through years and years and years of pain and trauma. I'm being healed daily: It's unreal the amount of stuff that's built up all these years that's starting to be released. But it doesn't work like, 'Boom! -- I'm OK now.' "

PART-TIME PRINTER

Winters, 20, who hasn't acted since starring in Salva's first feature film, "Clownhouse," works part time as a screen printer at his stepfather's sign shop in Martinez.

Salva, 37, was arrested on three counts of felony child molestation in 1987 in the seduction of Winters. When police raided Salva's house, they found homemade pornographic tapes, one showing Salva having oral sex with Winters.

Although Salva served 15 months of a three-year prison sentence, completed parole in 1992 and claims to have "paid for my mistakes dearly," his former victim isn't about to forget.

"We've been through hell," said Winters' mother, Rebecca Winters, describing the four years of sexual abuse her son suffered.

Rated PG-13, "Powder" is the story of a ghostly pale young man (Sean Patrick Flanery), sheltered since birth in his grandparents' cellar, who meets rejection when he goes to school. Mary Steenburgen and Jeff Goldblum play sympathetic teachers. The protest could embarrass Disney, a studio known for wholesome family entertainment. The Winters' decision to protest "Powder," and to expose Salva to continued scrutiny, also raises questions about the rights of former sex offenders to privacy and self-respect.

A statement released by Salva yesterday began, "How deeply I regret my actions," and went on to say, "I paid for my mistakes dearly. Now, nearly 10 years later, I am excited about my work as a film maker and look forward to continuing to make a positive contribution to our society."

"He paid for his crime, he paid his debt to society," said Roger Birnbaum, whose Caravan Pictures made "Powder" for Disney and reportedly didn't know of Salva's record until the film was midway through production. "What happened eight years ago has nothing to do with this movie."

Rebecca Winters disagrees. "People have said, 'Get a life. Victor served his time.' But he hasn't paid his dues. Victor served 1 1/2 years of a three-year sentence. What's that in comparison to a lifetime of pain?"

According to a 1988 state Justice Department study, almost half of all sex offenders are rearrested.

REGISTERING WHEREABOUTS

California is among 46 states that require sex offenders to register their whereabouts with police for the rest of their lives.

Rebecca Winters, 41, denies that she and her family are vindictive. "We're only concerned with the past, present and future victims of Victor," she said. "People need to be forewarned."

"I'm not saying he should never work again," added Nathan Winters. "That's up to his employers. But I don't think he deserves to be around any children under the age of 25. Period. End of story."

Rebecca Winters met Salva in 1981 when he was working at a day-care center where one of her friends had a daughter enrolled.

"He was making his own little video, called 'The Goblins' God,' and I was helping to sculpt the goblin's face," she said. Salva became a "trusted family friend" and in 1986 directed "Something in the Basement," a 35-minute video that starred her son.

That video was entered in a national home-video competition sponsored by Sony and the American Film Institute and drew the attention of Francis Ford Coppola, who hired Salva to make "Clownhouse" for his company, Commercial Pictures.

Coppola would not comment when asked yesterday for a statement on Salva and the Winters' protest.

In "Clownhouse," which screened at the Sundance Film Festival in the late 1980s and is available on video, Nathan Winters played Casey, the youngest of three brothers. Casey is bullied by his older brothers because of his fear of clowns, but his fears prove prescient when a group of escaped convicts, disguised as clowns, terrorize him and his brothers.

Nathan Winters said Salva has talent as a film maker, "but that doesn't change the fact of what he is. . . .

"I'd known Victor two years before he tried anything sexual. I loved him like a father. I didn't have a strong male influence (Winters was raised by a stepfather and has never known his biological father), and that's what Victor was using against me -- that kind of trust and love that I was lacking."