Russians say 'nyet' to McCain fund-raising appeal
The Russians have turned down John McCain's request for campaign money - and had a bit of a laugh at his expense.

- McCain snubbed

- Money to 'defeat Obama'

- Fundraising blunder

SHARE

Share on Facebook SHARE

Share on Twitter TWEET

Link John McCain (right) addresses a rally in Missouri. Inset: Vitaly Churkin (left). Photo: AFP

Their public snub is a comeback to the Republican candidate's increasingly tough stance against Russia.

Russia's ambassador to the United Nations, Vitaly Churkin, received a fund-raising appeal from the Republican presidential nominee on Thursday, spokesman Ruslan Bakhtin said.

"Dear Friend," begins the six-page letter sent to Mr Churkin, asking for up to $US5,000 ($A7,095) to defeat Senator Barack Obama and help Senator McCain "promote freedom and democracy throughout the world", according to a copy of the letter provided to The Associated Press by the Russian mission.

Senator McCain has proposed expelling Russia from the Group of Eight world's major industrial nations and says Russia deserves international condemnation for its August war with Georgia.

Advertisement

He also has derided President George Bush for once saying he got a sense of Russian leader Vladimir Putin's soul the first time they met and locked eyes in 2001.

"I looked in Putin's eyes. I saw three letters: a K, a G and a B," Senator McCain said last year, referring to Putin's time in the Soviet Union's KGB security agency.

That approach has angered Moscow. Last month in New York, Russia's Foreign Minister, Sergei Lavrov, cast Senator McCain's foreign policy adviser, Henry Kissinger, as essentially clueless about the history behind the Georgian conflict.

The McCain campaign's fund-raising letter, dated September 29, did not use Mr Churkin's formal title.

That led Mr Churkin to conclude the request stemmed from "a computer failure" by Senator McCain's campaign, Bakhtin said.

"It's evident that it was a mistake. It happens," said Mr Bakhtin, who said the diplomats were entertained by the mix-up.

"Normally, they don't circulate these kinds of letters to diplomatic posts."

Mr Bakhtin emphasised that the "Russian authorities are in no way engaged in funding political campaigns or political activities abroad".

He said the mission had not sent any direct reply to the McCain campaign.

Brian Rogers, a spokesman for the campaign, said he was unable to pinpoint what caused the blunder.

"It sounds like they might have been sent to the wrong place. We obviously don't solicit campaign contributions from people who aren't able to contribute," he said.

US presidential campaigns are legally barred from accepting foreign contributions.

AP