Hillary Clinton Leaves 9/11 Ceremony Due to ‘Medical Episode’
Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign confirmed that the candidate departed sooner than planned from a 9/11 commemorative ceremony in New York City on 11 September 2016, due to a health problem the statement described as “feeling overheated”:

Secretary Clinton attended the September 11th Commemoration Ceremony for just one hour and 30 minutes this morning to pay her respects and greet some of the families of the fallen. During the ceremony, she felt overheated so departed to go to her daughter’s apartment, and is feeling much better.

The statement was issued in response to earlier, unconfirmed reports that Clinton had fainted and was rushed from the scene after being helped into a limousine by members of her security detail. A video posted to Twitter shows Clinton appearing to stumble as she stepped off the curb to enter the vehicle:

Hillary Clinton 9/11 NYC pic.twitter.com/q9YnsjTxss — Zdenek Gazda (@zgazda66) September 11, 2016

According to NBC News, Clinton was seen two hours later outside Chelsea Clinton’s Manhattan apartment, “walking on her own, and waved at the gathered crowds, saying, ‘It’s a beautiful day in New York.'” A video tweeted by ABC News reporter Liz Kreutz shows Clinton walking, unaided, to her vehicle:

Here is Hillary Clinton leaving Chelsea’s apartment. (A little girl came up to give her a hug) pic.twitter.com/VreSXmT1Yh — Liz Kreutz (@ABCLiz) September 11, 2016

Later in the afternoon, the New York Times reported that Clinton’s personal physician had released a statement saying the former secretary of state was suffering from pneumonia:

[J]ust after 5 p.m., a campaign official said Mrs. Clinton’s physician, Dr. Lisa R. Bardack, had examined the candidate at her home in Chappaqua, and Dr. Bardack said in a statement that Mrs. Clinton was “rehydrated and recovering nicely.” “Secretary Clinton has been experience a cough related to allergies,” Dr. Bardack’s statement said, adding that on Friday morning, after a prolonged cough, Mrs. Clinton was given a diagnosis of pneumonia. “She was put on antibiotics, and advised to rest and modify her schedule,” Dr. Bardack added. “At this morning’s event, she became overheated and dehydrated.”

A planned two-day campaign trip to California has been canceled, the Clinton campaign said.

Despite receiving a thorough examination and clean bill of health last year from Dr. Bardack, speculation about Clinton’s medical fitness has run rampant during the 2016 presidential campaign, with some sources claiming she suffers from seizures, others purporting to spot evidence of brain damage, and still others diagnosing her from afar with Parkinson’s disease. Opposing GOP candidate Donald Trump has played a major role in fomenting such speculation.