Douglas Hurt in Fatal Air Crash : Santa Paula: Two men die when a helicopter carrying the actor collides with a small plane after lifting off.

The third occupant of the helicopter, Beverly Hills Police Officer Michael Carra, was treated at Santa Paula Memorial for cuts and bruises and released.

Also aboard the copter was Noel Blanc, 52, son of the late Mel Blanc, the legendary master of cartoon voices. Blanc was in serious condition in the intensive-care unit of the Santa Paula hospital with chest injuries and a leg fracture. Blanc, also a cartoon voice and producer of commercials, owned the helicopter and reportedly was at the controls.

Douglas, 72, was taken first to Santa Paula Memorial Hospital and later was flown to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, where he was listed in satisfactory condition Wednesday night. Officials in Santa Paula said he suffered head cuts and a possible broken rib.

Two men were killed and three others, including actor Kirk Douglas, were injured Wednesday when a helicopter and a small plane collided above Santa Paula Airport.

Both men on the plane were killed. Witnesses identified the pilot as 46-year-old Lee Manelski of Santa Paula, a veteran stunt-flying instructor and airline pilot. His passenger was an 18-year-old man, officials said, but they withheld his name pending notification of relatives.

The crash occurred about 3:30 p.m. just after the Bell JetRanger helicopter carrying Douglas, Blanc and Carra lifted off the airport helipad. Instead of heading south over the Santa Clara riverbed--the normal route for helicopters--it apparently flew north over the airport's only runway and into the path of a Pitts Aerobatic that was taking off with Manelski and the other man.

"The plane attempted to take evasive action and hit the rotors of the helicopter," said Bill Nash, a spokesman for the Santa Paula Fire Department.

The silver-colored helicopter, minus a rotor, plunged 20 to 40 feet, hit the runway and turned on its side. The red, white and blue plane crashed about 200 feet farther down the runway before flipping over and bursting into flames.

"As the airplane came down, little pieces began flying around the runway," said Ramon Plascencia, an airport employee. "There was some fire coming out of it. Then it exploded. They never had a chance."

It took firefighters with chain saws 90 minutes to remove the bodies from the wreckage of the plane.

A paramedic at the scene said Douglas, Blanc and Carra were disoriented and told him that they didn't know what had happened. "They knew there was an accident but not why it happened," paramedic Jason Johnson said.

But Police Sgt. Mark Trimble said all three men were alert and talking with hospital staff when they arrived about 4 p.m.

Investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board are expected to examine the crash scene today, Santa Paula Police Chief Walt Adair said.

The airport, a general-aviation field on the southern edge of Santa Paula, is an uncontrolled facility with no tower or air-traffic controllers, officials said.

At uncontrolled airports, there is a single radio frequency by which all pilots are supposed to communicate, reporting their location and intentions--"Pitts N1234 departing runway 2," for example.