World View : Slavery, 20th-Century Style : In the Third World, bonded labor and child exploitation are widespread. Debt and greed set the trap; family burdens often perpetuate it.

Mukda was never allowed to leave the brothel, kept imprisoned behind a barbed-wire fence with a constant threat of beatings. When a Times reporter found her during a police raid, she was curled up with 23 other girls on a foul-smelling floor of what looked like a stall in a stable.

Every night, seven days a week, Mukda was forced to sleep with five or six men. The $1 per customer she earned was written down in a ledger, to be offset against the amount paid to her stepfather.

Eight months earlier, she had been brought to Bangkok from her village near the Myanmar border and sold to a brothel by her stepfather.

BANGKOK, Thailand — With her cherubic face, purple T-shirt and jeans, Mukda looks like a fairly typical 14-year-old from the rural areas of Thailand. She stands barely 4 1/2 feet tall and giggles bashfully when asked a personal question.

"I want to go back to my village," she said in a tiny voice. "I'm afraid."

Slavery. It sounds like a relic of the distant past, a dinosaur of human behavior found in dramas like "Roots" and "Gone with the Wind." But more than a century after Lincoln freed the slaves in America, slavery in various forms is still widespread in the developing world.

"People in the West are told in school that slavery was abolished long ago, but sadly there are more slaves now than ever before," said Alan Whittaker, a spokesman for Anti-Slavery International, a London-based group founded in 1839 to fight the traffic in slaves from Africa.

"Today's slaves are not made by iron chains, they are made by debt and exploitation," Whittaker said in a telephone interview.

These days, it is relatively rare to find old forms of slavery in which people are sold at auction. So the focus of current anti-slavery efforts is aimed at ending the practice of bonded labor, where a worker spends years struggling to repay a debt, and the exploitation of child labor at little or no wages.

Forced labor is prohibited by a United Nations convention, as is hazardous work for children under 18 and most other jobs for children under 15. Throughout the developing world, child laborers are prized for working cheap and raising few objections to their working conditions.

The worst examples of existing slavery are in India, where there are an estimated 5 million people working in bonded labor, mainly in agricultural jobs. Although the practice has been outlawed since 1976, the law is apparently rarely enforced.

Poor farm workers have no assets, so when they need to borrow money for medicine, a funeral or other emergencies, they have to mortgage their labor. The practice is common in Pakistan and Bangladesh as well.

"They live in hovels like animals. Once they get into the hands of unscrupulous landlords, it's almost impossible to get out," said Swami Agnivesh, head of the Bonded Labor Liberation Front in New Delhi.

The debts, often as little as $25, can nonetheless take up to 50 years to pay off because of usurious interest rates. Some debts are even passed from generation to generation--Agnivesh said his group had seen cases of seventh- or eighth-generation descendants working to pay off loans.