FACT CHECK: Marilyn Monroe's Toes
Claim: Marilyn Monroe had six toes on each foot.



Status: False.

Origins: Despite the way this “fact” about Marilyn Monroe’s toes is usually worded, the real issue is not whether she had six toes on each foot — she didn’t. The claim, which is traceable to a specific source,

is that she was born polydactyl, but with only one extra digit: a sixth toe on her left foot, which was supposedly surgically removed early on in her Hollywood career.

This claim originated with photographer Joseph Jasgur, who in March 1946 (as a favor to a friend who ran a modeling agency) took some test shots of a nineteen-year-old model named Norma Jean Dougherty. Young Norma Jean, of course, would later become one of the twentieth century’s most famous women under the name Marilyn Monroe.

Most of Jasgur’s pictures of a teenaged Marilyn Monroe remained unpublished for over forty years, until he finally assembled them for a book entitled The Birth of Marilyn: The Lost Photographs of Norma Jean. It was only then, four decades after the fact, that Jasgur noticed his photographic work revealed a previously undisclosed physical feature of the young Marilyn: she had an extra toe on her left foot. As the text of his book explained:





It wasn’t until 41 years later when Joseph Jasgur was alone in his darkroom making prints of that day’s excursion that he noticed something odd about Normal Jean’s left foot. She had six toes. A surprising discovery, he thought, but not earth-shaking. He had heard rumours of plastic surgery on her foot as well as her nose and chin, but he notes, “It’s none of my business.”





Despite Jasgur’s “It’s none of my business” disclaimer, his publisher made the most of the situation, using the photo in “What’s wrong with this picture?” publicity campaign to promote his book. The photograph was also published in the British tabloid Daily Mirror, and it was denounced as a hoax by many Marilyn devotees.

So, did she or didn’t she? Here is the relevant portion of the photograph upon which this rumor is based, and a second (less clear) photograph from the same session:









It does look a bit like Marilyn has more than the usual five toes in these pictures, but later photographs clearly show her left foot with only five toes, however:

The notion that Marilyn was born with an extra digit which was later surgically removed is bunk, and the appearance of a “sixth toe” Jasgur’s photos show is merely an artifact of the blending of shadows and light making the natural bulge that appears at the base of one’s small toe (where the digit joins the outer edge of the foot) look somewhat like an extra toe. Nothing other than these questionable photographs supports the claim:



There is no documentation to show that anybody who knew Marilyn when she was young (e.g., her mother, the foster parents and relatives with whom she lived, her first husband) ever mentioned anything about her having been born with an extra toe.

No other photographs showing a young Marilyn with an extra toe on one foot have come to light.

There is no explanation for how the young Marilyn Monroe, living hand to mouth and still years away from being a star, was able to afford the surgery required to “correct” this condition.

There is no record of Marilyn’s having had an operation at that point in her life, and no contemporary references to anyone’s noticing her walking with a bandaged foot or a limp for a period of time. (One doesn’t simply get up and start trotting around after having a toe removed — the missing digit affects one’s balance, and it takes some time to adjust to the change and “relearn” how to walk.)

missing digit affects one’s balance, and it takes some time to adjust to the change and “relearn” how to walk.) Nobody who knew Marilyn later in life (e.g., husbands, lovers, friends, doctors, fellow actors and actresses) stated that she confided she had been born with an extra toe which was subsequently removed. This “fact” isn’t mentioned in any known article or biography of Marilyn, even as an unsubstantiated rumor.



In short, the one and only piece of supporting evidence for the “sixth toe” claim is Jasgur’s photograph, which is far from clear. And even Jasgur himself didn’t notice the extra digit, either at the time he took the photographs or after he developed them — he spotted it only (somewhat conveniently) when he had a book coming out. Moreover, other photographs taken by Jasgur at the same time reveal a left foot that looks decidedly normal:

Marilyn Monroe may indeed have been “the girl with something extra,” but the extra something in this case doesn’t appear to have been a toe.

Last updated: 10 August 2007









Sources:



Hattenstone, Simon. “Arts: Chasing Shadows – Screen Diary”

The [London] Guardian. 4 July 1991.

Kotsilibas-Davies, James. Milton’s Marilyn: The Photographs of Milton H. Greene.

New York: Schirmer/Mosel, 1998. ISBN 3-8238-0366-2.

Sakol, Jeannie. The Birth of Marilyn: The Lost Photographs of Norma Jean by Joseph Jasgur.

New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991. ISBN 0-312-06770-4.

Steinem, Gloria. Marilyn.

New York: MJF Books, 1986. ISBN 1-56731-125-3.

The [London] Times. “Diary.”

30 June 1991.

The Toronto Star. “Diamonds Aren’t Forever.”