Hillary Clinton spends day courting key Democratic voter groups in Broward
Hillary Clinton spent much of Sunday in Broward County, appearing before enthusiastic audiences in an attempt to ramp up excitement among black voters and gay voters — two demographic groups that could make the difference in whether she wins Florida — and imploring those who say they want her to beat Donald Trump to back up their words with actual votes.

She didn't devote time at any of her stops — two in Fort Lauderdale, one in Pompano Beach and one in Wilton Manors — to the controversy swirling over what the FBI director said Friday were emails that might be pertinent to its past investigation of Clinton's email practices.

Clinton promised a presidency that would bring people together. And she excoriated Trump.

At New Mount Olive Baptist Church in the historically black northwest section of Fort Lauderdale, hundreds of congregants leapt to their feet, cheered and pulled out smart phones to record Clinton's arrival in the sanctuary shortly after noon for an appearance that wasn't announced in advance by the campaign.

Later, at the Manor, a nightclub transformed overnight to a rally site in the unofficial capital of South Florida's gay community, Clinton appealed for votes from the LGBT community before a crowd that was often raucous.

CAPTION Jim DeFede Takes A Look Jim DeFede Takes A Look CAPTION Jim DeFede Takes A Look Jim DeFede Takes A Look CAPTION Silva Harapetian Reports Silva Harapetian Reports CAPTION Jim DeFede Takes A Look Jim DeFede Takes A Look CAPTION Supporters watch election results at a Trump watch party in Elmhurst. Nov. 8, 2016. (Chris Walker / Chicago Tribune) Supporters watch election results at a Trump watch party in Elmhurst. Nov. 8, 2016. (Chris Walker / Chicago Tribune) CAPTION Trump was slightly ahead most of the evening, but the contest was so close news organizations didn't declare a winner even when results were in from 99 percent of the state's precincts. Trump was slightly ahead most of the evening, but the contest was so close news organizations didn't declare a winner even when results were in from 99 percent of the state's precincts.

Equality was a constant in both speeches, though she tailored her remarks to the different audiences, discussing scripture at church, but not at the gay rally. She discussed anti-LGBT discrimination and same-sex marriage at the Wilton Manors club, but not at church.

"There's a place in America for every one of us. Everyone deserves to have a place and we're not going to shy away from taking on injustice, and that includes systemic racism, sexism, prejudice against other people. Because when someone can be treated with bigotry and discrimination, that opens the door for everyone then to be subject to the same kind of mistreatment," she said at New Mount Olive.

In Wilton Manors, she declared "Donald Trump has a terrible record on LGBT rights." Clinton said the choice in the election is to continue progress "or let it be ripped away."

She said Trump would overturn Obama executive orders protecting LGBT people from discrimination and could jeopardize same-sex marriage because he would nominate "anti-marriage equality" justices to the U.S. Supreme Court.

Clinton promised to push for a federal law banning anti-LGBT discrimination, to work for an "AIDS-free generation," to promote LGBT rights internationally and to end the controversial practice called "conversion therapy" designed to change a person's sexual orientation. "LGBT kids don't need to be cured of anything. They just need to be accepted," she said.

Broward, which is home to the largest pool of Democrats in the state, is critical for the party's hopes of winning statewide. And Florida, which awards 29 of the 270 votes needed to win the presidency, is important to both campaigns.

An NBC News/Wall Street Journal/Marist poll released Sunday shows the state is a toss-up. The poll found 45 percent support Clinton while 44 percent support Trump. Libertarian Gary Johnson has 5 percent and Green Party candidate Jill Stein has 2 percent. The margin of error in the poll is plus or minus 4 percentage points.

Campaign schedules show how important Florida is to Clinton. In the past week, she has Clinton has campaigned in Broward, Palm Beach, Miami-Dade and Volusia counties. She'll be back in Broward, plus Tampa Bay and the Orlando area on Tuesday.

Also Tuesday, former President Bill Clinton will campaign on his wife's behalf in Miami-Dade, Collier and Pinellas counties. On Wednesday, Vice President Joe Biden will campaign on her behalf in Tampa area and in Palm Beach County. And on Thursday, President Barack Obama is scheduled to campaign for her in the Jacksonville area and in South Florida.

The Republican vice presidential nominee, Mike Pence, has three rallies scheduled for Florida on Monday, in Cocoa in Brevard County, in Maitland in Orange County, and in Clearwater in Pinellas County.

On Sunday, Broward was Clinton's focus.

With U.S. Rep. Alcee Hastings, a longtime Clinton supporter and civil rights veteran sitting nearby, Pastor Marcus Davidson told his congregants at New Mount Olive that he couldn't tell them who to vote for. But, he said, he's already voted for Clinton.

The candidate told stories that showed her empathy with the congregation, many of whose members come from poor communities.

She spoke about her mother, who was abandoned as a child and had to struggle to get an education. "Scripture tells us to rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance and endurance produces character and character produces hope," she said.

She described her meetings with women called Mothers of the Movement, whose children have been killed by gun violence or during incidents involving police. She promised to "fix our criminal justice system from end to end," and enact "common sense gun safety reform." She said she would devote federal money to supporting historically black colleges and universities.

The loudest cheers for Clinton, along with a standing ovation, came when she praised Obama. "I am going to defend President Barack Obama's legacy."

She was much more pointed about Trump in Wilton Manors than at the Fort Lauderdale church.

"It's time for him to stop fear-mongering. Stop distracting from what's really at stake," she said, calling on Trump to "stop disgracing our democracy."

"With Donald Trump, it's always Donald Trump first and everyone else last," Clinton said. "He abuses his power and he games the system and he doesn't care who's left holding the bag."