Florida should restore ex-felon voting rights
While nearly three million Floridians voted in Tuesday's state primary, 1.6 million citizens of voting age were locked out of the polls.

These disenfranchised Floridians have felony convictions in their backgrounds, and haven't had their right to vote restored.

Other states bar felons from voting, but most automatically restore that right after they have paid their debt to society by completing their sentences.

Florida's hard line toward former felons voting isn't just anti-democratic. It disproportionately punishes black residents by disqualifying nearly one in four of them from casting ballots — prolonging a shameful legacy of policies concocted to disenfranchise African-Americans that began after the Civil War.

It also discourages ex-felons' rehabilitation by excluding them from the most basic act of civic engagement. Darryl Paulson, a retired University of South Florida professor and fellow at the conservative Heritage Foundation, recently told the Miami Herald, "If conservatives want to end recidivism and reintegrate felons into society, the restoration of voting rights is essential." The same logic has led the International Association of Chiefs of Police to support restoration of voting and other civil rights for felons once they complete their sentences.

CAPTION Final recap of primary night in South Florida from Sun Sentinel Opinion. Final recap of primary night in South Florida from Sun Sentinel Opinion. CAPTION Final recap of primary night in South Florida from Sun Sentinel Opinion. Final recap of primary night in South Florida from Sun Sentinel Opinion. CAPTION CBS Miami’s Eliott Rodriguez reports. CBS Miami’s Eliott Rodriguez reports. CAPTION Wasserman Schultz Wins Her Florida Democratic Primary. Wasserman Schultz Wins Her Florida Democratic Primary. CAPTION Primary day recap with the Sun Sentinel Editorial Board: Marco Rubio and Patrick Murphy will face off in November Senate race. Primary day recap with the Sun Sentinel Editorial Board: Marco Rubio and Patrick Murphy will face off in November Senate race. CAPTION Primary day recap with the Sun Sentinel Editorial Board: How did you vote? Primary day recap with the Sun Sentinel Editorial Board: How did you vote?

Finally, the policy mocks the principles of liberty and minimal government regulation espoused by its defenders, the state's Republican leaders. Instead of hindering ex-felons from voting because they might support Democrats, GOP leaders should be working harder to convince them that their interests — starting with a stronger state economy that creates more opportunities — would be best advanced by voting Republican.

Florida is one of just three states — Iowa and Kentucky are the others — that disenfranchises ex-felons unless their right to vote has been restored through a clemency process. Before that process can even begin in Florida, ex-felons must wait at least five years after completing a sentence, probation and parole, and making restitution. If they were convicted of a violent, sexual or drug-trafficking offense, they must wait seven years. Then, in a procedure heavy on forms and certified documents, they must petition and persuade the governor and the Florida Cabinet, who meet only four times a year as the state Clemency Board, to restore their right to vote.

The process was less onerous under former Gov. Charlie Crist. The Clemency Board automatically restored voting and other civil rights for nonviolent felons who had served their time. More than 155,000 regained their right to vote during Crist's term.

But after he was elected, Gov. Rick Scott embraced a move from newly elected Attorney General Pam Bondi to impose the current process, with its years of delay and burdensome paperwork. As a result, only 2,200 felons have regained the right to vote since Scott took office in 2011. A waiting list has grown to more than 10,000.

A citizens' group called the Florida Rights Restoration Coalition is now collecting signatures to put a constitutional amendment on the ballot that would automatically restore voting rights to felons who have completed their sentences, including prison time, parole and probation. In a concession to political reality, the amendment wouldn't restore the right to anyone convicted of murder or serious sex crimes.

A citizens' effort to restore the right to vote to ex-felons is commendable. But Scott, Bondi and other Cabinet members — CFO Jeff Atwater and Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam — really should be leading it.