Most Media Outlets Aren't Reporting on the Disappearance of Black and Latinx D.C. Teens
A series of viral tweets is bringing attention to 10 young people of color who were reported missing in Washington, D.C., over the past 10 days.

On Sunday night, Twitter user @BlackMarvelGirl tweeted photos and information about eight black teenage girls who've gone missing in the Washington, D.C., area over the past week, receiving more than 35,000 retweets in less than 12 hours.

Additionally, The Root reported that in the past 10 days alone, 10 young people of color have been reported missing in D.C. but haven't received much media attention other than local news outlet mentions and tweets from the Washington, D.C., police department. Currently, 15-year-old Jacqueline Lassey, 13-year-old Yahshaiyah Enoch, 15-year-old Antwan Jordan, 15-year-old Juliana Otero, 15-year-old Dashann Trikia Wallace, 13-year-old Aniya McNeil, 15-year-old Dayanna White, 16-year-old Talisha Coles, and 15-year-old Morgan Richardson are all still missing.

The city of Washington, D.C., also seems to have a larger problem with missing young people, specifically young women; at one point in January 2017, there were as many as 15 open cases involving missing girls in the area at one time, FOX 5 reported.

Why aren't larger outlets talking about these teenagers as well as this pattern? Yesha Callahan of The Root asks how often cases like this are given the spotlight in comparison with cases featuring young, attractive white women. This phenomenon, first called "missing white woman syndrome" by PBS reporter Gwen Ifill, occurs when the mainstream media gives more attention and preference to covering the cases of young, white, and attractive women from middle-class or upper-class upbringings rather than people of color or others who don't fit that criteria. Well-known cases of nearly nonstop coverage include Natalee Holloway, who disappeared on a trip to Aruba in 2005 following her high school graduation, and Elizabeth Smart, who was kidnapped as a teenager in 2002 before being rescued nine months later.

If you have information on the missing teenagers, call the Washington, D.C., Police Department at (202) 727-9099. You can also check out Black & Missing Foundation, which seeks to offer more visibility for black people reported missing in the U.S.

Related: Meet 17 Black Leaders, Creatives, and Entrepreneurs Who Are Ready to Change the World

Check this out: