Tenth of Italian MPs in trouble with law
Almost one in 10 members of the Italian parliament is either on trial, awaiting an appeal, or has a conviction, only a decade after the political classes were purged by anti-corruption prosecutors.

Italy is also served by 25 MPs who have criminal convictions, the highest number ever recorded.

Research by the authors of a new book shows that another eight politicians have been sentenced but are awaiting appeal, a process that can take years, while 17 are on trial and 19 under investigation.

Italians believe that most of the people involved in running the state are furbi, or cunning, and politicians are sometimes described as diversamente onesti, or "differently honest".

But the scale of the problem appeared to have taken the authors by surprise.

"This is a percentage we do not even see in the famously criminal estates, such as the Zen Estate in Sicily, or in Scampia in Naples," said Marco Travaglio, one of the authors of Honourable Men Wanted, which lists charges against more than 80 MPs.

More than 3,000 politicians and state officials were put on trial for corruption during the "Clean Hands" campaign by prosecutors in the 1990s.

Bettino Craxi, then prime minister, was found guilty of taking huge bribes, which he labelled "the cost of politics". Silvio Berlusconi, the former prime minister defeated in the polls by Romani Prodi last April, faced a string of judicial investigations while in office.

Another 10 MPs were saved because the statute of limitations expired on their trial.

Mr Travaglio said a subdivision of the legal profession has emerged to help defendants delay trials until the allotted time to try them runs out. The disclosures came as parliament debated whether to grant a nationwide amnesty to the perpetrators of financial crimes and corruption, two of the most common offences among MPs.

This would free Mr Berlusconi's former lawyer, Cesare Previti, from house arrest. He is an MP despite his conviction for giving money to a judge.

"It has never happened before that an MP should be under house arrest," said Mr Travaglio.

A pardon would excuse the 18 MPs who have been accused of corruption, the 16 of illicit financing, the 10 of fraud and the nine for abuse of office and false accounting.

Most of the MPs involved are members of Mr Berlusconi's Forza Italia party and most, notably Mr Berlusconi and Mr Previti, have denied the charges and claimed that cases have been trumped up as part of a political vendetta.

However, Mr Prodi's ruling Left-wing coalition also contributes 17 names to the list.

Antonio Di Pietro, the former magistrate who is now infrastructure minister, is leading the fight against any pardon for financial crimes, which he said was being engineered by Mr Berlusconi's party.

"Why is there a need to insert into the pardon those who have committed crimes of corruption, misappropriation and bribery, as well as stealing money from the state?" he said yesterday.

Mr Travaglio said the revealing statistics were a direct result of Italy's electoral system. In April's general election, the public was asked to vote only for a party, rather than for a local MP. Based on the results, their MP was assigned later by party chiefs.

"This is a very Italian thing," he said.