MH17: the clues which may lead to missile launch site
Blackened grains of wheat mark where the heat must have been fiercest.

Among the scorched grass, melted fragments of plastic and discarded bottles litter the ground.

On its own the scene is relatively benign. But then there is the context.

The patch of blasted wheat and wildflowers lies just a few miles from the Russian border, 12 miles from the crash site of Malaysia Airlines, and – as the Telegraph discovered – just a few hundred metres from concealed rebel positions.

It is also in the area of the town of Snizhnoye, from where imagery released by the United States suggests an SA-11 missile was fired from a Buk mobile rocket launcher against the civilian aircraft.

Without forensic expertise, it is impossible to tell whether a missile was fired here leaving the earth scorched, or whether the indistinct tracks that lead through the area were made by a missile launcher, an armoured vehicle, or simply farm machinery.

But US imagery appears to coincide with social media analysis by bloggers pinpointing videos that show Buk missile launchers in Snizhnoye and Torez, the town nearest to the crash site, shortly before the destruction of the airliner.

Eliot Higgins, the video and photo analyst who runs the respected blogs Brown Moses and Bellingcat, published dashboard camera and satellite images appearing to authenticate videos showing Buk launchers moving in the area.

"I'm satisfied they show the locations I've pin pointed them too. It does seem there's a sequence of videos and photographs from various sources showing the Buk launcher travelling through the area, which seem to make sense chronologically," Mr Higgins said.

Another blogger claimed to have narrowed the possible launch site to a small area to the south east of Snizhnoye based on a photograph of the missile's smoke trail released by Ukraine's Security Service.

While the Telegraph cannot vouch for the soundness of the analysis, a visit to the locations suggested found a remote area with clear views in the direction of MH17's flight path, a heavy rebel military presence, and multiple marks across fields and dirt roads that suggested tracked vehicles had been operating in the area.

The area makes a very good match for a potential launch site.

While the world's attention has focused on the tragic deaths of 298 passengers and crew of flight MH17, the war that led to its destruction has raged on regardless. And Snizhnoye has been on the front line.

Little more than 11 miles from the nearest Russian border crossing, the town is a rebel stronghold where separatist fighters lurk in trenches and ill-aimed Ukrainian bombardments have shattered civilian houses. An air strike here killed several people on July 15, two days before MH17 was destroyed.

On the surrounding roads, rebels lie in concealed positions, and they cross the countryside on narrow farm tracks that barely appear even on local maps. The thud of artillery fire is constant.

None the less, the quest for the launch site is a frustrating search for a needle in a wheat field.

Two possible launch sites – a rundown collective farm and a nearby wheat field – showed some track marks but no sign of any rocket launch whatsoever.

In the middle of one proposed launch site, an ancient combine harvester sedately chewed its way through the wheat on a rise that gave excellent views in all directions – including towards the MH17s flight path.

It seemed an ideal spot to park a radar unit for an anti-aircraft missile. But Vassily, the driver, said he had neither heard nor seen anything like signs of a missile launch.

"No, haven't heard or seen anything like that. That said, I can't even hear the shelling when I'm in the cab," he said.

"But the field down the way burnt the other day. Don't know why. You might have a look there."

The location of the fire lies on the supposed flight path of the rocket, and track marks – though indistinct – are present. Some unidentifiable bits of green plastic littered the site of the fire.

It is well within rebel control, in easy reach of the Russian border, and in an area where the Ukrainian air force has struck rebel positions in the past.

But with a strip of recently ploughed land running straight through the potential site, the evidence is inconclusive.

To add to the difficulties, experts approached by the Telegraph said a Buk launcher is a relatively light piece of kit. So any telltale track marks are unlikely to be particularly distinguishable.

"The launch of the surface-to-air missile leaves scorched strip behind the launcher, so the second picture in theory might be taken at the place where launcher stood," said Igor Sutyagin, a Russian military expert at the Royal United Services Institute (Rusi) said.

The photograph of the missile's smoke trail also suggests the launch was "nearly vertical" he said.

"In this case the plume from the missile's nozzles will be to the very large extent 'deflected' by the hull of the launcher."

That might also place the launch site further north, much closer to the crash site.

Wherever it was fired from, the search for the Buk will be a long one.