BREAKING VIDEO: Seth Rich's Parents Grateful for Assistance Finding Son's Murderers
BREAKING VIDEO: Seth Rich’s Parents Grateful for Assistance Finding Son’s Murderers – No Indication They Want Search Stopped

Guest post by Joe Hoft

The Washington Examiner reported on Tuesday, May 16th that the parents of slain former DNC worker Seth Rich denied that he was the one who released 44,000 DNC emails to WikiLeaks. In the piece the family supposedly reported that:

We are a family who is committed to facts, not fake evidence that surfaces every few months to fill the void and distract law enforcement and the general public from finding Seth’s murderers,” the family’s statement continued. “The services of the private investigator who spoke to the press was offered to the Rich family and paid for by a third party, and contractually was barred from speaking to press or anyone outside of law enforcement or the family unless explicitly authorized by the family.

However, shortly after the Washington Examiner piece was released, WikiLeaks tweeted that

Seth Rich’s new “family spokesman” is Brad Bauman a professional Democrat crisis PR consultant with the Pastorum Group.

Seth Rich’s new “family spokesman” is Brad Bauman a professional Democrat crisis PR consultant with the Pastorum Group. — WikiLeaks (@wikileaks) August 11, 2016

Shortly after this, FOX News reported that they had information that Seth Rich did provide the DNC emails to WikiLeaks.

Now it is being reported that the parents of Seth Rich are on the Internet thanking everyone who is helping the family find the two individuals who killed Seth Rich. A video of Rich’s parents was tweeted as follows:

The MEDIA is lying about Seth Rich saying #SethRich parents want this to stop. Here’s a video from his parents THANKING the internet! pic.twitter.com/9w96tOhj37 — Red Pill (@RedPillDropper) May 20, 2017

Now it looks like the Seth’s parents want help in finding their son’s killers.

On July 8, 2016, 27 year-old Democratic staffer Seth Conrad Rich was murdered in Washington DC. The killer or killers took nothing from their victim, leaving behind his wallet, watch and phone.

Shortly after the killing, Redditors and social media users were pursuing a “lead” saying that Rich was en route to the FBI the morning of his murder, apparently intending to speak to special agents about an “ongoing court case” possibly involving the Clinton family.

Seth Rich’s father Joel told reporters, “If it was a robbery — it failed because he still has his watch, he still has his money — he still has his credit cards, still had his phone so it was a wasted effort except we lost a life.”

The Metropolitan police posted a reward for information on Rich’s murder.



in August Wikileaks offered a $20,000 reward for information on the murder of DNC staffer Seth rich.

Julian Assange also suggested in August that Seth Rich was a Wikileaks informant.

Via Mike Cernovich: