From murder accused to royalty, doctor treating Anwar says all get best care
Datuk Dr Jeyaindran Sinnadurai says his policy is to treat all patients professionally despite a request from Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim’s family to have him removed as head of a panel treating the jailed opposition leader. – The Malaysian Insider pic by Afif Abd Halim, October 11, 2015.The doctor heading a team of specialists treating jailed former opposition leader Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim has had many accusations hurled against him but takes them as part of the challenges in his medical career.

Deputy director-general of health Datuk Dr Jeyaindran Sinnadurai said he has dealt with much criticism throughout his 30 years with the ministry and addresses it by continuing to be professional in his treatment of all patients, including politicians.

In the end, despite accusations levelled at him whether by patients’ families or by the media, Dr Jeyaindran said those who came under his care would know him better.

“Patients know me better. Although I am rebuked by some quarters, I can sleep well at night.

“When they read about me in the media, they sympathise and they know me because I treat them,” he told The Malaysian Insider.

Dr Jeyaindran was in the spotlight recently after Anwar’s family demanded his removal as head of the medical team caring for the de facto PKR leader in prison.

But he said he had long had the experience of treating high-profile patients, including politicians from both sides of the political divide.

“I have treated murder accused, royalty. And I treat them to the best of my ability,” said Dr Jeyaindran, who hails from Alor Star and is an alumnus of Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia.

He said he held fast to the principles of professionalism, accountability and transparency.

“It’s a challenge when allegations are thrown at me but I have to protect the information that I have,” he said, adding that it was a doctor’s duty to observe confidentiality, especially when it comes to patients’ medical reports.

“Although some accuse me of not doing my job, I don’t feel a need to respond,” he said when asked about he felt after being criticised by Anwar’s family.

Dr Jeyaindran heads the panel treating the former opposition leader, who is suffering from various ailments, including a shoulder muscle tear, while serving out his five-year sentence for sodomy in Sungai Buloh prison which began in February.

“I am a professional and treat many people. My relationship is merely doctor-patient, that is all.

“I also do not have a problem with Anwar.” Datuk Dr Jeyaindran Sinnadurai says he has had offers to join politics but prefers to concentrate on voluntary work. – The Malaysian Insider pic by Afif Abd Halim, October 11, 2015.

Anwar’s family had alleged that Dr Jeyaindran was not acting in a professional manner as well as being a witness in Anwar’s first sodomy trial in 2008.

“I was not a material witness, neither did I treat Saiful Bukhari.

“I only answered three questions in court,” Dr Jeyaindran said, adding that his past role as a witness should not have any bearing on his professional duty now to lead the team of specialists treating Anwar.

He said he was not the only doctor treating prisoners at the Sungai Buloh prison.

“Many other doctors treat prisoners, not just me.

“I have been treating prisoners for nearly 15 years and I am very familiar with the prison procedure, what doctors can and cannot do in prison,” said the son of former senator Tan Sri Dr C. Sinnadurai, who had also served the Health Ministry in his time as head of medical services.

Asked about his hopes for the medical profession, Dr Jeyaindran said he wanted to see an increase in the quality of doctors over the next decade.

“We are short of specialists. After I was appointed deputy director-general in 2012, I did discuss this in the ministry to see how to tackle the issue.”

He also hopes to see an improvement in the quality of doctors in terms of clinical expertise.

The chairman of non-governmental organisation, Yayasan MyNadi, Dr Jeyaindran also has hopes of expanding socio-economic development to underprivileged communities.

“As the chairman of Mynadi, I am proud that we have created 570 volunteer projects and have worked with more than 300 NGOs in five years.”

The foundation focuses on areas populated by Indians and Orang Asli.

“Before this, people were under the impression that I created this platform to pave my way into politics.

“But I have no interest in joining politics. I am more interested in voluntary work," he said, although he had received offers to join politics. – October 11, 2015.