Half zine. Half blog. Half not good with fractions.
Really Good Grief After I put up that little tribute to Franklin from Peanuts, Randee sent me this outstanding email:

What a nice little tribute! I always will think of Franklin as the reason I got Charles Schulz pissed off at me. There was a four-panel strip in a Peanuts Treasury I read when I was about 15, and in it Franklin expresses a desire to play for the NHL. Peppermint Patty immediately squashes that dream with a final panel comment along the lines of "come on, Franklin, how many black players are there in the NHL?" Which I didn't actually get the point of. I mean, true: Yep. Trenchant to point out? Not in this case. But, at 15 I thought I might have missed what Schulz was trying to say, and I wrote ol' Chuck. I got a letter back on Snoopy stationery, from One Snoopy Place, hand typed, in which he berated me for calling him a "racist" (I'd actually said the strip could be perceived that way, but maybe he could explain it to me better) and said I'd rushed to judgment, and there wasn't anything racist at all in pointing out that there were no black players in the NHL. The thing is, there wasn't anything funny about pointing it out either. So, while Charles Schulz delighted generations with his Peanuts, I appear to have been a sour grape. Ah, well, I still love some of the early years. Want photographic proof? Lemme know. It's a gem of a letter. Hand-signed and everything. --Randee



PEANUTS © 1971, United Feature Syndicate, Inc. Thanks, Randee! (Just for fun, go piss off the Marmaduke guy now.) Click here for The Sneeze Home Page! Posted by Steven |

Posted by Steven | Archive « Stevie's Home! (A Valentine's Love Tip) | Home | Hail to the Chef »



You can follow me right here on Twitter. First time here?

Steve, Don't Eat It! might not be a bad place to start.

Why not subscribe to The Sneeze? It's free. It's painless. And I dare you.

HEY, IT'S THE

SNEEZE THEME SONG!







by Cloud Cult

(Visit their

Love them a lot.) by Cloud Cult(Visit their website Love them a lot.)



THE PAINLESS SNEEZE

HOLIDAY DONATION BOX If you're going to be doing any shopping at Amazon and would like to send a little love to The Sneeze at the same time...

PLEASE USE THIS LINK TO GET TO AMAZON . It won't cost you anything extra, and a small percentage of the sale will go directly toward keeping this site chugging along. Thanks!

If you're going to be doing any shopping atand would like to send a little love to The Sneeze at the same time.... It won't cost you anything extra, and a small percentage of the sale will go directly toward keeping this site chugging along. Thanks!