America's Finest News Source
Frequently Asked Questions

We'll try to answer your question immediately within this site. If you don't see the answer to your question here, click here for information on contacting The Onion.

If you have a question about the website or would like to report a technical problem please e-mail tech@theonion.com.

The Onion encourages all comments regarding content.

General

Website

Business

Archives

The Onion archives contain all of the content of the past nine years, from August 1996 to the present. You can browse by issue, section, or keyword.

NOTE: Requests for articles/graphics from past issues are not accepted and The Onion cannot guarantee a response to such requests.

What content is available in The Onion online archives?

The Onion archives contain all of the Onion content from the past nine years, from August 1996 through the present. Nearly 350 complete issues are now available, with more coming soon. You can browse by issue, by topic, by section, or search the entire archive by keyword.

What content is available in The A.V. Club online archives?

Most interviews, features, and reviews are available at The A.V. Club online. There are two ways to find archived content: by browsing the archives (e.g., features, music) or searching the site. If you couldn't find your content by searching or browsing, then that content is not available online.

Editorial

The Onion is a satirical weekly publication published 52 times a year on Thursdays. The Onion is published by Onion, Inc. The contents of this material are © Copyright 2010 by Onion, Inc. and may not be reprinted or re-transmitted in whole or in part without the express written consent of the publisher. The Onion is not intended for readers under 18 years of age.

The Onion uses invented names in all its stories, except in cases where public figures are being satirized. Any other use of real names is accidental and coincidental.

NOTE: Editorial submissions of any kind are not accepted. The Onion cannot guarantee their return, nor can The Onion guarantee a response to unsolicited submissions. Requests for articles/graphics from past issues are not accepted and The Onion cannot guarantee a response to such requests.

I think I found a typo or error in the content. Where do I report it?

Report typos and errors in content to editorial@theonion.com.

How can I become a writer for The Onion?

All editorial content in The Onion and The A.V. Club is written by staff and there are currently no writing positions available. Any freelance material sent to The Onion will not be read and will not be returned. Should The Onion seek new talent in the future, a call for submissions will appear in our newspapers and on our website.

What jobs or internships do you have available?

Please see our Jobs Page for available jobs and internships.

What is your letters policy?

"The Onion neither publishes nor accepts letters from its readers. It is The Onion's editorial policy that the readers should have no voice whatsoever and that The Onion newspaper shall be solely a one-way conduit of information. The editorial page is reserved for the exclusive use of the newspaper staff to advance whatever opinion or agenda it sees fit, or, in certain cases, for paid advertorials by the business community." —Passed by a majority of the editorial board, March 17, 1873.

Onion Radio News

The Onion Radio News is a daily newscast from The Onion's award-winning news team, available online and at broadcast resolution from the Onion satellite news service to radio stations throughout the world.

Check out the latest Onion Radio News here.

Web listeners: If the streaming audio on The Onion Radio News is choppy or doesn't play properly, check your Quicktime settings. Go into the Quicktime plugin setup and change the "Transport Setup" to "HTTP" instead of "UDP" (or "automatic"). That should improve the reliability of the streaming audio significantly.

Broadcast directors: To become an Onion Radio News affiliate and retain full broadcast rights to feature The Onion Radio News on your station, call Adrienne Munos at 203-877-8210 extension 10 or e-mail adrienne@americancomedynetwork.com for a free trial.

Onion Radio News affiliates receive 10 sixty-second newscasts weekly, a subscription to The Onion newsprint edition, and custom liners from Onion Radio News anchorman Doyle Redland. The Onion Radio News is market exclusive, depending on availability.

E-mail and Newsletters

Here you will find information and help for our e-mail services like the E-mail This Page script or our newsletters.

I want to use the "E-mail This Page" link, but I'm worried about including my e-mail address. Am I setting myself up to get spammed?

E-mail addresses are not sold for any purpose. We simply use them to let the friend you e-mailed know that the e-mail came from you. Please see our Privacy Policy for more information.

Simply go to the Newsletters page and check the Newsletters that you would like to receive. Enter your e-mail in the E-mail Address field and click the Submit button. You will receive an confirmation e-mail within minutes.

To unsubscribe to any Onion newsletter, simply click the unsubscribe link at the bottom of the newsletter.

Linking to The Onion

Here you will find information on how to link to The Onion website, how to create bookmarks/favorites, how to make The Onion or The A.V. Club your home page, and information about tickers/newsfeeds/headlines.

When I use my Onion bookmark or favorite, the same issue appears over and over. Help!

You may have an individual issue bookmarked. Make sure when you create your bookmark or favorite that the URL you are using is http://www.theonion.com/ or (for The A.V. Club) http://www.avclub.com/ . Using those URLs will ensure that you get the most recent version of the content.

How do I make The Onion my home page?

Under the "Internet Options" or "Preferences" panel in your browser, find the section that says "Home Page." Enter http://www.theonion.com/ into the address bar there. Now, when you select the "Home" button you will be taken to The Onion website. You can also choose to have The Onion load with each new window.

Can I link to The Onion on my home page?

Below are links that you can use on your site.

The Onion - America's Finest News Source URL: http://www.theonion.com/ HTML: <a href="http://theonion.com/"><b>The Onion</b> - America's Finest News Source</a>

The A.V. Club URL: http://www.avclub.com/ HTML: <a href="http://avclub.com/"><b>The A.V. Club</b></a>

Whom do I contact regarding exchanging links with The Onion?

The Onion does not exchange links with other websites. If you wish to buy a text link advertisement, please contact our Advertising Department.

Do you provide headlines in RSS or Atom format for use with news tickers or to put Onion headlines on my site?

We do provide feeds of Onion headlines. Please see our Connect Page for more information.

Mobile Versions

With your handheld device, you can read The Onion and The A.V. Club anywhere you go. Simply point your mobile/PDA device to The Onion's mobile-friendly website at www.theonion.com or mobile.avclub.com.

Website Problems

Here you will find information and help regarding browser issues, font problems, site blocking, tickers/newsfeeds/headlines, and other website-related issues.

My company blocks me from viewing your content. What can I do about it?

If your company chooses to restrict access to certain content, there's nothing we can do about it on our end. However, you can view our responsive site on your PDA or phone.

Advertising / Business

All advertising- and business-related questions/comments should be directed to the Business Department. This includes, but is not limited to, print advertising opportunities, online advertising opportunities, and questions or comments regarding advertisements. For more information regarding advertising opportunities on The Onion website, please consult our Media Kit.

Can you send me your print advertising rate card?

Please contact Matt McDonagh at advertising@theonion.com for information on print or online advertising rates. Please include your company name, contact information, and what type of advertising you are interested in.

Contact Us

Click here for information on contacting The Onion.

If you have a question about the website or would like to report a technical problem please e-mail tech@theonion.com.