Viral WhatsApp message claims Delhi to be hit by a 9.1 magnitude earthquake - What's the truth?
Representative image

New Delhi: A message pertaining to an impending earthquake in New Delhi has been doing the rounds on WhatsApp, warning citizens to take precautionary steps to safeguard themselves. The message claims that a massive earthquake of magnitude 9.2 on Richter scale is likely to strike the national capital between April 7 and April 15. The WhatsApp message attributes the information to the 'official' website of NASA, the US space agency.

Well, as is usually the case with such message, this one too is clearly a hoax.

The message, written in incorrect English, reads, “According to NASA, the biggest earthquake will hit Delhi soon. The Rector’s Scale is 9.1 or may be 9.2. Date has not cleared yet but it may occur in Between 7th of April to 15th April."(sic). The message even claims that "lakhs" of people could perish in the earthquake.

The message further claimed that the epicentre of the eartquake would be Gurugram. It further added, "This is the 2nd time in World’s History that huge loss of life and property has declared by NASA. This is biggest Earthquake may occure in Delhi NCR."

Readers are urged to spread the message to their relatives and friends living in the Delhi-NCR region. Infact, the message suggests that people living in the quake zone should move out of the area for a few days. The message reads, "This is the 2nd time in World’s History that huge loss of life and property has declared by NASA. This is biggest Earthquake may occure in Delhi NCR."

It adds, “Spread to all your relatives or friends who stay in Delhi NCR. This earthquake will be the largest as it covers the areas like In India ( Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, J&K to Tamilnadu, Rajasthan to Bihar. In Pakistan Rector’s Scale would be 4-4.2 maximum. If possible move at least for a week from Delhi NCR. Govt will take action very soon on This to save life of People. For More Details www.nasaalert.com,”

The truth behind the viral message

For starters, scientifically, as of now, it is not possible to predict the occurance of earthquakes anywhere in the world. Science has developed warning systems to predict possible tsunamis but the technology is not advances enough to foretell earthquakes.

Secondly, the site cited in the message, nasaalert.com is a fake site and is not associated with NASA. Infact, the official site of NASA is https://www.nasa.gov/ and that currently has no information on the 'Delhi earthquake'.

So, folks, moral of the story? Never believe in such forwarded messages blindly.