US Policy Met With Mixed Reaction From Afghan Politicians
Government leaders welcomed the new policy of the United States on Afghanistan and South-Asia, but Hizb-e-Islami led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar labeled the strategy a defending status not a solution to the current crisis.

Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah, welcomed the move and called the strategy “unique and perfect”.

He warned the insurgents and the countries that provide support to them and said militants should make use of the chance and quit violence; otherwise, they will be targeted.

“The issue of the existence of terrorists’ safe havens and support to Taliban and other terrorist groups has been highlighted very well (in the US strategy) and there are clear messages (in this respect),” Abdullah said.

Reacting to US President Donald Trump’s strategy for Afghanistan, Abdullah said: “Our message to our neighbors is that the new US policy is a chance for them (countries in the region) to utilize and benefit from this opportunity.”

President Ashraf Ghani also welcomed the new policy.

He called on anti-government armed groups to lay down their weapons and join the peace process.

“After this there is no timeline or time-based condition, the US will stay with the Afghan people up to the end,” said Ghani.

Hizb-e-Islami however reacted to Trump’s strategy, saying that it is full of questions and that it is as a defending stance, not a strategy.

According to Hizb-e-Islami, the strategy lacks solution to overcome the current crisis in the country.

“A solution was not announced; it is a defending status to save Afghanistan from collapse,” said Mohammad Amin Karim, member of Hizb-e-Islami political council.

Meanwhile, former president Hamid Karzai in a statement condemned the new US strategy on Afghanistan.

“The new strategy emphasizes on war at a time when Afghanistan and the Afghan people need peace; therefore, we denounce it in strongest terms,” Karzai said in the statement.

Instead of war, the US should achieve peace and stability through dialogue in order ensure peace in the entire region.

The only positive point of the strategy, the statement said, is that the US has accepted its past mistakes and has said that after this they will not allow terrorists to have safe havens in Pakistan.

Karzai said he will announce his stance after a review of the strategy.

Taliban also reacted to the new strategy announcement.

The group claimed in a statement that they will continue fighting as long as the last American soldier remains in the country.