Political Science & International Relations
Rashad T. Goldsborough

Production Assistant CNN

My favorite quote, from the ancient Greek philosopher, Aristotle, is to first "have a definite, clear practical ideal; a goal, an objective. Second, have the necessary means to achieve those ends; wisdom, money, materials, and methods. Third, adjust all your means to that end." With my background in political science, filmmaking and television production, I plan to use the mediums of TV and film as platforms, to articulate arguments, which critique institutional dysfunction, and comment on why it affects the everyday lives of people.

With my University of Delaware bachelor's degrees in Political Science, with a concentration in Global Studies and English, with a concentration in Film Studies, and Wilmington University master's degree in Administration of Justice, with a concentration in Homeland Security, I acquired the skills to research institutional problems, examine the specific flaws, creating those issues, and finally express my speculations, about them, by writing, directing and producing socially conscious movie and television narratives.

A recurring theme, in my analyses of institutional failure, is the lack of adequate leadership. "A startling 86% of respondents to the Survey on the Global Agenda agree that we have a leadership crisis in the world today". I believe it is important to encourage my audience to question the performance of their government leaders and hold them accountable, as they are the likeliest to hold a majority of politically powerful positions in societies.

During a 2014 summer internship, with the CNN Newsroom, in Atlanta, Georgia, I was able to start accomplishing these objectives, while working with Mr. Wolf Blitzer and his television news production team. I wrote segments for Mr. Blitzer's show, Wolf, and rapidly provided the writers and producers with in-depth research, in the control room. I was also given the opportunity to further understand what it takes to create content for film and TV, with previous internships for Mr. Spike Lee, Drop Squad Pictures, Delaware 28, Nickelodeon Development, Comedy Central Production, Nickelodeon Programming and HLN America. I most recently worked as a Freelance Production Assistant for CNN.

Today, I am pursuing my doctorates in Organizational Learning, Leadership and Innovation, at Wilmington University, while working as a CNN Production Assistant, in New York City. I am very thankful to have earned an undergraduate education at UD and a graduate degree from WilmU. The knowledge gives me a unique perspective in the television and movie business. I can take mediums, historically seen as platforms for entertainment, and use them to provide content that thoroughly critiques political leaders. This may encourage my audiences to survey the effectiveness of social structures, impacting their worlds.