2018 Values Voter Summit
BREAKOUT SESSIONS ONE

RECLAIMING AND PRESERVING CONSERVATISM IN A COUNTER-CHRISTIAN CULTURE—Ambassadar Ballroom

Rob Chambers, National Field Director, AFA Action*; Abraham Hamilton, Public Policy Analyst, AFA; Host, The Hamilton Corner*

Entranced by the notion that compromise is inherently virtuous, many good people mutate and change upon arrival in D.C. The Christian convictions that fuel conservatism must be more than mere political philosophy. This session will debunk the virtue of legislative compromise and will address how this compromise creates laws antithetical to Christianity and conservatism. Attendees will also learn how the national political party’s involvement in state elections perpetuates the election of candidates who value legislative compromise. Many of these politicians end up advancing crony corporatism, the expansion of government, or both. This session will equip attendees with resources to identify and elect Christian conservative candidates to office. Taking this into consideration, Christians will also be encouraged and equipped to assert their God-given responsibility and constitutional right to counter unbiblical views of social justice, immigration, gun control, and capitalism.

WHY AMERICA SHOULD STAY ON THE PATH OF RELIGIOUS FREEDOM—Congressional Room

Emilie Kao, Director of the DeVos Center for Religion and Civil Society, The Heritage Foundation*

America's robust protection of religious freedom has made our country great and unique in the world. In most of the world, people live in societies that place greater value on uniformity of thought than on freedom of thought. Almost 75 percent of the world lives under burdensome restrictions of their religious freedom and other civil liberties, which tends to increase economic and political strife. Now, new progressive ideology about sexuality, marriage, and the family is gaining ground in U.S. courts and at the UN and threatening to reduce the freedoms of Americans to think, speak, and work according to our deepest beliefs and values. In the wake of the redefinition of marriage in Obergefell v. Hodges, America is at a crossroads. Will we remain true to our historic values of allowing for a diversity of opinions to flourish? Religious freedom for all remains the best way forward to secure peace, prosperity, and freedom for all citizens. Join us to discuss how to get our country back on track for freedom.

WHAT THE MEDIA CANNOT TELL YOU ABOUT THE MID-TERM—Palladian Room

George Barna, President, Metaformation*; Brent Keilen, Executive Director, FRC Action*

This session will address the latest research and election strategies related to the mid-term election. Discussion will touch on critical races, key issues, effective messaging, voter registration considerations, and election turnout. Expect insights regarding the implications of the mid-terms for the 2020 elections.

HOW A CONSERVATIVE PAID FAMILY LEAVE POLICY CAN BENEFIT BABIES AND STRENGTHEN FAMILIES—Executive Room

Speakers: Dan Holler, Deputy Chief of Staff, Sen. Marco Rubio*; Nadine Maenza, Executive Director, Patriot Voices*; Adrienne Schweer, Fellow, Bipartisan Policy Center*; Representative from The White House*

Synopsis: Instead of a new baby creating a financial crisis, what if both parents could be supported to stay home and bond with their baby and family? Currently, 25% of new mothers return to work within two weeks of giving birth. Fathers go back even sooner, although studies show those home during this time are more likely to be involved in future child-rearing activities. Statistics on the health of families in the US is troubling with marriage and childbirth rates plummeting. Meanwhile, infant mortality rates are the highest in the developed world. The White House has long supported a conservative approach to paid family leave with Senators Rubio, Lee, and Ernst recently advocating for legislative solutions. This panel will discuss the options for what a pro-life, pro-family paid family leave policy could look like and why it should be a priority for conservatives.

THE GATHERING STORM: IRAN'S FANATICAL REGIME—Empire Room

Speakers: Steve Beckerman, Deputy Director of Policy and Government Affairs, AIPAC*

Synopsis: The Iranian regime, driven by Shiite fanaticism, is an existential threat to Israel and a serious national security threat to the United States. Iranian leaders chant "Death to Israel! Death to America!" They refer to the United States as "the Great Satan." Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has repeatedly promised a second Holocaust against the Jewish people, vowing that "Israel must be annihilated." The Trump Administration has withdrawn from Barack Obama's nuclear deal and it is reimposing tough sanctions against Tehran. But the regime remains defiant. The ayatollah banned talks with the U.S. A top Iranian general threatened the U.S. with terrorism, warning, "We are near you, where you can't even imagine." Iranian agents have been arrested in the United States. How dangerous is Iran? Can it develop nuclear weapons? Is Hezbollah operating inside the U.S.? Could a popular uprising topple Tehran's tyrants? Will the U.S. or Israel be forced to launch military strikes against Iran?