2 Harford Co. deputies killed in shootings
Advertisement 2 Harford County deputies killed in Abingdon shootings Suspect identified as 68-year-old David Evans Share Shares Copy Link Copy

Two Harford County Sheriff's deputies have succumbed to their injuries after shootings at an Abingdon shopping center, officials said.Download the WBAL appAuthorities said a deputy responded to a disturbance call at 11:46 a.m. Wednesday at the Panera Bread near Emmorton Road in Abingdon. That deputy was wounded when at least one shot was fired in his direction, Harford County Sheriff Jeffrey Gahler said.Gahler said restaurant witnesses gave good information as to which way the shooter went. A second responding deputy found the suspect, and shots were fired again, injuring the second deputy."We believe the deputies were shot by the same suspect," Gahler said."(The shooter) just took out his gun and shot him in the head right after the officer asked him, 'How's your day?'" witness Sophia Faulkner said.Two additional deputies, who responded to the initial shooting, fired rounds, and a short time later, the suspect was killed, Gahler said. The suspect was identified as 68-year-old David Evans, Gahler said."We know that there were two warrants for his arrest," Gahler said. "We believe we were sent (to Panera Bread), because someone knew who he was."Police said Evans had two open warrants in two states. Evans had a criminal warrant in Florida for assaulting a police officer and fleeing and eluding police. In Harford County, Evans had an open civil warrant.A loaded handgun was found with Evans after the shootout, Gahler said."We are not looking for anyone else," Gahler said. "There is no longer a threat to the community."The two deputies involved in shooting the suspect were placed on administrative leave, per agency protocol pending a completed investigation, Gahler said.SkyTeam 11 Capt. Roy Taylor reported that at least one deputy was airlifted to Shock Trauma. The other deputy was taken to University of Maryland Upper Chesapeake Medical Center in Bel Air. During a news conference Wednesday evening, Gahler said both deputies succumbed to their injuries."Today's a sad day for the Harford County Sheriff's Office and the citizens of Harford County, who we are sworn to serve. It's with great sadness that I tell you both deputies who were shot earlier today have succumbed to their injuries. One of our deputies was a 30-year veteran of this agency, served in the Court Services Division. The other deputy had served this agency for the last 16 years and was assigned to the Community Services Division."I would ask you at this time to please respect the families' privacy as they go through the period of grieving. I've met with both families. I still have to go to Upper Chesapeake. Obviously, I don't think I have to tell anybody. There's no words to describe what they are going through right now," Gahler said."Anytime law enforcement or first responders lose their lives in the line of duty, it is a tragedy and today's violence in Abingdon and the deaths of two Harford County sheriff's deputies is nothing less than absolutely heartbreaking," Gov. Larry Hogan said."This is a traumatic day for us, but we gave thanks to those two deputies that made the ultimate sacrifice for our citizens, and we just ask the county to come together as we lift them up and protect their families as we go forward," Harford County Executive Barry Glassman said during the news conference. "We stand with the sheriff and our department, and we give thanks for their service."The names of the deputies have not yet been released. Gahler said officials and immediate family are still in the process of notifying extended family members. He did talk about the relationship he shared with both deputies."They are two outstanding deputies who served the citizens of this county faithfully," Gahler said during the news conference. "I know both of them very well. One of them started at about the same time I started into law enforcement here in the county, so we go back a long way."WBAL-TV I-Team lead investigative reporter Jayne Miller said just before 4 p.m. a motorcade, including members of the Baltimore City Police Department and Harford County Sheriff's Office, formed, and at around 5:15 p.m., the motorcade and an ambulance, presumed to be carrying the body of the fallen deputy, left Shock Trauma in an escort.Harford County police spokeswoman Christie Kahler said that "the investigation is fluid," and further information will be provided as it becomes available.Witness: He just took out his gun and shot him in the headThe shooting happened during lunch time at the busy shopping center on a day when Harford County schools were closed because of the snow."You see this stuff in movies and online and everything on TV when it actually happens, but you never think you're going to go out to lunch one day with your mom, and it's just going to happen," witness 15-year-old Sophia Faulkner said.Faulkner said she was doing just that at Panera Bread. When she first walked in, she saw a man sitting in the back."The guy just looked a bit sketchy, and according to the waitresses or the cashiers in Panera, they said he comes in there regularly, but he's been sketchy, and they've been trying to question him and get him some help because they think he's, like, homeless," Faulkner said.According to the teen, a police officer approached the man."The police officer sitting near him said, 'How is your day?' and then immediately, according to one of the ladies, an officer that was in there apparently right after that, (the shooter) just took out his gun and shot him in the head right after the officer asked him, 'How's your day?'" Faulkner said.She said she saw the shooter run out the back door. Her mom yelled at her to get down, and it became pandemonium inside."I was freaking out so much, and everybody was just kind of running to one side of the store, and families were huddling and hugging together," Faulkner said.Outside the Panera, nearby businesses went into lockdown. An Old Navy employee ushered shopper Bethany Pace into a break room and locked the door."It's absolutely surreal as a Harford County resident. I think we all see these things unfold in news, national news, and don't really realize how much it can really happen very close to you," Pace said.Harford County Sheriff Jeffrey Gahler: This is just an awful dayWhile Gahler said, "This is just an awful day," Gov. Larry Hogan ordered flags to fly at half staff.Hogan on Wednesday issued the following statement in response to the violence that resulted in the deaths of two Harford County sheriff's deputies in Abingdon:"Anytime law enforcement or first responders lose their lives in the line of duty, it is a tragedy, and today's violence in Abingdon and the deaths of two Harford County sheriff's deputies is nothing less than absolutely heartbreaking. Our administration is committed to assisting Harford County during this investigation, and the Maryland State Police are working closely with local law enforcement to provide support as needed."The first lady and I send our most sincere thoughts and prayers to the families and loved ones of the brave deputies who made the ultimate sacrifice today for the community they selflessly served. It is my hope that their commitment and dedication to law enforcement and protecting others will be remembered and will forever serve as an inspiration to others.""Today was a terrible reminder that the men and women in law enforcement risk their lives on every call," Harford County Executive Barry Glassman said. "As we grieve together in the spirit of community, let us also honor the service and sacrifice of these two fallen heroes." Glassman has ordered the flag of Harford County to be flown at half-staff effective immediately in honor of the two fallen deputies.Glassman also issued the following statement Wednesday evening:"Today was a terrible reminder that the men and women in law enforcement risk their lives on every call. We had an opportunity to visit the families to share our condolences on behalf of the citizens of Harford County. We know that both families face trying times ahead and we pray for their healing and comfort. As we grieve together in the spirit of community, let us also honor the service and sacrifice of these two fallen heroes." Stay with WBALTV.com and 11 News for more on this developing story.WBAL-TV 11 News reporters Omar Jiminez and Kim Dacey, and I-Team lead investigative reporter Jayne Miller contributed to this story.22874254