Keith Scott's record shows past run-ins with law enforcement
CHARLOTTE, N.C. – On Tuesday, the NAACP made their demands loud and clear to the City of Charlotte.

The civil rights group wants immediate change from Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police and city council in the wake of the Keith Scott shooting. NBC Charlotte has also learned more about Scott and his past run-ins with law enforcement.

There are still a lot of questions surrounding Scott’s shooting, specifically whether he had a gun in his hand when he was shot near his home last week. But Scott’s criminal record indicates he had a lengthy history with law enforcement.

Forty-three-year-old Keith Scott was said to be a good man and father to his kids, but he also had a troubled past dating back to at least 2002, including run-ins with authorities in Gaston County and Mecklenburg County.

San Antonio, Texas, 2002. Scott was arrested for evading arrest, aggravated assault with a deadly weapon and assault bodily injury. The New York Times reported that he shot and wounded a man in the case.

Two years later in 2004, Scott was arrested for assault with a deadly weapon and then his wife filed for a restraining order. Court records indicate his wife said “my husband Keith Scott assaulted me several times by stabbing me in the back almost puncturing my lungs, he sliced my ear and bruised my body.” The restraining order was later voluntarily dismissed.

In October of last year, another restraining order was filed. Scott’s wife again wrong “He hit my 8-year-old in the head a total of three times with his fist. On October 2, 2015, he kicked me and threatened to kill us last night with his gun. He said he is a ‘killer’ and we should know that.”

Like the first restraining order, the second was dismissed several days later.

Meanwhile, the Charlotte-Mecklenburg NAACP is calling for justice after Scott was shot and killed by a CMPD officer last week.

“Many black people who become police officers become blue, not black,” the local organization said Tuesday. “In order for you to survive in a police department, you take on the police department’s ideology, ways of life, and culture.”

The State Bureau of Investigation is now leading the investigation, and it’s not clear when it will be complete.

Copyright 2016 WCNC