Leuren Moret

[back] Radiation

Leuren Moret is a geoscientist who has worked around the world on radiation issues, educating citizens, the media, members of parliaments and Congress and other officials. She became a whistleblower in 1991 at the Livermore Nuclear Weapons Lab after experiencing major science fraud on the Yucca Mountain Project. An environmental commissioner in the City of Berkeley.

A nuclear weapons lab whistleblower reveals the shady dealings and elite agenda that lurks behind the 2005 privatisation of the US nuclear weapons industry, as well as detailing the use of space-based directed energy weapons to effect thought and mood control in large populations.

[Oct 2007 Interview] of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

[2004] THE KISS OF DEATH - NUCLEAR WEAPONS STEALTH TAKEOVER by Leuren Moret

External

Interview: Lauren Moret Population Control [whale.to]

Quotes

We know the American Indian populations are declining; we know that the medical healers with traditional medicines in the Indian tribes are being murdered. I’ve been told that eight or ten healers just in one Indian population, they all died within a week of each other. Also, in Hawaii the Hawaiian High Priesthood has informed me that their native healers are also dying off very quickly. So, weather bioweapons or other exotic types of technologies are being used on them is not completely straightforward, but they certainly have both technologies and the ability to use them and apply them anywhere they want to. Interview: Lauren Moret Population Control [whale.to]

The Secretary for Food and Agriculture, Mr. Kawamura appeared at the Berkeley City Council meeting on February 21. He brought a panel of three other medical people with him, a medical doctor, a pesticide expert and a toxicologist. In that discussion that they had, presentation, questions and feedback from the City Council members, Mr. Kawamura announced that this Brown Moth had been in California for at least ten years; it had never been proven to be harmful to agriculture. The pesticide had had no affect in the two-year spraying program to eradicate the Brown Apple Moth in the Santa Cruz area. And, there have been no studies done on the health affects of this pesticide . He also stated that they would begin spraying for at least five years in the entire bay area in August or 2008, and that the Environmental Impact statement would not be finished until the fall of 2008. When City Council members and public citizens making comments brought up many issues—they said that over 600 people had been made ill by the spaying over a two-year period in Santa Cruz. The absenteeism in schools went up 100% the day after the spaying because it made school children ill. Some people had to move out of Santa Cruz; they were too ill to stay there during this spraying program. And, Mr. Kawamura said well that was just information from the Internet and they were mentally ill or they had some kind of stress syndrome, or other issues, but it wasn’t the pesticide. They just have mental problems. One of the City Council members said well, hundreds of thousands of cats died from this spray during the spaying of Santa Cruz; were they mentally ill, too?

So, it was quite obvious not only from his testimony in that City Council meeting, but from visits he had made to other cities in the bay area, feedback from the cities and thousands of worried citizens that the only five people who are in favor of this pesticide spaying program are Mr. Kawamura, the Secretary for Food and Agriculture, and the three panelists he brought with him, as well as Governor Schwarzenegger. Now, we know Governor Schwarzenegger was made governor by Jacob Rothschild at the city of London. And the economy of the State of California is the seventh largest economy in the world, and California has no debt. The city of London bankers are absolutely drooling and slobbering over the tremendous wealth that California has, so he has put in a governor will implement programs that are favorable or desired by the city of London Bankers.

Number one, the San Francisco Bay area—remember the Apartheid issue in South Africa, and the introduction of AIDS? The San Francisco Bay area is the most activist center in the United States. There are over 1,000 activist organizations here. It is also the most progressive; it is the most liberal and it is the strongest anti-war center in the United States. And what is the name of this pesticide? It is called Check Mate, or Check Point. So, doesn’t that kind of hint at the hidden agenda.

... There is another flag. But another very strong flag is that the Secretary for Food and Agriculture said our consultants on this spraying program are from Tasmania, New Zealand and Australia. They are not spaying down there because the moth isn’t a pest in agriculture. So, I was wondering how could they be experts on a spaying program if they don’t even spray down there?

So, what they are doing is attacking our immune systems globally with Depleted Uranium global contamination; they are attacking our fertility; they are increasing death rates and decreasing birth rates, and then locally they are using vaccines to sterilize; they are using pesticides and other chemical agents in combination with other components to interact in an unknown way. I think that most citizens who testified in the City Council meeting and they’ve written newspapers and so forth, are calling this a bio warfare attack on the bay area. I think people clearly understand that is exactly what this is. Interview: Lauren Moret Population Control [whale.to] Francis Crick, who worked with James Watson to crack the molecular code of DNA, suggested medicating public drinking water to lower the fertility rate. This is decreasing birth rates; it is part of the Depopulation program. Dr. Gary Glum’s book called, Full Disclosure, discussed Francis Crick’s plan. It is very shocking to hear the actual words of Francis Crick. He said '

in 1962 the Seva Foundation held a symposium called “Man and his Future.” '

Now, the Seva Foundation is the pharmaceutical company. . . .

at which the Keynote Speaker was Francis Crick. His favorite tactics of population control included putting a chemical,

which today we know is Fluoride that

would cause sterility in the water supplies of those nations he judged as “not fit to have children”. ............

Quoting Francis Crick:

This approach may run against Christian ethics, but I do not see why people should have a right to have children. We might be able to achieve remarkable results after 20 or 30 years by limiting reproduction to genetically superior couples.

Vaccines are the same thing. I interviewed a Black South African woman who told me that she and the women in her family had many children—not her, but the women in her family had no problem having children. She said that when she and her friends went into the hospital in South Africa to have their first babies—these are Black women, they were not allowed to leave the hospital until they had a shot

.

She said

they wouldn’t tell us what was in the shot, but we couldn’t leave until we had it.

She said

none of us ever had a live birth again.

They were given a vaccination, or chemical agent, medical agent that made them allergic to their own fertilized egg. So, none of them ever had another baby. She also said

Black babies born in these South African hospitals neither parent had AIDS, but the newborn baby went home with AIDS.

This Green Beret Special Ops soldier was on a special mission to South Africa. The U. S. military was transporting United Nations and World Health Organization doctors to South Africa to deal with an outbreak of an epidemic of something like Anthrax. He told me when they got down there the area was quarantined; it was also the center of the greatest resistance to Apartheid. He looked around and he said

there was no disease outbreak; it was very obvious.

He began challenging the doctors and asking them why they were really down there. Finally a doctor from Finland said

no, there is no outbreak here. But we are going to vaccinate all these people, and in 12 years they will be dead.

That was the introduction of AIDS.

First of all why would you give young girls a vaccine, when they are 10 to 12 years old before they have even entered puberty? They are pre-puberty age. Why would you give it girls who are not even sexually active? It would make much more sense to give it to them once they became sexually active. It is so widespread I suspected right away that it was possibly an agent for sterilizing these women. It doesn’t make sense. It also makes these young women sick sometimes; there is a reaction to it.

It certainly hasn’t been tested adequately. So, why is there this big rush? I’d like to read something. This is also from Bertrand Russell’s book, The Impact of Science on Society, and this was published in 1952. He said

the Nazis were more scientific then the present rulers of Russia. If they had survived they would probably have soon taken to scientific breeding. Any nation which adopts this practice will, within a generation, secure great military advantages. The system, one may surmise, will be something like this: Except possibly in the governing Aristocracy all but 5% of males and 30% of females will be sterilized. The 30% of females will be expected to spend their years from 18 to 40 in reproduction in order to secure adequate cannon fodder. As a rule, artificial insemination will be preferred to the natural method.

That’s Bertrand Russell’s own words. Medical doctors and insiders today have told me that “wild reproduction” is not a desirable outcome in the future. Already we have terrible infertility problems in men and women. He also told me that in the near future the only way people will be able to get pregnant is to go into a hospital.

it is clear that the international judicial system is morally and procedurally bankrupt. In other words, international laws and treaties are meaningless and/or selectively enforced. Just like the US nuclear weapons labs where I have worked, they selectively enforce the rules only when they want to 'get someone', in other words, they unfairly target and enforce laws that may be on the books, but are ignored. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

The decision to drop two atomic bombs was made by one man - Colonel Henry Stimson - a Wall Street banker with ties to Churchill and the city of London bankers. It's always the international bankers who are engineering these horrific wars and the development of ever more horrific technologies of war. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

Depleted uranium munitions meet the definition of WMDs under US Federal Code in 2 out of 3 categories, and they violate US military law because the US is a signatory to the Geneva and Hague conventions. If the US government is so worried about Iran being a nuclear threat, then why did Henry Kissinger give Iran nuclear power plants, and President Gerald Ford give Iran plutonium? [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

The truth is that the 'nuclear states' have, and are using, nuclear weapons for blackmailing weaker countries in order to depopulate them and steal their mineral resources. It's just that simple. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

In 1942, radioactive poison gas weapons were suggested for development under the Manhattan Project. In other words, the scientists did not know if they could successfully make atomic bombs, so they said “…Let's make dirty bombs, dirty missiles, and dirty bullets out of the depleted uranium, since we have lots of that, and it will permanently contaminate the air, water, soil, food, and blood in a region where we use these munitions.” It was a great weapon to kill, maim and disease lots of people. So in 1942 they knew everything about depleted uranium but did not use it until 1973, during the oil crisis, when the US government gave it to Israel and supervised them using it in the Yom Kippur war. I have met so many women in Berkeley, California, who lived in Israel [occupied Palestine] then in Kibbutzes, and they have an epidemic of breast cancer in their families now. Well, that was just the beginning. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

The US has contaminated 39 states with depleted uranium since 1945 from testing, manufacture, sales, storage and disposal of these weapons. The US is in a massive epidemic of radiation related illnesses, which is increasing every year - the US government nuked its own people with atomic bomb testing, nuclear power plants, and now depleted uranium.[Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

Not only are the Middle East and Central Asia contaminated forever with radioactive depleted uranium, which has a half-life of 4.5 billion years, but it has contaminated and mixed throughout the global atmosphere, causing a global epidemic of diabetes and other radiation related illnesses. Depleted uranium is a radioactive nano-particle doomsday machine, which is not only causing diabetes all over the world, but it is invisibly increasing death rates, and decreasing birth rates globally - that is called depopulation. The Queen of Britain and the Rockefellers (US) own most of the uranium, and the city of London bankers control world uranium supplies and prices. Nice partnership, isn't it? Through her mother (maiden name Roche), Princess Diana was actually a Rothschild (city of London bankers). Many people believe that Prince Charles married Diana for her Stuart bloodline, which made her more royal than Charles. But when Prince William becomes king, England will have a Rothschild on the throne… that is the bloodline wanted from Princess Diana. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

Well, if you think about the thousands of tons of depleted uranium the US/UK have admitted using since 1991, that would be the same as releasing the radiation from at least 400,000 Nagasaki bombs into the atmosphere since 1991, ten times more than during atmospheric testing. Well, look at the increase in diabetes in Japan since 1991, which represents the global effect of depleted uranium pollution. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

Depopulation, through a continuous global covert nuclear war, has been waged against citizens, paid for by citizens through taxation, privatized, and secretly implemented by the global ruling elite. From 62 years of depleted uranium wars alone, global public health has been devastated by large increases in death rates and chronic disease, and decreasing birth rates, both evident in the vital statistics of many countries since 1945. This is a global trend. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

So it is very clear that depleted uranium weaponry is being used for the purpose of depopulation in the Middle East, Central Asia, Lebanon, Yugoslavia… and these areas of course are rich in mineral resources that the Zionist Anglo-American economic empire wants to control. The tiger economies (China, Japan, Korea and India) are another serious economic threat - so another nuclear war is being carried out against them with nuclear power plants forced on them by the US/UK war crimes racketeering syndicate (who own the uranium and the nuclear power industry). The Zionist Anglo-American banking establishment is an international permanent war economy, a war crimes racketeering syndicate, the most vicious and ruthless in the history of the world: once again, they are the greedy bankers of the Wall Street and the city of London, and let's include the British throne which will soon crown a Rothschild as king. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

The leadership in the US, the Congress, the White House, and the Pentagon have been taken over by a shadow government - that shadow from Wall Street and the city of London. The US is bankrupt and is being carved up like a turkey by the globalists. Europe is too… the EU is just another region being dragged into slavery… like the US-Canada-Mexico, which is now undergoing unification. I cannot believe this global nightmare being rolled out. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

I think in reality the US government has killed far more Americans, their own citizens, than they have killed in other countries. The CIA has cannibalized the US just like it has eaten through the economies and killed the people of many other countries. The CIA is bringing the drugs from Afghanistan and South America into our communities. It's a great way to fund elections and to make huge profits. Over $850 billion a year in drug money in the US is the CIA cash-flow through the US economy. The US economy would collapse without it. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

They are receiving a plane ride back to the US and then they are dumped into their communities by the Pentagon and given no help, no medical care, nothing. I have them calling me up every day, they find my name on the internet, and they are begging me to help them… they want to commit suicide, their wives are sick… this is a nightmare not only over in the Middle East and Central Asia, but here as well. Our country is bankrupt - morally, spiritually, and financially. [Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

I want the people of Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan and the people of the world to know that I love and respect them. Americans are not bad people, I am not a bad person because I am American, it is our government that has hijacked and stolen our country and our soul from us.[Oct 2007] Interveiw of Leuren Moret: Wall Street Czars depopulating the World

The ruling elite have been carrying out secret nuclear wars for the purpose of depopulation since World War II under the guise of atmospheric testing “for national security,” nuclear power “too cheap to meter” and depleted uranium “kinetic energy” bullets. It seems undeniable now that the decision to move nuclear weapons testing from the Pacific region to the continental United States in the early 1950s had a hidden purpose..... It is hard to avoid the conclusion that atmospheric nuclear weapons testing at the Nevada Test Site had the hidden benefit of depopulating the United States in the short and the long term. The U.S. government was well aware of the damage it would do and the outrage of the public if they found out. So, in order to avoid this, the Atomic Energy Commission and the military together formed the Environmental Protection Agency to hide the environmental effects, the National Institutes of Health, the National Cancer Institute, and the Centers for Disease Control. These governmental agencies served as a cover of deception and lies to the public as cancer – including skyrocketing rates of breast cancer – infant mortality and other radiation related illnesses killed, maimed and sickened Americans. Because of the large number of nuclear tests – nearly 1,000 – at the Nevada Test Site, more than in any other country, testing has affected public health in the U.S. The long term effects are still emerging, such as a diabetes epidemic in the U.S., which has grown into a global diabetes pandemic. From Hiroshima to Iraq, 61 years of uranium wars



This is presentation #1 of the "Global Nuclear Cover Up" series by Leuren Moret who was interviewed by Dylan Avery, the director of "Loose Change 911" Leuren is a whistle blower from the Livermore Lab. She has been exposing the ugly secrets of the US government nuclear programs and their devastating effects on the health of the US citizens and the rest of humanity. Filmed and produced by Gypsy Taub See more at www.politicsfromtheheart.com and see my live TV show at www.busttheconsensus.com

http://link.brightcove.com/services/link/bcpid1632702612/bclid1632695543/bctid1582123044