The Beautiful and Mostly Deserted Islands in the Gulf of Nicoya, Costa Rica.
home | Living in Costa Rica | Costa Rica retirement information an . . .





A deserted beach where the only footprints are your own and your only companion is an old fishing boat

The Beautiful and Mostly Deserted Islands in the Gulf of Nicoya, Costa Rica.

If the only footprints that you like to see on a clean sandy beach are your own then you might want to consider hiring a boat so you can visit these gorgeous deserted islands...

I must admit that driving 90 minutes from Escazu to Puntarenas to spend the day enjoying the sun, the waves, the water and the freedom of the exotic islands in the Gulf of Nicoya wasn't too much of a hardship for me and of course I did it all for you - Our VIP Members!

Since all of the islands that we visited in the Gulf of Nicoya were only 20-60 minutes away from their location and since our VIP Members seem to like Costa Rica beaches, water and other exotic 'tropical' like activities, the invitation was gratefully accepted...

The Gulf of Nicoya (Spanish: Golfo de Nicoya) is an inlet of the Pacific Ocean, located at 9.7833333° N 84.8° W. It separates the Nicoya Peninsula from the mainland of Costa Rica, and encompasses a marine and coastal landscape of wetlands, rocky islands and cliffs.



Another busy Costa Rica beach

Costa Rica Islands

We will focus on the islands in the Gulf of Nicoya in this article but for your information, there are other Costa Rica Islands including:

Cocos Island Marine Park is the only Costa Rican island with volcanic origins and is located in the Eastern Tropical Pacific, 340 miles southwest of Cabo Blanco, Costa Rica. A rugged and incredibly beautiful island, this World Heritage Site is the largest island (about 20 square miles) and the crown jewel of Costa Rica's many National Parks. Caño Island which is a 740-acre biological refuge surrounded by healthy coral with numerous hammerhead sharks, manta rays and sea turtles located about ten miles west of the Osa Peninsula Cabo Blanco Island is a 3,089 acre protected island at the southernmost tip of the Nicoya peninsula and was created in 1963 as a Strict Nature Reserve, it protects vitally important roosting sites for several sea birds such as the brown pelican, laughing gull, anhinga, magnificent frigate and has the country's largest colony of brown boobies. The 625 acre Violin Island sits at the mouth of the Sierpe River near Corcovado National Park is for sale for only US$4 million. Uvita is a small island on the Atlantic side of Costa Rica. Supposedly, this is where Christopher Columbus first landed in Costa Rica in 1502, during his fourth voyage to the New World.



An almond tree on Tortuga Island

Costa Rica Islands in the Gulf of Nicoya

Depending on which fishermen you speak with, they will tell you that there are about 12 islands nestled in the Gulf of Nicoya. Most of them are small, in fact the total land area of all the islands combined in the Gulf of Nicoya is only about 40 square miles.

Some of the Gulf of Nicoya islands are inhabited by seabirds only but others are larger and have people living on the island.



Tropical beach available for rest and relaxation with NOBODY around

From North West to South East these are the islands in the Gulf of Nicoya:

Chirra is the largest island and is inhabited by about 3,000 mostly humble people who are fishermen and people working on the salinas, where salt is extracted from sea. Pájaros island is also protected because of it's importance as roosting and nesting sites. Venado Island has about 1,100 inhabitants. Hiking trails through the protected forest lead to viewpoints or you can make guided tours to the mangroves. Bejuco Island is it's smaller sister island which is uninhabited with the exception of a caretaker keeping an eye on things. Caballo Islandis covered with tropical dry forest and has some nice beaches. The island is home to 200 fishermen, but there are no accommodations. San Lucas is infamous enough to be detailed below. Guayabo is a protected island and is the largest of four known Costa Rican nesting sites for the brown pelican and is also a wintering site for the peregrine falcon which we say while we were out on the water. Gitana Island protects the Bahia Gigante from rough weather, making the bay popular with boaters. Jesusita Island is a 58 acre island with four beaches covered with palm trees. Cedros Island The two protected Negritos Islands are covered with a semi-deciduous forest consisting primarily of frangipani, spiny cedar and gumbo- limbo. A number of different sea birds, including the brown pelican, roost there and you will find large conches and oysters in the waters. Tortuga Island is the most popular of Costa Rica's islands. It actually consists of 2 uninhabited islands, situated in front of the Curu Wildlife Refuge. The clear, turquoise waters afford excellent snorkeling and diving, and the white sand beaches lined with swaying palm trees provide the most sought-after setting in the world: a tropical island paradise.



Pelican Pit Stop - Next door to San Lucas, the former penal colony of Costa Rica

Costa Rica's Most Infamous Island

San Lucas is the most infamous because the worst of society's undesirables were banished to a prison built on this isolated 2,000 acre island. The prisoners essentially ran the community and fished, farmed and did all necessary domestic chores.

A book called 'La Isla de los Hombres Solos' was written by José León Sánchez who spent thirty years in this prison. It is supposedly an excellent book but, unfortunately hard to find.

Written by Scott Oliver, author of 1: How To Buy Costa Rica Real Estate Without Losing Your Camisa, 2: Costa Rica's Guide To Making Money Offshore and 3. ¿Cómo Comprar Bienes Raíces en Costa Rica, Sin Perder Su Camisa?

Scott Oliver's Four Books.

Central Pacific Coast Real Estate For Sale!

For more information about living in or near Jaco, on the Central Pacific Coast, please contact our Recommended Realtors in Jaco using the simple form below: