Obama Plan To Depopulate Montana Raises Crisis Fears In Moscow
World's Largest English Language News Service with Over 500 Articles Updated Daily

"The News You Need Today…For The World You’ll Live In Tomorrow."

What You Aren’t Being Told About The World You Live In

Picking up the Pieces: Practical Guide for Surviving Economic Crashes, Internal Unrest and Military Suppression By: Sorcha Faal “In the span of less than 3 months gasoline prices will rise 500%. The prices of both food and shelter rise over 300%. (Continued)

Partisans Handbook: By: Sorcha Faal “Essential Survival Guide For Resisting Foreign Military Occupation, Escape And Evasion Techniques, Surviving Interrogation, Facing Execution, Wilderness Survival (Continued)

The Great Refusal: An Historical Guide To Christian Suicide: By: Sorcha Faal is a MUST book for anyone who has contemplated suicide, tried suicide or has had someone they know commit suicide. For as the Sorcha Faal quotes in this psychologically, spiritual, monumental and controversial work: “The whole secret of existence is to have no fear. Never fear what will become of you. Only the moment you reject all are you freed.” (Continued)

January 17, 2014

Obama Plan To Depopulate Montana Raises Crisis Fears In Moscow

By: Sorcha Faal, and as reported to her Western Subscribers

A shocking report prepared by the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment of the Russian Federation (MINPRIRODY) circulating in the Kremlin today warns that the Obama regime has begun “a rapid implementation” of what will eventually become the largest internal displacement of American citizens in history that experts warn will “most certainly” lead to civil war in the United States.

According to this report, information relating to this pending human rights disaster in the US was obtained by MINPRIRODY analysts tasked with examining a “significant portion” of the nearly two million highly classified top-secret documents obtained from the United States Department of Defense (DOD) run National Security Agency-Central Security Service (NSA/CSS) by the American ex-patriot Edward Snowden.

Critical to note, this report says, (and as confirmed by Western news sources) most of the top-secret documents obtained by Snowden concerned US military activities rather than civil liberty violations by the NSA/CSS, though the latter has, by far, received the most global attention.

Specifically to note, this report continues, are the Snowden documents revealing US military activities related to the “mass internal displacement” of American citizens from the State of Montana and other rural areas of the United States that is now in its earliest stages and is set to accelerate over the next 3 years.

MINPRIRODY experts speaking directly with Snowden about these documents, along with Federal Security Services (FSB) analysts, state in this report that this information, in fact, was what led him (Snowden) to travel to India from Japan on 2 September 2010 for an intensive six day course in computer hacking and programming at Koenig Solutions, and which began his path from a virtual unknown to his status today of being “the most wanted man on earth.”

As to the exact methodology being implemented by the Obama regime against its own citizens in this planned mass depopulation event, this report says, involves the use of US environmental agencies seizing millions of acres of land from their present American owners and transferring its ownership to their indigenous population in areas known as Indian Reservations.

Shockingly, this report continues, the Obama regime began implementing this “master plan” when the Obama regimes US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on 6 December 2013 [photo top left] gave over ownership of the entire city of Riverton, Wyoming to the Wind River Indian Reservation thus depriving over 10,000 American citizens of their home ownership rights.

Important to note, this report says, is that the Obama regimes EPA used what is called the Clean Air Act to steal these American homes and land as a part of this environmental legislation allows indigenous tribes to file applications as a state in order to delineate boundaries and receive higher levels of grant funding for monitoring their air quality.

States — or in this case, the tribes — must monitor up to 50 miles beyond any boundary demarcating land monitored under the Clean Air Act. Because the Wind River Indian Reservation surrounds Riverton, the Obama regime found that the city falls under the jurisdiction of the tribes.

Wyoming State Senator Leland Christensen in response to this unprecedented Obama “land grab” stated “This is an alarming action when you have a federal agency step in and start to undo congressional acts that has really been our history for 108 years … with the stroke of a pen without talking to the biggest groups impacted, and that would be the city of Riverton and the state of Wyoming.”

Snowden’s documents, however, this report says, show that Riverton, Wyoming is “just the beginning” of the Obama regimes plans to divest these rural Americans of their homes and land with the entire western half of the State of Montana [4th in size, but 44th in population and 48th in population density of the 50 United States] set to become the next target of depopulation.

Like Riverton, Wyoming, this report continues, the Obama regimes EPA next is set to steal the homes and lands of over 118,000 Montanans that are surrounded by the Flathead Indian Reservation using as a pretext US federal water laws which on the EPA’s own website states can be made up by Obama anytime he wants, to wit: “Presidential Executive Orders (EOs) play a central role in a number of Office of Water activities. EOs are legally binding orders that direct EPA and other federal agencies in their execution of Congressionally established laws and policies.”

Using as a pretext for seizing this Montana land from its present owners, this report says, is the proposed water compact (1,400 pages long, a decade in the making and bewilderingly complex) that lays out the water rights of the Flathead Indian Reservation tribe and water users like farmers and ranchers that the Obama regimes EPA is ready to abrogate and take total control over itself.

Having the most to gain from this unprecedented land seizure, this report warns, is the Obama regime protected biotechnology giant Monsanto whose genetically modified crops are currently grown on these millions of acres set to be taken, but under a US Supreme Court ruling titled Montana v. United States would nevermore face lawsuits due to their dangerous and defective foods.

With Obama this past week vowing to bypass the US Congress and write his own laws (“I’ve got a pen.”), this report concludes, the likelihood that the peoples in Wyoming and Montana will sit still while their homes and lands are taken remains “highly doubtful.”

And with Snowden’s documents now proving the Obama regimes intent to us the military against them, civil war is now said to be “a certainty.”

January 17, 2014 © EU and US all rights reserved. Permission to use this report in its entirety is granted under the condition it is linked back to its original source at WhatDoesItMean.Com. Freebase content licensed under CC-BY and GFDL.

[Ed. Note: Western governments and their intelligence services actively campaign against the information found in these reports so as not to alarm their citizens about the many catastrophic Earth changes and events to come, a stance that the Sisters of Sorcha Faal strongly disagrees with in believing that it is every human beings right to know the truth. Due to our missions conflicts with that of those governments, the responses of their ‘agents’ against us has been a longstanding misinformation/misdirection campaign designed to discredit and which is addressed in the report “Who Is Sorcha Faal?”.]

Americans Celebrate Last Year As Free People

They Are Going To Come For You…Why Are You Helping Them?

Return To Main Page