National Ocean Policy Implementation Plan

To translate President Obama's National Policy for the Stewardship of the Ocean, Our Coasts, and the Great Lakes into on-the-ground actions to benefit the American people, the National Ocean Council released the National Ocean Policy Implementation Plan. The Implementation Plan describes specific actions Federal agencies will take to address key ocean challenges, give states and communities greater input in Federal decisions, streamline Federal operations, save taxpayer dollars, and promote economic growth.

The Council developed the Implementation Plan over the past two years with extensive input from national, regional, and local stakeholders from all marine sectors; tribal, State and local governments; and the private sector, scientists and the public.

In early 2012, the National Ocean Council released for public comment the draft Implementation Plan. The final Implementation Plan incorporates suggestions on the draft, including key support for local and regional capacity and self-determination, and the development of more and better information related to ocean conditions. The plan specifies that regional stakeholders will determine the scope, scale and content of collaborative marine planning, that participation is voluntary, and that regional planning bodies will be established only in regions that want them.

Click here to read the press release.

Click here to read the Implementation Plan.

Click here to read the Implementation Plan Appendix.

Click here to read the Draft Implementation Plan and the public comments received.

For more information, visit the National Ocean Council website.

The Interagency Ocean Policy Task Force

On June 12, 2009, President Obama sent a memorandum to the heads of executive departments and Federal agencies establishing an Interagency Ocean Policy Task Force and charged it with developing recommendations to enhance national stewardship of the ocean, coasts, and Great Lakes. The Task Force released interim reports for public comment in September 2009 and December 2009, and received and reviewed close to 5,000 written comments from Congress, stakeholders, and the public before finalizing its recommendations. President Obama signed an Executive Order on July 19, 2010 adopting the Final Recommendations and establishing a National Policy for the Stewardship of the Ocean, Coasts, and Great Lakes.

Read the Final Recommendations of the Interagency Ocean Policy Task Force