Security vet: 'Smoking gun' email should put Hillary in prison
The handling of an email to Hillary Clinton from longtime adviser Sidney Blumenthal discovered in a new release of documents is a “smoking gun” violation of national security laws requiring a prison sentence, charges a former military intelligence officer.

Clinton forwarded the Aug. 8, 2009, email – clearly marked “Classified” – to a personal, nonsecure email address registered to aide Huma Abedin, [email protected] Abedin then forwarded the message to another personal, nonsecure account, [email protected]

The exchange from Blumenthal to Clinton concerned the “disastrous nature” of an Obama trip to Germany, charging the U.S. was “totally out of the loop in Berlin – no ambassador,” resulting in the expectation that “Germans and Russians will now cut their own separate deals on energy, regional security, etc.”

Jerome Corsi’s “Partners in Crime: The Clintons’ Scheme to Monetize the White House for Personal Profit,” is available only at the WND Superstore!

“This email is completely an obvious violation of national security regulations regarding the handling of classified information for which people normally go to prison,” Greg Davis, a U.S. Army veteran with more than 30 years experience as a military intelligence officer, told WND in an interview.

Davis, the creator of the intelligence-oriented website SpookdBlog.com, said that typically Justice Department would grant Abedin immunity from prosecution in return for her willingness to turn state’s evidence against Clinton.

“If Huma refused to cooperate, the Department of Justice could threaten to seek a maximum prison term for her should their effort to bring a criminal prosecution against her succeed,” he said.

Should President Trump try to prosecute Hillary? Sign the hottest petition in America now to show your support!

The information previously was published by the State Department, but it was unknown until now that Clinton forwarded the exchange containing classified information to Abedin’s nonsecure non-State Department account.

The email was among 510 pages of documents released by Judicial Watch last week.

Davis’ LinkedIn biography reads: “30+ years in intelligence operations and analysis, with operational experience in every HUMINT (Human Intelligence) capacity including C1 (Command and Control), Special Operations, at the Defense Intelligence Agency and CIA, and analytical positions at Department of Defense, Defense Intelligence Agency, and State Department.”

Davis also holds a master’s degree in international economics from Georgetown University and the University of Oxford.

Related stories:

Hillary sent ‘marked classified’ info to nonsecure Abedin account

Hillary’s newest headache: Sex and emails

Security vet: ‘Smoking gun’ email should put Hillary in prison

Huma Abedin forwarded sensitive material to personal email

Hillary’s chief of staff used personal email for State business

‘Classified emails still at Yahoo.com’

WND reported that of the 725 pages of Abedin-related State Department emails released Aug. 22 by Judicial Watch, approximately two-thirds were forwarded by Abedin to one of two personal email addresses she controlled.

Davis spelled out the security vulnerability that Abedin created by forwarding the classified information to her Yahoo account.

“By sending this email containing clearly classified information to a personal unsecured email address at Yahoo.com, Huma Abedin created an intelligence breach where anyone with the username and password to her Yahoo.com had the ability to go into her Yahoo.com email account and read every one of the State Department emails that Huma archived in that account in a completely not-redacted form,” Davis said.

WND sent a test email to [email protected], but it bounced back as undeliverable, suggesting the email account was no longer active.

This, however, did not give Davis any comfort.

“Whether the email account is active or not, an expert hacker breaking through to Yahoo.com might yet be able to recover the emails Huma Abedin sent to herself at that address,” he said.

Davis said a federal or state court order could be sought to force Yahoo.com to make public the State Department emails Abedin emailed to her account.

“You could also file a FOIA request to the National Security Agency to obtain the State Department emails that Huma sent to her Yahoo.com account,” Davis pointed out.

Should President Trump try to prosecute Hillary? Sign the hottest petition in America now to show your support!

“You can bet that as part of its monitoring of all U.S. emails, the NSA has copies sitting on NSA servers of all emails sent to and from Abedin’s Yahoo.com, including all the State Department emails she sent to herself,” he said.

“The information is still there, at the NSA, even if Yahoo.com has closed Abedin’s email account.”

Davis stressed the NSA archive of Abedin emails at Yahoo.com would include complete, non-redacted copies of emails that may have been destroyed by Clinton or by her IT assistants.

Jerome Corsi’s “Partners in Crime: The Clintons’ Scheme to Monetize the White House for Personal Profit,” is available only at the WND Superstore!