Wreaths Across America
Frequently Asked Questions

Why do we use live wreaths to decorate graves?

Wreaths Across America™ feels strongly that we do not “decorate” graves. We are honoring all veterans and active military by placing wreaths on the headstones of veterans. The fresh evergreens are a symbol used for centuries to recognize honor, and a living tribute renewed annually. To use plastic wreaths that are put in storage each year is exactly the kind of tradition we want to avoid – it makes for great photos but misses the point. People who spend time participating each year, raising sponsorships and talking about how important this symbolic gesture is, are part of our mission. We want people to see the tradition as a living memorial to veterans and their families , whom we remember amid the hustle and bustle of the holiday season. We believe that the sacrifices they made are more than worth the effort.

What Sections And Stones Are Chosen For Wreaths?

Wreaths Across America as an organization, is a guest on the cemetery ground and defers to the decision of cemetery administration on all matters of policy and procedure. It is our belief that each wreath honors all veterans and that one day we will place a wreath on every headstone. At this time, the designated sections to receive wreaths are rotated each year so families will see wreath placed for their loved ones.

What About Wreaths On Jewish Graves?

This has been a challenging question as we have received requests and advice on both sides of this question about whether to place wreaths on stones showing the Star Of David. Wreaths Across America works closely with the Cemetery Administrators, and members of each community to honor our veterans in the way that most appropriately recognizes their service, our diversity and unification as Americans. Ultimately, as guests on the cemetery grounds our policies will match those of the Cemetery Administration at each participating location.

Do you accept grave specific requests?

We do not accept grave specific requests through the Wreaths Across America™ office. If you are interested in having a wreaths placed on a specific grave, we can put you in touch with the Location Leader, who will know whether they can accommodate your request.

How can I get a wreath for my loved one who is not buried in a participating cemetery?

This year Wreaths Across America™ is offering wreaths delivered to homes as third party gifts or ordered to be sent to your own home. We can now ship a wreath to an individual, for a small shipping fee, for placement at a non-participating location. Please watch the website merchandise pages and you will see that information when it comes up. From time to time WAA has special offers like the Memorial Wreath as well, so it is best to check the merchandise page often.

How do I get involved with WAA, and what can I do to help?

There are a number of ways for volunteers to get involved. Here is a short list of events coordinated each year. Please keep in mind there is NO COST to attend or participate in a Wreaths Across America™ event.

Wreaths Across America™ Day – On a Saturday in December, see events page or front page for specific date.

Escort of Wreaths to Arlington (or any of the other locations featuring wreath escorts)

State House Ceremony – in all 50 states and at our Nation’s Capital

‘Thanks-A-Million’ handout card program to thank our veterans and active military

WAA Education Program –work with our materials in your local schools

You can also volunteer to have another location in your state participate in the national remembrance Ceremony, or you can start or work with a local group to raise funds for the wreaths for your local ceremony, or for Arlington. Get more information on our home page.

You can sponsor wreaths yourself, or make a contribution to our organization. All information is available on our home page.

Why do we spend money on the fallen when living veterans have so many needs?

We have found throughout our experience over the years, that the wreath-laying tradition is NOT only for the fallen and those who have passed on, but for living veterans, our active military, and for their families – all of whom have sacrificed to provide for our freedoms. If you ask a Gold Star Mother about the loss of her son or daughter, their biggest fear is that their memory will be forgotten. That is why we believe it is so important to take the time amid the hustle and bustle of the holidays, to stop and remember our blessings that have come at such a great cost.

We recognize that there are a lot of needs out there, and one of those needs is that we stop and take the time in a symbolic way to show our appreciation to those families for our freedoms. There is a famous quote that says “One is never truly dead until they are forgotten.” And we have made it our mission to Remember, Honor, and Teach those memories.

Are sponsorships tax deductible?

Yes, contributions made to WAA and sponsorships are tax deductible to the fullest extent allowable. You should always consult a tax professional.

What service does Wreaths Across America offer my Location besides wreaths?

Wreaths Across America™ maintains a Headquarters that facilitates and coordinates all wreath sponsorships and their delivery. We maintain a web site that handles on-line sponsorships that are credited to the appropriate fundraising group, and sent to the designated location.

Wreaths Across America™ is trademarked, nationally recognized name. We offer local groups the ability to raise funds as part of a national effort, making it easier to generate funds for sponsorships, and offering the option of sharing in the funds raised.

Ceremonial wreaths are donated by Worcester Wreath Company. Sponsored memorial wreaths are guaranteed for quality and delivery.

All sanctioned Wreaths Across America™ events are insured for general liability through Wreaths Across America™.

All educational materials and other downloads are made available at no cost.

In the event of a special ceremony or funeral Wreaths Across America™ accepts requests for donated wreaths.

Can our group raise funds and buy wreaths locally using the Wreaths Across America™ name?

Wreaths Across America™ is a trademarked name. In order to protect our mission, our tax exempt status, and our trademark, all activities planned and funds raised using our name must be processed through our headquarters. If you have questions please contact the WAA office.