Knife-wielding man stabs teenager, 2 others inside East Liberty Target
Police said three people -- including a 16-year-old girl who was shopping with her family -- were stabbed inside the East Liberty Target store by a homeless man who was wanted by the U.S. Marshals Service for an unspecified probation violation.

Silverdale Baptist Academy in Chattanooga, Tenn., posted a Facebook message that identified the teen as a student, Allison Meadows, and said she had surgery on her arm and back and to restore air to a collapsed lung. This tweet came from Meadows' Twitter account on Monday night: "Hey y'all. This is actually Allison … thank you all so much for your prayers! I will try to get back with you all as soon as I can. ? Y'all!"

"After hearing the actual details of the attack, only God could have saved her life," the school's Facebook post said. "Our job now should be to pray for the Meadows family and Allison, show our love and support, and be there for them should they need us. Praise God that this little girl was being watched over and she we will be back home soon."

Silverdale Baptist Academy headmaster Becky Hansard told Channel 4 Action News' Bob Mayo that Meadows' lung was "working well" after doctors were able to inflate it.



"She doesn't need any medical assistance or equipment at all, so we're very, very pleased about that," said Hansard. "I truly believe that God used that conditioning and athletic body that Allison has to really help her come through this very well."

Hosea Davis, who was also wounded when he tried to disarm the girl's attacker, visited with Meadows and her family at the hospital on Tuesday.

Pittsburgh police said 41-year-old Leon Raymond Walls entered the store on Penn Avenue just after 5:30 p.m. Monday and headed toward the restroom. Shortly after, two men came in looking for him, and one of them followed him into the restroom, where he was chased out by the knife-wielding Walls, police said. (Slideshow: Photos from the scene)

"I took a peek at the top of the steps, and the guy was chasing the dude around with a long, long knife. It was a long, long knife. He was chasing him around through the aisles," a witness told Channel 4 Action News reporter Andrew Del Greco.

According to the criminal complaint, the incident began when Walls stabbed a man named Jobe Wright near a construction site on nearby Highland Avenue. Police said Walls ran down the street toward Penn Circle and into Target, followed by Wright, his friend Michael Turner, and Tyrique Walker, who called 911 to report their location, and Roland Smith, who grabbed a baseball bat to help Wright.

Once they were all inside the store, "Walls saw Walker and attempted to stab him with a large swing at his neck area," the complaint said. "Walls, missing his target, then moved towards the checkout area at the Target store where he began trying to stab additional victims who were in the store. Walls then grabbed Allison Meadows and held her against her will at knifepoint in one of the checkout lanes to use her as a shield. Victims Hosea Davis, Mike Turner, Jobe Wright and Roland Smith attempted to subdue Walls and to free Meadows when they saw him poke the knife into Meadows' back."

A witness told Del Greco, "I went back up the top of the steps, and he had this girl by the top of her hair. He just kept screaming, 'I'll stab her again.' He kept stabbing her. Me and like four or five other guys, they ran and tackled him. He cut the one guy's lip almost off. The other guy's finger was, like, hanging off."

The witness said he grabbed a bat that was on the ground and beat Walls with it, helping to subdue the man until police arrived. "That little girl, he just kept stabbing her. I just couldn't stand there and watch that. You can't stand there and watch that," he said. "It was crazy in there. That was horrible. That was something you don't want to see again, ever."

Turner told channel four action news, "I had to jump in because I couldn’t hear her screaming, the screaming.. it just got the best of me..."

(Raw Video: Witness describes using baseball bat to stop stabbing)

Police said Meadows was taken to Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh in critical condition with cuts to her back and arm, while two of the men -- one with a cut to his lip and another with cuts to his fingers -- were taken to UPMC Presbyterian. None of the injuries were believed to be life-threatening. A police officer was treated for pepper spray exposure, and another person was taken to UPMC Shadyside with chest pains, police said.

Walls was first taken to UPMC Mercy to be treated for pepper spray exposure, then was taken to the Allegheny County Jail for arraignment on charges including attempted homicide, aggravated assault, recklessly endangering another person, unlawful restraint, simple assault and resisting arrest.

Walls has no prior criminal record in Pennsylvania. Online records indicate that he has also lived in Queens, N.Y., and Trenton, N.J.