Right of reply: African Daily Voice did not publish these false stories
The director of the news agency African Daily Voice clarifies that his website is not responsible for several false stories that Africa Check have fact-checked.

The pan-African press agency African Daily Voice (ADV) has read several articles published on your site (in English) and available under these links:

11:48 | 14th December 2018 (GMT)

https://africacheck.org/fbcheck/duterte-statue-in-nairobi-african-daily-voice-makes-up-another-story

01:28 | 12th December 2018 (GMT)

No, eSwatini hasn’t passed a law to let its king marry ‘14-year-old virgins’

https://africacheck.org/fbcheck/no-eswatini-hasnt-passed-a-law-to-let-its-king-marry-14-year-old-virgins

10:18 | 4th December 2018 (GMT)

HOAX ALERT: ‘Man selling human meat in Nairobi butchery’ story is false

All of these articles contain inaccurate information, which our news agency African Daily Voice wishes to rectify in order to avoid confusion in the minds of the public.

Our company officially recognized and present in several African countries under the generic name “African Daily Voice – ADV“, operates under the unique URL www.africandailyvoice.com, is foreign to the publisher of the site http://afrikan-daily.com who illegally exploits our identity and logo.

Our press agency African Daily Voice (ADV) condemns these practices and reaffirms that its editorial staff in three languages (French, English and Arabic) are not responsible for the publications of this site, obviously specialized in fake news.

The brand “African Daily Voice (ADV)” and its logo are the exclusive property of the multimedia group called “African Daily Voice”.

We invite Africa Check to kindly check its information to avoid any confusion.

African Daily Voice (ADV) has entrusted this case to its lawyers in order to put an end to the usurpation of its brand and every resulting abuse.

Thanks for kindly respecting our right of reply,

Please accept, dear colleagues, the expression of our respectful greetings.

Toussaint Alain

Director, African Daily Voice (ADV)

© Copyright Africa Check 2018. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.