Americans for Prosperity Promotes Donald Bryson to NC State Director

“Bryson has shown tireless leadership in building a grassroots movement for limited government”

RALEIGH – Americans for Prosperity’s North Carolina chapter today announced the promotion of Donald Bryson to be the new State Director. Bryson formerly served as Deputy State Director, Policy Analyst, and Field Director for the organization, starting in 2011. He succeeds John Dudley, who resigned last week to pursue new opportunities.

“We are proud to promote a proven leader from within our ranks to head one of Americans for Prosperity’s strongest and largest state chapters,” explained Tim Phillips, President of AFP. “From his start as a field director in 2011, Bryson has shown tireless leadership in building a grassroots movement for limited government in his home state. Donald’s proven skills and experience will serve him well as he fights alongside fellow North Carolinians for greater freedom, higher levels of prosperity, and lower taxes. We look forward to seeing many more great things from him in the years to come.”

Bryson has been crucial in the North Carolina chapter’s efforts to pass tax reform, expand school choice, stymie corporate welfare, and hold Senator Kay Hagan accountable for her support for ObamaCare and wasteful Washington spending. Bryson offered the following statement:

“I am honored and humbled by the opportunity to lead our North Carolina chapter. North Carolina is my home and it’s a joy to come to work everyday to build a movement in support of less government and more freedom. We’ve come a long way in the last few years with budget and tax reform, the expansion of school choice, ending wasteful spending, and other legislative accomplishments that increase economic freedom and well-being. However, our work is far from over, and it will be exciting to lead the efforts to help North Carolina become a beacon for greater prosperity and liberty in the south.”

For further information or an interview, please contact Donald Bryson at DBryson@afphq.org or 919-710-0484

Americans for Prosperity (AFP) is a nationwide organization of citizen-leaders committed to advancing every individual’s right to economic freedom and opportunity. AFP believes reducing the size and intrusiveness of government is the best way to promote individual productivity and prosperity for all Americans. AFP does not support or oppose any political party or candidate for office. For more information, visit www.americansforprosperity.org

###