AEI Capital Corporation
Robert P. Johnson

Founder, President, Since 1970. Founder, director and majority owner of AEI Capital Corporation. He is involved in the development, analysis, marketing and management of public and private net leased property investment programs. He chairs the AEI investment committee.

Patrick W. Keene, CPA (Inactive)

Chief Financial Officer, Since 1986. Certified Public Accountant and Chief Financial Officer, Secretary, Treasurer, and an owner of AEI Capital Corporation. Pat joined AEI in 1986 and is responsible for all accounting and tax matters, including preparation of SEC and investor reports. His prior experience was with KPMG Peat Marwick Certified Public Accountants as an auditor and tax manager.

Rona L. Newtson, CRCP

Executive Vice President of Compliance & Operations, Since 1993. Executive Vice President of Compliance and Operations, a FINRA General Securities Principal and an owner of AEI Capital Corporation. Rona joined AEI in 1993 and is responsible for meeting the securities and regulatory requirements for AEI affiliate companies and Funds.

Marni Nygard, Esq.

Chief Investment Officer, Since 2005. Chief Investment Officer. Marni joined AEI in 2005 and is responsible for managing acquisition and disposition processes for AEI. Prior to joining AEI, she was employed as an attorney at CI Title in St. Paul, Minnesota in the residential and commercial property departments.

Paula R. Tillett

Executive Vice President - National Key Accounts/Distribution Director, Since 2002. National Key Accounts Manager and the Regional Marketing Director for the north-central sales region. Paula joined AEI in 2002 and is responsible for broker-dealer relationship management and coordinates the review and approval of AEI Fund offerings. She is also responsible for Fund and TIC/1031 sales in the north-central region. Prior to joining AEI, she was employed with Salomon Smith Barney as a Financial Adviser.

Kyle Hagen, CCIM

Vice President - Portfolio Management, Since 2018. Vice President - Portfolio Mananagement. Kyle is responsible for the management of the AEI portfolio of net lease properties. He manages property sales, leasing and tenant negotiations with a focus on maximizing asset value. Kyle was previously employed by AEI from 2011 through 2016 in both the acquisitions and asset management departments. Prior to rejoining AEI, he was employed by East Lake Capital Management as Vice President and lead originator for healthcare real estate investments throughout the United States.

Brian Schulz

Vice President of Asset Management, Since 1996. Vice President of Asset Management. Brian joined AEI in 1996 and is responsible for managing tenant lease compliance and property maintenance obligations. Prior to joining AEI, he was responsible for risk management with Travelers Express Company, Inc. and Dun & Bradstreet, Inc.