No, Orlando Pirates hasn’t fired player after arrest for rape of 12-year-old
Trends Daily is at it again.

The platform publishes on at least two websites – trendsdaily.co.za and hinnews.com – and three Facebook pages: Latest Football News, Latest News South Africa and Mzansi Football.

But one thing stays the same, as Africa Check has found. Its “news” can’t be trusted.

We’ve already busted its false stories on South African football. But this time Trends Daily has taken a real and tragic report on the rape of a 12-year-old girl in the Eastern Cape province and used it for clickbait.

Story copied from News24 report

“Pirates Terminate Their Player Contract After He Was Arrested For Raping 12-Year-Old Girl,” reads the Trends Daily headline. (“Pirates” is short for Orlando Pirates, a major South African football club.)

The story begins: “A 27-year-old man who identified himself as Pirates player has been arrested in Butterworth, in the Eastern Cape, on Sunday for allegedly raping a 12-year-old girl, police said.” It was published on 19 February 2019.

Except for the headline and first paragraph, the story is a word-for-word copy of a News24 article published on 18 February under the headline: “Eastern Cape man arrested for rape of 12-year-old girl”.

That article begins: “A 27-year-old man was arrested in Butterworth, in the Eastern Cape, on Sunday for allegedly raping a 12-year-old girl, police said.” There is no mention of the man being a Pirates player.

And no credible news reports of Orlando Pirates terminating a player’s contract after his arrest for the rape of a child can be found.

Photo is five years old

Trends Daily posted its story on all three of its Facebook pages. The photo in the post shows a handcuffed man climbing into the back of a South African police van.

But a reverse image search shows the photo has been online since at least 2014.

It was used in an EWN news report, dated 10 November 2014, on the arrest of police officers in Parow in the Western Cape province. – Mary Alexander (21/02/19)

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.