Israeli prime minister didn’t say Biafra would ‘overtake Nigeria as Africa’s giant’
A report claiming Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Biafra would take over from Nigeria as the giant of Africa has been circulating on Facebook.

Biafra refers to the South-Eastern region of Nigeria, which sought to secede from the country in 1967, leading to the 30-month Nigeria-Biafra civil war.

Some of the Facebook posts linking to the report have been shared over 200 times.

The report claims Netanyahu said: “Biafra is a Jewish nation in Africa and the moment Biafrans go out from Nigeria, within five years, they will take over from Nigeria as the giant of Africa.”

There is no evidence that the Israeli prime minister made such a statement publicly.

Speech at Holocaust memorial

Netanyahu’s only known public reference to Biafra was in his remarks at the Holocaust Martyrs’ and Heroes’ Remembrance Day ceremony at Yad Vashem in April 2017.

In the speech he mentioned Biafra as one of the places mass murder had occurred without the world’s intervention since World War II.

A transcript of his remarks, which were in Hebrew, reads: “It is true that since World War II, no tragedy on the scale of the Holocaust has occurred, but there are many cases in which the world just stood by and did nothing to prevent the destruction of peoples or mass murder: in Biafra, in Cambodia, in Rwanda, in Sudan and indeed, also in Syria.”

Netanyahu was referring to the civil war, which caused an estimated 1 to 3 million deaths. – Allwell Okpi (26/03/2019)

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.