ADW: Pteropus vampyrus: INFORMATION
Reproduction Pteropus vampyrus is most often polygynous, with males protecting a small harem and mating with up to ten females. Dominant males occupy the best roosting sites, and there is a social hierarchy among males. (Organization for Bat Conservation, 2011; Tampa's Lowry Park Zoo, 2010) Mating System

polygynous Unlike other pteropods, which have fused horns on the baculum, Pteropus vampyrus has a saddle-shaped baculum. It ranges from 4.5 to 8.2 mm and is wider than it is long. Females typically give birth to only one offspring per year. Synchronous birthing occurs within each population, and timing depends on local geography and seasonality. In peninsular Malaysia, mating peaks from November to January. In Thailand, birthing peaks during March and April and in the Philippines it peaks during April and May. In captive populations, birthing peaks during May and June. Mean body mass newborns is 133g (20-30% of maternal body mass) and their forearm length is around 79.5 mm. Mothers carry their young during the first few days after parturition, then leave them at the roost during foraging bouts. Young are weaned by 2 to 3 months after birth. (Kunz and Jones, 2000) Key Reproductive Features

iteroparous

seasonal breeding

gonochoric/gonochoristic/dioecious (sexes separate)

sexual

viviparous Breeding interval once yearly

Breeding season Mating season varies according to local geography and climate

Range number of offspring 1 to 2

Average number of offspring 1

Range gestation period 140 to 192 days

Range weaning age 2 to 3 months

Average age at sexual or reproductive maturity (female) 2 years

Average age at sexual or reproductive maturity (male) 2 years Pteropus vampyrus offspring are born with eyes open and fully furred, but in many ways are altricial. They are carried with the mother initially, then left in the roost after a couple of days so that the mother can feed. Mothers nurse young for the first 2 to 3 months after parturition, or until weaning is complete, which can be anywhere from 3 to 5 months. All parental care is provided by the mother, though males often help protect and defend their harem. (Kunz and Jones, 2000; Organization for Bat Conservation, 2011) Parental Investment

altricial

female parental care

pre-fertilization provisioning protecting male

pre-hatching/birth provisioning female protecting male female

pre-weaning/fledging provisioning female protecting male female

pre-independence provisioning female protecting female



Communication and Perception During flight, Pteropus vampyrus tends to remain silent. During feeding, however, it is often very noisy. Returning to the roost at dawn is also associated with loud vocalizations, which are used in territorial behavior and to help maintain inter-individual spacing at roost sites. Evidence suggests that P. vampyrus vocalizes to communicate emotion as well. It uses vision rather then echolocation for in-flight navigation, and they find food using their acute senses of sight and smell. (Mohd-Azlan, et al., 2011; Oakland Zoo, 2011) Communication Channels

visual

tactile

acoustic Other Communication Modes

choruses

pheromones

scent marks Perception Channels

visual

tactile

acoustic

chemical

Food Habits Large flying foxes feed on flowers, nectar, and fruit such as bananas and mangos. Common foods also include the pollen and flowers of coconut, durian, and fig trees. When foraging, they slice the rind with their teeth and extract the fruit with their long tongue, which is also used for lapping up nectar. They can carry up to 200 g of food at a time. On a daily basis, large flying foxes can eat half of their body weight in fruit. (Kunz and Jones, 2000; Oakland Zoo, 2011) Primary Diet

herbivore frugivore

Plant Foods

leaves

fruit

nectar

pollen

flowers

Predation Pteropus vampyrus is commonly hunted for food and sport throughout its geographic range. In peninsular Malaysia, an estimated 22,000 flying foxes are legally hunted each year. No other information exits on potential predators of this species. Its nocturnal and roosting lifestyle likely decreases risk of predation. (Ardea, 2009) Known Predators Humans (Homo sapiens)



Ecosystem Roles Flying foxes are important frugivores in tropical forests. They serve as seed dispersers and pollinators of forest trees, including durian, which produce a high-priced fruit that is considered a delicacy in southeast Asia. Members of the genus Pteropus are often the only seed dispersers or pollinators large enough to carry the large fruit they feed upon. They also pollinate canopy trees when searching for nectar. Seed dispersal by large flying foxes is thought to play an important role in the regeneration of cleared forests. They are host to the parasitic nematode Litmosa maki, which inhabits the abdominal cavity. In malaysia, ectoparasites from the families Laelapidae, Nycteribiidae, and Spinturnicidae have also been reported. (Ardea, 2009; Brown, 1997; Mohd-Azlan, et al., 2011; Muscarella and Fleming, 2007) Ecosystem Impact

disperses seeds

pollinates Commensal/Parasitic Species

parasitic nematode ( Litmosa maki )

) mites (Laelapidae)

mites ( Spinturnicidae )

) bat flies ( Nycteribiidae )

Economic Importance for Humans: Negative In some areas, large flying foxes are viewed as agricultural pests, as forage sites often include fruit farms. They are also exceptionally noisy while feeding, and many farmers use flapping or whirling devices and bright lights to deter them. Large flying foxes carry a number of zoonotic diseases such as the Hendra virus and the Nipah virus. Nipah virus first appeared in humans in Malaysia in 1998, followed by cases in Bangladesh and India. Evidence suggests that large flying foxes are reservoirs for a number of different henipaviruses, including Nipah. In particular, it is suspected that this species was the reservoir hosts of the 1998 Nipah outbreak in pigs and humans. The long distance movements of large flying foxes increases its potential to transfer these diseases to other countries in the Australian and Asian regions. (Breed, et al., 2010; Hassan, et al., 2010; Kunz and Jones, 2000) Negative Impacts

injures humans carries human disease

crop pest

causes or carries domestic animal disease

Synonyms include for Pteropus vampyrus include Pteropus caninus, Pteropus celaeno, Pteropus edulis, Pteropus funereus, Pteropus javanicus, Pteropus kalou, Pteropus kelaarti, Pteropus kopangi, Pteropus lanensis, Pteropus malaccensis, Pteropus natunae, Pteropus nudus, Pteropus phaiops, Pteropus pluton, Pteropus pteronotus, and Pteropus sumatrensis. ("ARKive Images of Life on Earth", 2011)

Contributors Kelsie Norton (author), University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, Phil Myers (editor), University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, John Berini (editor), Animal Diversity Web Staff.

Glossary acoustic uses sound to communicate agricultural living in landscapes dominated by human agriculture. altricial young are born in a relatively underdeveloped state; they are unable to feed or care for themselves or locomote independently for a period of time after birth/hatching. In birds, naked and helpless after hatching. arboreal Referring to an animal that lives in trees; tree-climbing. bilateral symmetry having body symmetry such that the animal can be divided in one plane into two mirror-image halves. Animals with bilateral symmetry have dorsal and ventral sides, as well as anterior and posterior ends. Synapomorphy of the Bilateria. causes or carries domestic animal disease either directly causes, or indirectly transmits, a disease to a domestic animal chemical uses smells or other chemicals to communicate choruses to jointly display, usually with sounds, at the same time as two or more other individuals of the same or different species dominance hierarchies ranking system or pecking order among members of a long-term social group, where dominance status affects access to resources or mates drug a substance used for the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease endothermic animals that use metabolically generated heat to regulate body temperature independently of ambient temperature. Endothermy is a synapomorphy of the Mammalia, although it may have arisen in a (now extinct) synapsid ancestor; the fossil record does not distinguish these possibilities. Convergent in birds. female parental care parental care is carried out by females food A substance that provides both nutrients and energy to a living thing. forest forest biomes are dominated by trees, otherwise forest biomes can vary widely in amount of precipitation and seasonality. frugivore an animal that mainly eats fruit herbivore An animal that eats mainly plants or parts of plants. iteroparous offspring are produced in more than one group (litters, clutches, etc.) and across multiple seasons (or other periods hospitable to reproduction). Iteroparous animals must, by definition, survive over multiple seasons (or periodic condition changes). migratory makes seasonal movements between breeding and wintering grounds motile having the capacity to move from one place to another. native range the area in which the animal is naturally found, the region in which it is endemic. nocturnal active during the night oriental found in the oriental region of the world. In other words, India and southeast Asia. pheromones chemicals released into air or water that are detected by and responded to by other animals of the same species polygynous having more than one female as a mate at one time rainforest rainforests, both temperate and tropical, are dominated by trees often forming a closed canopy with little light reaching the ground. Epiphytes and climbing plants are also abundant. Precipitation is typically not limiting, but may be somewhat seasonal. riparian Referring to something living or located adjacent to a waterbody (usually, but not always, a river or stream). scent marks communicates by producing scents from special gland(s) and placing them on a surface whether others can smell or taste them seasonal breeding breeding is confined to a particular season sexual reproduction that includes combining the genetic contribution of two individuals, a male and a female social associates with others of its species; forms social groups. swamp a wetland area that may be permanently or intermittently covered in water, often dominated by woody vegetation. tactile uses touch to communicate terrestrial Living on the ground. territorial defends an area within the home range, occupied by a single animals or group of animals of the same species and held through overt defense, display, or advertisement tropical the region of the earth that surrounds the equator, from 23.5 degrees north to 23.5 degrees south. visual uses sight to communicate viviparous reproduction in which fertilization and development take place within the female body and the developing embryo derives nourishment from the female.