ADW: Pteropodidae: INFORMATION
Diversity Members of Pteropodidae are known colloquially as the flying foxes, or Old World fruit bats. The family is composed of 41 genera and about 170 species. The most species-rich genus in the family is Pteropus with 59 species, many of which are island endemics. Body and wing size ranges from small (37 mm forearm length) to large (220 mm forearm length). The family boasts the largest bats in the world. Pteropus vampyrus individuals have a wingspan of up to 1.7 m. Pteropus giganteus individuals have a comparable wingspan but a greater mass, with males weighing between 1.3 and 1.6 kg. Pteropodids are strictly vegetarian, foraging for fruits, nectar, and pollen using their sight and a sensitive olfactory system. Bats of the genus Rousettus use tongue clicks as a crude form of echolocation while navigating in the dark. Some species are migratory, covering vast distances, while others have more moderate home ranges. Eidolon helvum individuals aggregate in numbers reaching the hundreds of thousands, yet many species roost with only a few conspecifics. Members of Pteropodidae service the ecosystems they inhabit by playing important roles as pollinators and seed dispersers. (Fenton, 2001; Koopman, 1994; Neuweiler, 2000; Nowak, 1999)

Geographic Range Pteropodidae has a tropical and subtropical distribution in the Old World (eastern hemisphere). Species are found as far north as the eastern Mediterranean, continuing along the southern coast of the Arabian Peninsula and across South Asia. Species are found as far south as South Africa, the islands of the Indian Ocean, and to the northern and western coasts of Australia. The longitudinal range reaches from the Atlantic coast of Africa to the islands of the western Pacific. Pteropodids are absent from northwest Africa, southwest Australia, a majority of the Palearctic region, and all of the Western Hemisphere. (Koopman, 1994; Mickleburgh, et al., 1992; Nowak, 1994) Biogeographic Regions

palearctic native

oriental native

ethiopian native

australian native

oceanic islands native



Physical Description The head and body length of pteropodids varies from 50 mm to 406 mm. Despite size, many characteristics are shared among genera. A relatively long rostrum (pronounced in nectarivores), large eyes, and simple external ears give members of this family a dog or fox-like appearance (hence “flying fox”). The genera Nyctimene and Paranyctimene are exceptions in that they contain tubular nostrils that project from the upper surface of the snout. On the skull, postorbital processes are present over the orbital region. The palatine extends posterior to nearly cover the presphenoid. No more than two upper and two lower incisors are present in adults, otherwise cheek and canine dentition varies between species. The tongue is highly protrusible in nectar feeding bats and often complex with terminal papillae. (Myers, 2001; Neuweiler, 2000; Nowak, 1999) The chest is robust, comprised of the down-thrusting pectoralis and serratus muscles. The articulating regions of the humerus never come into contact with the scapula, which differs from a locking mechanism that occurs in the shoulder joint of other bat groups. The second digit is relatively independent from the third digit and contains a vestigial claw that adorns the leading edge of the wing. (Altringham, 1996; Neuweiler, 2000) Modifications for hanging include a relocation of the hip socket. The acetabulum is shifted upward and dorsally, and articulates with a large headed femur for a wider range of motion. In contrast to most other mammal orders, the legs cannot be positioned in a straight line under the body. In conjunction with large claws on their feet, pteropodids use a tendon-ratchet system that allows them to hang without prolonged muscular contraction. The legs manipulate a primitive uropatagium during flight. Aside from Notopteris, most species are tailless or with just a spicule of a tail. (Neuweiler, 2000) Several species of Pteropodidae demonstrate sexual dimorphism. Males of Hypsignathus monstrosus have rather outlandish facial features, while females have the conservative fox-like look. Males of the genus Epomops have distinctive white patches in association with a glandular membrane on their shoulders, whereas females do not. Considering the whole family, males are generally larger than females. The penis of all pteropodids is a pendant and freely movable organ, resembling that of Primates. Juveniles are typically naked or have a velvety coat that is darker than adult pelage. (Neuweiler, 2000; Nowak, 1999) Other Physical Features

endothermic

homoiothermic

bilateral symmetry Sexual Dimorphism

sexes alike

male larger

sexes colored or patterned differently

ornamentation

Reproduction Mating behavior in pteropodids is highly variable, and much is unknown. The males of one genus (Hypsignathus) set up lekking territories twice a year and draw in females with unique vocalizations and wing-flapping displays. Male epauletted fruit bats (genus Epomophorus) often display their concealed epaulets (hair tufts near the shoulder) and emit courting calls to attract females. Many species form harems consisting of 1 dominant male and up to 37 females, while bachelor males roost separately. (Nowak, 1999; Storz, et al., 2000) Mating System

polygynous

polygynandrous (promiscuous) While most bats have one reproduction event per year, many pteropodids are polyestrous, with two seasonal cycles corresponding to the annual wet and dry seasons. Usually one young is born per pregnancy, but twins are not uncommon. Upon fertilization, ova implantation in the uteri can be immediate or delayed, probably in response to the environment. Development of the embryo (once implanted) may also be delayed, probably to ensure birth at a time when fruit is available during the rainy seasons. One species, Macroglossus minimus, exhibits asynchronous breeding and sperm storage, suggesting the importance of birth during an optimal (rainy) season. (Hood and Smith, 1989; Nowak, 1999) Pregnant females usually leave social roosts to form nursery groups with other pregnant females. Females in nursery roosts form their own social network and take care of each other through mutual grooming. Gestation periods usually lasts 4 to 6 months, but can be longer if implantation is delayed. Birth patterns of pteropodids have been widely studied and usually occur during the wet periods both in the northern latitudes (February to April) and the southern latitudes (August to November). Species that are polyestrous will give birth during both of these rainy seasons. It is predicted that birth during these seasons yields high survival rates because lactation occurs when fruit availability is at a maximum. Birth is followed by postpartum estrous and subsequent mating. After weaning, young may stay with their mothers up to 4 months. Sexual maturity in juveniles is reached by 2 years old or earlier. Female sexual maturity is reached earlier than in males. (Kofron, 2007; Kretschmann and Hayes, 2004; Nowak, 1999) Key Reproductive Features

iteroparous

seasonal breeding

gonochoric/gonochoristic/dioecious (sexes separate)

sexual

viviparous

delayed implantation

post-partum estrous Female pteropodids are primarily responsible for rearing the young. Lactation lasts anywhere from 7 weeks to 4 months, and the mother may care for her young slightly longer. In one genus (Dyacopterus), males with functional mammary glands have been reported lactating, which suggests the sharing of juvenile care among both parents. (Nowak, 1999) Parental Investment

altricial

pre-fertilization provisioning protecting female

pre-hatching/birth provisioning female protecting female

pre-weaning/fledging provisioning female protecting female

pre-independence provisioning female protecting female



Lifespan/Longevity Pteropodids have been known to live at least 30 years, both in captivity and in the wild. (Nowak, 1999)

Behavior Pteropodids are different from all other chiropteran in that, with the exception of Rousettus species, they do not echolocate. Pteropodids rely instead on vision and olfaction to perceive their world. Pteropodids can functionally be divided into two groups based on size. Smaller pteropodids such as Micropteropus pusilla, Epomops buttikorteri, and Epomophorus wahlbergi tend to have shorter, deeper wings which allow for more maneuverable flight under the canopy. Larger pteropodids such as Eidolon, Pteropus, and Acerodon species have longer, narrower wings which allow for efficient long distant flight. Pteropodid species display varying degrees of coloniality. This range is broad, from solitary species to those that roost in groups of up to 200,000 individuals. Roost size may also vary seasonally within a species, possibly due to a depletion of local food sources. Some species commonly roost in mixed groups with other species. Roost selection by pteropodids is poorly understood. Pteropodids roost in a wide range of habitats, from cultivated kapok plantations to rainforests and mangroves. Some species are associated with particular types of plants. Pteropodids can show long term fidelity to roost sites when the sites are undisturbed. Some species of Pteropus in Australia have been recorded using the same roost for over 80 years. (Kunz and Fenton, 2003; Mickleburgh, et al., 1992) Key Behaviors

arboreal

flies

nocturnal

crepuscular

motile

migratory

sedentary

daily torpor

social

colonial

Food Habits Pteropodids are frugivorous and nectarivorous. Some species also eat flowers of the plants they visit. Foraging habits are not well documented, though many species of the genus Pteropus rely heavily on figs. Many species rely on broad array of resources, though there may be a functional dichotomy between large species that rely heavily on canopy resources and smaller species that can use understory resources. Some larger species can use the claws on their thumbs and second digits to climb into the understory and seek out fruit that is hidden or inaccessible by flight. (Kunz and Fenton, 2003; Mickleburgh, et al., 1992) Primary Diet

herbivore frugivore nectarivore



Predation Birds of prey and carnivorous mammals, as well as snakes and large lizards may prey on pteropodids. Pteropodids tend to have fewer predators on islands. However, there have been several cases of introductions of non-native, arboreal snakes which have decimated pteropodid populations. (Mickleburgh, et al., 1992)

Ecosystem Roles Pteropodids provide important pollination and seed dispersal services to a wide range of plants. On islands in the south Pacific, pteropodids are the principle pollinators and dispersers of plants. Many plants have adaptations specifically for seed dispersal and pollination by bats, such as fruiting or flowering at the ends of branches and at bat accessible locations in the canopy. Eidolon dupreanum has been shown to likely be the sole pollinator of the baobab tree Adansonia suarezensis in Madagascar. (Cox, et al., 2005; Kunz and Fenton, 2003; Mickleburgh, et al., 1992; Andriafidison, et al., 2006) Ecosystem Impact

disperses seeds

pollinates

Economic Importance for Humans: Positive Larger species of pteropodids are hunted for their meat. Both subsistence and commercial hunting of Pteropus species have been reported. Consumer demand for Pteropus species on the island of Guam has been so great that it has resulted in the extinction of at least one species in the Pacific region. Flying foxes are also important in the dispersal and pollination of economically important plants. They attract tourists in some areas and produce accumulations of guano that can be used as fertilizer. (Mickleburgh, et al., 1992) Positive Impacts

food

ecotourism

produces fertilizer

pollinates crops

Economic Importance for Humans: Negative Many crop species are attractive food sources for pteropodids. Because cultivars are often developed from wild species, these commercial crops have the same characteristics that wild plants evolved to attract bats to their fruit. Fruit growers have experimented with visual, audio, and olfactory deterrents as well as electric wire to keep pteropodids from eating their crops. Pteropodids may also be dispersers of invasive plant species, as they consume crops introduced for cultivation and may disperse the seeds into natural habitat. Pteropodids have been indicated as reservoirs for a variety of viruses such as Ebola and other viruses in the family Paramyxoviridae. Hendra virus, Menangle virus, and Nipah virus have all been linked to pteropodids. (Mickleburgh, et al., 1992) Negative Impacts

injures humans carries human disease

crop pest

Conservation Status Many factors threaten pteropodids throughout their range. Human activities have decimated populations of certain species directly through hunting or indirectly through habitat destruction. In Asia and Australia, deforestation is the most important contributor to pteropodid population decline. Some species are vulnerable to typhoons and hurricanes which may destroy roosting habitat on islands. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species lists 5 species as recently extinct, 10 species as critically endangered, 19 species as endangered, 15 species as near threatened, and 39 species as vulnerable, suggesting that nearly half of all pteropodid species face significant threats to population viability. (IUCN 2008, 2008; Kunz and Fenton, 2003) IUCN Red List [Link] Not Evaluated

Contributors Tanya Dewey (), Animal Diversity Web, Kenneth Cody Luzynski (author), University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, Emily Margaret Sluzas (author), University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, Megan Marie Wallen (author), University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, Phil Myers (editor, instructor), Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor.

Glossary Australian Living in Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania, New Guinea and associated islands. Ethiopian living in sub-Saharan Africa (south of 30 degrees north) and Madagascar. Palearctic living in the northern part of the Old World. In otherwords, Europe and Asia and northern Africa. acoustic uses sound to communicate agricultural living in landscapes dominated by human agriculture. altricial young are born in a relatively underdeveloped state; they are unable to feed or care for themselves or locomote independently for a period of time after birth/hatching. In birds, naked and helpless after hatching. arboreal Referring to an animal that lives in trees; tree-climbing. bilateral symmetry having body symmetry such that the animal can be divided in one plane into two mirror-image halves. Animals with bilateral symmetry have dorsal and ventral sides, as well as anterior and posterior ends. Synapomorphy of the Bilateria. chemical uses smells or other chemicals to communicate colonial used loosely to describe any group of organisms living together or in close proximity to each other - for example nesting shorebirds that live in large colonies. More specifically refers to a group of organisms in which members act as specialized subunits (a continuous, modular society) - as in clonal organisms. crepuscular active at dawn and dusk delayed implantation in mammals, a condition in which a fertilized egg reaches the uterus but delays its implantation in the uterine lining, sometimes for several months. ecotourism humans benefit economically by promoting tourism that focuses on the appreciation of natural areas or animals. Ecotourism implies that there are existing programs that profit from the appreciation of natural areas or animals. endothermic animals that use metabolically generated heat to regulate body temperature independently of ambient temperature. Endothermy is a synapomorphy of the Mammalia, although it may have arisen in a (now extinct) synapsid ancestor; the fossil record does not distinguish these possibilities. Convergent in birds. estuarine an area where a freshwater river meets the ocean and tidal influences result in fluctuations in salinity. food A substance that provides both nutrients and energy to a living thing. forest forest biomes are dominated by trees, otherwise forest biomes can vary widely in amount of precipitation and seasonality. frugivore an animal that mainly eats fruit herbivore An animal that eats mainly plants or parts of plants. iteroparous offspring are produced in more than one group (litters, clutches, etc.) and across multiple seasons (or other periods hospitable to reproduction). Iteroparous animals must, by definition, survive over multiple seasons (or periodic condition changes). migratory makes seasonal movements between breeding and wintering grounds motile having the capacity to move from one place to another. native range the area in which the animal is naturally found, the region in which it is endemic. nectarivore an animal that mainly eats nectar from flowers nocturnal active during the night oceanic islands islands that are not part of continental shelf areas, they are not, and have never been, connected to a continental land mass, most typically these are volcanic islands. oriental found in the oriental region of the world. In other words, India and southeast Asia. polygynandrous the kind of polygamy in which a female pairs with several males, each of which also pairs with several different females. polygynous having more than one female as a mate at one time rainforest rainforests, both temperate and tropical, are dominated by trees often forming a closed canopy with little light reaching the ground. Epiphytes and climbing plants are also abundant. Precipitation is typically not limiting, but may be somewhat seasonal. riparian Referring to something living or located adjacent to a waterbody (usually, but not always, a river or stream). seasonal breeding breeding is confined to a particular season sedentary remains in the same area sexual reproduction that includes combining the genetic contribution of two individuals, a male and a female sexual ornamentation one of the sexes (usually males) has special physical structures used in courting the other sex or fighting the same sex. For example: antlers, elongated tails, special spurs. social associates with others of its species; forms social groups. suburban living in residential areas on the outskirts of large cities or towns. tactile uses touch to communicate terrestrial Living on the ground. tropical the region of the earth that surrounds the equator, from 23.5 degrees north to 23.5 degrees south. tropical savanna and grassland A terrestrial biome. Savannas are grasslands with scattered individual trees that do not form a closed canopy. Extensive savannas are found in parts of subtropical and tropical Africa and South America, and in Australia. savanna A grassland with scattered trees or scattered clumps of trees, a type of community intermediate between grassland and forest. See also Tropical savanna and grassland biome. temperate grassland A terrestrial biome found in temperate latitudes (>23.5° N or S latitude). Vegetation is made up mostly of grasses, the height and species diversity of which depend largely on the amount of moisture available. Fire and grazing are important in the long-term maintenance of grasslands. ultrasound uses sound above the range of human hearing for either navigation or communication or both visual uses sight to communicate viviparous reproduction in which fertilization and development take place within the female body and the developing embryo derives nourishment from the female.