EXPOSED: School Shooting Surviver Turned Activist David Hogg's Father…
In what seemed initially as an incredibly odd move for a high school student, Hogg’s vehemently defended the FBI and placed the blame squarely on the President’s shoulders…. before admitting that his father was in the FBI .

One student, in particular, David Hogg seems articulate and highly skilled at setting a new anti-Conservative/anti-Trump narrative behind the recent school shooting. Few have seen this type of rapid media play before and when they have it has come from well-trained political operatives and MSM commentators.

pic.twitter.com/qNszGv95L6 Two survivors of the Florida school shooting slam politicians' responses to the massacre, calling them "disgusting" and "pathetic" https://t.co/XqjuNCCBvF — CNN (@CNN) February 19, 2018

“I think it’s disgusting, personally. My father’s a retired FBI agent and the FBI are some of the hardest working individuals I have ever seen in my life,” proclaimed David Hogg to CNN.

“It’s wrong that the president is blaming them for this.”

Continuing, Hogg demonstrated his complete lack of American civics knowledge. A clueless Hogg appeared unaware of the fact that the President is not ‘in control’ of each department and branch of government, but must work and negotiate with them. Hogg added that Trump is in charge of the FBI.

“He can’t put that off on them. He is in charge of them and these people, what they love to do is push this off on bureaucracy and say it’s not them,” he said. “He is in charge of the FBI … the executive branch is supposed to enforce laws and as such, President Trump is in charge of that and the FBI.”

The fault for this tragedy lies squarely on the shoulder’s of the FBI who could have prevented this back in January.

Adding to the credibility of Hogg, in a recently uncovered early cut from one of his interviews it appears he was heavily coached on lines and is merely reciting a script. Frequently seen in the footage mouthing the lines he should be reciting, Hogg becomes flustered multiple times and apologizing and asking for re-takes.

Why would the child of an FBI agent be used as a pawn for anti-Trump rhetoric and anti-gun legislation? Because the FBI is only looking to curb OUR Constitutional rights and INCREASE their power. We’ve seen their propaganda many times. Don’t let them win.