The Left’s ATTACKS on white people resemble the same demonization of JEWS before the great GENOCIDE

In case you haven’t noticed lately, the Leftist-dominated popular culture has a new boogeyman: White people.

This was plainly evident (again) recently after People magazine dared to name a white guy as the latest “sexiest man alive.”

The Unz Review: As reported by Gregory Hood at

For the mainstream media, it was a bona fide crisis. Blake Shelton, a European-American country singer and a host of The Voice, whom I had never heard of until yesterday morning, was named People Magazine’s “Sexiest Man In The World.” The result was outrage.

Hood noted that Marlow Stern, writing at the Daily Beast , claimed that “people” are justifiably in an “uproar given Mr. Shelton’s history of homophobic and racist comments.”

“Many on social media are blasting the magazine’s decision, calling upon Mr. Shelton’s past tweets that have been labeled as racist, misogynistic and homophobic,” noted Fox News

Okay, so the “mainstream media” being hyper-focused on this kind of tripe isn’t anything new; because Shelton has often jokingly made references to alternative lifestyles is problematic only for Left-wing kooks, none of whom will ever be accused of having a sense of humor.

But most of the additional criticism of Shelton was focused on his whiteness.

an underwhelming white man to a position of popular acclaim, the ignoring of people of color’ and various other perceived sins.” As Hood noted further, “Gabriel Bell at Salon called it a ‘ problematic pick ’ because it was a ‘reinforcement and celebration of sometimes-toxic cisgender male sexuality, the elevation ofto a position of popular acclaim, the ignoring of people of color’ and various other perceived sins.”

Others made similar claims. Some tied in their criticism of Shelton’s race to “Trump’s America,” an insinuation that, of course, Trump is a bigoted racist as well, despite the very obvious lack of evidence that’s true.

Make no mistake, all of this “white-shaming” is as purposeful as it is problematic. Here’s why: By objectifying white people, which is what this is, it makes them less in the eyes of others. And when races of people are made to feel like they’re less than others, what follows next is usually horrifying.

Like slavery. Or worse, extermination.

Because some people have objectified others, slavery has existed (and it existed long before slavery was brought to the American continent). Because Adolph Hitler and his Nazi Party objectified Jews, six million of them were exterminated in the 1940s.

And now, the Left seeks to objectify whites.

Syndicated columnist and former Reagan administration official Paul Craig Roberts discussed this objectification in a recent column. Referencing the Unz Review piece by Hood, Roberts said it was a clarion call for white people.

“Whiteness will be over because we want it to be,” the article reads, according to a photograph sent to Fox News by multiple viewers. “And when it dies, there will be millions of cultural zombies aimlessly wandering across a vastly changed landscape.”

Besides stating “white death will mean liberation for all,” the columnist, Rudy Martinez, also says whiteness is “a construct used to perpetuate a system of racist power” and white people are “an aberration.”

Now, imagine the utter outrage if a white person had written that black DNA or Hispanic DNA or Asian DNA was “an aberration.” That person would literally face death.

But it’s okay to say that white DNA is an “aberration,” though really, it’s not okay.

Understand that these people are not writing and saying these things just to be ‘outrageous.’

They really believe it.

Follow more news on genocide at Genocide.news

J.D. Heyes is editor of The National Sentinel and a senior writer for Natural News and News Target.

Sources include: