Report: UN, Soros Behind Migrant Caravan Invasion
A note from Alex Jones: This is 21st century warfare being carried out by multinational corporations and NGOs, organizing around the United Nations and quarterbacked by Soros-affiliated groups. It’s meant to break the will of the nation-state by opening up large migration routes from the third-world into the first-world as part of a neo-colonialism system. The multinational banks, NGOs and corporations want to use third-world populations as a tool to colonize the first world with third-world labor to drive down wages and create political instability which they can then control.

Video Player is loading. Play Video Play Mute Current Time 0:00 / Duration 0:00 Loaded : 0% Progress : 0% Stream Type LIVE Remaining Time -0:00 Playback Rate 1x Chapters Chapters Descriptions descriptions off , selected Captions captions and subtitles off , selected Audio Track Fullscreen This is a modal window. Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window. Text Color White Black Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan Transparency Opaque Semi-Transparent Background Color Black White Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan Transparency Opaque Semi-Transparent Transparent Window Color Black White Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan Transparency Transparent Semi-Transparent Opaque Font Size 50% 75% 100% 125% 150% 175% 200% 300% 400% Text Edge Style None Raised Depressed Uniform Dropshadow Font Family Proportional Sans-Serif Monospace Sans-Serif Proportional Serif Monospace Serif Casual Script Small Caps Reset restore all settings to the default values Done Close Modal Dialog End of dialog window.

Third-world populations are exploding and are under increasing pressure by globalist forces. The developing world is in a pressure-cooker type scenario, and the UN and affiliated globalist groups are now “westernizing” these populations and turning them into political battering rams in an attempt to make the first-world, the western world, submit to multinational, corporate demands. This is 21st century warfare, and the nation will collapse by capitulating to it. It’s why Democrats are openly calling for no borders and the abolishment of ICE while orchestrating the very migrant hordes to invade using migration routes. This is an attack from the outside and treason from within.

The UN and billionaire globalist George Soros are the driving forces behind the massive migrant caravan marching to the U.S. southern border, according to reports.

As with the previous caravan that sprung up last spring, the open borders group As with the previous caravan that sprung up last spring, the open borders group Pueblo Sin Fronteras , which is connected to Soros’ Open Society Foundation, is involved with organizing the caravan of 4,000, and the leader of the group was arrested Thursday for attacking Mexican immigration agents.

The UN’s High Commissioner for Refugees has intervened in the situation to aid in the migrants’ travels.

“We’re in discussions. UNHCR is talking to the government to see how we can best help them,” “We’re in discussions. UNHCR is talking to the government to see how we can best help them,” said Sibylla Brodzinsky, a UN spokesperson. “This is just starting. Talks are happening.”

“The caravan is organized by a group called Pueblo Sin Fronteras, [b]ut the effort is supported by the coalition CARA Family Detention Pro Bono Project, which includes Catholic Legal Immigration Network (CLIN), the American Immigration Council (AIC), the Refugee and Immigration Center for Education and Legal Services (RICELS) and the American Immigration Lawyers Association (AILA) – thus the acronym CARA,” WND “The caravan is organized by a group called Pueblo Sin Fronteras, [b]ut the effort is supported by the coalition CARA Family Detention Pro Bono Project, which includes Catholic Legal Immigration Network (CLIN), the American Immigration Council (AIC), the Refugee and Immigration Center for Education and Legal Services (RICELS) and the American Immigration Lawyers Association (AILA) – thus the acronym CARA,” WND reported in April.

“At least three of the four groups are funded by George Soros’ Open Society Foundation.”

Even President Trump called out the caravan’s questionable origins, noting the convenient timing for Democrats just weeks before the midterm elections.

“We’re starting to find out, and I won’t say 100 percent, I’ll put a little tiny question mark at the end … but a lot of money has been passing through people to come up and try to get to the border by election day,” Trump “We’re starting to find out, and I won’t say 100 percent, I’ll put a little tiny question mark at the end … but a lot of money has been passing through people to come up and try to get to the border by election day,” Trump said during a Montana rally Thursday.

“They wanted that caravan, and there are those who say that caravan didn’t just happen,” he added.

Tensions between the U.S., Mexico, and Honduras escalated after the caravan Tensions between the U.S., Mexico, and Honduras escalated after the caravan violently tore through the Guatemala-Mexico border , underscoring both the caravan’s disregard for national sovereignty, as well as the rule of law.

“This is an organized effort to come through and violate the sovereignty of Mexico, and so we’re prepared to do all that we can to support the decisions that Mexico makes about how they’re going to address this very serious and important issue to their country,” Secretary of State Mike Pompeo “This is an organized effort to come through and violate the sovereignty of Mexico, and so we’re prepared to do all that we can to support the decisions that Mexico makes about how they’re going to address this very serious and important issue to their country,” Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said Friday.

Watch this critical transmission breaking down the UN-backed migrant caravan: