October 26, 2017 Dear Brothers and Sisters in Christ, Earlier this su…
October 26, 2017

Dear Brothers and Sisters in Christ,

Earlier this summer, the Vestry began to consider whether the George Washington and Robert E. Lee

memorial plaques should remain in or be moved from the worship space in Christ Church. The Vestry also

began to consider how Christ Church can better understand and present our significant history, which

dates back to 1773. This was not a discussion we entered into lightly, but rather a sincere attempt to have a

family conversation about our worship space, our larger history, and our future.

We spent the month of September listening to the parish: seven listening sessions, many emails, numerous

phone calls, countless informal conversations, and many one-on-one meetings and discussions with

parishioners. The passion, respect, and thoughtfulness of the people of this parish were evident throughout

the listening sessions, conversations, and emails.

We are especially thankful for those who prayed daily for both the parish and Vestry, which has been

prayerfully discerning where God is calling Christ Church.

The plaques were erected in 1870, just two months after Robert E. Lee’s death, by parishioners eager to

memorialize two men who had impact within our parish and an outsized impact on our nation. We

recognize that our church was present at the center of two of the most important events in our nation’s

history.

Washington is unique in our nation’s history: the leader of the Revolution, the visionary who not only

refused to be king but also gave up power after eight years, and a symbol of our democracy. He regularly

worshiped in our pews and helped shape our city’s character.

Lee was a longtime parishioner, whose family had a significant presence in our church. From “Light-Horse

Harry” Lee’s membership in our parish at the time he memorialized George Washington as “first in war,

first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen,” to Mary Custis Lee’s gift of $10,000 to begin the

Christ Church endowment, the Lee family was a prominent part of the Christ Church family.

We understand that both Washington and Lee lived in times much different than our own, and that each

man, in addition to his public persona, was a complicated human being, and like all of us, a child of God.

Today, the legacy of slavery and of the Confederacy is understood differently than it was in 1870. For some,

Lee symbolizes the attempt to overthrow the Union and to preserve slavery. Today our country is trying

once again to come to grips with the history of slavery and the subsequent disenfranchisement of people of

color.

Hebrews 13:2 says, “Do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers, for thereby some have entertained angels

unawares.” Christ Church lives into this call, feeding the hungry with our Lazarus ministry, welcoming the

stranger in our refugee ministry, and inviting all to worship with us. The plaques in our sanctuary make

some in our presence feel unsafe or unwelcome. Some visitors and guests who worship with us choose not