Democrat Principal Defecates In Front Of Students During Pledge Of Allegiance
An intoxicated school principal at a Springfield, Ohio middle school was arrested Friday morning after defecating in front of hundreds of students during the pledge of allegiance.

Andrew Whitmore, 53, was “visibly under the influence of alcohol,” according to witnesses, when he decided to take down his pants and defecate on the schoolyard in front of disturbed students and teachers.

Mr. Whitmore, a registered Democrat, also embarrassed himself further when he lost his balance and “fell to the ground into his own pile of feces” before passing out. He was eventually carried away by local police officers.

“He started yelling something about Trump being a racist pig and a fascist **** or something,” one student told local reporters.

“He dropped down his pants and everybody was shocked, but then he started to crap on the grass, fell down and started puking all over himself. It was truly disturbing,” said another student, visibly repulsed.

Franklin Middle School secretary, Hillary Johnson, says she was shocked by the behavior of the principal and had never seen him this out of control.

Highly intoxicated

The middle school principal later admitted to police officers that he had spent the previous night night “drinking heavily” and “may have smoked some crystal meth.”

“He said the situation with Donald Trump and the national anthem had really pissed him off and that he didn’t remember doing the things he had done,” Deputy Sheriff Tom Hannity told local reporters.

“He allegedly had a blackout and does not remember defecating in front of the whole school,” he explained.

Mr. Whitmore made local headlines last June when he uploaded a faceless live video of himself masturbating on Facebook at 3 am, telling President Donald Trump to “suck it”, before taking down the video hours later, claiming his account had been hacked.

Whitmore was arrested on charges of public intoxication and faces six counts of obscenity and could face up to 18 months in jail, according to legal experts.

.