Well, Well, Well, Look Who Adam Schiff Has “Family Ties” To – Truthfe…
Well, Well, Well, Look Who Adam Schiff Has “Family Ties” To

Well, Well, Well, Look Who Adam Schiff Has “Family Ties” To

Twitter is on fire with the revelation that Democratic party mouthpiece Adam Schiff turns out to have “family ties” to none other than George Soros himself.



Also, there is a Soros tie to Schumer and the Clintons. Fact: Adam Schiff's sister, Melissa is a Soros.Also, there is a Soros tie to Schumer and the Clintons. pic.twitter.com/mZOp40V3uz Patriot 24/7 (@TT45Pac) Patriot 24/7(@TT45Pac) February 5, 2018 

Melissa Schiff Soros pictured with Adam Schiff. Melissa Schiff Soros is Ex-wife of George Soros Son per @SueCFlorida But dirty hands are pictured here wrapped around a beer. pic.twitter.com/YNur931Cjr — Trumpette (@Trumpette777) December 12, 2017 

I discovered just today that Adam Schiffs sister, Melissa Schiff SOROS, is married to George Soros’ son! Hes a globalist pig! pic.twitter.com/icjzMYCnXM — patriotwoman19 (@patriotwoman19) February 6, 2018 

Per Breitbart, those family ties helped Adam Schiff score big bucks from Soros org MoveOn, to boost his political career.

Rep. Adam Schiff, the ranking Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, was previously financially aided by the George Soros-financed MoveOn.org to win his Congressional seat. Schiff was also awarded the Toll Fellowship, which is sponsored by the Council of State Governments, a nonprofit that monitors federal government activities and is heavily financed by Soros’s Open Society Foundations. The Open Society and Soros-funded groups have additionally supported a number of Schiff’s legislative efforts. Schiff has been helping to lead the Democrats’ unsubstantiated charges of alleged collusion between President Donald Trump and Moscow. Last month, Schiff delivered the opening statements at a Congressional hearing where he laid out the case for alleged Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election. This reporter previously documented serious problems with Schiff’s charges, which include wild conspiracy theories and heavy reliance on a questionable source. In largely forgotten history, Schiff’s 2000 Congressional campaign against Republican incumbent Jim Rogan was openly aided by MoveOn.org. On January 1, 2000, the Wall Street Journal reported on the radical group’s fundraising efforts for Schiff. The Congressional seat was particularly important since Rogan had gained fame after he was selected to be one of thirteen House Managers in the 1998 impeachment case of Bill Clinton. Rogan was supportive of Clinton’s impeachment and became a hero in the Republican Party. 

The divorce between Adam Schiff’s sister and George Soros’ brother was a messy one.

With this property transfer, I thee divorce. Melissa Schiff Soros, the soon-to-be ex-wife of scion Robert Soros, has paid her estranged husband $10 million for the privilege of taking possession of the townhouse they once shared at 263 West 11th Street, city records show.

The couple, who are in the midst of a messy divorce, have provided the tabloids with some delightful fodder of late, including reports that Mr. Soros, the eldest son of George and president of his father’s $28 billion firm, canoodled with his 29-year-old girlfriend in front of his wife on a eight-hour-plus flight from Italy.

The marriage foundered after Mr. Soros allegedly had an affair with model/”naked artist” Meredith Ostrom (who paints by rolling around a canvas naked in covered in paint), which sparked a lengthy court battle over how to divide up the very serious marital assets the Soroses had built up over the course of the their 22-year marriage. Ms. Schiff Soros’ lawyer has argued that the prenup is ambiguous. And we’re guessing the transfer of funds from Schiff to Soros is merely a perfunctory lob in what is likely to be an avalanche of assets flowing Ms. Schiff’s way. (When your husband of more than two decades cheats on you with a “naked artist”…).

The couple also owns a country house in Rhinebeck, N.Y., and a $9 million waterfront “cottage” in Martha’s Vineyard.

Ms. Schiff Soros, a filmmaker and photographer, apparently had a strong desire to hang onto their charming West Village townhome, broken or not. The house is notable for being where Thomas Wolfe wrote the first draft of his novel Look, Homeward Angel. The couple bought the house in 1993, a year after their marriage, according to city records, though the price they paid was not recorded; the Soroses have two college-aged children who might presumably wish to return to their old bedrooms.