Netflix Edits Old 'Bill Nye' Episode To Hide Segment Saying Chromosomes Determine Gender

May 4, 2017

W hen confronted with politically incorrect language which exposes a leftist hero as a self-contradicting sellout, the only solution is some modern day book burning!

In an original version of a 1996 Bill Nye the Science Guy episode, called "Probability," a young girl explains that it's your chromosomes that determine your sex and gender, which there are two of, not 97. This segment has now been removed entirely from the Netflix version of the episode. The In an original version of a 1996Bill Nye the Science Guyepisode, called "Probability," a young girl explains that it's yourchromosomesthat determine your sex and gender, which there are two of, not 97. This segment has now been removedentirelyfrom the Netflix version of the episode. The Ministry of Truth has made sure that Nye has always believed gender is fluid.

"I'm a girl. Could have just as easily been a boy, though, because the probability of becoming a girl is always 1 in 2," "I'm a girl. Could have just as easily been a boy, though, because the probability of becoming a girl is always 1 in 2," says the young girl in the original episode.

"See, inside each of our cells are these things called chromosomes, and they control whether we become a boy or a girl," she continues. "See, there are only two possibilities: XX, a girl, or XY, a boy."

Of course, such basic scientific truth flies in the face of the liberal and Bill Nye-supported narrative that chromosomes have nothing to do with gender, which is totally detached from your sex (though the left turns around and conflates the two when convenient); it's feelings that actually change your biology and determine if you're male or female.

So, naturally, such blasphemy had to be scrubbed from existence, which is not fascistic at all and super science-y.

Since the days of Nye videos filling up time in your middle school science class, the Not a Scientist Guy has completely sold out to the progressive ideological agenda. Nye's new series on Netflix, Bill Nye Saves the World, is filled with some of the most anti-science Left-wing propaganda available. Not only does Nye claim sex and gender are on a " Since the days of Nye videos filling up time in your middle school science class, the Not a Scientist Guy has completely sold out to the progressive ideological agenda. Nye's new series on Netflix,Bill Nye Saves the World,is filled with some of the most anti-science Left-wing propaganda available. Not only does Nye claim sex and gender are on a " spectrum " (they aren't), he even suggests, bizarrely using animated ice cream, that monogamous heterosexuality is immoral

Again with all the science.

As The Washington Free Beacon , "It is not clear whether the 1996 segment was cut when it was first uploaded, or whether the edit was in reaction to recent controversies over Bill Nye's stance on gender identity." As noted byThe Washington Free Beacon, "It is not clear whether the 1996 segment was cut when it was first uploaded, or whether the edit was in reaction to recent controversies over Bill Nye's stance on gender identity."

As the Left scrubs scientific realities they dislike from past media without so much as a disclaimer, it's important to remember that the "Religious Right" is our greatest threat to fascism. Or something.

WATCH: