Never Pay For Cable Or Subscriptions Again? This Device Allows You To Watch Anything For Free

March 27, 2017 at 11:29 am EDT | Sponsored by TVFrog

With over 1.5 million units sold worldwide, this is the best solution to watch your favourite movies and shows for free!

We all know how frustrating overpriced cable bills and subscription services can be.

You pay for cable, apps, movies and sports on demand... it adds up.

And of course there is all this hardware. Your receiver, TV boxes or Sticks, DVD Player and often expensive Smart TVs.

So it doesn't come as a surprise that more and more people are searching for cheaper, simpler solutions to cut cable bills and get rid of all the hardware.

Thankfully, there is a solution to legally watch anything on the net!

A Netherland-based startup company has come up with a new innovative and inexpensive gadget that is changing the way people consume media.

What is it?

It's called It's called TVFrog . It is a state-of-the-art Home Theater box that can be easily connected to any TV. It comes with everything already installed and is up and running within minutes. No technical know-how needed.

It is a all-in-one entertainment center that allows you to get rid of all your other hardware and remotes. All the apps we know are already pre-installed like you might know it from other TV boxes, sticks and products. But there is a main differnce - it allows you to watch any of your content for free. With no subscriptions or monthly bills.

How Does it Work?

It's easy! Just connect TVFrog with any TV or monitor your have. All cables are included in the package. Press the power button and done. No seriously, it literally takes 10 seconds and you are able to watch anything you want.

But how can you watch for free? The secret to that is TVFrog's open system architecture paired with an innovative user interface. This allows you to install everything on it from apps to other software. Easy for everyone to use. It already has preinstalled all relevant apps you might need. TVFrog has completely reprogrammed and redesigned the user experience so it works even easier. The TVFrog technology searches the internet where it will locate free content. Thousands of shows, movies, sports events are right at your finger tips.

"This device has saved me tons of money!"

You can even tune into live television 24/7 with thousands of channels from all over the world. Ultra HD of course if your internet is capable.

What sounds to good to be true is reality, no strings attached. That's one reason why TVFrog is selling globally like crazy at the moment. Of course you need to have internet and that is a few bucks a month. But don't you have it anyway? And concering loading and buffer times. TVFrog automatically adjusts to your internet speed so every kind of content can be watched immediately. If Youtube works TVFrog will work,too.

With TVFrog you have access to all apps, movies, shows and even Live-TV - WORLDWIDE.

But is it legal?

YES the device is completely legal. It is like a computer, so always depending what you do with it, but there is so much premium content on the internet, that is completely free. You wouldn't imagine. That is the great thing about it.

Of course cable companies are not happy with the situation so they are trying to stop TVFrog from selling it to the public. So it might get banned soon, but as soon as you have one you are completely fine and will be able to watch everything for free forever - completely legal.

How Much Is It Going To Cost Me?

You're probably thinking that this device is very expensive... False! TVFrog is on sale at the moment for under $70! One time payment - no subscription, no monthly costs.

Where can I buy one?

NOTE: As it might get banned soon, people started to buy multiple devices at once as they want to resell them at a higher price later. So demand is crazy right now - please allow 1-2 weeks for shipping.

even comes with an innovative remote/mouse for a new kind of user experience and a universal power adaptor and surge protector. So you can use it in any country of the world. Of course also with all cables you need to connect to any TV. TVFrog even comes with an innovative remote/mouse for a new kind of user experience and a universal power adaptor and surge protector. So you can use it in any country of the world. Of course also with all cables you need to connect to any TV.

Start to watch anything for free... Now that you've been informed about this brilliant invention, let me show you how easy it is to set up. All you need to do is to follow these 3 steps: Step 1: Order Order TVFrog today to take advantage of the 30% OFF sale.

Step 2: When you receive it, open the package and connect it to any TV you like with cables included and press the power button. TVFrog asks about your wi-fi key. Put it in and you are ready to go.

Step 3: Watch anything... TVFrog will automatically show you all the apps and content to watch. And you can always search for anything and watch it immediately. Here's a tip: TVFrog is a great gift because it will save everybody, who receives it, a ton of money!

"Remember, as they are on sale at the moment and might get banned soon, the demand is skyrocketing right now.



As a lot of people buy multiple devices at once to resell them if they get banned. So please allow 1-2 weeks for shipping. It ships globally."