BREAKING NEWS: Manny Pacquiao donates $50 million to Hurricane Harvey Victims
Like 57K Share

There’s a well known saying that “To whom much is given, much is expected” and by all accounts, it appears Manny Pacquiao knows what he means on the world stage. He’s living up to that expectation. By way of financial support, the Filipino professional boxer and politician, Manny Pacquiao has offered an overwhelming sum of money to the Hurricane Harvey victims.

One of the World famous boxers Manny Pacquiao has donated 50 million dollars to help rebuild Houston, after the most populous city in the state of Texas and the fourth-most populous city in the United States was slammed by Hurricane Harvey on Sunday.

The donation which will be utilized through his foundation was announced today after he travelled to Houston to ascertain the damage caused by the hurricane.

“It is a humanitarian gesture, an act of solidarity and support for a brotherly affected people,” the Filipino boxing hero said.

“My thoughts and prayers are with our brothers and sisters in Houston. My initiative is donating $50m to the entire Houston community to assist and house victims of the devastating flood that has rendered people homeless. The fund is intended to provide shelter, food, clothing and medicines.” – Pacquiao added.

On Sunday, sprawling and soaked Houston metro area and other deluged towns in southeast Texas were braced for devastating floods and pummeling rainfall as Tropical Storm Harvey stalled over land and drenched dogged searchers and anxious residents.

A flash flood emergency was in effect for parts of the Houston area. National Weather Service and local officials advised Houston-area residents to avoid traveling.

Three to 4 inches of rainfall were reported in the region in one hour’s time. First responders investigated the report of a woman swept away in her vehicle by floodwaters.

“Stay put,” the National Weather Service said.

It wass confirmed the downpour is going to last four to five days.

With dire warnings of tornadoes, torrential downpours and days of flooding to come, broad swaths of southeast Texas were littered with uprooted trees, toppled signs, flagpoles that snapped like toothpicks and clusters of bricks peeled like scabs from walls and rooftops.

Additional fatalities were feared in Rockport, where an estimated 5,000 residents had stayed put for the storm that blasted ashore as a Category 4 around 11 p.m. ET Friday between Port Aransas and Port O’Connor.

The flood damage is expected to cost tens of billions and there are concerns for the longer-term health of people caught up in muddy floodwaters.

Like 57K Share