Border Crossing/Entry Data
Hide Coverage, Availability, Definitions and Notes.

Incoming vehicle, container, passenger, and pedestrian counts at U.S.-Mexico and U.S.-Canada land border ports.

Number of arriving buses at a particular port, whether or not they are carrying passengers.

A Container is defined as any conveyance entering the U.S. used for commercial purposes, either full or empty. Includes containers moving in-bond for the port initiating the bonded movements.

The following are examples of a Container: Stakebed truck, truck with a car carrier, van, pickup truck/car, flatbed truck, piggyback truck with two linked trailers/containers = 2 containers, straight truck, bobtail truck, railcar, rail flatbed car stacked with four containers = 4 containers (on each rail car if there is multiple box containers count each container and the flatbed car.), and tri-level boxcar with multiple containers inside = 3 containers

Number of persons arriving by bus requiring U.S. Customs processing.

Persons entering the United States at a particular port by private automobiles, pick-up trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, taxis, ambulances, hearses, tractors, snowmobiles and other motorized private ground vehicles.

Number of passengers and crew arriving by train and requiring U.S. Customs processing.

The number of persons arriving on foot or by certain conveyance (such as bicycles, mopeds, or wheel chairs) requiring U.S. Customs processing.

Number of privately owned vehicles (POVs) arriving at a particular port. Includes pick-up trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, taxis, snowmobiles, ambulances, hearses, and other motorized private ground vehicles.

A container is any conveyance entering the U.S. used for commercial purposes, full or empty. In this case, it is the number of full or empty rail containers arriving at a port. This series includes containers moving as inbound shipments.

Number of arriving trains at a particular port.

A container is any conveyance entering the U.S. used for commercial purposes, full or empty. In this case, it is the number of full or empty truck containers arriving at a port. This series includes containers moving as inbound shipments.

Number of arriving trucks; does not include privately owned pick-up trucks.