Trump Says Americans Have “No Right” to Protest Him. TYRANNY.
SECURITY WARNING: Please treat the URL above as you would your password and do not share it with anyone. See the Facebook Help Center for more information. SECURITY WARNING: Please treat the URL above as you would your password and do not share it with anyone. See the Facebook Help Center for more information.

This is a DIRECT affront to our 1st Amendment rights and Trump’s boldest tyrannical power play yet. In one of his most alarming moves yet , Donald Trump just had his lawyer file a motion claiming the American people have “no right” to protest President Orange.

That’s right, Trump’s officially kicking his “anti-Civil Rights” era off with an outrageous bang, as he’s literally arguing in court that it’s illegal for American citizens to protest against him at his campaign rallies. This is TYRANNY, folks, plain and simple, and it should horrify every American who values their Constitutional rights to free speech and free assembly.

The tyrannical line of Trump’s lawyer is that American citizens have “no right” to convey “dissenting views” at Trump’s rallies because these protests violate the Orange One’s free speech. Nevermind that Trump is arguing that his free speech rights should supersede the free speech rights of EVERY other American.

The case in question first arose when three anti-Trump protestors filed suit against Trump. They’re suing because they were the victims of aggressive mob violence after Trump commanded his supporters to eject the protesters from one of his rallies in Louisville in 2016.

Let that fascist reality sink in for a second. We now have a president who’s being sued for inciting political violence at one of his rallies.

So instead of responding to the charges against Trump, his legal team is trying to make an unconstitutional, smokescreen swipe at the free speech rights of Trump’s protesters. Sounds like Team Trump, doesn’t it

In fact, Trump’s lawyers are so backward that they initially argued that Trump’s violence-inciting speech at the rally was protected under the 1st Amendment. Except the ONLY kind of speech that the 1st Amendment doesn’t guarantee is violence-inciting speech.

If this case is any indication, Trump doesn’t give a damn about free speech, one of the most sacred ideals of America’s Founding Fathers. His filing is literally a direct assault on our most fundamental right as Americans.

What this means for the American people is that Trump clearly doesn’t want us to keep speaking up and protesting like we have been. That’s because our anti-Trump efforts are making a difference, folks.

We’re definitely getting under Trump’s skin , and now he’s trying to fight back in the worst way possible. We just have to keep protesting: we can’t let him get the upper-hand.

POLL: Do Americans have the RIGHT to protest?

What’s your stance on the 1st Amendment? Do you think Americans have a right to protest Trump?

Please, make sure you speak up in these dire days for the nation. Take our poll below and enter your voice into the national debate.

There’s a popular saying that there’s nothing new under the sun, but Trump’s totally disproven this, seeing as how the American people have NEVER endured this kind of tyrannical presidency before . From top to bottom, the Trump administration poses an unprecedented threat to the very fabric of American society.

We can’t allow this madness to continue without fighting like hell. The only way that Trump wins is if we in the Resistance give up, so we have to do the opposite and become more passionate than ever in our opposition to the Orange Tyrant.

We’re all doing good work, but we have to keep it up. Help us keep the pressure up on Trump by sharing this story on Facebook ASAP.

.