People
Sephora Just Announced They Are Buying Out Ulta - Here's How YOU Can Take Advantage

Recently, Sephora spoke with People's chief editor announcing the liquidation of Ulta stores all around the US! The mega-retailer plans to launch an internet campaign to clear shelves in which no other department store has ever done. Courtesy AP

BY K.C. BLUMM Friday, May 12, 2017

Sephora just announced that they will acquire the 950 Ulta Stores nationwide, the first major announcement regarding the buy out in the new year. The mega-retailer will double in size and has already begun the liquidation process of Ulta products. To date, 18 of the 950 Ulta stores have already closed. The remaining stores will close by the end of the year.

Some of you may be sad to see your local Ulta Beauty close down, but the rest of you are probably wondering:"Will this benefit me in any way?" The answer to that question is absolutely "YES!" On top of the final blowout sales that are going to be held at each of the closing locations, Ulta Beauty cosmetics department is offering FREE SAMPLES of their skin care products..

Until recently, Ulta Beauty has always kept an amazing wrinkle secret called Vlamorous Cream reserved for their high paying celebrity clients. They reported that in order to clear the products off the shelves, they needed to give out free samples for everyone to try. As a result, a few weeks ago they shared the simple solution previously only shared with celeb clients to everyone!

Ulta Beauty shares with People their incredible Cosmetics Giveaway called Vlamorous Cream

Women everywhere are now taking advantage of this amazing opportunity Ulta Beauty has presented to the public. In fact, a few of our own ladies caught wind of the deal and ordered the product for themselves. They were shocked when the FREE SAMPLES arrived on their doorstep just a few days later! Here's how it turned out for one of our own."

The Best Solution You've Never Heard Of -Vlamorous Cream

Will This Work For You?

There are plenty of skincare gimmicks out there, and most of them are ridiculously expensive. With so many options it’s only natural for you to be skeptical about the results, so we don't want to promise our readers anything. We simply want to challenge you to take Ulta Beauty up on their limited time offer and try it for yourself!

Once you’ve experienced this anti-aging skin saviour for yourself, please leave your comments below and share your success story with others, like we have shared with you. Document the progression and prove to the world that you don’t need to spend thousands of dollars to LOOK AND FEEL GREAT. For your convenience, we have provided the link courtesy of Ulta for you to enjoy Free Samples of Vlamorous Cream

Just For You!