Mueller Must Be Close, Because Trump Just Issued A New Executive Order To Prepare For War
Trump has just issued a Trump has just issued a new Executive Order that amends Executive Order 13223. Executive Order 13223 was issued by former President George W Bush on September 14, 2001 , which essentially started official preparations for war following the terrorist attacks on 9/11.

The Executive Order that Trump any retired member of the Regular Army, Regular Navy, Regular Air Force, or Regular Marine Corps. To repeat, Trump can now call back any retired service member into service under this Executive Order, including reserves. The Executive Order that Trump just signed amends Bush’s old order and gives the Federal Government the power to recall into serviceretired member of the Regular Army, Regular Navy, Regular Air Force, or Regular Marine Corps. To repeat, Trump can now call backany retired service memberinto service under this Executive Order, including reserves.

What this order essentially means is that there is a foreseeably strong chance that war is imminent and Trump wants to make sure no military members who have left lately, or who may leave when their term is up during the war, can walk away. Unlike Bush, who was forcing extensions on the service of soldiers who were already serving, Trump is granting himself the ability to recall anyone who’s ever served in the past. You are justified in being concerned over this.

These are the two most important passages from Trump’s amended by adding at the end: “The authorities available for use during a national emergency under sections 688 and 690 of title 10, United States Code, are also invoked and made available, according to their terms, to the Secretary concerned, subject in the case of the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, to the direction of the Secretary of Defense.” These are the two most important passages from Trump’s new order as far as I can tell; “Section 1. Amendment to Executive Order 13223. Section 1 of Executive Order 13223 is“The authorities available for use during a national emergency under sections 688 and 690 of title 10, United States Code, are also invoked and made available, according to their terms, to the Secretary concerned, subject in the case of the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, to the direction of the Secretary of Defense.”

That section makes sense once you read Section 688 of title 10, where this new piece above has been added, “Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense, a member described in subsection (b) may be ordered to active duty by the Secretary of the military department concerned at any time. ”

This is a way to ensure that we would have enough soldiers in wartime, without having to bring back the draft, something they must know people would not go for with Trump as President. The only conceivable purpose of this new Executive Order is to aid in war and natural disasters. If this was done to aid Puerto Rico, then it might be a good thing, but sadly it seems this was done for the wartime aspect. *UPDATE* U.S. Air Force Has Recalled 1,000 Retired Pilots! See More HERE This is a way to ensure that we would have enough soldiers in wartime, without having to bring back the draft, something they must know people would not go for with Trump as President. The only conceivable purpose of this new Executive Order is to aid in war and natural disasters. If this was done to aid Puerto Rico, then it might be a good thing, but sadly it seems this was done for the wartime aspect.

Comments