Student at Cornell University Amazing Weight Loss!
by Suzanne Pischner Thursday, April 06, 2017

(CNN) - Amanda Haughman, a student at Cornell University, was able to drop 37lbs off her waist in 1 month without ever using a dime of her own money. Amanda is studying nutrition sciences at Cornell, and for a required research project Amanda thought it would be perfect to use university funds to find out how to 'hack' her weight loss. According to Amanda, "the most expensive piece of it all was actually finding what worked. But the actual solution only cost about $5."

"I had struggled with my weight my whole life. I tried things like Weight Watchers and Jenny Craig, which just didn't work as good as they promised. I am a single Mom with a kid at home and I am also working towards my degree, so I don't have any time to be at the gym. When I was assigned this big research project, I saw it as a perfect opportunity to get a deeper look at the natural weight loss opportunities that are out there, and that is when I found out about combining Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia and apple cider vinegar. The best part of it all, I can tell that my daughter is proud of me." - Amanda Haughman

Since the study, Amanda shared the Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia and apple cider vinegar combination with her close friend, Mark, who had also been struggling with his weight. Mark's results are even more impressive than Amanda.

Mark lost over 130lbs in under 3 months with Amanda's help

We sat down with Amanda to ask her more about how she found out about Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia and whether or not that is all that she used to lose 37lbs so quickly.

CNN: Tell us, how did you know where to start?

Amanda: To be honest, I really didn't. I was given a budget for the project by the university, and I spent nearly all of it researching everything under the sun. I looked into other previous research, case studies, and even successful weight loss stories of others.

CNN: So, how did you find out about Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia and apple cider vinegar?

Amanda: It's sort of funny. I am a big fan of Melissa McCarthy, and while I was looking into weight loss stories of others I decided to see if I could find out more about how McCarthy was able to lose so much weight so quickly. Surprisingly, even with all of the tabloids, it was pretty challenging to find concrete information on exactly how she did it. However, I was able to find a radio interview where McCarthy credited her entire weight loss to combining Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia with apple cider vinegar.

CNN: Was it expensive to get Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia ?

Amanda: It actually was not very expensive at all, and thankfully so. By the time I had found out about Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia and apple cider vinegar, I had about $13 left in my project budget. Since Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia is a completely natural formula, the supplier doesn't spend a lot to manufacture it. Additionally, they actually provided me with a free 1 month sample and I just paid for shipping! So I got Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia for $5 and picked up a bottle of apple cider vinegar for $6 from a local grocery store, and I still had $2 left in my budget!

CNN: That's impressive! Could you explain how it works?

Amanda: There isn't much to it, and that is the appeal of it all. Every morning, I made tea with 1 - 2 teaspoons of apple cider vinegar and took Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia with it. Other than that, I didn't change a single thing in my daily routine. 30 days later, I am 37lbs off the waist and in better shape than ever before!

Since helping her friend Mark, Amanda has gone on to share the Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia and apple cider vinegar recipe with many others!

Why is Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia so effective?

Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia contains the naturally occurring ingredient, hydroxycitcric acid, which boosts weight loss by blocking excess body fat production while increasing resting metabolism by more than 130%. This combination makes the body go from a fat-gain to fat-loss state while resting.

Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia with apple cider vinegar has been clinically proven to: Increase Resting Metabolism More Than 130% Flush Out Harmful Toxins Boosts Energy Levels and Increase Mood Block Excess Fat Production

For our readers, Amanda Haughman has provided the week by week breakdown of her weight loss, the apple cider vinegar recipe she used, and the link to get a free 1 month sample of Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia .

Results - Amanda lost 37lbs of pure body fat in just 1 month using Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia - Amanda lost 37lbs of pure body fat in just 1 month using

1. Mix in a glass, 1-2 teaspoons of organic Apple Cider Vinegar with warm water.

2. In the morning, take one Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia capsule with your drink.



Week One: Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia with apple cider vinegar every morning I was surprised at the dramatic results. My energy level was up, and I wasn't even hungry. A welcomed side effect of One week after combiningwith apple cider vinegar every morning I was surprised at the dramatic results. My energy level was up, and I wasn't even hungry. A welcomed side effect of Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia is its power to curb the appetite. Best of all, I didn't even change anything about my daily routine. On Day 7, I got on the scale and couldn't believe my eyes. I had lost 9.5lbs. But I still wasn't convinced, since they say you lose a lot of water weight at the beginning of any diet. I wanted to wait and see the results in the upcoming weeks. Week Three: After 3 weeks, all my doubts and skepticism had absolutely vanished! I am down 2 pant sizes after losing another 16.5lbs. And I still have a ton of energy. Quite often, around the third week of other diets, I would tend to run out of steam. But with Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia my energy levels didn't dip, instead they remain steady throughout the day. Week Four: Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia in week 4, I lost an additional 11 lbs. After the fourth week, my final results were shocking. I lost an unbelievable 37lbs since starting with apple cider vinegar and Ultra Premium Garcinia Cambogia ! I feel blessed to share this with other people who are struggling with their weight as well. Usingin week 4, I lost an additional 11 lbs.