Hurricane Irma – Shocking moment three ‘sharks’ are spotted swimming through flooded Miami STREET… but is all as it seems?
Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 32

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

ONLINE viewers have spotted something fishy about footage which appears to show sharks swimming through a flooded Miami street during Hurricane Irma.

The astonishing video features three shark fins above the water’s surface during torrential flooding in the downtown area of the port city in Florida.

4 The footage shows shark fins above the flood water on a Miami street during Hurricane Irma

4 Online viewers were quick to point out that sharks do not move in packs and labelled the video 'fake'

But animal enthusiasts pointed out that the fearsome apex predators do not swim in groups proving the footage had been faked.

One user wrote: “Sharks don’t swim in packs, clearly fake,” reports The Daily Star.

While another added: “Fake. Sharks are solitary animals.”

Deadly Irma, which was 400 miles-wide, killed at least 38 people as it swept across the Atlantic Ocean towards the US mainland.

Irma, which was ranked at the maximum category five, is the most powerful storm ever recorded in the Atlantic.

The monster weather system is the size of France and battered the Caribbean islands over several days, wreaking devastation with winds of 185mph and leaving at least 25 people dead.

MOST READ IN NEWS TICKED OFF Blood-sucking tick carrying killer disease sparks panic after it VANISHES at press conference warning of its dangers KAMPF AMERICA Inside Hitler's terrifying AMERICAN summer camps where US boys were taught twisted Nazi ideology and trained to shoot, march and salute BESTIVAL DEATH DASH Holby City star made 130 mile 1am dash to Bestival after WhatsApp map pinpointed where his daughter was found dead 'BOILED ALIVE' IN VOLCANO First pics of boy, 11, and mum who died along with his dad after he slipped into volcanic crater and they fell in trying to save him UP IN FLAMES Huge blaze engulfs Sainsbury's near Lakeside Shopping Centre as shoppers post dramatic pictures of fireball 'boiled alive' in volcano Boy, 11, and parents killed after he slips into volcano crater's boiling mud and they fall in trying to save him - as brother, 7, scrambles to safety

AFP or licensors 4 Satellite image shows the eye of Hurricane Irma moving over the Florida Keys on Saturday

Its outer bands began buffetting the coast of Florida on the morning of September 9, before the eye of the storm wrought devastation in the state the following day.

Irma came less than a fortnight after Irma came less than a fortnight after Hurricane Harvey caused devastating flooding in Texas

Another incredible viral video showed Another incredible viral video showed an alligator strolling across a road in the wake of Irma as survivors are warned to watch out for killer beasts.

The reptile was spotted in downtown Melbourne, Florida, crossing a pavement next to a bus stop and diving into a ditch just hours after the mega-storm battered the region.

The shocking scenes were captured by Melbourne Fire Department as officials warned people to watch out for alligators and snakes.

Alligator strolls across a road in the wake of Hurricane Irma in Melbourne, Florida

4 An alligator was seen crossing a road in Melbourne, Florida after Hurricane Irma