hey everyone, suave called and took a report on...
hey everyone, suave called and took a report on what i have gone through and i mentioned the problems some of you have been having as well! the lady that called me was the nicest person ive ever talked to! they suggest you call their toll free number to report your problems as well +1-800-782-8301 or 866-657-8283

😒 let me talk about my hair for a hot second. So a couple months ago I switched from Pantene (I knowalready off to a bad start) to Suave Beauty Professionals. At first my hair looked and felt great but recently its looked horrible, felt horrible, and literally clumps of my hair falling were falling out when i showered and strands would fall out when I would run my fingers though my hair. Now I take radiation pills everyday for a blood disorder I have so I just thought the radiation was finally catching up to me. But out of curiosity, I decided to see if my shampoo and conditioner was the problem. Turns out there was a class action settlement suit for 10 million dollars against them for hair loss while using their products. and its active ingredient, thioglycolic acid, is extremely corrosive, and if left on long enough, can dissolve the hair and burn the scalp.

😠 😠 so basically ive been burning my hair off for monthsyesterday I switch to another brand and today when I showered 2 strands of hair fell out and not a s-i-n-g-l-e clump. so if you use suave professionals STOP USING IT RIGHT NOW or atleast pay attention to the health of your hair to make sure it isnt harming you

**edit** its been brought to my attention that this specific one doesnt have thioglycolic acid, i couldnt check cause i already threw it away. the product that had the acid was taken off the market. that doesnt mean that my hair isnt falling out, this post is to inform people of what its done to my hair and apparently tens of thousands of other people. i have gotten hundreds of messages from people sending me pictures of their bald spots from using this exact product