Warning for parents as teens join in Facebook 'missing game' - Belfas…
Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe  Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Teenagers in Northern Ireland have joined a dangerous Facebook game in which they “disappear”.

Kids as young as 14 are taking part in the 48-Hour Challenge during which they vanish without a word to families, often in pairs or small groups.

It is a copycat of the Game Of 72 which swept parts of Western Europe four years ago.

That craze saw children dare each other to vanish without trace for up to three days and took off quickly in France.

However, the 48-Hour Challenge has a distinct twist. Every mention the missing teen gets on social media increases their score. This means frantic parents asking Facebook followers for help only add to the “game”.

One Co Derry mum whose child disappeared recently said: “This is a competition and it’s sick. The anxiety it left our family in is unspeakable.

“My child and others left Co Down and Co Antrim and were found 55 hours later in Ballymena.

“I was terrified they were dead or would be raped, trafficked or killed. But these kids just think it’s funny. There was not even a moment of remorse when my child was taken into police custody and when the police brought my child home, I could see posts of selfies from the police car.

“I’ve been told my child and friends are in the lead in this competition because they managed to vanish for 55 hours before they were discovered.

“It was just terrifying and my child, who is 14, doesn’t seem to get it. They need a wake up call but I’m worried what that would be.”

Read More Belfast blogger overwhelmed after posting first swimsuit photo

When police visited the teenager’s school pupils assured officers it was just a Facebook challenge and would be over within 48 hours. But the youngsters ignored the 48-hour goal and kept the game going.

The mum said: “We got lucky this time. Another teenager may not be so lucky and I dread to think of the consequences that could bring about.”