BREAKING NEWS: RUSSIA CONFIRMS IT WILL RETALIATE BY FORCE -- MASSIVE …
World News

Details Category: World News  Sunday, 29 April 2018 17:01 < Hits: 110497

UPDATED 6:01 PM EDT - RUSSIA TO RETALIATE BY FORCE (SEE BOTTOM) --

UPDATED 6:28 PM EDT -- RUSSIA WITHDRAWS "DE-ESCALATION CENTERS" FROM SYRIA "THIS IS NOW A DIRECT FIGHT"

UPDATED 11:22 PM EDT -- EMERGENCY ACTION MESSAGES BEING TRANSMITTED TO US MILITARY

At around 3:40 PM Eastern US time, an utterly MASSIVE explosion took place at an Iranian base inside Syria. The photo above was taken from 5 kilometers (about 3 MILES) away, and well-into the explosion which "seemed to linger." There are now widespread BUT UNCORROBORATED rumors Israel used a Tactical Nuclear Bomb against the Iranian base.

European-Mediterranean Seismological Centre (EMSC), which is now reporting a Magnitude 2.6 earthquake at that site! ( The explosion was so intense, it registered as an EARTHQUAKE with the The(EMSC), which is now reporting a Magnitude 2.6 earthquake at that site! ( Link

This is a very-fast-developing story. Updates within minutes. Check back. . .

UPDATE 5:15 PM EDT --

The precise location of the blast:

VIDEO -- 5:30 PM EDT --

The video below lasts only a few seconds. The cameraman told me he saw the "bright, white flash" then fumbled to get his camera started . . . capturing the rising blast AFTER the "flash." The cameraman also told me directly that when he started to see what looked like a "Mushroom cloud" rising up as the initial flames dissipated, he shut the camera off and ran like hell. This video was taken from about 5 kilometers (3.5 miles) away . . . that's how large the explosion was.

UPDATE 6:01 PM EDT --

Russia and Syria are reviewing radar recordings. CONFLICTING INFORMATION coming in. Some reports claim Israeli jets were in the air at the time of the attack. Other reports say that radar picked-up a total of NINE missiles coming from the south, south of As-Suwayda as shown on the map below:

Other reports claim missiles came fromt he direction of the US Base at Al-Tanf.

Russia confirms "the origin of the attacks will be attacked in retaliation . . . ."

UPDATE 6:24 PM EDT --

BREAKING:Syrian Sources saying that a huge underground Iranian missile facility has been hit and dozens of Iranian surface-surface missiles destroyed which have added to the massive explosions seen — EndGameWW3 (@EndGameShowWW3) April 29, 2018

***** BULLETIN ****

6:28 PM EDT --

Russia has WITHDRAWN it's "De-Escalation" teams from southern Syria. "There is no need for them anymore; this is now a direct fight."

Syrian Government has confirmed that bases in Hama and Aleppo have been hit by enemy missiles.

Unconfirmed, so no official Syrian and or Iranian statement yet: dozens upon dozens of (mostly) Iranian soldiers (of all factions) have been killed tonight.

Blood of all types needed for the hospitals of Suqailabiya and Masyaf... There's a shortage and many wounded.

Reports now of nearly 50 dead and many dozens and dozens wounded (majority are reportedly Iranian soldiers) from Israeli strikes on Hama

SANA CONFIRMS Syrian Army Fire Brigade station has been hit near the attack site at the Iranian Brigade 47 base, in an attempt to kill all firefighters and stop the fire being put out.

UPDATE 6:55 PM EDT --

MORE CONFUSING AND CONFLICTING REPORTS. Syrian Army Soldier Says the Strikes came from Turkish AirSpace

UPDATE 7:16 PM EDT --

*Unconfirmed* reports that Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and his ministers are holding an emergency cabinet meeting at the Kirya military base in Tel Aviv following the alleged Israeli airstrike on an underground Iranian rockets depot in Syria.

UPDATE 7:35 PM EDT --

The explosions at the Hama depot lasted for over an hour and a half, spreading to the nearby area and forcing some of the residents to flee their homes, Sky News reported, citing sources.

EDITOR'S NOTE: Most folks are aware that cloud-based web sites like this one, which feed from a main server to 19 separate data centers around the world, get BILLED each time a reader gets a page from the site; it's called "bandwidth" or "data transfer." You read, I get billed. So if you enjoy this type of reporting, cutting-edge information that the mass-media simply does not cover, PLEASE take just a moment and make a small donation of a few bucks. Your donation not only helps pay for what you read, it helps sustain this endeavor for the future. To make a ONE-OFF DONATION, click Every little bit helps, so PLEASE make a donation. This web site exists thanks to the generosity and dedication of readers like YOU Thanks! (Updates will continue below . . . .) Most folks are aware that cloud-based web sites like this one, which feed from a main server to 19 separate data centers around the world, get BILLED each time a reader gets a page from the site; it's called "bandwidth" or "data transfer."So if you enjoy this type of reporting, cutting-edge information that the mass-media simply does not cover, PLEASE take just a moment and make a small donation of a few bucks. Your donation not only helps pay for what you read, it helps sustain this endeavor for the future. To make a ONE-OFF DONATION, click HERE . To subscribe and help with $1 a week billed Quarterly ($13) click HERE . If that's too big a bite for your budget, you can help with a $5 a month Subscription (Updates will continue below . . . .)

UPDATE 8:31 PM EDT --

Russian Military is changing all its radio encryption; no longer communicating with US/Coalition or allowing us to hear what they're doing in Syria. VERY BAD SIGN.

REMINDER FROM APRIL 12 --

From April 12



Putin warns Netanyahu against further Israeli strikes in Syria



Russian President Putin spoke today on the phone with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and warned against further Israeli military strikes in Syria.



In the call, Putin stressed "the fundamental importance of respecting the sovereignty of Syria" and asked Netanyahu to "refrain from any actions that further destabilize the situation in this country and pose a threat to its security," according to a statement by the Kremlin.



According to the Israeli Prime Minister's office, Netanyahu pushed back on Putin and stressed that Israel will not allow Iranian military entrenchment in Syria.

UPDATE 11:22 PM EDT --

In the last hour, there have been at least THREE (3) "Skyking" Emergency Action Message (EAM) transmissions over the United States Military Global High Frequency Communications System.

An EAM is exactly what it sounds like: It is the highest priority message in the entire US Military. In layman's terms, it means stop whatever you're doing and do this right now.

All these messages are encrypted in a manner that makes it impossible for anyone other than the military to decipher what the message means. The fact that EAM's are being transmitted on the very evening that so much is taking place in the Middle East, is not a good thing.

UPDATE 11:25 PM EDT --

Iranian state-run mass-media outlet PRESS.TV has suddenly gone offline. It's web site has either been taken down or attacked and taken offline.

UPDATE 02:30 AM MONDAY 30 APRIL --

An overnight missile attack in Syria's northern region has killed 26 pro-government fighters, mostly Iranians, a Syria war monitoring group said Monday.

The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the attack appears to have been carried out by Israel and targeted an arms depot for surface-to-surface missiles at a base in northern Syria known as Brigade 47. The Observatory said four Syrians were also among casualties.

It said the death toll could rise as the attack also wounded 60 fighters and there were several others are still missing.

The attack comes amid rising tensions between Iran and Israel following an airstrike earlier this month on Syria's T4 air base in central province of Homs that killed seven Iranian military personnel. Syria, Iran and Russia blamed Israel for that attack. Israel did not confirm or deny it.

UPDATE 9:00 AM EDT MONDAY, 30 APRIL --

Minutes before it was scheduled to begin, the Likud canceled its celebratory Knesset opening faction meeting due to Netanyahu and several other ministers still being in Tel Aviv for a Security Cabinet meeting on the Syria strikes.

COVERT INTEL Iran has called-up its QUDS force; a special forces unit of Iran's Revolutionary Guards responsible for their extraterritorial operations. The Quds Force reports directly to the Supreme Leader of Iran, Ali Khamenei. Its commander is Major General Qasem Soleimani and his deputy was Hossein Hamadani. While "little is reliably known" about the force, as of 2007, its size was estimated at 15,000 troops. The United States has designated the Quds Force a supporter of terrorism since 2007.