Introduced version
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED

AN ACT

relating to state contracts with and investments in companies that

boycott Israel.

BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:

SECTION 1. Subtitle F, Title 10, Government Code, is

amended by adding Chapter 2270 to read as follows:

CHAPTER 2270. PROHIBITION ON CONTRACTS WITH COMPANIES BOYCOTTING

ISRAEL

Sec. 2270.001. DEFINITIONS. In this chapter:

(1) "Boycott Israel" has the meaning assigned by

Section 808.001.

(2) "Company" has the meaning assigned by Section

808.001.

(3) "Governmental entity" has the meaning assigned by

Section 2251.001.

Sec. 2270.002. PROVISION REQUIRED IN CONTRACT. A

governmental entity may not enter into a contract with a company for

goods or services unless the contract contains a written

verification from the company that it:

(1) does not boycott Israel; and

(2) will not boycott Israel during the term of the

contract.

SECTION 2. Subtitle A, Title 8, Government Code, is amended

by adding Chapter 808 to read as follows:

CHAPTER 808. PROHIBITION ON INVESTMENT IN COMPANIES THAT BOYCOTT

ISRAEL

SUBCHAPTER A. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 808.001. DEFINITIONS. In this chapter:

(1) "Boycott Israel" means refusing to deal with,

terminating business activities with, or otherwise taking any

action that is intended to penalize, inflict economic harm on, or

limit commercial relations specifically with Israel, or with a

person or entity doing business in Israel or in an

Israeli-controlled territory, but does not include an action made

for ordinary business purposes.

(2) "Company" means a for-profit sole proprietorship,

organization, association, corporation, partnership, joint

venture, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, or

limited liability company, including a wholly owned subsidiary,

majority-owned subsidiary, parent company, or affiliate of those

entities or business associations that exists to make a profit.

(3) "Direct holdings" means, with respect to a

company, all securities of that company held directly by a state

governmental entity in an account or fund in which a state

governmental entity owns all shares or interests.

(4) "Indirect holdings" means, with respect to a

company, all securities of that company held in an account or fund,

such as a mutual fund, managed by one or more persons not employed

by a state governmental entity, in which the state governmental

entity owns shares or interests together with other investors not

subject to the provisions of this chapter. The term does not

include money invested under a plan described by Section 401(k) or

457 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

(5) "Listed company" means a company listed by the

comptroller under Section 808.051.

(6) "State governmental entity" means:

(A) the Employees Retirement System of Texas,

including a retirement system administered by that system;

(B) the Teacher Retirement System of Texas;

(C) the Texas Municipal Retirement System;

(D) the Texas County and District Retirement

System;

(E) the Texas Emergency Services Retirement

System;

(F) The University of Texas Investment

Management Company; and

(G) the permanent school fund.

Sec. 808.002. OTHER LEGAL OBLIGATIONS. With respect to

actions taken in compliance with this chapter, including all good

faith determinations regarding companies as required by this

chapter, a state governmental entity and the comptroller are exempt

from any conflicting statutory or common law obligations, including

any obligations with respect to making investments, divesting from

any investment, preparing or maintaining any list of companies, or

choosing asset managers, investment funds, or investments for the

state governmental entity's securities portfolios.

Sec. 808.003. INDEMNIFICATION OF STATE GOVERNMENTAL

ENTITIES, EMPLOYEES, AND OTHERS. In a cause of action based on an

action, inaction, decision, divestment, investment, company

communication, report, or other determination made or taken in

connection with this chapter, the state shall, without regard to

whether the person performed services for compensation, indemnify

and hold harmless for actual damages, court costs, and attorney's

fees adjudged against, and defend:

(1) an employee, a member of the governing body, or any

other officer of a state governmental entity;

(2) a contractor of a state governmental entity;

(3) a former employee, a former member of the

governing body, or any other former officer of a state governmental

entity who was an employee, member of the governing body, or other

officer when the act or omission on which the damages are based

occurred;

(4) a former contractor of a state governmental entity

who was a contractor when the act or omission on which the damages

are based occurred; and

(5) a state governmental entity.

Sec. 808.004. NO PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION. (a) A person,

including a member, retiree, or beneficiary of a retirement system

to which this chapter applies, an association, a research firm, a

company, or any other person may not sue or pursue a private cause

of action against the state, a state governmental entity, a current

or former employee, a member of the governing body, or any other

officer of a state governmental entity, or a contractor of a state

governmental entity, for any claim or cause of action, including

breach of fiduciary duty, or for violation of any constitutional,

statutory, or regulatory requirement in connection with any action,

inaction, decision, divestment, investment, company communication,

report, or other determination made or taken in connection with

this chapter.

(b) A person who files suit against the state, a state

governmental entity, an employee, a member of the governing body,

or any other officer of a state governmental entity, or a contractor

of a state governmental entity, is liable for paying the costs and

attorney's fees of a person sued in violation of this section.

Sec. 808.005. RELIANCE ON COMPANY RESPONSE. The

comptroller and a state governmental entity may rely on a company's

response to a notice or communication made under this chapter

without conducting any further investigation, research, or

inquiry.

SUBCHAPTER B. DUTIES REGARDING INVESTMENTS

Sec. 808.051. LISTED COMPANIES. (a) The comptroller shall

prepare and maintain, and provide to each state governmental

entity, a list of all companies that boycott Israel. In maintaining

the list, the comptroller may review and rely, as appropriate in the

comptroller's judgment, on publicly available information

regarding companies, including information provided by the state,

nonprofit organizations, research firms, international

organizations, and governmental entities.

(b) The comptroller shall update the list annually or more

often as the comptroller considers necessary, but not more often

than quarterly, based on information from, among other sources,

those listed in Subsection (a).

(c) Not later than the 30th day after the date the list of

companies that boycott Israel is first provided or updated, the

comptroller shall file the list with the presiding officer of each

house of the legislature and the attorney general and post the list

on a publicly available website.

Sec. 808.052. IDENTIFICATION OF INVESTMENT IN LISTED

COMPANIES. Not later than the 30th day after the date a state

governmental entity receives the list provided under Section

808.051, the state governmental entity shall notify the comptroller

of the listed companies in which the state governmental entity owns

direct holdings or indirect holdings.

Sec. 808.053. ACTIONS RELATING TO LISTED COMPANY. (a) For

each listed company identified under Section 808.052, the state

governmental entity shall send a written notice informing the

company of its status as a listed company and warning the company

that it may become subject to divestment by state governmental

entities.

(b) The notice must offer the company the opportunity to

clarify its Israel-related activities and must encourage the

company, not later than the 90th day after the date the company

receives notice under this section, to cease boycotting Israel in

order to avoid qualifying for divestment by state governmental

entities.

(c) If, during the time provided by Subsection (b), the

company ceases boycotting Israel, the comptroller shall remove the

company from the list maintained under Section 808.051 and this

chapter will no longer apply to the company unless it resumes

boycotting Israel.

(d) If, after the time provided by Subsection (b) expires,

the company continues to boycott Israel, the state governmental

entity shall sell, redeem, divest, or withdraw all publicly traded

securities of the company, except securities described by Section

808.055, according to the schedule provided by Section 808.054.

Sec. 808.054. DIVESTMENT OF ASSETS. (a) A state

governmental entity required to sell, redeem, divest, or withdraw

all publicly traded securities of a listed company shall comply

with the following schedule:

(1) at least 50 percent of those assets must be removed

from the state governmental entity's assets under management not

later than the 180th day after the date the company receives notice

under Section 808.053 or Subsection (b) unless the state

governmental entity determines, based on a good faith exercise of

its fiduciary discretion and subject to Subdivision (2), that a

later date is more prudent; and

(2) 100 percent of those assets must be removed from

the state governmental entity's assets under management not later

than the 360th day after the date the company receives notice under

Section 808.053 or Subsection (b).

(b) If a company that ceased boycotting Israel after

receiving notice under Section 808.053 resumes its boycott, the

state governmental entity shall send a written notice to the

company informing it that the state governmental entity will sell,

redeem, divest, or withdraw all publicly traded securities of the

company according to the schedule in Subsection (a).

(c) Except as provided by Subsection (a), a state

governmental entity may delay the schedule for divestment under

that subsection only to the extent that the state governmental

entity determines, in the state governmental entity's good faith

judgment, and consistent with the entity's fiduciary duty, that

divestment from listed companies will likely result in a loss in

value or a benchmark deviation described by Section 808.056(a). If

a state governmental entity delays the schedule for divestment, the

state governmental entity shall submit a report to the presiding

officer of each house of the legislature and the attorney general

stating the reasons and justification for the state governmental

entity's delay in divestment from listed companies. The report

must include documentation supporting its determination that the

divestment would result in a loss in value or a benchmark deviation

described by Section 808.056(a), including objective numerical

estimates. The state governmental entity shall update the report

every six months.

Sec. 808.055. INVESTMENTS EXEMPTED FROM DIVESTMENT. A

state governmental entity is not required to divest from any

indirect holdings in actively or passively managed investment funds

or private equity funds. The state governmental entity shall

submit letters to the managers of each investment fund containing

listed companies requesting that they remove those companies from

the fund or create a similar actively or passively managed fund with

indirect holdings devoid of listed companies. If a manager creates

a similar fund with substantially the same management fees and same

level of investment risk and anticipated return, the state

governmental entity may replace all applicable investments with

investments in the similar fund in a time frame consistent with

prudent fiduciary standards but not later than the 450th day after

the date the fund is created.

Sec. 808.056. AUTHORIZED INVESTMENT IN LISTED COMPANIES.

(a) A state governmental entity may cease divesting from one or

more listed companies only if clear and convincing evidence shows

that:

(1) the state governmental entity has suffered or will

suffer a loss in the hypothetical value of all assets under

management by the state governmental entity as a result of having to

divest from listed companies under this chapter; or

(2) an individual portfolio that uses a

benchmark-aware strategy would be subject to an aggregate expected

deviation from its benchmark as a result of having to divest from

listed companies under this chapter.

(b) A state governmental entity may cease divesting from a

listed company as provided by this section only to the extent

necessary to ensure that the state governmental entity does not

suffer a loss in value or deviate from its benchmark as described by

Subsection (a).

(c) Before a state governmental entity may cease divesting

from a listed company under this section, the state governmental

entity must provide a written report to the comptroller, the

presiding officer of each house of the legislature, and the

attorney general setting forth the reason and justification,

supported by clear and convincing evidence, for deciding to cease

divestment or to remain invested in a listed company.

(d) The state governmental entity shall update the report

required by Subsection (c) semiannually, as applicable.

(e) This section does not apply to reinvestment in a company

that is no longer a listed company.

Sec. 808.057. PROHIBITED INVESTMENTS. Except as provided

by Section 808.056, a state governmental entity may not acquire

securities of a listed company.

SUBCHAPTER C. REPORT; ENFORCEMENT

Sec. 808.101. REPORT. Not later than January 5 of each

year, each state governmental entity shall file a publicly

available report with the presiding officer of each house of the

legislature and the attorney general that:

(1) identifies all securities sold, redeemed,

divested, or withdrawn in compliance with Section 808.054;

(2) identifies all prohibited investments under

Section 808.057; and

(3) summarizes any changes made under Section 808.055.

Sec. 808.102. ENFORCEMENT. The attorney general may bring

any action necessary to enforce this chapter.