JUST IN: Obama Just Mandated These 5 Schools to Pray in Muslim, Make Sure YOUR Kids Do NOT Go Here
The Obama administration is NOT new to taking advantage of Americans. Quite the opposite, Obama and his crooked party have added to the global chaos at the expense of our Great Nation.

Now that Obama is in his last days of presidency, it’s quite clear that he is moving to establish his “master plan.” This isn’t the first time we have heard about it. The closer we get to election day, the more it becomes clear just how true it is.

Joy Ellis is the mother a student at one of these schools and has told us that her daughter was not only encouraged, but forced to participate in this. It is absolutely terrible. Here is the list of schools currently doing this:

Desert View High School in Tuscon, Arizona All schools in Dearborn, Michigan Parkdale High School in Riverdale Maryland Carver Elementary School in San Diego Sir Robert Borden High School in New York

We highly recommend you make sure your kids do not go to these schools.

Put that’s not all. On top of this new cultural program, more and more schools are allowing Muslim prayer in school. The catch? Christians aren’t allowed to pray. Obama is effectively pushing Muslim ideologies and spitting in the face of all Christians.

Don’t believe us? Look at this statement that was released by PBS:

The [Muslim] rooms used for prayer are open to all students to observe their beliefs and are used for other purposes throughout the school day. Districtwide, school lunch menus provide pork-free options for students, and staff members try to spur the newcomer students’ interest in sports, culture clubs, and other extracurricular activities to develop connections beyond the classroom.

Somali student-athletes played key roles on Apollo High’s 2014 state championship soccer team, and track and field teams have drawn plenty of Somali participants. The district has partnered with the University of Minnesota to develop uniforms for female athletes who wear hijab, the headscarves worn by some Muslim girls and women.

St. Cloud’s Technical High School, the site of Somali student protests last spring over anti-Muslim harassment, began an international club that allows English-learner students to showcase their cultural heritage.

“When you’re separated, it’s really hard to feel like you’re a part of the community,” assistant superintendent Marsha Baisch said. “You feel different, you feel other.”

SOURCE: Political Insider

Things have gone too far. It’s time to take back our country and institute the values that WE AMERICANS hold dear. If Muslims want to pray to Allah, that’s perfectly fine, but they need to go to THEIR OWN COUNTRY. We aren’t going to allow it any longer.

Please help us to speak out against this madness by sharing on Facebook. Please leave a comment below and tell us what you think; we all need to work together to stop Obama’s evil actions.