Updated Data on Harassment in the Congressional Workplace
WASHINGTON – As part of the Committee on House Administration’s extensive review of sexual harassment and discrimination in the congressional workplace, Chairman Gregg Harper (R-Miss.) requested additional information on the statistics of settlements and awards from the Office of Compliance (OOC). The OOC provided the Committee with preliminary statistics of settlements and awards paid, as well as a breakdown by type of claim, including a specific category for sexual harassment, as a result of cases originating with an employing office in the House of Representatives since FY2013. Information for additional years is currently being assembled by the OOC.

Chairman Harper said: “First and foremost, there is no place for sexual harassment in our society, and especially in Congress, and one case of sexual harassment is one case too many. As part of my Committee’s review, I asked the Office of Compliance for a breakdown of the $17 million total amount that has been reported by their office for all cases involving claims of violations of the Congressional Accountability Act. The OOC has provided our Committee with preliminary information from the last five years involving House Member led Offices. I thank the OOC for this preliminary data and we look forward to receiving the entire breakdown as soon as possible as our Committee reviews the entire process – from training, to House policy, to the reporting and settlement process.”

Letter sent to Chairman Harper by Susan Tsui Grundmann with the Office of Compliance:

December 1, 2017

Dear Chairman Harper:

In response to your letter of November 30, 2017, we have assembled the requested statistics going back to FY2013. As per our discussion with your staff, we are working on providing statistical information on the years prior to FY2013 and we will provide this information as soon as it is assembled. Here are the aggregate statistics going back to FY2013:

a) From FY2013 to the present, the Awards and Settlement Fund has:

1. Paid settlements involving claims against 6 House Member led Offices;

2. 2 of those claims included allegations of sex discrimination; and

3. 1 of those claims included allegations of sexual harassment.

b) From FY2013 to the present, the Awards and Settlement Fund has:

1. Paid out a total of $359,450 for claims against House Member led Offices;

2. The 1 claim that alleged sexual harassment was for $84,000;

3. The 1 claim that alleged age discrimination was for $76,000;

4. The 1 claim that alleged discrimination because of sex and religion as well as FLSA violations and retaliation was for $7,000;

5. The 1 claim that alleged disability discrimination and retaliation was for $37,250;

6. The 1 claim that alleged discrimination claims because of race, national origin, and military service, and retaliation was for $5,200.00; and

7. The 1 claim that alleged veteran status discrimination and retaliation was for $150,000.

Very truly yours,

Susan Tsui Grundmann

Letter to Chairman Harper from the Office of Compliance

Letter to the Office of Compliance from Chairman Harper

CHA