Emergency personnel respond to house fire at Dianne Feinstein’s DC compound
Emergency crews extinguished a house fire at the Washington, D.C. compound of California Sen. Dianne Feinstein on Monday afternoon, according to local officials and an on-scene witness.

A D.C. police spokesman confirmed to The Daily Caller that there had been a house fire at the “Willow Oaks” location — 3300 Nebraska Avenue NW — and had blocked off the street Monday afternoon. Tweets from the department noted that the fire had been contained.

Officials said there were no injuries. It is unclear whether Feinstein was in the home at the time. A Feinstein spokesman didn’t immediately return a request for comment.

“The fire was extinguished & No injuries/relocations reported. All travel lanes have reopened,” police tweeted.

The LexisNexis research service lists the Nebraska Ave. home as Feinstein’s current address. She has lived there since 2002. The home is owned by her investment banker husband, Richard C. Blum.

Washington Life described the home as a 1936 French Renaissance revival estate. Tax records list it as being worth $6.3 million in 2013.

A neighbor described seeing a large number of police and firefighters outside the home shortly before 4 p.m. on Monday. In an interview, the witness said: “She occupies probably a third of the block in a walled-in compound.”

PHOTO: Police respond to fire at Sen. Dianne Feinstein’s northwest D.C. home. (The Daily Caller)

“There were just cops everywhere,” he said. “I mean ladder trucks, probably nine to 12 different fire trucks. Probably 23 cop cars. They had cops in the intersection directing traffic at Foxhall [Road]. They had flares out.”

The witness couldn’t see any signs of a fire, though. “They had every approach to Feinstein’s compound blocked off.” The witness provided TheDC with several photos of the scene.

PHOTO: Police shut down road near Sen. Dianne Feinstein’s northwest D.C. home. (The Daily Caller)

D.C. police later tweeted that the roads had been reopened.

TheDC’s Vince Coglianese contributed reporting.

Follow Alex on Twitter