BRING IT HOME BOYS! M&S LAUNCHES NATIONAL WAISTCOAT DAY FOR THE BIG GAME AGAINST SWEDEN
This Saturday, 7th July, M&S is launching National Waistcoat Day in celebration of England playing in the quarter-finals of the 2018 World Cup and the nation’s ongoing love for THE waistcoat.

With some saying THE waistcoat is sending the team good luck, M&S is asking the nation to get behind our team and show them support by posting celebratory pictures on Twitter, Instagram and Facebook with #luckywaistcoat. Show our boys and the world’s most stylish manager our support for bringing it home.

M&S (Official Tailor to the England team) has been proud to see Gareth Southgate sporting his M&S waistcoat on the sidelines for all four of England's games. And in a term many have coined the ‘Southgate Effect', waistcoats have been flying off the shelves of M&S stores and into the online baskets on M&S.com. Sales of all M&S waistcoats have gone up by 35%. With 57 waistcoats available at M&S, starting from £19.50, there’s a waistcoat for everyone to show their support this Saturday.

David Binns, Head of Menswear Buying at M&S said, “England have reached the quarter finals, and frankly, we could not be more excited. With some saying THE waistcoat has been bringing the team extra luck we thought how better to mark the big game than launching National Waistcoat Day. Best of luck to the team – we hope they bring it home!”

#luckywaistcoat

#itscominghome





For further information, please contact:

Corporate Press Office

0208 718 1919

Notes to Editors



Percy Predictor

M&S’s famous mascot Percy Pig has been busy predicting the results of all the quarter final games. To see what Percy thinks, follow @mandsnews on Twitter.

Food Sales

M&S is predicting to sell 2.26m sausages and 1m burgers ahead of Saturday’s England world cup game, that’s over 3.34m individual burgers and hotdogs to be eaten at BBQs across the country on game day! World Cup fever mixed with warmer temperatures have seen our burger and sausage sales soar, up 100% on last year.