Digital Single Market
How does it work?

You can call 112 from fixed and mobile phones to contact any emergency service: an ambulance, the fire brigade or the police.

A specially trained operator will answer any 112 call. The operator will either deal with the request directly or transfer the call to the most appropriate emergency service depending on the national organisation of emergency services.

Operators in many countries can answer the calls not only in their national language, but also in English or French. If the caller does not know where he is, the operator will identify where the person making the call is physically located and will pass it to the emergency authorities so that these can help immediately.

112 is also used in some countries outside the EU - such as Switzerland and South Africa - and is available worldwide on GSM mobile networks.

Check the European Emergency number association website for more information.

Do Remember

112 functions alongside existing national emergency numbers. Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, Malta and Romania have opted for 112 as their only national emergency number.

112 operators respond only to real emergencies. They do not provide traffic and weather reports, general information or answers to queries.

Hoax Calls to 112 are a waste the time and money of the emergency operators and can also be dangerous and a criminal offense in most countries.

Find more information on the implementation of 112 in the European Union on 112 in your country.

112 for children

Every child and young person must know what to do in case of an accident or fire. If parents and educators teach young people which number to call and what to do when they are in difficulty, they will know how to act in case of a real accident.

The Kids corner has some child-friendly material that will help educate children and young people on 112.

See also 112 on Your Europe.

EU rules on 112

The EU telecoms rules ensure that European citizens have a good access to 112, it means that people can call 112 from any type of phone, wherever they are. More on EU rules on 112.

Promotion of 112

The European Commission supports specific projects on 112 and runs campaigns to promote it: