Forensic Autopsy of Blunt Force Trauma: Overview, Definitions, Scene Findings
The individual types of blunt force trauma discussed above do not always occur individually; they often occur in combination. That is, one may encounter abraded contusions, abraded lacerations, and lacerated contusions (as depicted in the images below). The appearance of a blunt force injury is determined by several variables, including the impacting weapon or surface, the anatomic site impacted, and individual factors including skin elasticity and coagulability status.

Abraded contusion on the back. View Media Gallery

Two abraded lacerations on the forehead. View Media Gallery

One common type of blunt force injury is the so-called brush-burn abrasion. Brush-burn abrasions are broad, dried abrasions that often have a yellow-orange or orange-red coloration. These abrasions are caused by dragging or scraping the surface of the skin against a rugged surface; they are most often encountered when a body slides on pavement. These abrasions are sometimes called "road rash." [1] (See the following image.)

Brush-burn type abrasion on the left flank. View Media Gallery

In some cases, a patterned abrasion or contusion may result when an object impacts the skin. Whereas nonspecific blunt force injuries provide no hint as to what may have caused them, a patterned abrasion or contusion recapitulates some features of the impacting object. Such patterns may be of importance in identifying a weapon used in an assault or in identifying a tire or other part of a vehicle that strikes a body during a hit-and-run collision. In such scenarios, it is advisable to take photographs with a scaled ruler to help identify the object (see the images below). Overlaying the injury with plastic wrap and tracing it with a pen can also provide useful documentation.

Patterned abrasion on the head due to impact by a motor vehicle. View Media Gallery

Patterned abrasion on the flank inflicted by a crowbar. View Media Gallery

Chop injuries are sometimes regarded as a variant of blunt force trauma. These injuries result from impact of the skin by a heavy object with a somewhat sharp facet, causing a wound that has attributes of both sharp force and blunt force trauma. Depending on how sharp the weapon is, these may resemble either gaping lacerations or large cuts with marginal abrasion and are often associated with underlying fractures. [2] Objects that commonly cause chop injuries include axes, propellers, and lawnmower blades (as shown in the image below).

Several chop injuries inflicted by a boat propeller. View Media Gallery

Finally, one must know that the degree of blunt trauma evidenced on the surface of the skin may not be indicative of the degree of underlying injuries or the cause of death. [1, 2, 3, 4] Severe, deep scalp lacerations may overlie a skull free of fractures, brain injuries, or hemorrhages. Alternatively, a child may have little or no evidence of injury on the skin, yet have devastating internal injuries. Commotio cordis, a sudden cardiac arrhythmia caused by blunt impact to the chest -- often by a ball, steering wheel, or some other object -- is another type of blunt force injury. The object may leave a patterned injury or there may be no evidence of injury at all, in which case, one would need to rely on scene investigation, witness statements, and other sources to determine the cause of death.

Special dissections

In most instances, a review of the medical record and a standard, complete autopsy are all that is necessary to document significant blunt force injuries; however, certain cases may call for more specialized dissections.

Among such cases are those involving blunt force injuries of the neck. If a compressive, crushing force was thought to impact the neck, it may be advisable to perform a layer-by-layer anterior neck dissection, by which hemorrhage may be identified in the individual strap muscles (as seen in the image below). Once the muscles are dissected away, the cartilages of the trachea and the hyoid bone should be examined for fractures. After the dissection is complete, the neck organs should be removed so that the anterior cervical spine may be examined. If hemorrhage or fractures are noted, one may choose to remove and examine the spinal cord in order to document any pertinent injuries.

Anterior neck dissection demonstrating hemorrhage within several strap muscles. View Media Gallery

In other scenarios, particularly motor vehicle related fatalities with nonlethal injuries documented by routine autopsy, a posterior neck dissection may be required to document the cause of death. In this procedure, a linear, vertical incision is made from the mid occiput to the upper spine. The soft tissues are then dissected away, so that the deep muscles, ligaments, and cervical vertebrae can be examined for injuries. At this point, the spinal cord may be removed from the posterior aspect and examined for injury. In cases in which cervical subluxation is suspected, the brainstem should be initially sectioned in the sagittal midline to identify subtle pontomedullary lacerations.

Special dissections may be required to thoroughly document blunt force trauma in children in which there is suspicion of abuse. One such dissection involves stripping the parietal pleura from the pleural cavities after all thoracic organs have been removed. [2] Although some rib fractures may be identified without doing so, stripping the pleura allows for a much more detailed examination and may help detect fractures that would otherwise go unnoticed (see the image below).

Rib fractures exposed after peeling away the parietal pleura. View Media Gallery

Another procedure often performed in suspected child abuse cases is removal of the ocular globes in order to examine the retinae and optic nerves for foci of hemorrhage. After the brain has been removed, wedge-shaped cuts are made into the anterior fossae in order to remove the orbital plates. Once removed, the eyes may be gently dissected away from the surrounding soft tissues, then placed in formalin (or other fixative) for fixation. The eyes are later sectioned to examine for hemorrhages; the presence of hemorrhage may be further evidence of blunt force trauma (as shown below).

Cross section of the left eye and optic nerve demonstrating hemorrhage surrounding the optic nerve. View Media Gallery

At the completion of a suspected child abuse autopsy, the pathologist will often make incisions or cutdowns into the skin of the back and extremities to further document injuries to bone and soft tissue. Because of the skin's elasticity, the skin surface may be free of trauma; however, deeper tissues may have been injured. Incisions through the skin may show deep muscular hemorrhage and/or bony fractures (see the following image).

Cutdown of the posterior aspect of the left leg showing no injuries. View Media Gallery

Although the aforementioned procedures may be performed on any decedent, they are most often utilized in child fatalities.