Definition of fascism in English by Oxford Dictionaries
noun

mass noun

1An authoritarian and nationalistic right-wing system of government and social organization. Example sentences ‘But others did so from a genuine patriotism or a hatred of German fascism.’ ‘Italian fascism was very distinctive from National Socialism, and neither resembled Japanese totalitarianism.’ ‘Why did the European bourgeoisie resort to fascism in the 1930s?’ ‘The Italian partisans had risen up against Italian and German fascism only 20 years before.’ ‘Many came with the hope of turning Spain into a graveyard of European fascism.’ ‘The connection between Berlusconi and Italian fascism is not difficult to decipher.’ ‘According to this theory there was no difference between social democracy and fascism.’ ‘His only objection to Italian fascism was that it wasn't fanatical enough.’ ‘The party focused on parliament, not mass action, and its leaders had no strategy for resisting fascism.’ ‘I joined the Communist Party because I saw they really were fighting fascism at home and abroad.’ ‘Third, his treatment of fascism in the late 1930s and early 1940s seems too broad.’ ‘Earlier generations of Americans defeated fascism and won the long twilight struggle against communism.’ ‘Organisational independence would be maintained but they would unite to confront and defeat fascism.’ ‘An analogy could be made with how the emergence of European fascism should be taught.’ ‘In defining fascism, it is useful to recall the movement's genesis.’ ‘I agree with him that Islamic fascism needs to be condemned without reservations, and combated.’ ‘His book is an important read for anyone who wants to understand how to oppose fascism.’ ‘Egyptian mainstream intellectuals roundly condemned fascism in the 1930s.’ ‘Do you oppose fascism while keeping fascists within your circle of friends?’ ‘We were able to argue why fascism exists, what it is, and how we fight it.’ Synonyms authoritarianism , totalitarianism, dictatorship, despotism, autocracy, absolute rule, nazism, rightism, militarism View synonyms 1.1 (in general use) extreme authoritarian, oppressive, or intolerant views or practices. ‘this is yet another example of health fascism in action’ More example sentences ‘On the other, the arid monochrome of dull and vicious theocratic fascism.’ ‘To be forced to argue your case is not a symptom of incipient clerical fascism, but of a respect for the views of others.’ ‘So here are my questions of the left: Where are your demonstrations against Islamic fascism?’ ‘He used his celebrity to speak out against fascism and racial prejudice.’ ‘Getting drunk is mostly an exercise of choice, one of the few available in the current climate of health fascism.’ ‘The theocratic fascism of the networks must be defeated also.’ ‘Welcome to the authoritarian world of health fascism.’ ‘Apparently her success was a heart-warming populist victory against the corporate body fascism visible in hip-hop videos.’ ‘I think it's true: it's a strand of theocratic fascism.’ ‘I detest the cult of body fascism, the more so since I live in its global capital.’ ‘The next thing we have to tackle is the fight against racism and fascism.’ ‘That, to me, is a recipe for chauvinism and potentially even fascism.’ ‘Those who say a smoking ban smacks of fascism are closer to the truth than they realise.’ ‘The media are rightly criticised for 'body fascism', and placing too much attention on size 10 supermodels.’ ‘Those seeking protection from religious fascism can rely on the judiciary to deliver them up to it on a plate.’ ‘Condemnations of colonialism, class and fascism were all themes running through his work.’ ‘On top of that, I'm probably indulging fascism, anti-Semitism and snottiness.’ ‘A conference was being held today to explore the rise of fascism and far right movements, and how to combat racism.’ ‘We may be fighting defensive struggles, against the war, racism, fascism and cuts in social services.’ ‘It emerged in a war-ravaged nation as a type of clerical fascism.’



The term Fascism was first used of the totalitarian right-wing nationalist regime of Mussolini in Italy (1922–43); the regimes of the Nazis in Germany and Franco in Spain were also Fascist. Fascism tends to include a belief in the supremacy of one national or ethnic group, a contempt for democracy, an insistence on obedience to a powerful leader, and a strong demagogic approach