Hare Trimmed is a 1953 Warner Bros. Merrie Melodies short directed by Friz Freleng and written by Warren Foster, which features Bugs Bunny and Yosemite Sam voiced by Mel Blanc, and Granny voiced by Bea Benaderet.

Plot [ edit ]

The story opens in a town called Doughnut Center with a caption that reads "What A Hole" and Sam reading a newspaper indicating that a local widow has just inherited $50 million (about $468,000,000 today). Sam plots to marry the widow and take the money, close the orphanage and get rid of the police department, but Bugs overhears him and plots to foil the plan by posing as a rival French suitor. The widow, who bears a striking resemblance to Granny, is very excited to have two suitors, but Sam is not. Challenging Bugs by throwing down a gauntlet, he slaps him with a glove; Bugs slaps him with a brick-filled glove. Bugs then challenges Sam to a shooting round at ten paces. Timing the steps, Bugs waits until a bus arrives for Sam to fire, causing him to be run over by it. Bugs then poses as the widow, teasing him and pushing a piano down the stairs on him. The real widow arrives and offers a cup of black coffee. While Sam waits for his coffee, Bugs returns disguised again and asks whether Sam wants one lump or two (of sugar). Sam replies two and receives two blows from a mallet.

The real widow returns with Sam's coffee, and Sam violently kicks the cup with rage after she asks the same question, causing her to gasp in fear: "He's flipped his lid!" Hiding in an upstairs room, Sam then realizes what he just did and tries to apologize to her, but no avail, she shoots at Sam whenever he tries to enter. Outside the room, Bugs whistles at him and (still disguised) suggests they elope after Sam says he wants the lumps which he did. Bugs then begins throwing down things he wants them to take along. So many things are thrown down that Sam says, "That dame's takin' everything but the kitchen sink!" which is then (ironically) promptly thrown down as well. The last to go is the safe, got dazed from the safe falling on his head, and they go to get married.

At the church, Bugs' gown bottom comes off, and Sam, still dazed, refuses to marry him, running off. Bugs mock cries: "Boo-hoo-hoo! Always a bridesmaid but never a bride. Boo-hoo-hoo-hoo!" Iris out.

Trivia [ edit ]

Segments of the cartoon are used in 1981's The Looney Looney Looney Bugs Bunny Movie .

. This is the only cartoon Sam didn't encounter Bugs as himself.

Avalibility [ edit ]

VHS- Yosemite Sam's Yeller Fever

Laserdisc- Bugs Bunny: Winner By A Hare

DVD- Looney Tunes Super Stars' Bugs Bunny: Hare Extraordinaire

See also [ edit ]