Sunday Sport
For the RTÉ Radio 1 programme, see Weekend Sport

Sunday Sport is a British tabloid newspaper, published by Sport Newspapers, which was originally established in 1986. Defenders of the publication have said the Sport was never intended to be taken seriously: it has featured such stories as a London Bus being discovered at the Antarctic, a World War II Bomber on the Moon, or a statue of Elvis Presley on Mars.[2] Its content also includes a high quotient of softcore female nudity and advertising for sexual services.[3]

History [ edit ]

The Sunday Sport was founded in 1986, the first issue for sale was dated 14 September 1986.[4] Its original publisher was David Sullivan. Advertising in the Sunday Sport was once the responsibility of Sullivan's protegee Karren Brady (now the life peer Baroness Brady), who later became managing director of Birmingham City Football Club and vice chairman of West Ham United. Sullivan sold the paper to Sport Newspapers, but had to give them a £1.68m bailout in 2009.[5] The last editor was Nick Appleyard, appointed in September 2007. His predecessors included Dominic Mohan, Michael Gabbert and Paul Carter.

Its sister daily title, Daily Sport, began publication in 1991, but ceased publication and entered administration on 1 April 2011.[2][6] One of the creditors was Richard Desmond, who had refused to print the title because of outstanding debts.[7] However, it returned on 8 May, after being reacquired by its original publisher David Sullivan for £50,000.[7] The paper appears three times a week as Midweek Sport (Wednesdays), Weekend Sport (Fridays) and Sunday Sport, through his company Sunday Sport (2011) Limited.[1]

It has always possessed a salacious edge, copying The Sun's Page 3 feature, but with female nudity on more pages. Following the departure of editor in chief Tony Livesey in August 2006, the paper moved towards increasing its show business content. Most issues come with a free gift, which have included pints of lager, downloads, sex DVDs and tomato ketchup squeezy holders.

The Daily Sport and Sunday Sport helped launch the careers of many Page 3 models,[citation needed] including Linsey Dawn Mckenzie, Solange Hop, Cherry Dee, Zoe Parker, Josie Shaw and Dani Thompson.

Ed Miliband story [ edit ]

In October 2013, shortly after the Daily Mail had run a controversial story about the Marxist academic Ralph Miliband (father of then Labour leader Ed Miliband) allegedly hating Britain, the Sunday Sport ran a story about Ralph Miliband allegedly killing a kitten in 1944. Eunice Clark said,

Winston was my only friend. One night he was late coming home so I went out to look for him. It was a freezing, foggy night but I saw him walking down the road, bold as brass. I shouted 'Come here Winston!' But at that moment, a young naval officer came pedalling down the road on his bike, singing in a language I now know to be Belgian. He was obviously steaming drunk. He barrelled into Winston squashing him flat, then carried on as if nothing had happened. I am convinced that man was Ralph Miliband. Only a Belgian – a Belgian Communist – could have killed a kitten in cold blood.[8]

Ed Miliband later read from the article and "recorded a tongue in cheek video message" for a Spectator Parliamentarian of the Year award in November that year, pledging to "battle" the "scurrilous story".[9] Barely stifling his laughter, Ed Miliband said "Now my friends, that is the kind of stuff I have to deal with, sorry I can't be with you".[10]

See also [ edit ]