Taxes in Denmark
General about employment income

The income tax rates for employment income in Denmark are progressive and the income tax payable is calculated on an annual basis. The income year is the calendar year. Spouses/partners are taxed separately. The size of the family will not affect the tax rates, i.e. you will pay the same tax rates irrespective of how many children you have.

As an individual you pay state taxes, municipal tax, health tax, social security tax and church tax. You are however not obliged to pay church tax if you are not a member of the Danish Lutheran church.

The 8 % social security tax (“AM-bidrag”) is a “gross-tax” which means it is deducted before other taxes are calculated. The municipal taxes vary from the different municipalities (“kommuner”). In 2013 the average municipal tax is 24.9 %.

You only pay the top tax rate of 15 % of “personal income” (salary after deduction of the 8% social security tax) exceeding DKK 421,000 (2013) and DKK 449,100 (2014).

You are entitled to a personal allowance deduction (for 2013 DKK 42,000 and for 2014 DKK 42,800) that is deducted from your income before the final tax is calculated.

In total the Danish marginal tax rate is approximately 55.6 % (2013 and 2014).

Deductions

A number of deductions are available to the individual taxpayer. Salary earners may for example deduct the following expenses from their taxable income:

· Travel deduction (“befordringsfradrag”) for travels between your home and your work place. The deduction depends on your distance to work and is given in excess of 24 km regardless of the type of transport.

· Contributions to unemployment insurance

· Union subscriptions

Special expatriate tax regime

If certain conditions are met, employees meeting a specific salary level and researchers, who are recruited abroad, have the opportunity to be taxed in Denmark according to the special expatriate tax regime instead of being taxed according to the regular income taxation.

According to the special expatriate tax regime, the tax rate on salary income is reduced to a flat rate of 26 % (31.92 % including the social security tax) for 5 years. No deductions are allowed.

The 26 % tax rate is calculated on salary income (so called A-income), e.g. cash salary and bonus, employer-funded health care services, employer-paid telephone and the taxable value of a company car.

All other types of income must be included on the ordinary income tax return, e.g. rental income and interest income.

Conditions:

·You must be fully or limited tax liable to Denmark as from the date you move to Denmark and/or start working for a Danish employer. It may be accepted if you move to Denmark for a short interim period in order to settle in before you commence your work in Denmark. It is not a condition that you are deemed resident for tax treaty purposes in Denmark, i.e. you can for example live in Sweden and commute to Denmark to work.

·You must not have been fully tax liable to Denmark or limited tax liable on earned income (salary) or business income, etc., within the last 10 years prior to your employment in Denmark.

·Your employment contract shall be concluded with a Danish resident employer or a permanent Danish establishment of a foreign entity.

·The work is expected to be performed in Denmark. Ordinary business trips, etc., are accepted. If you are deemed resident for tax treaty purposes in Denmark you will not meet this condition if the period of work abroad leads to another country being entitled to tax your salary according to the relevant tax treaty.

·The monthly average salary must exceed DKK 69,300 (2013) and DKK 70,600 (2014) after deduction of contributions to the Danish Labour Market Supplementary Pension Fund (ATP) and possible pension contributions. The salary requirement may be adjusted annually by the Danish tax authorities.

·You must not have, or have had, any direct or indirect part of the management or control of the activity where you are or have been employed during the 5 years prior to signing the employment contract. The condition primarily concerns ownership of an enterprise.

It is necessary with an individual assessment of your situation and your employment contract in order to assess whether the conditions are met. Practical issues such as correct signing and application deadlines are very important as well.

Researchers who qualify and are approved as working as researchers in Denmark must not meet the minimum salary requirement.

Capital gains tax / Shares

Capital gains tax

Generally speaking, Denmark imposes tax on capital gains arising from the sale of private (non-business) assets. Capital gains on assets other than shares are taxed as capital income with a tax rate up to 43.5 % for 2013 and 42 % for 2014.

Interest from foreign bank accounts is taxable in Denmark. Interest expenses are deductible without limit from capital income.

You are required to provide information about your foreign bank accounts to the Danish tax authorities using the so-called “Erklæring K”.

Shares

If you are a tax treaty resident in Denmark you will be taxed on share income, such as dividends, regardless of the nationality of the company in which you own shares, options, etc.

Net gains on shares - quoted or unquoted - are taxed as share income at a rate of 27 % on the first DKK 48,300 (2013) received during the year as dividends and capital gains from the shares and 42 % on the remainder. For 2014 the threshold is DKK 49,200.

Losses can be offset against gains. The treatment of losses depends on whether the shares are quoted or unquoted.

You are required to provide information about your foreign shares to the Danish tax authorities using the so-called “Erklæring V”.

Real property

If you own a permanent residence and/or a summer cottage abroad that you hire out you are liable to tax on the profit of the hiring out. You are allowed to deduct expenses related to the hiring out such as interest expenses, house insurance, electricity, water, heating, etc.

If you do not hire out your permanent residence and/or summer cottage or only on a partly basis, a property value tax is levied on property in Denmark and abroad for the periods when the real property is not hired out. The property value tax is a partial wealth tax which will be levied along with other income taxes. The tax is calculated as 1 % of the value up to a ceiling of DKK 3,040,000 (2013 and 2014) and 3 % of the remainder. There are a number of exceptions to the main rules.

Further information

You will find further information on the Danish tax authorities’ website www.skat.dk

Social security

Denmark

If you work full time in Denmark you will be covered by social security in Denmark. If you are covered by Danish social security, you are entitled to a number of benefits, such as:

·Old-age benefits

·Sickness benefits

·Invalidity benefits

·Benefits in respect of accidents at work and occupational diseases

·Family benefits

·Maternity and paternity benefits

Special EU-rules regulate which country’s social security system an employee is covered by. The rules imply that you are only covered by one system at a time. The social security position is determined by where you work and where you live.

As a main rule you are covered by social security in the country where your work is carried out. This means that if you work for a Danish employer in Denmark, you are covered by Danish social security. However, if you are living in Sweden and also carrying out work in Sweden, the social security position is determined by the amount of work carried out in Sweden. If you work less than 25 % in Sweden, you will be covered by Danish social security. If this criteria is not possible for you to meet (i.e. if you work 25% or more in Sweden), you should contact HR.

Pension

The Danish state pension is relatively small, and it is therefore worth considering having a larger private pension contribution – either through an employer-provided pension scheme, a private scheme or both.

State pension

The pension is calculated based on the number of years during which you have obtained an entitlement to Danish pension. To receive the maximum amount you must have obtained 40 years of “saving” between the age of 15 and your pensionable age. If it is less, the pension will be pro-rated.

ATP

All individuals working in Denmark, who are covered by social security in Denmark, must pay contributions to the Danish Labour Market Supplementary Pension Fund (ATP). The ordinary contribution to ATP is calculated based on the weekly or monthly working hours rather than the salary earned. For full-time employees the contribution is DKK 90 per month and the employer pays twice this amount, i.e. DKK 180 per month.

Employer provided pension scheme

The pension scheme is normally placed in a Danish pension institute, bank or similar, and there are basically two different types of pension schemes available. These pension schemes are administered by the employer (contributions) and owned by the employee.

The rates/contributions will be mentioned in your employment contract if such a scheme is established.

Family benefits

Family benefits in Denmark are mainly comprised by a child benefit and a child allowance.

The child benefit is paid out to the mother of the family and is a fixed tax-free amount for each child. The amount varies in accordance with the age of the child. Further child allowances are granted if the parent is single or under other special circumstances.

Health care

When you are living in Denmark (you have your registered address with the Danish National Register), you also have extensive rights to health care in Denmark.

In Denmark it is common for a citizen to have a personal general practitioner (doctor) assigned. The doctor is the first point of consultation. The doctor may subsequently refer the patient to specialized treatment. Visiting the doctor is free of charge.

If you are covered by Danish social security, but live in Sweden, the Danish municipality in which the employer is located must be asked to issue a special health card to ascertain the administration of your rights in Denmark. The municipality can also give you a list of available doctors. You also have the right to treatment in Sweden as long as you are registered with the authorities (“folkbokförd”). This means you can choose between having treatment in Sweden or Denmark.

Live in Sweden and work in Denmark

If you choose to live in Sweden and commute to your work in Denmark on a daily basis, you will be regarded as non-resident for tax purposes in Denmark.

Denmark and Sweden have entered into a special agreement about taxation for individuals who commute between Sweden and Denmark.

According to the “Øresunds agreement on tax” your salary income will be fully taxed in Denmark if you meet the following conditions:

·You must work at least 50 % of your working days in Denmark (within every 3-months’ period)

·Your work outside of Denmark should either be workdays from home or spontaneous business trips

If you meet the above conditions, your salary income will be fully taxed in Denmark and exempted from taxation in Sweden. Basically, this means that your salary income will only be taxed in Denmark and not Sweden.

If the above conditions are not met, if you e.g. have a fixed working pattern on a Swedish entity, you will have to pay Swedish taxes on Swedish workdays and Danish tax on Danish workdays.

In Sweden you will be liable to tax on your worldwide income. The income for work performed in Denmark will be exempted from taxation in Sweden. You should just inform of the Danish income in your Swedish tax return.

If you on regularly basis perform work in any other country than Denmark, special rules will apply regarding taxation and social security. Please contact the Tax Agency, www.skat.dk or the Pension Authority, www.penst.dk for further information.

The Danish cross-border rules (“Grænsegængerreglerne”)

If you pay tax on more than 75 % of your annual income in Denmark, you can ask to be taxed according to the so-called “cross-border rule”. If you meet the conditions for being a “cross-border worker” you are entitled to almost the same tax allowances and deductions as people living in Denmark such as e.g. Swedish mortgage interest expenses.

Your “qualified income” should constitute at least 75 % of your total global income. The qualified income is the income which is taxed in Denmark.