Requirements for importing bodies in coffins
What is the process for bringing bodies in coffins and ashes in urns? What paperwork is required?

Human remains intended for interment or subsequent cremation after entry into the United States must be accompanied by a death certificate stating the cause of death.

If the death certificate is in a language other than English, then it should be accompanied by an English language translation.

CBP Officers will examine the death certificate to determine the cause of death and ensure that the remains are shipped in accordance with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) requirements. If CDC requirements are not met, CBP will hold the casket and contact the appropriate quarantine station for instructions.

Corpses, together with their coffins and accompanying flowers are exempt from duty. No formal entry is required. There may be Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) concerns regarding the accompanying flowers. CBP Officers will make a determination of Admissibility of any accompanying flowers on site.

There are no requirements for importation into the United States if human remains consist entirely of the following:

clean, dry bones or bone fragments

human hair

teeth

fingernails or toenails

human remains that are cremated before entry into the Unites States ( no death certificate needed )

If traveling on a connecting or domestic flight within the United States with cremated remains, the remains MUST be transported in a temporary container that can pass through TSA x-ray machines. This should be a container constructed of wood, plastic, cardboard or any non-lead based ceramic.

For a shipment some airlines do require the production of certain documentation. The death certificate and cremation permit will be required and further export and embassy paperwork may be required for an international shipment of cremated remains.

The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) is responsible for ensuring security and safety when we travel, and their guidelines concerning the transporting of cremated remains state that "passengers transport remains in temporary or permanent 'security friendly' containers constructed of light-weight materials such as plastic or wood." This means that you need to ensure you are traveling with the ashes in either a temporary container or a cremation urn constructed of x-ray friendly material. If you have a cremation urn, you do need to ensure it is purely wood or plastic, and can be x-rayed.

For additional information on requirements for importing human remains through a U.S. Ports, see 42 CFR Part 71.55.

If you wish to receive automatic updates to this Q&A, select "Subscribe to Updates" on the left side of this screen.