Extreme Risk Protection Orders
The bill creates the ability for a family or household member or a law enforcement officer to petition the court for a temporary extreme risk protection order (ERPO). The petitioner must establish by a preponderance of the evidence that a person poses a significant risk to self or others by having a firearm in her or her custody or control or by possessing, purchasing, or receiving a firearm. The petitioner must submit an affidavit signed under oath and penalty of perjury that sets forth facts to support the issuance of a temporary ERPO and a reasonable basis for believing they exist. The court must hold a temporary ERPO hearing in person or by telephone on the day the petition is filed or on the court day immediately following the day the petition is filed.

After issuance of a temporary ERPO, the court must schedule a second hearing no later than 7 days following the issuance to determine whether the issuance of a continuing ERPO is warranted. If a family or household member or a law enforcement officer establishes by clear and convincing evidence that a person poses a significant risk to self or others by having a firearm in his or her custody or control or by possessing, purchasing, or receiving a firearm, the court may issue a continuing ERPO. The ERPO would prohibit the respondent from possessing, controlling, purchasing, or receiving a firearm for 182 days.

Upon issuance of the ERPO, the respondent shall surrender all of his or her firearms and his or her concealed carry permit if the respondent has one. The respondent may surrender his or her firearms either to a law enforcement agency or a federally licensed firearms dealer. If a person other than the respondent claims title to any firearms surrendered to law enforcement, the firearm shall be returned to him or her.

The respondent can motion the court once during the 182-day ERPO for a hearing to terminate the ERPO. The petitioner has the burden of proof at a termination hearing. The court shall terminate the ERPO if the petitioner does not establish by clear and convincing evidence that the respondent continues to pose a significant risk of causing personal injury to self or others by having in his or her custody or control a firearm or by purchasing, possessing, or receiving a firearm. The party requesting the original ERPO may request an extension of the ERPO before it expires. The requesting party must show by clear and convincing evidence that the respondent continues to pose a significant risk of causing personal injury to self or others by having a firearm in his or her custody or control or by purchasing, possessing, or receiving a firearm. If the ERPO expires or is terminated, all of the respondent's firearms must be returned.

The bill requires the state court administrator to develop and prepare standard petitions and ERPO forms. Additionally, the state court administrator at the judicial department's 'State Measurement for Accountable, Responsive, and Transparent (SMART) Government Act' hearing shall provide statistics related to petitions for ERPOs.



(Note: This summary applies to the reengrossed version of this bill as introduced in the second house.)

,