What was Fox News covering while Manafort and Cohen were in court? This hilarious meme has some answers.
Hey, Fox News, any big news going on? No? Okay.

As you may have noticed, a lot went down on Tuesday. Paul Manafort, Trump's former campaign manager, was found guilty of eight counts of tax and bank fraud.

Trump's former lawyer Michael Cohen, meanwhile, plead guilty to campaign finance crimes and stated that Trump directed him to pay off two women during the campaign to keep them quiet about affairs they had with Trump.

While most news outlets have been airing extensive coverage of the two major cases, Fox News has predictably turned a mostly blind eye to it.

People on Twitter responded to the channel's reluctance to cover anything that looks bad on Trump into a very amusing meme.

CNN: Manafort and Cohen Guilty!



NBC: Manafort and Cohen Guilty!



BBC: Manafort and Cohen Guilty!



ABC: Manafort and Cohen Guilty!



HLN: Manafort and Cohen Guilty!



Fox News: Hey, do you ever just stare at one spot and zone out for a while? Crazy, right? What’s up with that? — Jules Suzdaltsev (@jules_su) August 21, 2018

CNN - Cohen plea deal

MSNBC - Cohen plea deal

Fox News - Are cats becoming too tall? — Fred Delicious (@Fred_Delicious) August 21, 2018

CNN: Manafort guilty on 8 counts

NYT: Manafort guilty of fraud

AP: Cohen pleads guilty

Fox News: Were the lobsters on the Titanic happy that it sank? — #1 Rachel (@rachel) August 21, 2018

CNN: Michael Cohen.



NBC: Michael Cohen.



Fox News: Pornhub bans Alex Jones. — Michael Blackman (@mikerblackman) August 21, 2018

CNN: Cohen pleads guilty.

NBC: Manafort found guilty.

CBS: Hunter indicted.

FOX News: Look at the receipt from 2011 where Hillary didn't tip 15% — Ted Flint (@TedFlintKansas) August 21, 2018

CNN: Cohen implicates Trump

MNBC: Cohen implicates Trump

Fox News: Is a giraffe a type of tall horse? — Kumail Nanjiani (@kumailn) August 21, 2018

CNN: Manafort Guilty.Cohen plea deal

NBC: Manafort Guilty.Cohen plea deal

CBS: Manafort Guilty.Cohen plea deal

BBC: Manafort Guilty.Cohen plea deal



Fox News: Melania Trump’s cookie receipe next



InfoWars: The Deep State are training coked up rabbits to attack conservatives — St Peter (@stpeteyontweety) August 21, 2018

CNN: Manafort Convicted, Cohen Pleads Guilty

MSNBC: Manafort Convicted, Cohen Pleads Guilty

FOOD NETWORK: Manafort Convicted, Cohen Pleads Guilty

ANIMAL PLANET: Manafort Convicted, Cohen Pleads Guilty

FOX NEWS: Tasty Coleslaw Recipes For Labor Day — Quinn Sutherland (@ReelQuinn) August 21, 2018

CNN: Michael Cohen reaches plea deal.



MSNBC: Michael Cohen reaches plea deal.



Fox News: Hillary Clinton wants open borders! — Denizcan Grimes (@MrFilmkritik) August 21, 2018

CNN: Michael Cohen to plead guilty.

ABC: Michael Cohen to plead guilty.

NBC: Michael Cohen to plead guilty.

FOX News: pic.twitter.com/JR4uAnyCQn — Diane N. Sevenay (@Diane_7A) August 21, 2018

CNN: Trump’s former lawyer says Trump committed crimes



NBC: Trump’s former lawyer says Trump committed crimes



ABC: Trump’s former lawyer says Trump committed crimes



Fox News: So, like, how sweet can a bagel get before it becomes a donut? — Jake Hightower (@jakehightower34) August 21, 2018

CNN: Cohen & Manafort convictions.

ABC: Cohen to plead guilty.

MSNBC: Cohen plea deal.

FOX News: Are candelabras female candles? — Sarah Sweeney (@heysarahsweeney) August 21, 2018

Sadly, these memes aren't too far off from how Fox is actually covering these stories. The channel didn't really touch the verdicts, opting instead to lean heavily on coverage of Post Malone's plane, the Mollie Tibbetts case, and confederate monuments.





Let me check the news:

CNN: "Trump decries Manafort verdict, says Mueller investigation a 'disgrace'"

MSNBC: "Michael Cohen pleads guilty, says he paid hush money at Trump's direction"

Fox News: "Authorities Say Illegal Immigrant Has Been Charged with First Degree Murder..." — Jim Cummings (@JamesNCummings) August 21, 2018

CNN & MSNBC covering a huge story right now: The President's longtime personal attorney pleading guilty to campaign finance violations, tax & bank fraud.

Fox News? A plane carrying @PostMalone making an emergency landing. — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 21, 2018

MSNBC is discussing Michael Cohen & Paul Manafort being found guilty.



Fox News is talking about rainy weather and the toppling of a confederate monument. — Alex Morash (@AlexMorash) August 21, 2018

Actual news: Manafort convicted and Cohen pleads guilty



Fox News: pic.twitter.com/f3qRbdPLmj — JT ✨ (@JustThomp) August 21, 2018

Ok, but will we ever know if lobsters were happy that the Titanic sunk, though? Or if giraffes are just tall horses?

Fox hasn't (actually) covered those stories (yet), but they're still steering clear of the actual news.