OREO-A Design Shrouded in Mystery

Do you know the cookie OREO? Who doesn’t! It was a cookie first introduced in 1912, but Nabisco. Research reveals that people at Nabisco aren’t even quite sure where the name came from. ODD! Some believe it was taken from the French word for gold, “or” (the main color on the early Oreo packages). Others claim the name stemmed from the shape of a hill-shaped test version; thus naming the cookie in Greek for mountain, “oros”, or even the Greek word ‘oreo‘, meaning beautiful or nice. Still others believe the name is a combination of taking the “re” from “cream” and placing it between the two “o”s in “chocolate” – making “o-re-o.”

And still others believe that the cookie was named Oreo because it was short and easy to pronounce. First called ‘biscuits’ they were mound shaped.

Guinness World Records honored Oreo as the first brand to attempt – and set – the Guinness World Records® mark for the “Most ‘likes’ on a Facebook post in 24 hours.”

Would you be surprised to hear that the rumor is that the cookie’s design stem from symbols used by the Knights Templar, as well as the Freemasons? Some argue that the circle atop the cookie has a geometric pattern which is said to be the two-bar cross, and may even be the “CROSS OF LORRAINE”. This symbol was carried by the Knights Templar into the Crusades.

I do see the similarities.

Amazingly the phrase “the stuff of legend” seems to be ringing in my ears.

The very closely design of HYDROX which was invented in 1908 seems to have intriguing similarities as well.

The evolution process of the Oreo emboss from 1912-1914

Originally stamped with a wreath-which is a pagan symbol.

In 1924, two doves were added.

Even the LOGO of Nabisco (originally known as National Biscuit Company) has the cross which is very much like the ANK!

The geometric pattern with the dot with four triangles radiating outward could be construed as a four-leaf clover or the a cross pattée…also associated with the Knights Templar,a s well as the German military and today’s Freemasons.

The practice of punching holes in biscuits is known as “docking,” and has been done by bakers for centuries in order to prevent uneven puffiness and promote flat crispness, a pre-mechanization docker was “a dangerous-looking utensil consisting of sharp heavy spikes driven into a bun-shaped piece of wood.”

After a variety of test runs, the “Oreo Biscuit-two beautifully embossed chocolate-flavored wafers with a rich creamy filling were made at 30 cents per pound”.

Marking the 75th birthday, in 1986, Goldberger declared Oreo stands as the archetype of its kind.

The contemporary Oreo stamp was introduced in 1952, and remains unchanged.

No one can argue that symbols can powerfully drive our activities and influence our subconscious. Symbols act as a sort of short-hand that triggers (through association) our subconscious and eventually our thought process, feelings and actions. The crosses, the swastika, the yin-yang symbol all drive human activity with their visual impact.

A Four-leafed clover/Lorraine Cross/Circle;



What do four-leaf clovers symbolize? We can ask Saint Patrick or any Irish man or woman about Shamrocks, but actually the four-leaf clover goes way back to the Celtic Priests or the Druids who used four-leaf clovers as protection against evil spirits. The reality is that the clover plant doesn’t naturally produce four leaves. So, four-leaf clovers for hundreds of years have symbolized to our mass consciousness a rarity that protects and bestows good luck.

Antennas symbolize communication, broadcasting and reception. Funny coincidence is that “National Biscuit Company” abbreviates to NBC.

Crosses symbolized in pagan times, the four-elements and the power of manifestation in the earthly realm. This particular double cross was called the Lorraine cross and was considered the symbol of Joan of Arc’s crusade.

The Lorraine cross was carried to the Crusades by the original Knights Templar, granted to them for their use by the Patriarch of Jerusalem. Hermetic alchemists of the Renaissance used the emblem as a symbol of earth and spirit by combining the square earth cross with the cross of Christ.

When drawn symmetrically, it symbolized the hermetic maxim, “As above, so below.” The Lorraine Cross is used in Freemasonry as a degree symbol. In the Catholic Church, the equal-armed Lorraine Cross denotes the office of Cardinal.

In 1940, the cross of Lorraine was adopted by Admiral d’Argenlieu (commander of the Free French Forces) as a symbol of the French Resistance, chosen as a symbol to stand against the Nazi Swastika. A very old form of this cross, a depiction of a shepherd’s staff, was used in ancient Sumeria as an ideogram for rulership. The Cross of Lorraine is not a “Gothic” symbol, or a symbol of Satanism.

The circle is a symbol of wholeness and infinity.

The symbolic equation probably linked to Oreo’s success?

“Beauty and Goodness” or “mounds” of plenty surrounded by ”infinity and unity” transmitting an earthly manifestation or crusade or receiving “Oreo” (Beauty) from the Great Beyond which bestows garlands of good luck and protection from evil.

That is one powerful symbol on a small round cookie, over 12 billion of which, have been consumed by the world’s population in almost 100 years. And not to forget; a cookie born in our Chelsea Market here New York City.

Sources: ediblegeography.com/examiner.com