President Bush addresses FFA convention at Penn State
University Park, Pa. -- Flanked by hundreds of future farmers from high schools around the state, President George W. Bush addressed a packed Eisenhower Auditorium today (June 14) on Penn State's University Park campus.

"It is an honor for me to be here at Penn State University, one of the great universities of our country," said Bush in his opening remarks.

The highlight of the annual FFA state convention held annually at Penn State, Bush spoke on issues ranging from homeland to American agriculture before launching into the focus of his remarks - social security reform. He also acknowledged a special guest in his motorcade from University Park Airport - Penn State football coach Joe Paterno.

Starting with comments on the war on terror, Bush emphasized that a free society is necessary in "spreading the peace."

"We're laying the foundation for a peaceful world," he said. "Boys and girls from all cultures and all countries can realize their dreams and live in a free society."

Keeping with the context of the FFA convention, Bush also addressed issues of importance to the farming community, including tax reform proposals that would benefit the millions of family farmers in America.

"Farming is still the first industry in America," said Bush. "It is a luxury that we live in a country that can feed itself and we want to keep it that way. American agriculture is diverse and a complex industry."

Bush promised that seniors today will continue to receive social security checks, he stressed that the problem falls to younger Americans because of the large population of baby boomers about to reach retirement age - the president included among them.

"I reach retirement age in 2008 - it's a convenient year for me," said Bush.

This was Bush's second visit to Penn State during his presidency. His first appearance was at Penn State Delaware County on April 2, 2002, where he spoke to a crowd of about 700 with a bipartisan message for reforming and bolstering early childhood education.

Stay tuned to Penn State Live for more on this story as the president's speech continues.