Journal of Cutaneous Pathology
Free‐living amebae are ubiquitous in our environment, but rarely cause cutaneous infection. Balamuthia mandrillaris has a predilection for infecting skin of the central face. Infection may be restricted to the skin or associated with life‐threatening central nervous system (CNS) involvement. We report a case of a 91‐year‐old woman, who presented with a non‐healing red plaque over her right cheek. Several punch biopsies exhibited non‐specific granulomatous inflammation without demonstrable fungi or mycobacteria in histochemical stains. She was treated empirically for granulomatous rosacea, but the lesion continued to progress. A larger incisional biopsy was performed in which amebae were observed in hematoxylin‐eosin stained sections. These were retrospectively apparent in the prior punch biopsy specimens. Immunohistochemistry and polymerase chain reaction studies identified the organisms as Balamuthia mandrillaris . Cutaneous infection by B. mandrillaris is a rare condition that is sometimes complicated by life‐threatening CNS involvement and which often evades timely diagnosis due to its rarity and nonspecific clinical manifestations. Moreover, these amebae are easily overlooked in histopathologic sections because of their small number and their resemblance to histiocytes. Dermatopathologists should be familiar with the histopathologic appearance of these organisms and include balamuthiasis and other amebic infections in the differential diagnosis of granulomatous dermatitis.

Free‐living ameba uncommonly infect the skin but can do so in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients.1, 2 Only a few genera of free‐living ameba are recognized as human pathogens: Acanthamoeba, Naegleria, Balamuthia and Sappinia. Exposure to these organisms is probably common because of their ubiquitous nature in the natural environment; however, clinically significant skin infection is quite rare. Balamuthia mandrillaris has a predilection for infection of the central facial skin and can also involve the central nervous system (CNS), leading to granulomatous amebic encephalitis (GAE), which is almost invariably fatal.1, 3-5 This report describes a patient with a large centrofacial cutaneous lesion due to B. mandrillaris infection, the diagnosis of which eluded dermatologists and dermatopathologists for over 1 year.6-8

Report of a patient A 91‐year‐old woman with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension, congestive heart failure, and monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance (MGUS) was referred to dermatology clinic for a nonhealing, red plaque over her right cheek. She denied trauma to the area and had not traveled out of the state of Washington in decades; there was no history of fresh‐water swimming. The lesion began approximately 1 year prior as a skin‐colored bump and progressively enlarged, gradually developing into an erythematous and markedly indurated (‘rock‐hard’) plaque (Fig. 1). The patient underwent several biopsies, each with nonspecific pathologic findings of granulomatous dermatitis. Repeated cultures and histochemical stains were negative for atypical mycobacterial and fungal organisms. The slides from these biopsies were also reviewed at our institution and another referral center with a similar interpretation. Initially, granulomatous rosacea was the favored diagnosis, but the lesion continued to enlarge despite multiple treatment modalities including intra‐lesional steroid injection, oral antibiotics and electron beam therapy. Figure 1 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Clinical appearance of an erythematous and indurated plaque on the right cheek. The lesion shown is approximately 1‐year old. After failing to improve, the patient was referred to our institution a second time, and underwent a larger, incisional biopsy near the site of her previous biopsies. In addition, previous histopathologic slides from prior punch biopsy specimens were reviewed a second time along with clinical photographs and clinical notes from the electronic medical record. Hematoxylin‐eosin‐stained sections of the incisional biopsy specimen contained skin and subcutaneous fat. There was diffuse, non‐caseating granulomatous inflammation involving the dermis and subcutaneous fat (Fig. 2A). The overlying epidermis was thin, without other significant pathologic alteration. Some areas lacked granulomas, but instead showed a mixed inflammatory infiltrate comprising lymphocytes, mature plasma cells, as well as occasional eosinophils. Histochemical stains and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) studies were negative for fungal and mycobacterial organisms. The key finding in routinely stained histopathologic sections was the presence of rare cells with bubbly pale grey cytoplasm, small, perfectly round nuclei and extremely large nucleoli occupying greater than one‐half of the nuclear area imparting a targetoid appearance consistent with amebae (Fig. 2B–D). In some organisms, the extremely large nucleolus could be readily mistaken for the entire nucleus, due to faintly staining‐to‐clear peripheral chromatin and inconspicuous nuclear membrane. These structures resembled histiocytes, but could be distinguished by careful morphologic examination (Table 1). The number of organisms exhibiting diagnostic morphologic features was sparse – approximately one diagnostic form per slide. Subsequent immunohistochemical staining highlighted many more organisms than could be appreciated in conventional sections. Retrospective analysis of the previous punch biopsies revealed the presence of scattered amebae in each of the specimens. Figure 2 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint A) Noncaseating granulomatous inflammation and lymphoid aggregates involving the dermis and subcutaneous fat without epidermal abnormalities (hematoxylin‐eosin: ×20). B) An amebic organism (arrow and inset) with pale‐gray, bubbly cytoplasm, round nucleus, and prominent nucleolus, imparting a targetoid appearance in an area of chronic inflammation (hematoxylineosin: ×400). C) An area of granulomatous inflammation with a binucleate ameba inside of a multinucleated histiocyte giant cell (arrow and inset) (hematoxylin‐eosin: ×400). D) Two amebae (arrows) with retraction artifact imparting a lacunar appearance on the right (hematoxylin‐eosin: ×400). Table 1. Morphologic comparison of Balamuthia mandrillaris trophozoites and histiocytes in H&E‐stained sections Trophozoites Foamy histiocytes Epithelioid histiocytes Cytoplasm Bubbly, faint amphophilic Bubbly, colorless Solid, eosinophilic Nucleus Small and perfectly round Oval‐to‐reniform Oval‐to‐reniform Nuclear membrane Delicate‐to‐absent Thin Thin Nucleolus Large, sometimes occupying nearly the entire nucleus Inconspicuous Inconspicuous A formalin‐fixed tissue block from one of the punch biopsy specimens was then sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for further characterization using PCR and immunohistochemical analysis. DNA extracted from the skin specimen was positive for B. mandrillaris, and the cells of interest were immunoreactive using a free‐living ameba immunohistochemistry assay (known to detect both B. mandrillaris and Acanthamoeba spp.), but appropriately non‐reactive with antibodies against Acanthamoeba spp. (Fig. 3). The patient was immediately referred to the infectious disease service, and began a CDC‐recommended course of multi‐agent antibiotic therapy comprised of azithromycin 500 mg daily, fluconazole 400 mg daily and sulfadiazine 1500 mg four times a day. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study did not show evidence of CNS involvement. Figure 3 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Immunohistochemical staining with a red chromogen highlights multiple amebae in the deep dermis with granular cytoplasmic immunoreactivity (inset) (anti‐free living amebae pooled antibody, ×40). The patient remained on this three‐drug regimen for 5 months without any notable side effects. Her plaques softened and the total area of involvement was significantly reduced; however, there were some areas of slow progression near the midline of her face. At this point a course of miltefosine 50 mg three times a day, supplied by the CDC, was added in an effort to better control her disease. Unfortunately, less than 2 weeks later, the patient developed nausea, anorexia, decreased appetite and lower extremity swelling, which are known side effects of miltefosine, thus prompting its discontinuation. She also developed acute renal failure requiring hospitalization and discontinuation of her sulfadiazine. Her kidney function ultimately returned to normal and she returned to her previous state of general health. Neither the miltefosine nor the sulfadiazine were re‐initiated. Currently she remains on a 2‐drug regimen of azithromycin and fluconazole and is followed clinically by dermatology and infectious diseases every 3 months. Owing to the patient's age, overall medical condition, and the above‐described severe adverse drug reactions, the goal of her current treatment regimen is now disease containment but not necessarily complete clinical clearance. She remains free of symptoms of CNS involvement.

Discussion B. mandrillaris is one of just a few free‐living ameba which cause human disease, along with Acanthamoeba spp., Naegleria fowleri and Sappinia pedata.8 B. mandrillaris was first identified in 1986 within the brain of a mandrill that died of meningoencephalitis at the San Diego Zoo. Mandrills are primates of the Old World monkey family. Since 1986, approximately 150–200 cases of cutaneous and/or CNS infections in humans have been reported. B. mandrillaris is found worldwide, but the majority of reported cases appear to arise from Lima, Peru and the United States, mostly in California and Texas.6 Similar to other free‐living amebae, B. mandrillaris organisms can complete their entire life cycle independent of a host organism.9 The major reservoir for the organism is soil; organisms have been isolated from garden soil, mud baths and potted plants.10-13 The organism has also been identified in domestic water‐based environments, including faucets, showerheads and bathtubs.10, 14 Our patient has been an avid gardener, and garden soil is the suspected source of her exposure to this organism. Transmission of free‐living ameba from the environment to hosts usually occurs via skin breakage or via the respiratory system.15 Alternate modes of infection reported in literature include organ transplantation.16 B. mandrillaris infection occurs in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent hosts, particularly children.1, 2, 17 Cutaneous involvement alone is an unusual presentation of balamuthiasis in the United States where most cases do not have skin lesions at all (only GAE), and if skin lesions are present, they exist in combination with CNS manifestations (CDC unpublished data). This is in contrast to Peruvian cases, in which skin lesions precede CNS involvement.8 Cutaneous balamuthiasis characteristically presents with painless swelling and skin redness; however, physical exam findings vary widely, including ulcers, indurated plaques and polypoid/warty configurations, sometimes mimicking cutaneous neoplasms such as squamous cell carcinoma.8, 9, 18 B. mandrillaris has a predilection for skin of the central face and extremities, and lesions are usually solitary. Cutaneous disease typically has a subacute to chronic clinical course – month to years may pass before a definitive diagnosis is made. GAE has a prodromal phase with nonspecific neurologic signs (e.g. headache, fever, nausea and photophobia) lasting weeks to months followed by a rapidly progressive phase which may be heralded by seizures, focal sensory‐motor deficits or lethargy soon followed by coma and death in over 90% of the reported cases.2, 8 Given the rarity of amebic infections and non‐specific symptoms, clinical diagnosis of B. mandrillaris infection is frequently incorrect. Most likely, a significant proportion of cases go undiagnosed and unreported. Even when B. mandrillaris is clinically suspected, histopathologic and laboratory diagnosis can still be challenging. Serologic tests can detect circulating antibodies against ameba using enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), indirect immunofluorescence and Western blot. In addition, direct immunofluorescence staining with rabbit anti‐Balamuthia sera exists as well. Immunohistochemical assays targeting free‐living amebae have also been developed. Recently, PCR assays using primers against mitochondrial rRNA gene regions specific for Balamuthia have been developed. Real time PCR assays can have exquisitely high sensitivity, with the capability of detecting as few as a single ameba per sample.9 Given the rarity of suspected B. mandrillaris infection, these tests are not widely available outside of a few reference laboratories such as CDC. Because the diagnosis is usually not suspected clinically, pathologists can have a pivotal role in facilitating timely diagnosis. The histopathologic inflammatory pattern is usually noncaseating granulomatous inflammation or mixed inflammation. Usually, both trophozoites and cysts are present in tissue specimens. Nevertheless, recognition of the organisms is hindered by their sparse number relative to the extensive inflammation, as well as their resemblance to histiocytes. Cysts are round, 15–30 µm in diameter, have a thick outer wall, a bubbly cytoplasm with refractile granules and an inconspicuous nucleus. They are easily mistaken for degenerating histiocytes. Trophozoites are round, oval or irregular in shape and 12–60 µm in diameter. Most are uninucleate and contain bubbly amphophilic cytoplasm. The most helpful findings are the small nuclei with distinctive morphology imparted by a perfectly round shape, an extremely large nucleolus – (the ‘karyosome’) – more than one half the diameter of the nucleus, and a thin or unapparent nuclear membrane. However, not all trophozoites have the characteristic nuclear features and if the nuclei of the trophozoites are not represented in the plane of section, the organisms will probably go unnoticed. Also, Balamuthia and Acanthamoeba trophozoites have similar morphology in histopathologic sections and distinction may be difficult. The presence of multiple nucleoli may favor Balamuthia trophozoites over Acanthamoeba8 (Fig. 2C). If the pathologist suspects amebic infection in biopsy specimens, immunohistochemical stains and molecular PCR assays can provide diagnostic confirmation and species identification. For patients presenting with cutaneous lesions, the most feared complication is CNS involvement and development of GAE, which is fatal if untreated or if treatment is delayed to the advanced stages of the disease. Unfortunately, the majority of the reported GAE cases have been diagnosed at autopsy. Nevertheless, there are reports in which GAE has been diagnosed early and successfully treated.19, 20 Therefore, early biopsy of skin lesions and correct histopathologic diagnosis before patients develop advanced CNS injury may be lifesaving in some cases.

Conclusion This report serves to raise awareness of cutaneous lesions due to B. mandrillaris, a rare and potentially deadly infection when complicated by CNS involvement. Delayed diagnosis is typical due to the rarity of this disorder, its nonspecific clinical findings, and nonspecific histopathologic findings – with the exception of scattered organisms exhibiting subtle but characteristic morphologic features. When the diagnosis is clinically unsuspected, biopsy of skin lesions may provide the first and only avenue for timely diagnosis and early intervention. Thus, infection by B. mandrillaris and other pathogenic amebae should be included in the histopathologic differential diagnosis of granulomatous dermatitis, and dermatopathologists should be familiar with the appearance of these organisms in routinely stained histopathologic sections.

Disclaimer The findings and conclusions herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.