Welcome to The SAVES Program
The political, economic, and civil unrest in the world impacts the United States as it embraces refugees and asylees by opening its doors to provide a safe heaven and opportunities for a better life. A large number of Cubans have entered the United States as a result of the Cuban revolution in 1959. Also a great number of Haitians have been arriving through the years and especially after the earthquake that devastated Haiti in 2010. Other countries have equally been impacted by terrorism, dictatorships, civil wars, human trafficking, and famine. As countries are negatively impacted by these events, refugees and asylees seek protection and opportunities in the United States. Due to the geographic location of the State of Florida and Miami-Dade County, the majority of the refugees/asylees resettle in South Florida and Miami-Dade. As a result, Miami-Dade County Public Schools (M-DCPS) has been and continues to be heavily impacted. The M-DCPS Skills for Academic, Vocational and English Studies (SAVES) program first established in April 1996 became a critical support for these refugees.



The SAVES program is sponsored by the Florida Department of Children and Families, Refugee Services Program, and is funded solely with grants from the U.S. Department of Human Services, Office of Refugee Resettlement. SAVES was established to address the specific English language, academic and vocational training needs of this refugee/asylee population. English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) and English Literacy for Career and Technical Education (ELCATE) curricula, as well as other high priority Vocational/Technical were developed to meet the needs of this population.

Students are identified and interviewed using program-specific intake forms. Once legal eligibility requirements are identified for program participation, instructional needs and individual client vocational goals are established. English language instruction is emphasized. SAVES classes are offered through 14 adult and vocational education technical centers strategically located throughout Miami-Dade County to better serve our clients.