Demi Lovato expected to leave hospital this week
Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Demi Lovato has reportedly turned a corner after her overdose.

Lovato, 25, has stabilized following an overdose last week of drugs that may have included opiates and meth, TMZ reports. She’s expected to be discharged from Cedars-Sinai in Los Angeles this week.

Her team is reportedly urging her to go to rehab, although the decision is ultimately up to the “Heart Attack” singer.

Sources told the site that those close to her, as well as some of her staff, have threatened to walk away from her if she doesn’t get help.

“She could die if she doesn’t, and that’s not going to be on my watch that we did nothing,” one of her employees told TMZ.

The threat of abandonment is a tactic similar to what her team used in 2012.

Lovato’s then-manager Phil McIntyre and her CAST Centers partner and former sobriety coach Mike Bayer revealed in her documentary “Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated” that they worked with Lovato’s team to force her to get help.

“The most important thing to Demi is losing people, losing people that she cares about and that love her,” Bayer said in the film.

McIntyre recalled of the intervention, “I worked with everyone on the team — business managers, agents, attorneys, everybody, to say, ‘If Phil walks, we walk.’ This was the showdown of all showdowns.”

Lovato asked what she needed to do to get those close to her to stay, at which point Bayer demanded she destroy her cellphone, which was rife with drug dealer contacts.

After getting help, Lovato was sober for the better part of six years until her relapse this spring, but it’s been claimed that every day was a battle for her to stay healthy.

The former Disney starlet was found unconscious in her bed July 24 after reportedly partying for 12 straight hours with friends. Lovato’s assistant called 911 upon discovering the unresponsive singer.

She remained hospitalized as of Thursday after suffering complications related to her overdose, including a high fever and nausea, both of which can be side effects of Narcan, which was administered before paramedics took her to the hospital, as well as symptoms of opiate withdrawal.

A rep for Lovato did not immediately return a request for comment.