Sizing ocean giants: patterns of intraspecific size variation in marine megafauna
In the absence of detailed observations about the biology of these often rare, elusive, and/or remote marine megafauna, accurate body sizes may provide insights into other aspects of their biology. For example, only 12 complete specimens of the largest invertebrate, the colossal squid, are known. Insights into these organisms are all the more important given that body size may be decreasing due to climate warming ( Ohlberger & Fox, 2013 ) and overfishing ( Kuparinen & Merilä, 2007 ; Genner et al., 2009 ) and many marine megafauna are listed as vulnerable, threatened, or endangered by the IUCN. Here, we document body size for the largest known marine species of several clades. For these marine megafauna, we also analyzed intraspecific variation and confirmed the largest known individuals for the species. Where data allowed, we analyzed spatial and temporal intraspecific size variation. We also provided allometric scaling equations between different size measurements as resources to other researchers. In some cases, the lack of data prevented us from fully examining these topics and instead we specifically highlighted these data deficiencies and barriers that exist for data collection.

“We tend to pick most ‘notable’ cases out of general pools, often for idiosyncratic reasons that can only distort a proper scientific investigation...Our strong and biased predilection for focusing on extremes (and misconstruing their trends as surrogates for a totality), rather than documenting full ranges of variation, generates all manner of deep and stubborn errors.”

Species were chosen that frequently occur in the mainstream media and where sizes were often misreported. Additional taxa were added when data were accessible. A thorough search of the available literature was conducted to find size measurements for the species covered here ( Table 1 ). This included finding data through literature searches via Google Scholar and Web of Science, fisheries data and governmental reports, stranding data, museum records and specimens, online auctions and sales, and personal communications with scientists conducting research on the organisms examined here. All data for each species are available online at http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.411mv . Analyses were all conducted in R ( R Core Team, 2014 ) including D’Agostino tests for skewness, t -tests for differences in mean sizes between groups, and Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests for similarity in distributions, e.g., ocean differences, on intraspecific size distributions. General linear models were also fit to reveal allometric scaling relationships between different body measurements and geographic patterns over temporal or spatial gradients, e.g., year, depth, latitude. All R-scripts for the recreation of the analyses and figures presented here are available at http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.411mv .

Results and Discussion

Longest Medusozoa: Lion’s Mane Jellyfish, Cyanea capillata (Linnaeus, 1758) Many authorities regard the Lion’s Mane Jellyfish to be the longest of all jellyfish. They are a group of medusavore jellies within the genus Cyanea. Many cryptic and described species occur within Cyanea, and we therefore report on observations within the genus (Dawson, 2005). On the east coast of the United States, a Cyanea medusa was recorded by A Agassiz in an illustrated catalog in 1865 (Agassiz, 1865). He wrote, “I measured myself a specimen at Nahant, the disk of which had attained a diameter of seven and a half feet, the tentacles extending to a length of more than one hundred and twenty feet.” Though this species is reported as C. capillata, molecular data from the eastern United States suggests that this species is an undescribed Cyanea sp., which is genetically distinct from C. capillata in Europe (Dawson, 2005). Nevertheless, this 120-foot (36.6 m) measurement is repeated in both the popular media and scientific literature. No other size measurements of Cyanea were found in the literature and we are skeptical of Agassiz’s measurement, as no details are provided on how the measurements were taken. The ultimate length of Cyanea sp. may relate to the fragility of their tentacles and oral arms. In captive scyphozoan jellies, tentacles often tangle with increasing length, and can fragment when knotted together (R Helm, pers. obs., 2014). In wild jellies, tentacles and oral arms may grow substantially longer, but may still break when entangled in marine debris or with other tentacles. Exceptionally long tentacles may also take considerably more time to contract, and thus would be vulnerable to predation. Alternatively, long tentacle trains may increase drag coefficients during ensnaring of large food items.

Heaviest Medusozoa: Nomura’s jellyfish, Nemopilema nomurai (Kishinouye, 1922) The heaviest Medusozoa is likely Nemopilema nomurai, distributed off the coast of China and in the Sea of Japan, where it has received considerable attention in recent years for its massive aggregations. Though only a small number of medusa species have been measured for mass to define the ‘heaviest Medusozoa’, N. nomurai is a top contender. Nemopilema nomurai can reach ca. 2 m in bell diameter and ca. 200 kg in body mass (Uye, 2008). The medusae are able to gain roughly 2–10% of their body mass per day, depending on size (Uye, 2008). For large 100 kg individuals this would result in growth rates of up to 2 kg per day. Uye (2008) estimated that an 80 kg N. nomurai medusa must consume 14.4 g of carbon per day to meet metabolic and growth demands. Unlike other large pelagic predators like filter-feeding sharks or whales, medusae are unable to actively pursue new food resources if their surrounding seawater becomes depleted. This may place seasonal limits on the upper size of N. nomurai. In addition to ecological constraints, interactions between medusa morphology and the surrounding seawater may also limit size. For many medusae, swimming is synonymous with foraging—by moving through the water they create a wake structure that entrains prey (Costello & Colin, 1994). Morphological variation within Medusozoa reflects different modes of swimming and prey capture (Costello, Colin & Dabiri, 2008). For some medusae, such as small jet-swimming hydrozoans, limited scalability of morphology (i.e., muscle tissue) may limit size (Costello, Colin & Dabiri, 2008). In the same way, it is not unreasonable to invoke morphological constraints incurred from larger sizes as setting a size limit on N. nomurai.

Widest Arthropod Legspan: Japanese Spider Crab, Macrocheira kaempferi (Temminck, 1836) Macrocheira kaempferi possesses the longest legspan of any arthropod and may be the heaviest extant arthropod. Actual size measurements of M. kaemperi are rare, especially in the scientific literature. A classification of recent crustaceans placed the maximum legspan at 4 m (Martin & Davis, 2001). Images of M. kaemperi are frequent on the internet but often lack measurements. Wikipedia placed the maximum legspan at 3.8 m and the maximum mass at 19 kg. However, none of these measurements can be confirmed. Huang, Yu & Takeda (1990) provided measurements for a considerably smaller mature female off Taiwan, outside of its typical Japanese geographic distribution, that measured 0.242 m in carapace length and 0.184 m wide. A recent specimen on display at the Scheveningen Sea Life center in The Hague, Netherlands has a leg span of 3.7 m and mass greater than 13.6 kg. In terms of mass, the heaviest arthropod is the American Lobster, Homarus americanus, with the record holder, according to Guinness World Records, being caught in 1977 off Nova Scotia and weighing 20.14 kg. However, given the lack of mass data for M. kaempferi and that specimens of 19 kg are claimed, designating H. americanus as the heaviest arthropod may be premature. It is clear that larger sizes in brachyuran crabs are associated with greater reproductive output in terms of brood weight, number of eggs per brood, and annual fecundity (Hines, 1982). The upper size of marine crustaceans may be limited by oxygen, as noted for amphipods (Chapelle & Peck, 1999; Chapelle & Peck, 2004), but it is unclear whether this is true for arthropods. Dalinger (2011) laid out several hypotheses for the size limits of arthropods living in water that largely center on the size constraints of an exoskeleton. The first is that the time for cuticle regeneration after molt increases with size. For relatively small crabs of 11–14 mm, this can take 8–13 days. Although the cuticle regeneration time for M. kaempferi is presently unknown, it may be prohibitively longer at larger masses. Presumably, with a larger cuticle regeneration time, the risk of predation would increase. This longer regeneration time and the time needed between molts may also increase wear and tear on the exoskeleton surface. This damage, although potentially light, may have a cumulative effect that decreases the strength of the cuticle. A larger exoskeleton size also requires disproportionately increasing volumes of molting fluid from the surface area of epidermal cells.

Largest Gastropod: Australian Trumpet, Syrinx aruanus (Linnaeus, 1758) Distributed from Northern Australia and through the Indonesian Papua New Guinean archipelago, Syrinx aruanus is the largest living species of the class Gastropoda. The length of the snail was described by Deshayes as “longeur 3 pouces, 11 lignes” (∼10.6 cm) and the monographer Tryon described the snail to be a modest 20–30 cm in length (Hedley, 1905). Hedley (1905) illustrated the first specimen that measured 58 cm in length and weighed 4.88 kg. Taylor & Glover (2003) reported that largest specimen was 91 cm in length and referenced a 1982 issue of Hawaiian Shell News (Issue 7, pg. 12). A photograph shows club member Don Pisor and children holding the specimen, with the caption stating the specimen was 36 inches (91.4 cm). However, the record holder for the largest S. aruanus ascribed by the Registry of World Record Size Shells places the maximum length at 72.2 cm. This specimen is also attributed to Don Pisor and was recorded in 1979. We have learned that these specimens are the same individual and the correct measurement is 72.2 cm (D Pisor, pers. obs., 2014); the specimen is currently housed in the Houston Museum of Natural Science. A specimen sold online on 6/8/2011 through eBay UK (http://www.worthpoint.com/worthopedia/syrinx-aruanus-20-0x28-5inc-o13-163769658) was claimed to be 72.4 cm in length. A number of websites claim the existence of a specimen that measured one meter long, but we were unable to confirm this claim. Limits to the maximum size of gastropods are speculative at this time, but likely reflect energetic constraints. Crawling in gastropods is metabolically expensive compared to almost every other mode of locomotion in the oceans with the exclusion of burrowing in polychaetes (Innes & Houlihan, 1985). Increased surface area of the foot may increase surface friction, adhesion, and drag, thereby reducing efficiency at the largest sizes. Mucus production required for locomotion may also ultimately exceed metabolic scope for such large sizes. In gastropods, up to 80% of ingested energy, but more typically 30%, can be required for mucus production. In an aptly named review, “Mucus from Marine Molluscs,” the authors comment that mucus production in gastropods “is very likely to be more expensive than the respiratory costs of locomotion in many animals” (Davies & Hawkins, 1998). In addition, the physiological costs of calcification may limit the maximum size of shells produced by marine molluscs (Palmer, 1992). The reported maximum length of S. aruanus at 72.2 cm indicates the species is shorter than at least one extinct species. Campanile giganteum from the Eocene is the longest fossil gastropod with a maximum reported length of 90 cm (Jung, 1987). Despite having a shorter length, the biovolume of S. aruanus is expected to surpass that of C. giganteum given the relatively slender shell morphology of the latter species. Body size measurements collected for S. aruanus include the length of the shell (maximum length from base to apex along the central axis), the width of the shell (maximum length perpendicular to the central axis), the height of the shell, and the dry mass of the shell. There were minimal size data available for S. aruanus in the literature and from museums, with only four specimens listed in Taylor & Glover (2003) and seven specimens at the Delaware Museum of Natural History; therefore, the majority of the data collected were obtained from online auctions. The maximum size for S. aruanus found through sales data was 72.4 cm in length (Fig. 8). The distribution of lengths of S. aruanus was significantly left-skewed (Table 3). The median length of individuals from the literature and museums dataset was slightly higher (50.8 cm) than that of online sales (45.7 cm); however the mean length of individuals sold online was slightly higher (46.4 versus 41.0 cm) due to a greater representation of the smallest size classes in the literature and museum dataset. Similar to T. gigas, larger shells were found to yield exponentially higher online sales prices (Table 2, Fig. 9). Figure 9: Linear regression between Log 10 Shell Length (cm) and Log 10 Price (US) for Syrinx aruanus. See Table 2 for regression equations. Figure 10: (A) Distribution Mass (kg), (B) distributions of Mass between 0 and 40 kg, and (C) Interocular Distance (m) for male and female Enteroctopus dofleini.

Largest Octopod: Giant Pacific Octopus, Enteroctopus dofleini (Wülker, 1910) Enteroctopus dofleini, the largest known species from the class Cephalopoda, is distributed along the coastal regions of the North Pacific, ranging from Korea though Russia and Alaska, and through to California (Nesis, 1987). A review of the largest recorded sizes for E. dofleini was provided by Cosgrove & McDaniel (2009). Potentially the largest E. dofleini, an individual observed off Port Hardy, British Columbia was reported to weigh 600 pounds (272 kg) with a 32 feet (9.8 m) radial arm span; however, these measurements are estimates, as the specimen was never collected and weighed (Newman, 1994). A specimen caught in the same location in 1956 was collected and weighed; the individual had a radial spread of 8.5 m and mass of 198.2 kg (Newman, 1994). A larger specimen, as measured by radial spread, from Iliuliuk Bay, Unalaska Island in the Aleutians, was reported by Dall (1885) to have a radial spread of 9.8 m. Numerous websites (e.g., Wikipedia) and online fact sheets of the species give the largest specimen as 71 kg, as reported by Cosgrove & McDaniel (2009) when it was brought to the aquarium Undersea Gardens in the 1980s. As noted by Cosgrove & McDaniel (2009), all of the largest E. dofleini were caught several decades ago. More recent estimates of maximum sizes are below 57 kg. The contamination of sediments from anthropogenic sources may be impairing E. dofleini growth. Anderson (2003) found that individuals typically had high concentrations of heavy metals and PCBs, suggesting that contamination of sediments from anthropogenic sources may be impairing E. dofleini growth, and reducing their size at maturity. Limits to the maximum size of E. dofleini may reflect anatomical and energetic constraints related to having a blind gut. The blind gut of E. dofleini relegates caloric intake to an installment plan where the entire digestive and excretory processes must occur before additional food is consumed. The inefficiency of this process may ultimately limit energy intake required for growth. This inefficiency may also explain why octopuses on average have the most efficient rates of converting food into body mass. Enteroctopus dofleini can grow from a paralarvae of 0.028 g to 18 kg in an average of 34 months (J Cosgrove, pers. obs., 1988). While large size may be an adaptation to reduce predation pressure, it may also constrain the upper size limit. Octopuses rely on hiding and camouflage to reduce predation. Topographically complex habitats, like the rocky subtidal habitat of E. dofleini, afford numerous crevasses in which to conceal themselves. Despite the elastic body of octopods, even larger sizes may run out of hiding places. In addition, they have a short life span (no more than 3–5 years) and die after reproducing, thus their maximum size is limited by the speed at which they can grow in a relatively short period of time. Although data were collected for multiple size metrics, sufficient data exist only for an analysis of body mass and interocular distance of E. dofleini. For the limited number of individuals in our data set (Fig. 10), most individuals were well below 30 kg. The distribution of masses was heavily right-skewed and significantly different from normal (Table 3), but interocular distance was left-skewed (Table 3). Males and females differed in both interocular distance and body mass, with males being significantly larger in both cases (p = 0.022 and p = 0.0352, respectively; Fig. 10). Interocular distance was found to be a significant predictor of body mass (Table 2, Fig. 11). Figure 11: Linear regression between Log 10 Interocular Distance (m) and Log 10 Mass (kg) for Enteroctopus dofleini. See Table 2 for regression equations. Figure 12: Distribution of (A) Total Length (m), (B) Mantle Length (m), and (A) Mass (kg) for Architeuthis dux. Figure 13: Linear regressions for Architeuthis dux. 10 Total Length (m) and Log 10 Mass (kg). (B) Log 10 Mantle Length (m) and Log 10 Total Length (m). (C) Log 10 Mantle Length (m) and Log 10 Mass (kg). See (A) LogTotal Length (m) and LogMass (kg). (B) LogMantle Length (m) and LogTotal Length (m). (C) LogMantle Length (m) and LogMass (kg). See Table 2 for regression equations.

Heaviest Cephalopod and Invertebrate: Colossal Squid,Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni (Robson, 1925) Of all the marine megafauna listed here, we found the least information for Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni. Only 12 complete specimens are known (another 4 are known from just a fin, mantle, arms, or tentacles) and six of these are juveniles or subadults. The majority of specimens of this species are only known from beaks (N = 55). The best preserved and most complete adult specimen was caught on February 22, 2007 by the New Zealand fishing vessel San Aspiring while fishing for Antarctic toothfish in the Ross Sea. The total length, including the mantle and tentacles, was 4.2 m with a mantle length of 2.5 m. The total mass was reported as 495 kg. The measurements were confirmed by the Te Papa Museum, where the specimen is currently housed. In 2003, a smaller specimen by mass (300 kg) but with a longer total length of 5.4 m was captured. Although the largest reported giant squid, Architeuthis dux, “was estimated to mass 2,000 pounds” (907 kg) by Verrill (1879) based on a Grand Banks specimen from 1871 it is unlikely this is an accurate mass (see discussion below). More typical maximum masses reported in the contemporary literature are 200–280 kg, suggesting that M. hamiltoni may reach masses double that of A. dux.

Longest Cephalopod: Giant Squid, Architeuthis dux (Verrill, 1879–1880) The longest cephalopod is A. dux. Since the original species description, over 20 species in the genus Architeteuthis have been described. However, many of these descriptions are questionable, and new genetic evidence suggests that only a single species exists with minimal genetic variation among ocean basins (Winkelmann et al., 2013). Therefore, herein we treated all size measurements from individuals as A. dux. A substantial amount of size data exists for A. dux, including 75 total length measurements, 167 mantle lengths, and 95 mass measurements. The maximum reported length (mantle plus tentacles) of A. dux is 17.37 m (Verrill, 1879). The same paper describes three specimens at near 15 m, and several more ranging from 12 m upward and are the largest reported sizes for A. dux. A specimen documented in 2002 was reported to be approximately 15 m, but the length was estimated and the actual tentacles were absent. The largest recorded and well-preserved specimen in the contemporary, peer-reviewed literature is 12 m (Bustamante et al., 2008). Given that the few lengths >12 m were not first-hand measurements and come from reported statements, we feel that the longest scientifically verified giant squid is 12 m. What limits the large size of A. dux and M. hamiltoni remains unclear. Compared to other molluscs, cephalopods in general have higher metabolic rates (McClain et al., 2012a). The metabolic demands of cephalopods is reflected in the anatomy as coleoid cephalopods consists of two branchial hearts that augment the circulation produced by a main, systemic heart (Barnes, 1987), suggesting selection pressure for increased oxygen delivery. Potentially, metabolic demands would be too great for even larger squids. This may also explain the habitat preference of these larger squids for cold waters (Roper & Boss, 1982) and high mortality rates associated with ocean warming events (Guerra et al., 2011), i.e., the need to slow metabolic rates behaviorally by preferring colder temperature. While also speculative, large sizes may be due to selection for decreased predation pressure as the predators for adult A. dux and M. hamiltoni are limited to odontocetes. The intraspecific size distribution of A. dux was right-skewed, but not significantly different from a normal distribution (Table 3). The median total length was 7.29 m with 90% of specimens being below 12.9 m in total length (Fig. 12). No significant differences were found between the total lengths of A. dux collected in the Atlantic versus the Pacific Ocean, suggesting oceanic variability in size may be minimal (KS Test D = 0.0958, p = 0.9509). The distributions of mantle lengths and body masses were also heavily right-skewed and significantly different than normal (Table 3). The 900 kg + specimen reported by Verrill (1879) also appears to be an extreme outlier, as the next largest individual only weighed 317.62 kg and 95% of specimens were below 250 kg. Figure 14: Distribution of Total Length (m) of mature Cetorhinus maximus by hemisphere. We calculated three different allometric equations (Fig. 13). The relationship between total length (TL) and body mass was significant but had low predictive power (Table 2). The relationship between body mass and mantle length (ML) provided better predictive power (Table 2). The improvement in predictive power in the second relationship likely reflects preservation issues resulting in greater changes in tentacle length and that parts of tentacles are often missing; both of which would impact TL measurements. The relationship between mantle length and total length is also significant and provides a useful tool because mantles on specimens are often intact even when tentacles are missing (Table 2). Figure 15: Distribution of Total Length (m) for Carcharadon carcharias reported in the (A) literature by sex and (B) media.

Longest Osteichthyan: Oarfish, Regalecus glesne (Ascanius, 1772) Although several species have been erected in the genus Regalecus, morphometrics suggests that two valid species occur, R. glesne and R. russellii, both with cosmopolitan distributions, and attaining similar maximum sizes of approximately 8 m in length (Roberts, 2012). Although reports of R. glesne reaching lengths greater than 8 m in total length exist, these are very likely inaccurate estimates and measurements. From Roberts (2012) recent thorough description of Regalecus, “The largest specimens preserved in museum collections, of both R. russellii and R. glesne, are just under 8 m total length. I have not been able to find any evidence that Regalecus ever attain lengths greater than this. The report of a 15–16 m (50–60 foot) long Regalecus stranded on Stronsay Island in the Orkneys in 1808 is based upon the rotting carcass of a large basking shark. Records of oarfish 10, 10.7, or 11 m total length are based on addition of extrapolated lengths of the posterior part of the body lost at much smaller sizes.” Roberts (2012) provided comprehensive and verified length measurements for R. glesne, which we analyzed here. The size distribution was bimodal, with a distinctive peak at juvenile lengths and at 4 m adult lengths (Fig. 23). Most specimens were well below 5 m long. The distribution of adult lengths was normally distributed (Table 3). Figure 29: Distribution of Curved Carapace Length (m) for Dermochelys coriacea. Some geographic variation in size does appear in R. glesne (Fig. 24). Mean lengths in the Northwest Atlantic, Mediterranean, and South Africa were much shorter relative to those reported from Western Europe, British Isles, Scandinavia, and New Zealand, and may be consistent with Bergmann’s Rule (Bergmann, 1847). Figure 30: Distribution of Total Length (m) for Mirounga leonine. Oarfish are oceanic fishes that normally inhabit the epipelagic and upper mesopelagic zones (Roberts, 2012). Encounters with healthy animals in the open ocean are rare (Benfield et al., 2013). It is also important to note that almost all size measurements of R. glesne and R. russellii are derived from dead or dying animals that have washed up on shorelines, or been stranded in shallow, coastal waters. Consequently, our estimates of the maximum length attainable by either species are based on measurements of individuals that were not randomly collected from a healthy population. Given how little we know about oarfish, one can only speculate about what constraints there may be to attaining their maximum size.