Months between rejuvenation and volcanic eruption at Yellowstone caldera, Wyoming
If a step function represents the initial concentration profile prior to diffusion, then Ba self-diffusion across the inner rim boundary indicates an elapsed time between crystallization of the rim and eruption of (n = 4 grains, 95% confidence) at 819 °C, whereas the Sr profiles indicate an elapsed time of yr (n = 4 grains, 95% confidence) (Fig. 3). Three of four Mg profiles are flat, consistent with faster diffusivity of Mg, with the other sanidine profile (grain 04-43) yielding an elapsed time of yr at 819 °C (see the Data Repository). A critical observation is that the Ba, Sr, and Mg profiles have equivalent widths (4–7 μm) (Fig. 2; see the Data Repository), a characteristic that rules out simple diffusion from an initial step function given their contrasting experimentally determined diffusivities (Table DR1; see footnote 1). If changes in the melt composition due to the resorption of feldspar and mafic minerals during remelting with or without mixing were not instantaneous compared to the time scale of rim growth, then the initial concentration profile would not be a step function. Instead, the initial concentration profile would resemble a relaxed diffusion profile but in fact represent a changing concentration of trace elements in the host melt during crystal growth (Fig. 2). Given the mismatch between the calculated time scales for Ba, Sr, and Mg and the observation that their profile shapes are identical when scaled to the same relative concentration difference, we interpret that the chemical zoning recorded in the sanidine rims nearly entirely represents crystal growth from an evolving melt composition in the aftermath of rejuvenation with little to no subsequent diffusion. Therefore, the time scales calculated assuming a stepped initial condition for the individual Ba, Sr, and Mg profiles (Fig. 3) significantly overestimate the time scale between crystal growth and eruption. Instead, the time interval between sanidine rim growth and eruption for all of the sanidine phenocrysts examined is constrained to <40 yr, which is the time required for the Sr concentration profile to diffusively diverge in shape and length from the Ba profile at the resolution of the NanoSIMS analyses. A decade is necessary for Mg to diffuse from the shape of the Ba concentration curve to the flat profiles recorded in 3 of the sanidine analyzed, so together these observations place an upper limit of ∼10–40 yr on the time scale between the start of rim growth and eruption for the SCL magma as a whole. For grain 04-43, which has a resolvable step in Mg concentration across the rim-core boundary, the diffusive time scale recorded by fast diffusing Mg refines the time interval to <0.8 yr or 10 mo, suggesting that this phenocryst records the final period of remobilization before eruption (Fig. 3). These short durations between rejuvenation and eruption are consistent with crystal growth rates for feldspars in silicic magma based on experiments and natural samples (e.g., Swanson et al., 1989; Zellmer and Clavero, 2006). At appropriate degrees of undercooling, experimental crystallization rates (∼10−10 cm/s) predict ∼15 yr for growth of the entire sanidine rim (∼500 μm) and 1.5–3.5 mo for the growth of the 4–7 μm concentration gradients (see the Data Repository). Any time elapsed between sanidine dissolution in response to rejuvenation and the onset of renewed crystallization must be <∼1200 yr due to preservation of 18O/16O disequilibrium in the resorbed cores of SCL zircons (Bindeman et al., 2008), but is likely much shorter because the entire population of SCL sanidine crystals would be consumed in only ∼30–45 yr within heated rhyolite given their rate of dissolution (see the Data Repository). Diffusion during SCL lava emplacement is likely to have been insignificant because silicic lavas are typically emplaced as a series of quickly quenched lobes (e.g., Tuffen et al., 2013).