Is Goofy a Dog?
Goofy's career hung in the balance in the 1950s with the birth of his son, Max. While Goofy's screen persona was that of a dog, he could not deny his bovine heritage. One day after filming, he met his true love, Clarabelle Cow. Clarabelle was an actress on the rise at Disney but saw Goofy for what he was: a handsome Angus bull stud. Goofy was enamored with his new girlfriend, and at the height of their romance, their son Max was born.

The Disney team was outraged. The Walt Disney company was on a roll producing hit movies and planning to open a theme park in the 60s. They could ill afford to have a scandal that not only revealed that Goofy had a calf out of wedlock, but one that also revealed his true identity. If the truth was exposed, the public's trust would be violated and the lines to buy tickets to the Disney blockbusters would dwindle.

Goofy was quickly cast with his son and a dog-wife in the short series, "Mr. Geef." After the failure of "Mr. Geef," Goofy was taken out of feature films and reduced to an actor in film shorts. Once a headliner, Goofy films were now only being seen during previews and intermissions. Although his merchandise sales remained strong, Goofy decided to take more of a production role with the Disney team and spend time with his young family.

In the 1990s, Goofy was back on the small screen with the introduction of "The Goof Troop" TV series. Goofy was delighted. He was able to spend time with his son and co-star, Max, and did not have to hide their relationship. Goofy, Max, and Clarabelle were allowed to be together on set. Things finally seemed to be getting easier for the Angus cow family. There was even talk of giving Clarabelle the role of Goofy's dog-wife, Cuddles.

The entire family was going to be on screen again until Clarabelle was suddenly stricken with mad cow disease. Clarabelle's illness forced the cancellation of "Goof Troop" so that Goofy could spend time with his ailing companion. Despite great risk to his own health, Goofy spent day and night with his love, Clarabelle. It was said that Goofy was often up at all hours of the night chewing cud and waiting for Clarabelle's fever to break.

Miraculously, after weeks in bed, Clarabelle recovered but not before their son Max was stricken with the terrible disease. In 2000, Max lost his battle with mad cow disease on a farm in Northern Scotland. Goofy was devastated and most feared he would never return to acting again.