Safeguarding the Arts
Please ver­i­fy a Churchill story/quotation dur­ing his defense of his bud­get in front of the House of Com­mons while Lon­don was being bombed. A Mem­ber ques­tioned Churchill’s increase in the arts bud­get while Britain was fight­ing for her life. Churchill’s sup­pos­ed­ly respond­ed that he could jus­ti­fy the increase “to remind us what we are fight­ing for.” —K.L., Chica­go.

This alleged quo­ta­tion was raised some few years ago in the Vil­lage Voice and is all over the web, but it is not among Churchill’s 15 mil­lion pub­lished words in speech­es, papers, let­ters, arti­cles or books.

It was reprised recent­ly by actor Kevin Spacey to Chris Matthews of MSNBC, though the Youtube post actu­al­ly cor­rects the mis­quote with a tex­tu­al over­lay. I had an inter­est­ing exchange with Mr. Spacey who was grate­ful for the cor­rec­tion.

I advised him that in address­ing the Roy­al Acad­e­my on 30 April 1938, Churchill expressed sim­i­lar views. Although he was refer­ring to paint­ing and sculp­ture, it is not hard to believe he would have applied these thoughts to the Arts in gen­er­al:

The arts are essen­tial to any com­plete nation­al life. The State owes it to itself to sus­tain and encour­age them….Ill fares the race which fails to salute the arts with the rev­er­ence and delight which are their due.

“We are going to beat them.”

Sir Winston’s daugh­ter Lady Soames put me on to anoth­er com­ment about safe­guard­ing works of art dur­ing the war, record­ed in the offi­cial biog­ra­phy, Win­ston S. Churchill, by Mar­tin Gilbert, vol. 6, Finest Hour 1939-1941, (Hills­dale Col­lege Press, 2011), page 449. This is not quite what the Vil­lage Voice record­ed, but in a way apro­pos….

D.J.M.D. Scott, 30 May 1940; Churchill minute, 1 June 1940 (Pre­mier papers 7/2):

The sec­ond mat­ter con­cerned evac­u­a­tion in the event of inva­sion, or even before inva­sion. This had been raised in sev­er­al forms. The For­eign Office had put for­ward a sug­ges­tion to pre­pare to evac­u­ate the Roy­al Fam­i­ly, and also the Gov­ern­ment, to “some part of the Over­seas Empire, where the war would con­tin­ue to be waged.” When [Desmond] Mor­ton passed on this request to Churchill, the Prime Min­is­ter answered: “I believe we shall make them rue the day they try to invade our island. No such dis­cus­sion can be per­mit­ted.”

At this same moment, the Direc­tor of the Nation­al Gallery, Ken­neth Clark, sug­gest­ed that the paint­ings in the Nation­al Gallery should be sent from Lon­don to Cana­da. Churchill was like­wise against this sug­ges­tion, and emphat­i­cal­ly so. “No,” he min­ut­ed, “bury them in caves and cel­lars. None must go. We are going to beat them.” (1 June 1940 Colville Diary)