JUUL Support
JUUL Age Policy

Changes to JUUL Labs Minimum Age Policy

What is the minimum age to purchase JUUL products from JUULvapor.com?

Beginning August 23, 2017, the minimum age to purchase JUUL products on JUULvapor.com will be 21 years or older. For some existing customers, this may mean changes to your account or delivery experience. Warranties will continue to be honored for JUUL devices purchased at retail or online for customers who are of legal age in their state.

Why have you increased the minimum age to purchase your products from JUULvapor.com?

Our products are designed for adult smokers. Along with many states that are increasing the minimum purchase age for tobacco and nicotine products to 21 years or older, we have also decided to adopt this policy on JUULvapor.com.

Why can I still buy JUUL products in stores if I'm under 21?

We are raising the minimum purchase age on our e-commerce site. In the retail environment, state law will govern the age at which a person can buy a tobacco or nicotine product. This means you are still able to receive warranty on your JUUL if you are of legal age in your state.

Will I still be able to claim my device warranty if I'm 18?

We will continue to honor our Limited Warranty for devices purchased on JUULvapor.com or at an authorized retailer for those of legal age to purchase JUUL in their states. Customers who request warranty service will be subject to age verification on our RMA / Warranty website before a warranty replacement is approved.

I'm 18-20 and currently subscribe to Auto-Ship. What will happen to my subscription?

All Auto-Ship subscribers will be age verified to ensure they meet our 21+ standard. As of August 23, 2017 all new subscribers to JUUL Auto-Ship, as well as subscribers who have previously canceled their Auto-Ship subscription, will be subject to age verification and our minimum age requirement of 21 years to purchase JUUL products on JUULvapor.com.

I'm 18-20 and I canceled my monthly Auto-Ship subscription. Can I sign-up again?

Along with many states that are moving to restrict sales to people under age 21, we have elected to implement this change on our e-commerce website. We apologize that this change affects you. Your support and understanding are appreciated.

Changes to your JUUL Account

Can I change the name on my JUUL account or billing information?

Since the name associated with your account and billing information is used to help verify your age, we do not allow changes to that information.

Can I buy JUUL as a gift and ship it to someone else?

Yes, unless you are in California or Washington. For those able to gift, if the name on the shipping address does not match your account or billing name, your order will require the signature of an adult over the age of 21 at the time of delivery. An additional $5.71 will be added to your order total for this shipping method.

I live in California or Washington. Why can't I change my shipping address?

California and Washington state laws require that your billing and shipping information be identical. If you change your billing information, we will automatically update your shipping information to match.

Age Verification Process

How are you age verifying me?

We've partnered with Veratad Technologies, an industry leading age verification service. The information you provide during check out on JUULvapor.com is used by Veratad to complete a public records search, only reporting back whether or not you are 21 years of age or older. If the system cannot immediately verify your age, you may be required to upload a photo I.D. Your order will temporarily be placed on hold until an agent can review your I.D and order information.

How do I know if I'm age verified?

If the system successfully verifies your age during checkout, you'll be directed to an order confirmation page and will receive confirmation of your order and shipping details by email. If the system has been unable to verify your age, you'll be asked to upload an ID for further verification and your order will be temporarily placed on hold. Customers whose ID's are approved will be updated by email and the order will process and ship as usual. Customers whose ID's are not approved will be notified by email and the order will be canceled within 4 business days. You can also review your age verification status by logging into your JUUL account and clicking on Age Verification.

Do I have to be age verified every time I place an order on JUULvapor.com?

Your age verification is associated with the information you provided when you created your JUUL account during check out. As long as you are logged in under that account, you will not have to re-age verify on JUULvapor.com for additional purchases. You can also review your age verification status by logging into your JUUL account and clicking on Age Verification.

Is my account information safe?

JUUL Labs understands that when people shop online, they want to know their personal information will be safe and secure. JUUL Labs is compliant with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) Certification and uses secure socket layer (SSL) technology to help keep personal information secure.