George Soros Arrested; Obama Believed Charged With Treason

George Soros was said arrested in Switzerland at 13:23 GMT on Feb. 3 2019. Evidently members of what was known as the Alliance stormed his retreat at Saint Margrethenberg, Switzerland based on a tip from local police. The Alliance was a military force working under orders of the Pentagon, GITMO Military Tribunal Judges and in conjunction with legal entities across the globe.

Soros has been suspected to illegally influence US elections over the years, was thought behind thousands of immigrants forcing their way across the US Border, his organizations were believed to own and control software used in state voting machines and even worse, the multi billionaire was known to be a leader in the Vatican’s Ninth Circle Satanic Cult. He was thought behind regularly scheduled Satanic Child Sacrifice Rites and Human Hunting Parties organized under the Vatican and involving children and kidnapped teens across the globe according to Kevin Annette of ITCCS (www.itccs.org).

Vatican, Clinton, Soros, Global Elites Named in Child Rape, Homicides

Evidently the Alliance had enough evidence supplied by former US President Barak Obama and other informants at GITMO to arrest Soros. Obama was believed to have been incarcerated at GITMO for at least a month, exposing crimes of upper echelons of the Deep State to save his own skin. Obama was thought to have been charged with High Treason for multiple crimes including Uranium One and the Benghazi massacre.

Believed to be in poor health Soros was reported to have been prevented from committing suicide with a cyanide pill prior to capture. Presently he was thought to be under interrogation at a bunker near Gasternal, Switzerland.

J. Christian Adams, a former DOJ attorney under the Obama administration who was now president of Public Interest Legal Foundation, once told Fox News that Soros had Obama’s Department of Justice at his beck and call. “Soros’ organizations in the U.S. were instrumental in shaping DOJ policy under the Obama administration,” Adams said, noting allegations that Soros was involved in police procedures and voter ID rules across the nation. “Americans do not understand the extent to which Soros fuels this anti-constitutional, anti-American agenda.”

As far as Soros’ involvement in the international child exploitation ring run by the Vatican: back on 16 August 2014 human sacrifices of two children on a blood stained altar was interrupted by police and an ITCCS team in an upscale neighborhood in Outremont Montreal Quebec, Canada. The Satanic rite was believed organized by George Soros and executives of Sinclair Oil and Cargill Corporation. The children were said to be held at McGill University, site of CIA 1940s to 1960s MKULTRA tortuous experiments on children.

Cult Arrested with Caged Abused Babies and Body Parts Released Without Charges

A few years ago in just one ITCCS raid on the Soros/Vatican Ninth Circle they found sexually abused, beaten and starved babies and children, all below age six, in small padlocked cages among frozen body parts of prior victims. Raids by ITCCS teams and local police had also disrupted Satanic Ninth Circle Child Sacrifice rites at Catholic facilities in Zwolle Holland, Dijon France and Lucerne Switzerland.

Documents found at Soros’ retreat revealed the locations of Cabal underground bases from Ireland to Croatia, as well as a new type of CERN quantum machine. Alliance sources revealed that this was their technology stolen back in 2007.

Check out the life changing BeforeitsNews natural health products and sign up to be an Affiliate so you earn on all sales through your links on Beforeitsnews, other websites or social networks!

APeX – Far superior to colloidal silver in destroying viruses, bacteria and other pathogens. See the videos and 50 page report!

Ultimate Curcumin – Most powerful natural pain relief you can buy. Reduce inflammation, depression, arthritis and so much more!

Supreme Fulvic – Nature’s most important supplement! Read our amazing testimonials and experience vivid dreams again!

MitoCopper – First bioavailable copper cleans up your blood from pathogens and gives you more energy! Watch all videos on our website!