School Solutions Call For Taxes, Video Lottery

An Advisory Panel Of The Governor's Commission On Education Ok'd Several Ideas.

In a 4-3 vote, the funding committee of the Governor's Commission on Education approved a smorgasbord of recommendations the state could use to overcome an estimated $3.3 billion school building backlog.

TALLAHASSEE — Florida's public-school construction crunch could be eased through a variety of local taxes and a video lottery, a state advisory panel agreed Tuesday.

But Gov. Lawton Chiles put an immediate damper on expanding Florida's gambling options to get more money for schools.

''I don't think we should rely on the suckers who get lured into playing the lottery as the means of providing for our kids,'' Chiles said late Tuesday in response to the committee's proposal.

The construction-funding package also includes a suggestion that school boards be allowed to tax real estate transactions or impose a half-penny sales tax by a super majority vote.

School districts now may levy the half-cent for schools, but only with voter approval.

Six of 11 counties that have asked voters to OK the extra local sales tax for school construction have failed. Broward's plea for the tax was resoundingly defeated in 1995.

''The problem is, the counties that need it the most can't pass it,'' said Jim Apthorp, a Tampa businessman who chairs the funding committee. ''It's not their problem. It's our problem. It's not fair to say to a district that's growing as fast as Broward that we're not going to deal with your problem.''

Some legislators on the committee suggested that the state might let counties impose the sales tax without referendum only if they reach a certain growth threshold in their student population. But no specific threshold was discussed.

The committee's report goes to the full commission, which is scheduled to meet in Tallahassee on Monday to vote on its final recommendations.

Chiles has vowed to call the Legislature into special session on Nov. 3 to address school crowding and wants the commission to propose some solutions for lawmakers to address at that session.

But some key lawmakers who serve on the commission voiced doubts that any tax proposals would have a prayer of getting passed.

''I think it'll sink like a lead balloon,'' said Sen. Fred Dudley, R-Fort Myers, a member of the commission and vice chairman of the Senate Ways and Means Committee. ''I think it's unfortunate. It probably funds twice as much as we need.''