Donate to NIWRC
WE OFFER SEVERAL WAYS TO SUPPORT NIWRC : DONATE ONLINE : your tax-deductible contributions using PayPal or Network for Good Select Fund to Donate General Fund StrongHearts Native Helpline NativeLove Women Are Sacred Tillie Black Bear Award Restoration Magazine VAWA Sovereignty Initiative MAIL YOUR DONATION : You can make tax-deductible contributions Payable to “NIWRC”

Mail to:

NIWRC

PO Box 99

Lame Deer, MT 59043 Via AMAZON SMILE :



NIWRC’s vision is to restore the safety of Native women by upholding the inherent sovereignty of Native nations and building the capacity of Indigenous communities.

The Mission of NIWRC is to support culturally grounded, grassroots advocacy and to provide national leadership to ending gender-based violence in Indigenous communities through the development of educational materials and programs, direct technical assistance, and the development of local and national policy that builds the capacity of Indigenous communities and strengthens the exercise of tribal sovereignty. Key principles to ending gender-based violence are:

• To support grassroots efforts

• Provide national leadership

• Develop educational and programmatic materials

• Provide direct technical assistance

• Build capacity of Indigenous communities

• Support tribal sovereignty

Who We Are :

The National Indigenous Women’s Resource Center, Inc. (NIWRC) is a non-profit organization, with 501(c)(3) certification from the IRS, dedicated to ending violence against Native women and children. The overall goal of the NIWRC is to restore safety to Native women by upholding the sovereignty of Indian and Alaska Native tribes. We are designated as the National Indian Resource Center Addressing Violence Against Native Women, as mandated by the Family Violence Prevention Services Act.

NIWRC, through its Board of Directors and staff, have the demonstrated and unique expertise to serve as the National Indian Resource Center. Our Board consists of Native women from throughout the United States with extensive experience and commitment to providing technical assistance/training and resource information regarding violence committed against Native women and their children. This leadership ensures that our work supports and upholds grassroots advocacy and policy development work to improve the prevention of and response family violence. Further, NIWRC’s staff brings decades of expertise regarding violence against Native women, each having worked in various capacities to build a strong grassroots movement to increase the response within tribes to domestic violence and safety for Indian women.

Our main office is in Lame Deer, Montana, on the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation. We serve tribal domestic violence programs across the United States.

What We Do:

Native women suffer from violence at a rate two and a half times greater than that of any other population in the United States. One in three Native women will be raped in her lifetime; four in five will be victims of a violent assault. It is startling that non-Native offenders commit an estimated 88% of these crimes.

In everyday life, a woman’s security depends in large part on whether the government of a particular geographic area has the authority and resources to effectively police, prosecute, punish crimes, and establish strong laws criminalizing violence against women. In most non-Indian communities, the local county or city government has authority to investigate and prosecute both misdemeanor and felony crimes against women. In Indian country, however, Federal legislation, case law, and policies have left tribal governments with far less legal authority and resources to protect their citizens than any other local government, effectively denying Indian women access to justice and services and preventing them from living free from violence.

The NIWRC is dedicated to reclaiming the sovereignty of Native nations and safeguarding Native women and their children. Through public awareness and resource development, training and technical assistance, policy development, and research activities, we provide leadership across the United States to show that offenders can and will be held accountable and that Native women and their children are entitled to: 1) safety from violence within their homes and in their community; 2) justice both on and off tribal lands; and 3) access to services designed by and for Native women based on their tribal beliefs and practices.