Militant pro-rape 'pick up artist' Roosh V organises event for followers in Manchester City Centre
Get the biggest daily stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

A militant ‘pick up artist’ who believes rape should be legalised has organised a meeting for his followers in Manchester city centre.

Self-confessed ‘neomasculinist’ Daryush Valizadeh, who goes by the name of Roosh V, has called for an international meet up of his fans who share the belief that ‘rape should be legalised on private property’.

The anti-feminist blogger has organised meetings in eight different cities in the UK, including a gathering outside Sinclair’s Oyster Bar this Saturday, February 6.

It is understood the group will be meeting at the entrance to the city centre pub at 8pm before moving to a secret location at 8.20pm.

Watch: Roosh V's shocking views on women

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

However bosses at the bar told the MEN the group will not be welcome inside and they would be turned away.

The 36-year-old from Washington DC penned a book titled Bang: The Pickup Bible That Helps You Get More Lays and Bang Iceland, “a travel guide designed to help you sleep with Icelandic women in Iceland without paying for it”.

Read more: M.E.N readers tell pro-rape ‘pick up artist’ Roosh V he is not welcome in Manchester

A statement on his website says: “Without daddy government to protect her, a girl would absolutely not enter a private room with a man she doesn’t know or trust unless she is absolutely sure she is ready to sleep with him.

“Consent is now achieved when she passes underneath the room’s door frame, because she knows that that man can legally do anything he wants to her when it comes to sex.

“Bad encounters are sure to occur, but these can be learning experiences for the poorly trained woman so she can better identify in the future the type of good man who will treat her like the delicate flower that she believes she is.”

(Image: Mark Waugh / Manchester Press Photography Ltd)

The pick up artist also recently featured in a BBC documentary with Reggie Yates where he discussed his methods of sexual exploiting.

Roosh V has also condemned gay marriage, LGBT rights on his website.

A counter-protest has been organised through Facebook by Roosh V opposers in an attempt to block the event from happening.

A manager at Sinclair’s Oyster Bar said members of the group will be barred from going inside the pub.

He said: “I have no tolerance for anything like that. They clearly won’t get into our land. Whatever they do outside the pub I can’t control.”

The MEN has contacted Roosh V for a comment.