New Laws To Rein In Payday Loan Rate

The Legislation Takes Effect Oct. 1 And Regulates Loans That Have Hurt The Poor.

Payday loans provide easy cash for people trying to tide themselves over until their next paycheck. But the high interest rates charged by lenders have prompted consumer groups to condemn the booming industry as legal loan-sharking.

TALLAHASSEE -- Triple-digit interest rates for so-called payday loans -- a quick but expensive source of cash for many poor Floridians -- will be history under legislation signed Thursday by Gov. Jeb Bush.

Bush agreed.

"This is an incredible growth industry," he said. "Shops are set up all over the place, and they're charging outrageous interest to people who are not equipped to pay it back."

Although effectively outlawed in 16 states, the payday loan industry has flourished in Florida. As many as 800 stores operate around the state. Essentially, the borrower hands over a postdated check, which includes a fee, in exchange for cash. The loan is usually due within two weeks.

The ease of getting a payday loan has spawned stores near military bases and in low-income neighborhoods. But the downside of the loans has prompted calls for reform from Florida Legal Services, AARP and even the Navy.

If a customer can't repay the money on time, many lenders "roll over'' the loan, compounding the fee. Over time, with debt multiplying every week or two, the interest rates can quickly rocket to as much as 300 percent. People who borrowed $100 can find themselves thousands of dollars in debt.

"They borrow for the cash, then borrow to pay off the debt, then they borrow again to pay off that debt," said Sen. Lee Constantine, R-Altamonte Springs, who sponsored the legislation. "It's a terrible cycle to get stuck on."

Constantine's legislation (CS/SB 1526) brings a host of reforms, crafted through hours of negotiation with consumer groups and the industry. Payday loans would be capped at $500 each and borrowers could not get more than one loan at a time. Interest fees could not exceed 10 percent of the amount of the loan, and the term of the loan could not be more than 31 days or fewer than seven.

If borrowers can't repay a loan, the bill provides for a 60-day grace period, provided they agree to take part in credit counseling and set up a repayment schedule. Credit counselors would have to be nonprofit and affiliated with the National Foundation for Consumer Credit. They would provide their services free or on a sliding scale based on income, under the bill.

In addition, payday lenders would be required to pay half of their borrowers' counseling fees, once the service is completed. A new statewide database also would be established by the state Department of Banking to assure that lenders are not issuing multiple payday loans, although that technology is not expected to be ready until at least February.

The new law takes effect Oct. 1. Bush called it "good, solid consumer protection." To highlight the measure, the governor's office is planning a ceremonial signing of the bill in the Orlando area in coming weeks.