Frequently Asked Questions: Schlesinger v. Ticketmaster
[Updated March 5, 2019]

1. What is this class action settlement?

In 2003, the Schlesinger v. Ticketmaster class action lawsuit was filed, alleging that Ticketmaster failed to fully disclose to consumers all aspects of its UPS and order processing fees. While vigorously defending the lawsuit, Ticketmaster settled the case in 2013, with the court granting final approval of the settlement in February 2015.

The settlement class generally includes all consumers who purchased tickets on Ticketmaster.com between October 21, 1999, and February 27, 2013 (the “class period”).

2. Why do I have discount codes?

As part of the Schlesinger v. Ticketmaster settlement, Ticketmaster agreed to provide:

1. To each class member, one discount code (worth $2.25 off a future purchase of primary tickets) for every purchase made on Ticketmaster.com during the class period, up to 17 discount codes per person.

2. To class members who used UPS delivery during the class period, one $5 UPS discount code for every purchase made on Ticketmaster.com that included UPS delivery, again up to 17 UPS discount codes per person.

3. How many codes do I get?

1. Each class member received one discount code for each Ticketmaster.com purchase made during the class period, up to a maximum of 17 discount codes.

2. Each class member who used UPS delivery for a ticket order during the class period also received one UPS discount code for each UPS delivery he or she paid for over the class period, up to a maximum of 17 UPS discount codes.

4. Will any additional events available for ticket voucher redemption be released under the settlement agreement?

No. As of July of 2018, class members redeemed all available tickets, and Ticketmaster’s obligation to provide tickets for voucher redemption under the settlement agreement was fulfilled. Note that any unused $2.25 or $5.00 discount codes can be redeemed until June of 2020.

The vouchers were redeemable on a first-come, first-served basis.

5. Where do I find my discount codes?

Your discount codes and UPS discount codes are made available to you in your Ticketmaster account.

If you have lost or misplaced your Ticketmaster login name and/or password, please use the “Forgot password?” link to reset your password.

6. Can I apply the discount codes to a previously placed order?

No. You cannot use your discount codes or UPS discount codes for previously placed orders.

7. Can I combine the codes together?

You can combine up to two discount codes per transaction ($4.50 total).

If you elect UPS delivery, you can combine up to two discount codes ($4.50 total) and up to two UPS discount codes ($10.00 total) per transaction (for a total discount of $14.50).

8. Can I transfer my codes to someone else?

No. Discount codes or UPS discount codes can only be redeemed by the class member. They are non-transferable.

9. Where do I apply my discount codes?

To redeem your $2.25 discount code or $5.00 UPS discount codes, log on to Ticketmaster using your Ticketmaster username and password from your desktop or laptop. Enter the code(s) you would like to use in the applicable area on the billing page. Please note that discount codes may not be redeemed via mobile or mobile apps.

10. Can I use the mobile app or mobile web to redeem my discount codes?

Discount codes, UPS codes cannot be redeemed on the mobile website or the mobile app. See FAQ #9 above for information on how to redeem your discount codes on your desktop or laptop.

11. I think I should have more discount codes than I see in my account. What should I do?

For questions regarding discount codes and UPS discount codes, please email ticketfeelitigation@gcginc.com . As of 2018, Ticketmaster fulfilled the ticket voucher requirements.

12. When will my discount codes expire?

Your discount codes and UPS discount codes will expire on June 18, 2020.

13. What happened to the ticket vouchers?

As part of the settlement, Ticketmaster provided class members with ticket vouchers that were potentially redeemable for general admission tickets for eligible events at Live Nation owned or operated venues within the United States. The vouchers were redeemable on a first-come, first-served basis. As of July of 2018, class members redeemed all available tickets, and Ticketmaster’s obligation to provide tickets for voucher redemption under the settlement agreement was fulfilled. Due to this, all remaining ticket vouchers have been removed from all class members’ accounts. Note that any unused $2.25 or $5.00 discount codes can be redeemed until June of 2020.

14. I no longer have access to the email I used to set up and access my Ticketmaster account. What should I do?

You can contact Ticketmaster here.

15. Who do I contact if my question isn’t answered here?

If you have a question about the lawsuit or the benefits to which you are entitled, or if you believe you did not receive codes that you should have received, please reach out to Garden City Group at ticketfeelitigation@gcginc.com.

If you have a question about how to access your account, how to use your codes, please reach out to Ticketmaster customer service.