How To Create Fake Screenshots For Facebook, Whatsapp, Twitter etc
Screenshots are the real-time images of the moving screen of any display devices, be it any smartphone, computer, etc. Learn how to create the Fake conversation in any of your devices with all possible methods for these.

The screenshots capture the real details of the screen and don’t modify it, using up the screenshot feature anyone can capture up to the apps inside images, capture video frame, or check up the chat screen of any social media so that it can be used for some purposes. There are some button combinations or some apps on the smartphones that can create up the screenshots, options on the PC to get the screen captured. But there are some tricks by which you can create up the fake screenshots for various apps that relate to the text conversation. You can use these methods to create up the fake screenshots by which you can shock your friends, show them fake chats with someone, etc. So to know about these tricks read the article given below!

How to Create Fake Screenshots

Have a look at all the possible ways by which you can easily create fake screenshots in your device. So follow the below guide to proceed.

Facebook has a unique style of interface for the conversations in which the text appears greatly in a clean manner and to create the fake copy of that design with photoshop or other essential imaging tools it is not possible. But here is a very simple tool that makes this task a lot easier and that app is “fake convo“. Just give access to your profile on this app and then start to fill up some areas like the text message, time, date, etc. and then create up your desired fake screenshot from the options.

Also Read: How to Report Fake Account of Facebook In Android

#2 Fake iPhone Conversation

First of all, you will need to create a fake conversation that you can do through using the web-based App “ifaketext“. Enter the general details of the conversation and then put on your text messages both for the receiver and sender (i.e., you) and then proceed with the action button inside the app that will generate the fake screenshot with all that details you put in before.

Also Read: How To Send Fake SMS For Free

#3 Fake Android Text Message

Now for creating the fake text messages on Android the app named “Fake Android version” will help you for that. The process is same like you do in the fake iPhone conversation creating the app but the only difference here will be that the screenshots that will be generated will carry a different default Android text message style interface.

Also Read: How to Report Fake Account of Facebook In Android

There is a great tool for the computer with which one can easily create the traditional Facebook style screenshots with the required details and fields and the device names “The wall machine.” Just enter into this device and play up with the functions to modify different aspects of the screenshot like comments, likes, events, etc. that you want and then go for it.

Also Read: Best GIF Keyboards for Android to share GIFs with Ease

#5 Fake WhatsApp Conversation

There is a fantastic application for the Android devices named “What said” through which one can create up the fake screenshots of the WhatsApp conversations. Like the most of the other tools or apps stated above for different app screenshots, this app also works like same and helps you to create the real looking WhatsApp conversation screenshots.

Also Read: How To Change Working Of Hardware Buttons In Android

Create fake conversations that look like WhatsApp. FakeWhats Generator allows you to quickly simulate very realistic WhatsApp chats. You can change every detail of a WhatsApp message with our Generator: Time, delivery status and much more. Just set your options and you get a fake WhatsApp Chat to download as an image.

Prank your friends or imitate celebrities. You can make fake twitter tweets in any creative way you like. Upload profile picture, select username, write a message, change date, and many more cool settings. Build your own fake twitter tweet now.

Make Any Fake Conversations on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, iPhone, FB Chat Messenger. Create Fake Crazy Facebook Status, Facebook Chat ScreenShot as a Jokes. Make Any fake testimonial facebook status, upload your friend profile pictures or any people whoever you want, write a status, set any like whatever you want!

Hence these were the various methods by which you can actually make the fake screenshots for the different app interfaces like Text Message, Facebook Wall, WhatsApp conversation, FB conversation, etc. All these screenshots that you create can include your provided details like your own message, another person whom you are chatting with, etc. and all that is dubbed in the general interface of the particular app.