Vetoes Trim State Budget

Gov. Bush Cuts $349 Million, Oks Worker Training In Orlando

And in a slap at the Legislature's leaders who battled with Bush off-and-on during the past two years, the governor vetoed $12 million for an Alzheimer's disease research center named after House Speaker Johnnie Byrd's father, who died of the disease, and $3 million that Senate President Jim King tabbed for a biomedical research program named for his late parents. Byrd and King added that extra money for the projects during budget negotiations.

TALLAHASSEE -- Gov. Jeb Bush vetoed a record $349 million in proposed spending before signing a $57.3 billion state budget on Friday, eliminating money for projects ranging from a pilot pre-kindergarten program and assistance to 21 medical trauma centers to $2 million in proposed security improvements for Orlando International Airport.

But Bush spared money for a key Orlando economic-incentive project, saying he was impressed by a $4.2 million University of Central Florida program to train prospective employees of Electronic Arts, a California-based game company.

"That is the kind of win-win we're excited about," Bush said.

Orlando Mayor Buddy Dyer welcomed the news and said he thinks the financial package -- which includes another $36 million from Orlando, Orange County and UCF -- will entice EA and its 775 jobs to move to downtown Orlando.

"That's wonderful," Dyer said. "The Governor's Office worked for us in creating that funding, so I would have been extremely surprised if he did veto it."

SET PRIORITIES

The governor said many of the vetoed projects were worthwhile but said that long-term financial pressures -- to pay for schools, a pre-kindergarten program mandated to take effect in 2005, smaller class sizes and a rapidly growing Medicaid program -- must take priority.

"They're done with the best intentions, but we can't afford them if we're going to meet the needs of the broader issues of this state," he said.

Bush's previous record for vetoes was $290 million in 2001; the total was only $33 million last year. He said this year's amount reflects that this year's $57.3 billion budget has grown under pressure from interest groups and an improving economy.

"The pressure to spend is extraordinary," he said.

Bush, who is in his second term as governor, doesn't need to worry about angering voters because he won't run again for the state's top post. But cuts could impact other Republican candidates in Florida, including Bush's older brother in the November presidential election.

Bush's past vetoes have caused hard feelings with some legislative leaders, and the deep cuts could add to tensions with lawmakers in his final two years. He said he understands how local legislators have to face voters "down at the Rotary Club" after losing local projects. But he noted that the overall budget is up $2.8 billion, or 5.1 percent, from this year.

The governor said he didn't intend to single out King, R-Jacksonville, and Byrd, R-Plant City, by vetoing their "turkeys," saying they were among many projects that hadn't been properly reviewed by legislative committees. He cited his vetoes of $5 million for a Hillsborough County courthouse project in Byrd's hometown, and three other courthouses.

"It's not about the speaker or the president," Bush said. "I vetoed them all."

Byrd's year-old Alzheimer's center, at the University of South Florida, does get $15 million in the current year. King's proposed center for biomedical research, though, will not be created at Florida State University.