Confirmed – Philando Castile Was an Armed Robbery Suspect – False Media Narrative Now Driving Cop Killings…
The Falcon Heights, Minnesota police shooting of Philando Castile is based around an entirely false narrative. Castile and Ms. Diamond Reynolds (Facebook video uploader) were pulled over by police because Castile matched a BOLO Alert for an armed robbery suspect from four days prior.

Unfortunately, the false statements in the video – which have gone viral, and are being pushed by the mainstream media – have created a backlash against police officers.

Police officers in: Dallas (link), Tennessee (link), Missouri (link) and Georgia (link) have been Shot or killed in the past 24 hours as a result of a false narrative driven by the Black Lives Matter movement. It is important to get the truth out quickly.

Saint Anthony, MN, Police Officers Jeronimo Yanez and Joseph Kauser pulled over Mr. Castile and Ms. Reynolds because the driver, Philando Castile, matched the suspect profile in an armed robbery which occurred on July 2nd, at a convenience store, only a few blocks from where their car was pulled over.

The armed robbery occurred on July 2nd 7:30pm (Sat). The CCTV images were given to media and LEO by detectives on July 5th (Tuesday). A BOLO (Be On Look Out) alert was issued the same day, Tuesday July 5th. Philando Castile was pulled over on July 6th.

From the radio dispatch of Officer Jeronimo Yanez:

“I’m going to stop a car. I’m going to check IDs. I have reason to pull it over.” “The two occupants just look like people that were involved in a robbery. The driver looks more like one of our suspects, just ‘cause of the wide set nose.” A minute and a half later, the recording captures the first report that there was a shooting. (link)

Ms. Diamond Reynolds narrates the now viral Facebook video with several false statements.

Reynolds claimed they were pulled over for a broken tail light, false.

Ms. Reynolds also claims her boyfriend, Castile, was holding a concealed carry permit for a firearm that was resting on his left thigh. This also appears to be false.

According to a question presented to the local county sheriff who oversees the Concealed Carry Permit process, Mr. Castile had never requested a concealed carry permit from their office:

It is possible a CCP was obtained in another county, however the media are conflating “permit to purchase” with “concealed carry permit”. For some reason the CCP ownership is being amplified; it really has no bearing and is largely irrelevant for the context of the situation. That said, there is no factual evidence Mr. Philando Castile had a CCP.

Due to the rear facing camera option on the phone Ms. Reynolds was using, the uploaded video everyone has seen is a reversed mirror image – making it appear she was in the drivers side, and Castile was on the passenger side. However, that impression is incorrect, Castile was driving the vehicle. The uploaded image is reversed by Facebook Livestream Video.

However, correcting the mirror image, in part of the video it is possible to see a hand gun located on the thigh of Philando Castile. This also appears to be why Officer Yanez repeats to Ms. Reynolds not to reach toward her boyfriend:

This hand gun also appears to be the same type of hand gun used in the Convenience Store Armed robbery four days earlier (7/2/16):

In addition, Mr. Castile also matched the physical description of the suspect as given by eye witnesses:

[…] The other suspect was described as a black man with shoulder-length dreadlocks, who wore tan pants, tan shoes with white soles, a green jacket, a green baseball cap and glasses, the release says. He also had some of his hair pulled into a bun through the strap on the back of his hat and had a small mustache and facial hair on his chin. (link)

Similar clothes as noted on the robbery suspect are also noted in the Facebook images of Mr. Castile. However, whether Mr. Castile is actually the person who committed the armed robbery is -again- essentially a moot point. Officer Jeronimo Yanez gave the reason for the stop over the radio to his dispatcher as a possible ID on an “armed robbery suspect”:

“I’m going to stop a car. I’m going to check IDs. I have reason to pull it over.” “The two occupants just look like people that were involved in a robbery. The driver looks more like one of our suspects, just ‘cause of the wide set nose.”

(link) SIDE NOTE from the BOLO article: “According to a press release from the St. Anthony Police Department, which contracts for police service in Lauderdale, the two robbed the Super USA store in the 2400 block of Larpenteur Avenue around 7:30 p.m., taking cash from the register and cartons of Newport cigarettes.”

(Above is a screen grab still frame image of Diamond “Aka Lavish” Reynolds during a press conference early morning 07/07/16 – link at 09:45)

It is with that “armed robbery suspect perspective” the approach toward the vehicle was made by officers Yanez and Kauser.

Mr. Castile, fitting the physical description, being in the same geography, generally matching the BOLO CCTV image, and then having a handgun on his thigh only made the suspicions gain exponential weight.

Any behaviors or sudden movements by Mr. Castile would only increase the anxiety and increase the officer’s perception of Castile as a threat.

St. Anthony Police Officer Jeronimo Yanez (pictured) was identified as the patrolman who fatally shot Castile during a traffic stop.

Given that police around the country are being targeted based on an entirely false premise, it is critical the truth behind the entire incident be revealed with the same veracity as the MSM narrative. Unfortunately, lies travel around the world twice – before the truth even has time to put its boots on.

Update: Having outlined the factual reason/intent for the St. Anthony officers Yanez and Kauser to initially pull over Mr. Castile and Ms. Reynolds, it should also be pointed out the timing of Diamond Reynold beginning her Live Stream Video.

As you can tell from the video she uploaded, her four year old daughter was NOT in the vehicle when Ms. Reynolds began broadcasting. Whether her daughter was factually inside the vehicle when the shooting took place is unknown, Ms. Reynolds has never claimed that to be the case.

What is known is there was no activity to remove the child from when the video began uploading (Facebook), to when you see her daughter in the arms of an officer when Ms. Reynolds exits the vehicle (continuously live streaming).

In essence, there is a lot of time not captured between the stop, the shooting, and when Ms. Reynolds begins using her phone to broadcast the post shooting events. [ There is footage from Yanez and Kauser’s dash-cam which should clarify this missing timeline ] Ms. Reynolds begins broadcasting AFTER her daughter was removed from the vehicle (video below for reference):

Lastly, it appears the family circle around Philando Castile is moving quickly to raise funds from the event. There are currently at least THREE Go-Fund-Me Donation, accounts set up by entities within the familial circle, currently running to raise money:

♦ Lavish “Diamond” Reynolds has raised $16,564 so far with a goal of $50,000

♦ The “Family” has raised $149,720 so far, exceeding their goal of $100,000.

♦ Big Sister “Allysza” has raised $55,866 so far, with a goal of $80,000.

GRAND TOTAL $222,150 raised under various Philando Castile Go-Fund-Me Accounts.

Another Self-Promoted Video Uploaded by Lavish “Diamond” Reynolds Two Days Prior To the shooting, July 4th 2016

Advertisements