The Punishment for reading a Bible in Saudi Arabia – photo
Ever had a cut in your finger and it hurts like mad? Well…

(This is a stock photo of accidential damages from a paper shredder, and not an actual image from the incident)

Saudi Arabia: This is the new form of punishment in one of the Saudi nations. According to a report sent to us from Saudi Arabia, this is a new punishment used on at least one person found to possess a Bible.

Since then, four more people have come forth and confirmed that they have seen people with similar punishments. We have no information if these were isolated incidents or if it is a new form of punishment.

Saudi Arabia refuses to recognize the religion of immigrants, and allows any non-Muslim within a certain distance of Mecca to be killed.

“Crucifixion is a hadd punishment, stipulated in the Quran, Sura 5:33, and therefore an obligatory part of Shariah.” The crucified man, branded as Christian, is Saleh Ahmed Saleh Al-Jamely who was executed on February 12, 2012 after being convicted by a court managed by Ansar Al-Shari’a accused of being a “Saudi spy” and placing two chips in two cars that were later targeted by U.S. drones.



Apart from their Sharia law, based on the doctrine’s of their ‘prophet’ Mohammed (warlord and pedophile) Saudi Arabia has been short of head-choppers for their 2,500+ decapitations per year PER executioner and have been advertising to fill these dirty positions for quite sometime.

An executioner is a job done by ‘lower status’ individual and is a position that is paid per execution by the government under confidentiality agreements. The government also provides the sword. The Saudi government has been considering firing squads to fill the shortage of executioners.

Executioners have said they are “proud to do God’s work”. But is it a god or a man who sentence these people, without a fair trial, tortured into confessions?

Textbooks handed out in Saudi Arabian schools teach children how to cut off a thief’s hands and feet under Sharia law – Photo Daily Mail. The books were published and handed out to 9th and 10th-graders despite Saudi Arabia’s promises to clean up textbooks in the kingdom. Ali Al-Ahmed, director of the Institute for Gulf Affairs, told Fox News: ‘This is where terrorism starts, in the education system. ‘They show students how to cut (the) hand and the feet of a thief,’ he said.The textbooks were printed for the 2010-2011 academic year and translated from Arabic by the institute. In one, for ninth-graders, students are taught the annihilation of the Jewish people is imperative. In addition to calling for the murder of Jews, the texts reportedly call women “weak” and teach that gays are dangerous and should be put to death.

And it doesn’t get better in other Muslim societies. Sharia is prevalent in all of them, with more or less extreme measures. The Iranian government announced new legal punishment tools under Sharia: an electronic saw is now being used to cut off hands, fingers and feet [see picture from government announcement below].

Iran: A man gets his hand cut off. In January 2013 the Iranian government published pictures of a new tool for cutting fingers and hands off people. The machine, resembling a saw, was used for the public amputation of an adulterer’s fingers on Wednesday. The images were published by on of Iran’s official press agencies. Apparently the machine has been used before, but it’s not clear for how long. The machine intends to replace manual cutting of limbs by knife..

Challenge:

Many Muslims commenting on our blog claim these punishments are fake and that Islam is the religion of peace, being slandered by non-Muslims, and that they have no problems reading a bible in their country. This can be easily proven. We challenge any Muslim in UAE, Kuwait, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, to come forth and provide a video clip of them reading a bible with their full face visible. Include the address and we will forward the clip to the Muttawwa of the country. You can then send a videoclip from the office of the Muttawwa with yourself and your bible, and an official letter from the police confirming you had no restrictions or problems reading your bible. You can also film yourself in Mecca reading a bible in public view. Forward this to us to prove these claims are false, and we will publish the letter and the video clip to provide evidence to your claim.

____________________

Related:

1. Saudi Court Sentences Blogger To Seven Years And 600 Lashes Under Sharia Law

2. (Video) Britanistan: “We will not integrate. We will only follow Sharia. Soon we will see Sharia in U.S., UK, Europe”

3. ISNA Reinvents ‘Sharia’ for Western Consumption

4. (Video) Sharia law: Islamic Hand Cutting

5. (Video) Australian girl and her rape ordeal in Liberal Dubai, and its Sharia law

6. Statistics: The Muslim World’s Problem: Over 70% Of Muslims Support Sharia Law, 90% Support Execution Of Apostates

7. Cleric instructs: Make Sharia sound appealing to attract kafirs to support it. Don’t tell them about cutting hands and feet.

8. Third Muslim beheading attempt takes place in London within weeks. How many more unreported ones are there?

9. [Graphic images] 12-Year Old Muslim Boy’s First Beheading

10. (Video) Saudi Arabia: Nameless Filipino Maid Subject to Savage Muslim Assault and Rape in the Middle East (Graphic!). And it’s all legal under Sharia to assault, enslave and kill non-Muslims.

11. Jordan teens think “honor killings” are justified, study says

12. (Fox Report Video) America’s New Nightmare: Muslim Honor Killings

13. California “racist hate crime” of Muslim woman turns out to be honor killing. Husband arrested.

14. Muslims commit 91% of all honor killings worldwide

15. A letter about Stoning to Death

16. (Statistics) Muslim countries, obsessed with women’s ‘honour’, have one of the highest rape scales in the world