Palin Joins Trump in Bashing NATO, Asks ‘Where Were They in World War II?’
By Rondell Pettus

President Donald Trump has been in Europe for two days and he’s already enraged America’s NATO allies, British Prime Minister Theresa May and half of the United Kingdom. He also called an interview he gave to the Sun fake news.

During the Sun interview, his criticized May’s performance on Brexit and also claimed that immigration was ruining Europe’s culture. But in a press conference, he denied saying that.

“I have a lot of respect for the prime minister and unfortunately there was a story that was done which was generally fine but it didn’t put in what I said about the prime minister and I said tremendous things…It’s called fake news,” said Trump.

Trump has bashed NATO and threatened to walk away from the alliance. The clueless president also told a bold face lie, when he said that the United States pays for about 90 percent of NATO’s costs. (Actually, it’s about 23 percent.)

But Trump has his supporters in the United States including well-known American quarter-wit Sarah Palin.

In an interview with right-wing One America News Network (OANN,) Palin joined Trump in bashing NATO.

“America is spending too much money defending a bunch of elitist Europeans, who look down their noses at us,” said Palin. “What has NATO ever done for us? Where were they in World War II, when America defeated the Nazis.”

Palin fails to understand that NATO was created after World War II to deter potential Russian aggression in Western Europe.

However, Palin is not the sharpest tool in the shed. After her dim statements sunk the McCain campaign, she walked away from being governor of Alaska and turned up at FOX News. But they eventually tired of her.

Recently she was duped by comedian Sacha Baron Cohen. Palin was tricked into giving Cohen an interview for his new project, “Who is America?”

In an interview on Good Morning America, she later accused Cohen’s show of making fun of “middle-class Americans.” However, Cohen’s interviews include Palin and former Vice-President Dick Cheney, who are both millionaires.