Gillibrand secures hearings on “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell”
For the first time in 16 years, at the urging of Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, a Senate panel is set this fall to hold a hearing examining the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy governing homosexuals in the military.

Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., decided his Senate Armed Services Committee or one of its subcommittees would hold the hearing after requests from Gillibrand, the Democrat from New York who has been pushing for the policy’s repeal.

Gillibrand said the “important hearing” would demonstrate that Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell “is an unfair, outdated measure that violates the civil rights of some of our bravest, most heroic men and women.”

Gillibrand previously had been considering offering an amendment to a defense spending bill that would have blocked the discharge of gay service members under the policy for 18 months. Gillibrand dropped that push when it appeared she would not be able to get the 60 votes the proposal would have needed for adoption and after securing the commitment from Levin.

Gillibrand’s moves on gay rights could help her build support among liberal Democrats in New York, particularly downstate, where she has been viewed warily as too socially conservative since her appointment to the Senate in January. It also could help her in a primary challenge planned by Long Island Rep. Carolyn Maloney.

But it runs the risk of jeopardizing President Obama’s support among gay rights advocates who have been frustrated that he hasn’t done more from the White House to advance their cause. Obama has promised to repeal the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy but said it is up to Congress to strike the statute from the lawbooks.

Congress passed and President Clinton enacted the policy, which bars openly gay members from serving in the U.S. armed forces, in 1993. It has been under mounting criticism ever since.

In the House, Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Pa., is leading a push to repeal the policy. In the Senate, Gillibrand is joining Edward M. Kennedy as a leader in fighting the directive.

A full statement from Gillibrand is available after the jump.



GILLIBRAND ANNOUNCES SENATE HEARING ON “DON’T ASK, DON’T TELL” POLICY

Armed Services Committee Chairman Levin Agrees to Hold A Senate Hearing on the Policy This Fall

265 Men and Women Have Been Discharged Since President Obama Took Office

Washington, D.C. – U.S. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand is announcing that the Senate Armed Services Committee is agreeing to hold a Senate hearing on the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy in the Armed Forces this fall. Because of the policy, 265 men and women have been unfairly dismissed from the Armed Forces since President Barack Obama took office

“This policy is wrong for our national security and wrong for the moral foundation upon which our country was founded,’” Senator Gillibrand said. “I thank Chairman Levin for agreeing to hold this important hearing. Numerous military leaders are telling us that the times have changed. ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’ is an unfair, outdated measure that violates the civil rights of some of our bravest, most heroic men and women. By repealing this policy, we will increase America’s strength – both militarily and morally.”

Nearly 13,000 service members have been discharged for their sexual orientation since 1993, when the policy was first instituted. The Government Accountability Office estimates that the policy cost the Armed Forces approximately $95.4 million in recruiting costs and $95.1 million for training replacements for the 9,488 troops that were discharged from 1994 through 2003.

According to a Gallup Poll from May of this year, 69 percent of Americans favor military service by openly gay men and lesbians.

More than 100 retired U.S. military leaders – including the former head of the Naval Academy –signed on to a statement <http://www.palmcenter.org/files/active/0/104Generals11-17-08.pdf> last November calling for an end to DADT policy.

Last month, Senator Gillibrand met with Lt. Dan Choi, a constituent, who was dismissed from the Armed Forces because of the DADT policy. Senator Gillibrand pledged to work with him to repair the damage that has been done to his career and spare thousands of innocent, brave men and women from the same injustice.

# # #