Crist – and his veto pen – still have friends in Florida politics

Sure, a portion of Crist's inner circle – the political handlers who emerged once Crist was an up-and-coming name-brand – bolted over his decision to independent. The Washington-dispatched communications team has departed. Political advisers like Jim Rimes , Eric Eikenberg , and George LeMieux are gone.

It was evident watching the eclectic atmosphere surrounding him in St. Petersburg last week that Florida Gov. Charlie Crist had left the party of Abraham Lincoln for the circus of Jesse Ventura . But does the governor's move to go rogue and become a man without a party mean he's also running without any friends?

LeMieux, whom Crist appointed to the U.S. Senate despite much contrary advice, deep-sixed the governor last week in a public way that stunned the Crist inner sanctum.

"Our friendship runs deep, but my commitment to the principles of the Republican Party runs deeper. I cannot walk down the path he has chosen," said LeMieux, who will leave his appointed post after this year and is angling to launch a 2012 U.S. Senate bid.

But the governor could still get by with a little help from his friends. And thanks to Florida lawmakers' decision to send him a raft of controversial legislation, Crist has used – and will use -- his veto pen to mobilize groups for his independent run.

There are more than 120,000 state workers who can thank the governor for vetoing a 3-percent pay cut last year and for the Legislature's reluctance to go there again this session. Crist has also given state employees an extra day off around the holiday season – a perk they're likely to remember.

Then there's Florida's 700,000-plus gun owners. Crist vetoed a move by lawmakers last year to take $6 million out of the trust fund that pays for licensing gun owners and processing concealed weapons permits. That prompted adoration from the National Rifle Association, and this session Crist double-downed by signing into law a bill preventing future raids on the fund.

Florida's 167,000 teachers were incensed over SB 6, which would have tied pay more closely to student test scores and eliminated tenure for new teachers. Crist didn't just veto that bill; he drop-kicked it with a statewide campaign tour. The Florida Education Association rewarded him with TV ads thanking the governor. The FEA is a political force that doesn't forget its friends – though Crist's Democratic U.S. Senate rival, Congressman Kendrick Meek, has been a longtime friend of the union.

Finally, the Legislature passed a last-day anti- abortion measure that would require women who want a first-trimester abortion to pay for an ultrasound. A lot of women voters will be keenly interested in Crist's response.

Republican legislators are already describing Crist's expected veto as an act of political desperation.

"I think he's turned his back on a lot of loyal Republicans who have supported him over the years," said Republican Party of Florida chairman John Thrasher. "He's been gone a long time in my opinion. This just makes it official."

Crist described the far-right forces within the GOP as a "club within a club" and said his defection "says more about our nation and our state than it does about me."

That may be under-selling the governor's passion for survival. But it's also intellectually dishonest to conclude this historic gamble is not in keeping with what has made Charlie Crist a unique and successful electoral name-brand.