FY 2018 Budget
Our budget, Building A Better America, balances within 10 years. For too long, the federal government’s excessive spending has put future generations at risk. Massive tax increases or crippling austerity measures are the natural conclusion of our current rate of spending, and future generations will pay the price. Failure to take swift and decisive action is not only inexcusable, it is immoral.

Watch the markup from July 19, 2017 below:

Meeting the government’s fiscal challenges will be a daunting task, requiring conviction and resolve. Governing is hard. Then again, Members of Congress are elected not to do what is easy, but to do what is right. This budget resolution starts the process. It retains longstanding beliefs about budgeting and governing. It reverses the drift toward excessive spending and larger government; it reinforces the innovation and creativity stirring in the myriad institutions and communities across the country; and it revitalizes the prosperity that creates ever-expanding opportunities for all Americans to pursue their destinies. Like any good budget resolution, our FY 2018 budget expresses a vision of governing, and of America itself.

Our blueprint discusses the following major themes of the budget:

Balancing the Budget

The resolution draws a path toward a balanced budget within 10 years, without raising taxes, and places the government on a fiscal course sustainable for the long term. The national debt is already an impediment to greater prosperity and a threat to the security of future generations. This committee’s budget significantly reduces spending and reforms government programs to put us on a sustainable spending path.

Promoting Economic Growth

For the past eight years, government has been a hindrance to economic growth. This budget urges reversing this trend with a combination of pro-growth policies, including deficit reduction, spending restraint, comprehensive tax reform, welfare reform, Obamacare repeal-and-replace legislation, and regulatory reform. All can promote more robust growth over the longer term.

Ensuring a Strong National Defense

Defending America’s security is the highest priority of the Federal Government. To that end, this budget supports robust funding for troop training, equipment, compensation, and improved readiness.

Improving the Sustainability of Medicare

Notwithstanding Medicare’s popularity, there are far better ways to achieve the program’s worthy goals. Retirees should be able to choose the coverage plan best suited to their particular needs, rather than accept a set of benefits dictated by Washington. The program should ensure doctors and patients make health care decisions for themselves, and promote competition among insurers to expand choices of coverage and restrain costs. Reforms such as these will have the added benefit of improving Medicare’s long-term financial condition, ensuring it will be there for future generations.

Restoring the Proper Role of State and Local Governments

The resolution encourages the innovation and creativity of State and local governments. It calls for returning significant authority to the States, which possess not only the ability but also the will to reform and modernize programs that serve their citizens. The laboratories of democracy, not the Federal Government, are where these reforms should happen.

Reforming Government Programs While Improving Accountability

Every tax dollar collected by the Federal Government was generated by private-sector economic activity. Responsible stewardship of taxpayer dollars is a fundamental component of the budget resolution. At every opportunity possible, the budget reforms government programs and improves accountability to while generating better outcomes for Americans.