BlueChip failure leaves solar customers up in air
BlueChip Energy failure leaves solar-power customers up in air

Homeowners wonder about safety of solar panels

About 300 customers who paid $20,000 to $40,000 for rooftop solar packages worry that they'll be stuck with solar panels that could be unusable or even unsafe. The homeowners, many of them in Central Florida, don't know whether they should keep the panels, which now have no warranty and were falsely sold as safe, court records show.

When BlueChip Energy failed this year, banks that made loans to the Lake Mary solar-power company weren't the only ones left in the lurch.

Taxpayers in general may take a hit as well: A $1.8 million federal stimulus grant may be lost in the company's financial failure.

"I believed in the technology, but it's unfortunate that I don't know how the panels will last," said Attilio Di Marco, who has a $42,000 system on the roof of his Longwood home. "For all I know, they could start overheating, or who knows?

"The sad thing is, this is a good industry taking off now that could do a lot for the environment, but it makes it hard for the consumer to know what to do," Di Marco said.

Another customer, Tuyet Le of Orlando, still owes $22,000 for a system installed at her home in October. "I'm still nervous," she said. "I don't know what else I'm supposed to do, or if it's legal to keep it there, but I want to continue using the panels."

BlueChip Energy, which also operated as Advanced Solar Photonics and SunHouse Solar, manufactured solar panels and solar-electricity packages. It also planned to build a massive solar farm in Lake County. But the company failed this past spring, awash in millions of dollars of debt. Its assets were sold at auction this month for $700,000.

Sales agents marketed the solar-electricity systems at the Seminole Towne Center in Sanford, at environmental festivals in Orlando and at a home show at the Orange County Convention Center.

At least half the customers also applied for rebates through their utilities, primarily Florida Power & Light and Progress Energy, which is now Duke Energy Florida, state records show.

The solar panels not only provide electricity for the home, but any excess electricity produced can be fed back into the power grid, with customers earning money back from the utility.

Homeowners' biggest concern is whether the panels are legitimate. Some solar panels had a counterfeit Underwriters Laboratories seal, meaning that they were falsely sold as having the industry-required safety approval. Without the safety testing, they shouldn't be connected to the electric grid.

Phillip Fairey, deputy director of the Florida Solar Energy Center in Cocoa, said owners should file complaints with the state Attorney General's office for consumer fraud. But it's unclear whether the panels actually pose a risk.