Orange leaders broke law in 'textgate' scandal, Ashton says
Orange leaders face $500 fines in 'textgate' scandal

Jacobs and Commissioners Scott Boyd, Fred Brummer, Jennifer Thompson and former Commissioner John Martinez each face the fines, which Ashton said could settle the issue. If they don't agree to pay, Ashton said he would file civil charges against them.

Orange County leaders, including Mayor Teresa Jacobs, violated state law by deleting text messages about the paid-sick-time debate that clearly were public record, State Attorney Jeff Ashton said Wednesday, and should pay $500 civil fines.

"All of the officials who deleted text messages related to this issue violated Florida law," Ashton wrote in a six-page summary of a Florida Department of Law Enforcement investigation.

Ashton said criminal charges were not warranted because "there's no evidence that they deleted these knowing that they were public records."

A spokeswoman said Jacobs plans to pay. "She absolutely intends to comply and will be paying the fine," said aide Lisa Nason.

Dennis O'Connor, an attorney representing Boyd, Brummer, Thompson and Martinez, said the report was a "vindication" for each of them because Ashton determined the deletion of public records was inadvertent.

"They will consider their options going forward," O'Connor said when asked whether they would pay the $500.

The six-month investigation unearthed almost none of the texts that commissioners say they deleted or lost. And none of the lobbyists interviewed in the probe provided copies of the missing records.

The probe was launched by Ashton after several Orange County leaders deleted text messages from their personal cellphones during a Sept. 11 hearing on a sick-time ballot measure.

Commissioners that day voted to block the measure from the ballot even though 50,000 voters had signed a petition seeking a referendum.

Advocates argued the initiative would help families with sick children, keep ill workers out of the workplace and save on health-care costs. Foes said it would hurt wages, kill jobs and create a potential "patchwork" of rules for employers.

Jon Kaney, First Amendment Foundation general counsel, said he was troubled by Ashton's "eager acceptance" of the commissioners' ignorance of public-records law.

"How many seminars or training sessions have these commissioners attended where the rather obvious point was made that the medium makes no difference for public-records-law purposes?" Kaney wrote via email after reviewing Ashton's report. "If none, why not?"