CARLY For America
Who Is Jeffrey Sonnenfeld?

Jeffrey Sonnenfeld claims to be a business expert, particularly when it comes to Carly's tenure at HP. Sonnenfeld's friendship with Bill Clinton, admiration for Walter Hewlett, a man who fought Carly at HP, and his disreputable past put him in no position to be a credible critic of Carly's career.

Long-Term Friend Of Bill Clinton

Sonnenfeld And Clinton Have A Long History Together Going Back Decades. “By choosing the Southeast as the starting point for a series of regional economic summits, President Clinton begins in the comfort of an area in obvious prosperity. That he is starting in Atlanta was probably not random chance. In early January, Emory University’s Jeffrey Sonnenfeld urged the president to consider Atlanta as the kickoff point while the pair jogged during the Renaissance Weekend in Hilton Head, S.C. Sonnenfeld and Clinton are 10-year veterans of the yearly Renaissance brainstorming get- together. ” (Ernest Holsendolph, “Summit May Give Business Leaders Clues To Future,” The Atlanta Journal Constitution, 3/26/95)

Sonnenfeld Used To Go Running With Bill Clinton Every New Year At A Conference In South Carolina Where He Would Also Give The President Strategic Advice. “Every New Year at Renaissance Weekend in Hilton Head, S.C., [Sonnenfeld] ran with Bill Clinton. In 1995, he advised the President to answer his setback in the midterm elections by holding regional economic summits, similar to the 1992 economic summit in Little Rock. ‘We were on the inner trails because the tide was up that day,’ Mr. Sonnenfeld remembered. ‘We stopped, and he pounded me with questions.’ The summits were held; Mr. Sonnenfeld has been publicly credited for the idea.” (Philip Weiss, “Is Emory Prof Jeffrey Sonnenfeld Caught in a New Dreyfus Affair?” Observer, 5//17/99)

After Becoming Unemployed, President Bill Clinton Sent His Condolences To Sonnenfeld. “Since his resignation, Dr. Sonnenfeld, 44, has established, with private financing, an institute in Atlanta for chief executives. He also has received letters of support from chief executives he has befriended over the years, including the chief executive of the United States.” (Kevin Sack, “Ex-Professor Sues Emory For Slander After Vandalism Accusation Cost Him A Job,” The New York Times, 6/2/98)

“‘I Regret What You’ve Been Through,’ President Clinton Wrote. ‘But, As My Critics Say, I Can Feel Your Pain.’” (Kevin Sack, “Ex-Professor Sues Emory For Slander After Vandalism Accusation Cost Him A Job,” The New York Times, 6/2/98)

Ardent Admirer And Chief Supporter Of Walter Hewlett

Sonnenfeld Said Walter Hewlett, Who Opposed Carly In The HP/Compaq Merger, “Was Ridiculed Publicly In A Smear Campaign” During Merger Fight. “Consider Walter Hewlett—an academic; the cofounder’s son, who controlled 18% of Hewlett-Packard stock; and someone with a deep understanding of the computer business—who had the temerity to question HP’s proposed merger with Compaq in the fall of 2001. Despite the fact that technology mergers rarely work, his point of view was summarily dismissed internally. When he was forced to go public with his objections, he was ridiculed publicly in a smear campaign.” (Jeffrey A. Sonnenfeld, “What Makes Great Boards Great,” Harvard Business Review, September 2002)

Sonnenfeld: “The board was deeply split over the Compaq deal, and Fiorina ‘humiliated and attacked Walter Hewlett in unseemly ways.’” (Susan Adams, “Apotheker Wasn’t The Problem At HP; It’s The Board,” Forbes, 9/22/11)

In 2002, Sonnenfeld Said Carly Should Apologize To Hewlett For The Merger Fight Getting “So Personal.” “Showing none of the jitters displayed by investors about their company’s merger partner, Compaq Computer Corp. shareholders yesterday overwhelmingly approved Compaq’s takeover by Hewlett-Packard Co. … But Walter Hewlett, an HP director who has been leading the opposition, would not concede defeat. … But others said that might be dangerous because Hewlett has become a folk hero to employees and others. ‘The smartest thing to do would be to bury the proverbial hatchet and work together. [Fiorina] could apologize that it got so personal and . . . she could show some appreciation for honest dissent,’ said Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a professor at the Yale University School of Management.” (Ariana Eunjung Cha And Mike Musgrove, “Compaq Merger Is Endorsed,” The Washington Post, 3/21/02)

In 2002, Sonnenfeld Argued In Favor Of Keeping Walter Hewlett On The HP Board. “‘He is not some fringe element,’ observed Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, associate dean at the Yale University school of management. ‘There is a logic to keeping his dissent on the board, even if there is some animosity between Walter Hewlett and other board members.’” (Steve Lohr, “Hewlett-Packard Moves To Drop Dissident Heir From Its Board,” The New York Times, 4/2/02)

A Critic With A Lack Of Credibility

Jeffrey Sonnenfeld’s Op-Eds Tend To Praise Companies And CEOs Who Were “Honored By His Chief Executive Leadership Institute Or Was A Financial Backer Of His Biannual CEO Summit.” “Being friends with Yale School of Management professor Jeffrey Sonnenfeld certainly has its advantages. Three times in the past 16 months, Sonnenfeld has written opinion pieces or been quoted in the media supporting a company or CEO who was honored by his Chief Executive Leadership Institute or was a financial backer of his biannual CEO Summit, The Post’s research reveals.” (Josh Kosman And Michelle Celarier, “Being Friends With Yale Prof Sonnenfeld Has Its Benefits,” New York Post, 4/15/15)

For Example, Sonnenfeld Attacked Investor Nelson Peltz And Praised DuPont CEO Ellen Kullman Who Received An Award From Sonnenfeld’s Institute. “Another time, the professor backed DuPont CEO Ellen Kullman and bashed activist investor Nelson Peltz, who is engaged in a much-publicized proxy battle with DuPont. Kullman received a Legend in Leadership award from Sonnenfeld in December 2013.” (Josh Kosman And Michelle Celarier, “Being Friends With Yale Prof Sonnenfeld Has Its Benefits,” New York Post, 4/15/15)

“None Of The Op-Eds Disclosed Either The Financial Backing The Companies Supplied To The Sonnenfeld-Led Nonprofit Or That CELI Had Honored Their CEOs.” (Josh Kosman And Michelle Celarier, “Being Friends With Yale Prof Sonnenfeld Has Its Benefits,” New York Post, 4/15/15)

“In May 2014, Sonnenfeld Told The Financial Times That IBM CEO Virginia Rometty Was ‘The Perfect Person’ To Lead The Company. IBM, From 2011 To 2014, Was A Leadership Partner Of His CEO Summit.” (Josh Kosman And Michelle Celarier, “Being Friends With Yale Prof Sonnenfeld Has Its Benefits,” New York Post, 4/15/15)

“In February 2014, Sonnenfeld Co-Authored A New York Times Op-Ed About The Unfair Treatment Of Women CEOs — Holding Up Patriarch Partners CEO Lynn Tilton As A Paradigm For Successful Female Leaders. Patriarch Was One Of Nine 2014 CEO Summit Sponsors.” (Josh Kosman And Michelle Celarier, “Being Friends With Yale Prof Sonnenfeld Has Its Benefits,” New York Post, 4/15/15)

“Sonnenfeld, In The Same Op-Ed, Came To The Defense Of PepsiCo CEO Indra Nooyi. The Soft-Drink And Snacks Maker Was A CEO Summit Sponsor From 2011 To 2014.” (Josh Kosman And Michelle Celarier, “Being Friends With Yale Prof Sonnenfeld Has Its Benefits,” New York Post, 4/15/15)

“Ford’s Lincoln Motor Co. Was A Sponsor Of The 2013 CEO Summit. Five Months Later, Sonnenfeld Told Bloomberg That Ford’s CEO Transition Was A ‘Classic Textbook, Done-Right CEO Succession.’” (Josh Kosman And Michelle Celarier, “Being Friends With Yale Prof Sonnenfeld Has Its Benefits,” New York Post, 4/15/15)

A Man With A Disreputable Past

Sonnenfeld Filed A Lawsuit Against Emory University After He Was Accused Of Vandalizing Property At The University And Lost A Job At The Georgia Institute Of Technology. “Jeffrey A. Sonnenfeld, a former Emory University business professor who lost an appointment at the Georgia Institute of Technology after Emory officials accused him of vandalism, has filed a lawsuit charging Emory with trumping up charges against him and sabotaging his career.” (Kevin Sack, “Ex-Professor Sues Emory For Slander After Vandalism Accusation Cost Him A Job,” The New York Times, 6/2/98)

“In The Lawsuit Filed … In Federal District Court In Atlanta, Dr. Sonnenfeld Seeks Reappointment To His Tenured Teaching Position And Unspecified Monetary Damages.” (Kevin Sack, “Ex-Professor Sues Emory For Slander After Vandalism Accusation Cost Him A Job,” The New York Times, 6/2/98)

Sonnenfeld Was Caught On Camera Defacing A Wall At Emory Causing Him To Resign. “But before the state Board of Regents [at the Georgia Institute of Technology] could approve the $200,000-a-year appointment, Emory officials informed Georgia Tech that a security camera had captured Dr. Sonnenfeld defacing a wall as he walked down a hallway on Nov. 26. When confronted by campus police about the incident, Dr. Sonnenfeld resigned from Emory. William M. Chace, Emory’s president, then told Georgia Tech’s president, G. Wayne Clough, about the developments, and Georgia Tech rescinded its offer on Dec. 3, according to the lawsuit. A copy of the videotape, which Dr. Sonnenfeld said was provided to his lawyer by Emory officials, shows the professor zigzagging down the hallway, apparently kicking the walls lightly as he goes. Dr. Sonnenfeld acknowledges that his behavior appears bizarre. But he has portrayed it as an eccentricity of a rumpled, often preoccupied professor, and not a criminal act.” (Kevin Sack, “Ex-Professor Sues Emory For Slander After Vandalism Accusation Cost Him A Job,” The New York Times, 6/2/98)

For more research please go here.

Categories: