State v. Pellicci, 133 N.H. 523
No. 88-203 1. Searches and Seizures — Acts Constituting Seizure — Constitutional Standards Officer who stops a motor vehicle "seizes" both vehicle and occupants for purposes of New Hampshire Constitution. N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 2. Searches and Seizures — Acts Constituting Seizure — Investigatory Stops Under carefully defined circumstances, certain investigative stops on the basis of less than probable cause to arrest are permissible under New Hampshire Constitution, because stops are substantially less intrusive than an arrest. N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 3. Searches and Seizures — Acts Constituting Seizure — Investigatory Stops In determining whether investigatory stop is lawful under New Hampshire Constitution, governmental interests justifying stop are balanced against extent of intrusion on protected interests. N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 4. Searches and Seizures — Acts Constituting Seizure — Investigatory Stops Investigative stop of a suspect by police, on basis of less than probable cause, is lawful under New Hampshire Constitution only where investigating officer undertook stop on basis of a reasonable suspicion that the person detained had committed, was committing, or was about to commit a crime; where officer can point to specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warranted the intrusion; and where scope of detention was carefully tailored to its underlying justification, was temporary, and lasted no longer than was necessary to effectuate the purpose of the stop. N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 5. Searches and Seizures — Investigatory Stop — Generally An officer may detain a suspect briefly in order to ask a moderate number of questions to determine identity and to try to obtain information confirming or dispelling his suspicions. 6. Searches and Seizures — Investigatory Stop — Generally Police officer may conduct a limited frisk of outer garments for weapons of a suspect temporarily detained in an investigatory stop in order to insure officer's own safety or that of others, where he has reason to believe that suspect is armed and dangerous. 7. Searches and Seizures — Investigatory Stop — Prerequisites In determining whether police officers made an investigatory stop based on reasonable and articulable suspicion, an appellate court must consider the facts the police articulated in light of all the surrounding circumstances, keeping in mind that a trained officer may make inferences and draw conclusions from conduct which may seem unremarkable to an untrained observer. 8. Searches and Seizures — Investigatory Stop — Particular Cases Officers had reasonable and articulable suspicion that suspect was carrying controlled substances in anticipation of immediate sale where, in addition to an anonymous tip that suspect sold drugs from his car, officers had several times documented suspect's brief trips to secluded parking lots and saw evidence of cocaine inhalation and exchange of money. 9. Searches and Seizures — Investigatory Stop — Particular Cases Even though police officers planned an investigative stop in advance, stop was constitutionally permissible where, based on the evidence previously gathered, they suspected defendant was carrying controlled substances for immediate sale; in this case the investigative stop was supported by reasonable suspicion and was not a mere pretext to gather evidence without first obtaining a warrant. 10. Constitutional Law — New Hampshire Constitution — Construction The New Hampshire Constitution may be more protective of individual rights than the Federal Constitution. 11. Constitutional Law — New Hampshire Constitution — Searches and Seizures The New Hampshire Constitution gives persons a right to be secure from unreasonable searches of their vehicles. N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 12. Constitutional Law — New Hampshire Constitution — Searches and Seizures For purposes of determining what constitutes an invasion of protected interests under the State Constitution, New Hampshire has neither adopted nor rejected the reasonable expectation of privacy analysis adopted by the United States Supreme Court in interpreting the fourth amendment to the Federal Constitution. U.S. CONST. amend. IV; N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 13. Constitutional Law — New Hampshire Constitution — Searches and Seizures For purposes of the New Hampshire Constitution, a search ordinarily implies a quest by an officer of the law, a prying into hidden places for that which is concealed. N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 14. Constitutional Law — New Hampshire Constitution — Searches and Seizures Employment of a trained canine by police to sniff a person's private vehicle in order to determine whether controlled substances are concealed is a search subject to the strictures of State constitutional prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures. N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 15. Constitutional Law — New Hampshire Constitution — Searches and Seizures Where canine sniff of a suspect's vehicle, made during the course of an otherwise constitutionally permissible investigative stop, was based on reasonable and articulable suspicion that the vehicle contained controlled substances and lasted no longer than permissible questioning, and involved no seizure of property other than one necessarily accompanying stop, intrusion on protected interests was sufficiently limited, and legitimate State interest sufficiently great, to justify the search on the basis of less than probable cause. N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 16. Constitutional Law — New Hampshire Constitution — Searches and Seizures Canine sniff satisfies State Constitutional requirements, where it: (1) is part of an investigative stop based on a reasonable and articulable suspicion of imminent criminal activity involving controlled substances; (2) is employed to search a vehicle; (3) in no way increases the time necessary for allowable moderate questioning; and (4) is itself based on a reasonable and articulable suspicion that the property searched contains controlled substances. N.H. CONST. pt. 1, art. 19. 17. Evidence — Bloodhound Evidence — Foundation Evidence of a dog's ability to track suspects is necessary before tracking evidence may be admitted at trial to prove guilt. 18. Evidence — Weight and Sufficiency — Particular Cases Even if a drug detection dog's reliability is insufficient to warrant admission of evidence at trial to prove guilt, a court may still give weight to the alert the dog gave officers, in determining whether of officers had probable cause to arrest or search. 19. Searches and Seizures — Probable Cause — Particular Cases Where a drug detection dog alerted of officers to the presence of contraband in suspect's vehicle, dog's reliability was sufficiently established to allow trial court to consider the alert in determining whether officers had probable cause to arrest suspect, where evidence was introduced of dog's training, success rate, and method of communicating the presence of contraband to officers, and that dog twice alerted officers to presence of controlled substances in suspect's car. 20. Searches and Seizures — Probable Cause — Particular Cases Drug detection dog's alert to officers during investigative stop clearly established probable cause for arrest of suspect, when considered in combination with evidence that justified the investigative stop in the first place. 21. Searches and Seizures — Warrantless Searches — Prior to Arrest Where probable cause to arrest was established independently of the results of a search of defendant's person which immediately preceded defendant's arrest, fact that search preceded rather than followed arrest was of no consequence, and search was permissible as search incident to an arrest. Stephen E. Merrill, attorney general (Tina Schneider, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State. Stephen T. Jeffco, of Portsmouth, by brief and orally, for the defendant.