Orange leaders settle 'textgate,' pay $90,000

Deal ends long legal fight

The settlement closes a year and a half of criminal and civil action resulting from the battle over paid sick time.

Orange County leaders have settled the "textgate" civil lawsuit and agreed to pay $90,000 to advocates of paid sick time who sued them for alleged open-government violations.

The civil suit was filed in late 2012 by Citizens for a Greater Orange County, a coalition of groups that led the fight for a paid-sick-time referendum opposed by county officials and local tourism interests.

Documents released Monday show that a settlement had been reached, though no details are outlined, and the "mutual release" states that this "is not intended as an admission of any wrongdoing or liability."

Risk Management manager John Petrelli said that the county's position is that "we were responsive to the records requests." The county admits no wrongdoing, he said, but instead settled the case to avoid added litigation costs.

The Citizens' group released this statement:

"It is unfortunate that this matter had to get to this point and that workers in Orange County will continue to risk being fired if they or a loved one get sick," the group said. "The County Commission could have avoided this by following the law when it really mattered."

The documents were signed by a lead Citizens' plaintiff, and the officials accused of open government violations: Commissioners Fred Brummer, Jennifer Thompson and former Commissioner John Martinez, along with Mayor Teresa Jacobs' Chief of Staff Graciela Noriega Jacoby.

Each of the defendants had lost or deleted phone texts messages that they had sent or received with lobbyists or other opponents of the ballot measure.

County officials also released a Jan. 10 document that discussed a $90,000 payment to a lawyer for the Citizens group. The $90,000 would cover lawyer, court and record request costs, the group said.

Orange's outside legal bill in the civil case: $158,000, with finals bills still to arrive.

The Sept. 11, 2012, vote by Orange County commissioners to keep that mandatory paid-sick time measure off the ballot prompted a judicial panel last February to rule that the board had violated the county charter.

Meanwhile, Orange-Osceola State Attorney Jeff Ashton opened a criminal probe early last year, using the Florida Department of Law Enforcement to investigate the same basic allegations leveled in the civil suit.

In August, Ashton said Mayor Teresa Jacobs and four commissioners violated state law when they deleted phone text messages that were public records.