Florida Sheriffs Association organizes anti-medical marijuana campaign
Sheriffs take lead against legalizing medical pot

They are launching a campaign called "Don't Let Florida Go To Pot" to oppose Amendment 2, which would legalize marijuana for medical purposes.

FSA President Sheriff Grady Judd of Polk County said people do not yet understand the ramifications of Amendment 2, and that's why the sheriffs association is stepping in.

"We have an obligation to educate our constituents and the people we've sworn to protect," Judd said. "How they vote is their decisions, and we'll abide by their decisions. But we would be remiss by not pointing out that this amendment would allow teenagers to obtain medical marijuana; this amendment allows caregivers with the only restriction that they're 21 years of age. They themselves can be drug dealers, convicted felons or your next-door neighbors."

"Don't Let Florida Go To Pot" will be more of a catch-all slogan or a brand for opposition. The FSA has no intention of incorporating a political action committee or corporation under that name.

Rather, the sheriffs association expects to coordinate with efforts of other opposition groups, such as St. Petersburg-based Save Our Society From Drugs, other law enforcement officials, and other opponents who want to join in, said FSA Executive Director Steve Casey.

The FSA will raise money through a Don't Let Florida Go To Pot website. The FSA's tax status would prevent it from explicitly advising people to vote no on Amendment 2 in November, so the association would use donations for an "educational campaign." The site also will provide links to allied groups that might run more explicit opposition advertising, Casey said.

In doing so, they'll be taking on the John Morgan-led "United For Care," which pushed last year to get the amendment on the ballot, and then quickly transformed into a campaign committee to advocate passage. It has raised — and spent — almost $5 million, most of it Morgan's personal money.

Casey said there is no way the group could match Morgan or his group in fundraising.

"They'll be the ones on TV," he said. "We don't have a lot of money but we have a lot of concerned people, so let's put them to work."

Morgan, who has debated sheriffs and other opponents throughout the state, expressed neither surprise nor concern about the emergence of Don't Let Florida Go To Pot. He said not all sheriffs personally oppose the amendment and said his side has a compelling message.

"We're talking about very, very sick people having access to something that works," Morgan said.

smpowers@tribune.com or 407-420-5441.