Direct Sale Of Dentures Urged, But Dentists Aren't Biting
In the clinical language of public health professionals, these are the ''dentally underserved," a few of the estimated 30 million Americans who need but cannot afford false teeth. A set of top and bottom dentures can cost $1,000 or more - an astronomical price to Tyndale and his wife, who live on only $650 a month in Social Security and pension.

Patients in Canada can save up to 50 percent by bypassing dentists and going directly to the technicians who make the false teeth, known as denturists.

But the American Dental Association opposes allowing technicians to work alone, saying that although they might be qualified to construct dentures, they lack the training to fit them properly or to recognize cancer or other diseases that can be present in the mouth.

Those who have examined the ADA's assertions - including some dentists and the staff of the Federal Trade Commission - say they have no basis. But aided by their generous campaign contributions, the dentists have largely prevailed.

State laws prohibit technicians from doing fittings and dealing directly with the public in most of the United States, including Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Delaware.

In Pennsylvania, supporters of a denturist legalization bill gave up after an attempt about six years ago. A bill that would legalize denturism in New Jersey is pending in the state Senate.

Toothlessness remains a major problem despite improved preventive care in the last two decades. A recent analysis by the National Institute of Dental Research found that nearly 20 percent of adults wear complete dentures and another 20 percent need, but lack, some form of dental prostheses.

Of people older than 65, 42 percent have no teeth, according to a 1985 survey by the institute.

Leslie Glasgoe, 62, a former farm worker who is now the Salvation Army's cook, hasn't seen a dentist since he left the Army in 1956. His teeth have been falling out ever since.

Talking with a stranger, he covered his mouth with his hand. "I'm afraid to smile," he said. "The first thing people say is, 'Where's your teeth, man?' . . . It's kind of shameful."

The need for dentures is not simply a matter of vanity.

People without dentures lose the pleasure of eating favorite foods and tend to withdraw from society, experts say.

"This withdrawal can hasten the aging process, just as certain psychological and physiological factors can help to retard the aging process," reported Sheldon Winkler, an associate professor in the School of Dentistry at the State University of New York at Buffalo.

Registered nurse Sylvia Collins, a health consultant at the Philadelphia Corporation for Aging, said people without teeth suffer nutritionally because they overcook their vegetables so that they become soft. "When they're overcooked, they have almost no nutritional value," she said.

To prevent competition from denturists, dentists have used the same strategy the medical profession tried to use to block the emergence of optometrists and podiatrists.

"I don't want to sit around here and tell you that dentists are altruistic - they're not," said Philip Cocuzza, executive director of the New Jersey Dental Association. "But they are concerned professionals, and they think in all honesty and sincerity that denturism would not be in the best interest of the public."

Cocuzza cited a 10-year-old American Cancer Society publication that stated that irritation from poorly fitting dentures "is a contributing factor in the development of oral cancer."

But the cancer society backed off from that contention in a 1990 paper by dentist Sol Silverman, who concluded: "It does not seem plausible at this time to consider denture irritation as a significant carcinogenic aggravating factor."

Dentists also say that they fear that denturists will fail to recognize oral cancer or other diseases that exhibit symptoms in the mouth. But the evidence suggests that the poor are at more risk under the current system. Dentists who have opened low-price denture clinics report that many of their patients had gone 10 or 20 years without any oral examination because of the cost.

In British Columbia, denturists are required to take a 36-hour course in oral pathology taught by a dentist. "There's not a lot of abnormal stuff in the mouth that looks normal," said denturist John Mayr, a member of the province's Dental Technicians and Denturists Board.

Dentist Herbert M. Hazelkorn, director of the Dental Public Health program at the University of Illinois, said dentists had put denturists in a Catch-22 by complaining that they lacked training, then lobbying "extensively to prevent denturists from being trained."

"If these people are trained and licensed . . . they should be able to make satisfactory, functional dentures that people can use and use well," Hazelkorn said.

The staff of the Federal Trade Commission, which did a two-year study of the denturism debate, also rejected the dentists' health fears.

In Canada, where denturism has been legal in some provinces since 1958, the practice "does not appear to have resulted in health problems," the FTC's report said. "Malpractice premiums are quite low . . . suggesting that the risk of serious injury in the event of inadequate care (is) quite low."

The report, by the FTC's San Francisco regional office, concluded that denturism is "a highly desirable alternative to our current method of delivering denture care" because it would save money and make care available to more people.

In interviews, Cocuzza and spokesmen for the ADA, the Canadian Dental Association and dental associations in the six states where the practice is legal acknowledged that they could not cite any studies documenting health problems caused by denturism.

When their health fears have been undermined, opponents of denturism have questioned the potential savings, suggesting that any initial difference will evaporate over time.

But studies in Canada and Oregon, where denturists were legalized in 1978, indicate that their prices continue to run 30 percent to 50 percent below that of dentists.

The competition has had benefits even for those who choose to go to a dentist. Dentists' denture prices in Oregon, which had been rising at the same rate as other dental services, increased at a much lower rate after denturists were legalized, according to a study by dentists at the Oregon School of Dentistry.

Aside from being cheaper, denturists say, their false teeth fit better than those from dentists, for whom fitting dentures is just one of many services they perform.

In Canada, denturists typically are required to attend two years of schooling - half as long as the four-year dental schools - plus an internship. But such students receive twice as many hours of instruction on denture construction and fit up to 25 times as many patients as do dental students, the American Journal of Public Health reported.

Many elderly in Philadelphia don't wear their dentures because they were never properly fitted by the dentist, according to nurse Collins.

"A lot of older people . . . have not been taught to challenge doctors, dentists, health care professionals. If something doesn't fit, it's an unusual older person who will go back and say these don't fit," she said. "I have had people say, 'I keep going back, and it never gets better.' "

Although the facts have not supported opponents of denturism, state legislators generally have.

Denturism has been legalized through referendums in Montana, Idaho and Oregon. But fewer than half the states allow voter initiatives. Although denturist legalization bills have been introduced in more than 20 states, only three legislatures - Arizona, Colorado and Maine - have approved them.

Despite support from the New Jersey Commission on Aging, the American Association of Retired Persons and the AFL-CIO, New Jersey denturists have been fighting for legalization for seven years without success.

Sidney Schneider, president of the Denturist Society of New Jersey, said the dentists' financial clout has prevented his group from getting a fair hearing on the bill. The 4,500-member New Jersey Dental Association has given legislative candidates more than $268,000 since 1989 and regularly ranks among the top political action committees in the state. The denturists, with only 40 members, have given about $2,000 during the same period.

Peter Bellincampi, president of the National Denturists Association, said he and other leaders of the movement had been "blacklisted" by dentists who refuse to send work to their labs. Technicians who deal with the public also have been targeted for practicing dentistry without a license by state dental boards, which are dominated by dentists.

"You can't take a broken denture (from a patient) and fix it. That's practicing dentistry without a license, even though you're never going to stick your hand near the oral cavity," Bellincampi said.

Everett Vendeneeden, founder of the now-defunct Pennsylvania Denturists Association, said an investigation by the Pennsylvania Board of Dentistry had driven him out of the state. "They started coming in investigating every couple weeks. So I moved to Montana," where the practice is legal.

Vendeneeden said a denturist licensing bill was introduced in Harrisburg about six years ago but went nowhere. There have been no legalization efforts in Pennsylvania since.

Dentists say they have addressed the needs of the poor through programs providing free or low-cost dentures. But the FTC concluded that the dentists' efforts were too limited to solve the problem.

Barbara Van Allen, legislative chair for the New Jersey chapter of the American Association of Retired Persons, said the dentists' charity programs were not well-publicized and served only a minority of those who could not afford full price for dentures. "There are senior citizens who don't want handouts like this," she added.

Government-funded programs fall short as well. Burlington County's dental program, funded with $28,000 in state and county money, serves 100 low-income senior citizens a year. "When the money runs out before the end of the year, we always have a waiting list," program director Arlene Salkin said.

"People who have lost all their teeth are the failures of the dental system," said denturist Mayr of British Columbia. "That's really why denturists exist in Canada."