Dole Clinches Nomination With Sweep In Midwest
``I think it's safe to say that I will be the nominee,'' Dole told cheering supporters at a Washington hotel ballroom.

``I must say that Tuesday night is about my favorite night of the week,'' he said. ``And it's just 230 days until Tuesday night, Nov. 5, when Bill Clinton will be on his way home.''

But Senate Majority Leader Dole last night refused to claim an outright hold on the nomination, preferring to wait until next week's California primary. Keeping the primary contest alive will help generate media interest in the state with the most electoral votes in the fall campaign.

``California, here we come,'' Dole said during his brief remarks after claiming victory in the Midwest. ``California will be a big one. It'll take us over the top, way over the top in only one week.''

Dole's victories yesterday ensure that for the next several months the presidential campaign will be fought along Pennsylvania Avenue, between the Dole-led Congress and Clinton's White House.

But while Dole tries to focus on Clinton, he may also have to worry about a third-party bid from billionaire Ross Perot.

Perot said yesterday that he would run if his Reform Party wanted him as its candidate. While he insisted anew that he does not want to run, Perot said he would do ``whatever it takes to put our country's house back in order.'' Most analysts believe a Perot bid would draw votes away from Dole.

Dole urged Perot to look at the GOP agenda of balancing the budget, term limits and campaign-finance reform.

``We are the reform party,'' Dole said on CNN last night. ``Take a look at your checklist. . . . Ross, what else do you want?''

The next several months will give Americans a unique opportunity to compare Dole and Clinton.

At one end of Pennsylvania Avenue will be the 72-year-old Dole, the veteran legislator who will use the Republican Congress as a platform to push the GOP agenda of balancing the budget, cutting taxes and reforming welfare.

A reticent speaker more at ease in the Senate than outside the Beltway, he will point to his ability to get things done, painting himself as a doer, not a talker.

At the other end will be Clinton, the baby boomer, promising to accomplish the same things while assuring Americans that his path is fairer, kinder. He is a masterful campaigner who thrives on his contacts with people.

As he has in other primaries, Dole attracted a cross-section of voters yesterday.

``He seems like the most honest, the most forthright,'' said David Hunter, 30, a student from Lake Orion, Mich. ``His experience helps him cut through all the gridlock, get things done.''

Ken Martens, 70, a retired automotive engineer from Warren, Mich., said he voted for Dole because he believes the Republican would cut the size of the government.

``There are too many leeches and parasites in this country,'' Martens said. ``Look at the debt we got with the giveaway programs.''

After hobbling out of the gate with a weak win in Iowa, and losses in New Hampshire, Delaware and Arizona, Dole turned the campaign into a ``battle for the heart and soul of the Republican Party'' against Buchanan. Given that choice, voters turned increasingly to Dole.

After winning big in South Carolina, he never lost another primary.

It was particularly sweet for Dole to clinch with victories in the Midwest, the site of his political demise eight years ago. In 1988, on his second try for the GOP nomination, Dole quit the race after dismal losses in Illinois and Wisconsin dashed any remaining hopes that he could overtake then-Vice President George Bush.

``The first time I came up empty,'' Dole said in reference to his first try for the nomination in 1980. ``The last time I came up short. This time I'm coming up full.''

Buchanan planned to take a break after the California primary, though he plans to continue campaigning to draw attention to his issues.

``We've got one week of hard campaigning, and then I'm going to be home for a while,'' Buchanan said.

With 84 percent of the vote counted in the four states, unofficial returns showed that Dole received 1,487,178 votes; Buchanan, 645,095; Steve Forbes, 133,253; Alan Keyes, 76,373; Lamar Alexander, 43,502; uncommitted, 22,725; Richard G. Lugar, 20,913; Phil Gramm, 8,445; Robert K. Dornan, 4,714, and Morry Taylor, 3,376.