Plant gunman 'mad at the world'
Today's Top News Stories • Report: In U.S., record numbers are plunged into poverty - • VP's plane has minor electrical problem - • Israeli troops raid West Bank city - • Severe storms injure 27 in Arkansas - • Va. lawmakers pass slavery apology - • Add USATODAY.com RSS feeds

Plant gunman 'mad at the world' By Tom Vanden Brook and Kevin Johnson, USA TODAY Relatives and co-workers of a factory worker who killed five people Tuesday at an aircraft parts plant in Mississippi said he was angry at the world and had threatened people for no reason. Some of Doug Williams' co-workers said they were not surprised to hear that he was the man who blasted away with a shotgun at a Lockheed Martin factory near Meridian, Miss., before shooting himself. "Mr. Williams was mad at the world," co-worker Hubert Threat said. "This man had an issue with everybody." Four of the five people he killed were black. Some co-workers said Williams, who was white, had made racist remarks. But authorities said it appeared Williams shot people at random. "There was no indication it involved race or gender as far as his targets were concerned," Lauderdale County Sheriff Billy Sollie said. What seems clear, co-workers said, is that Williams was an angry man. He had run-ins with management and fellow workers and felt mistreated. Threat said Williams had a big heart, "but then, boom! It's like Jekyll and Hyde." "It's not just about race," he said. "It was just the excuse he was looking for." People in this east-central Mississippi city of 40,000 were shocked by the shootings, which left more dead in one morning than Meridian sees from violence in a typical year. "Meridian has a big heart, and it is grieving," Mayor John Robert Smith said. "We have a reputation as the safest large city in Mississippi. We might have two or four violent deaths a year. Something like this just staggers us." Williams, 48, was armed as he walked into the plant shortly after 9:30 a.m. Dressed in a black T-shirt and camouflage pants, he opened fire on people he had worked with for more than 10 years. About 130 people were at the plant. Workers ran for their lives. In addition to the dead, nine people were injured; one was in critical condition. Leon Williams, a cousin, said Doug Williams had worked as an assembler at the plant for about 15 years. He had been divorced 14 years and had been dealing with "a lot of things" that could have contributed to the shootings. Leon Williams said his cousin was also depressed. "Several pastors have been coming over to offer some comfort," he said. "I don't know what it was about for sure. The guy I knew was a great guy." But others knew him differently. Bobby McCall said his wife, Lanette, had once told him Williams had made threats against black people. Lanette, who was black, was one of the dead. Others said Williams made racist remarks. Jim Payton, who is retired from the plant but had worked with him for about a year, said Williams had talked about wanting to kill people. " 'I'm capable of doing it,' " Payton quoted Williams as saying. Investigators were talking with Williams' co-workers and planned to review his employment history for clues about his behavior, Sheriff Sollie said. He had attended a meeting on ethics that morning with other employees, some of whom were shot. Plant employee Russell Wright said he did not go to work Tuesday because he had a feeling something bad might happen. He called Williams a "hothead." "He had run-ins with several employees and management, too," said Wright, whose brother Randy, also a plant worker, was wounded. "He didn't like to take instructions too well." Austin Clark, who had called in sick Tuesday, said Williams made accusations when he was angry. "He's had problems with white people, too," Clark said. "I have no idea what set him off." Dale Masi, a professor at the University of Maryland School of Social Work, said companies sometimes ignore warning signs from workers: "One of the biggest issues I've found is managers who have problem employees and are not dealing with them." Managers need to be trained to take note of "aberrant" behavior, such as bullying or talking about killing people, and take action, Dale said. People from Meridian and the surrounding community gathered Tuesday night for a prayer vigil on the steps of City Hall. Gov. Ronnie Musgrove said citizens would pull together. "The people of Mississippi are a close-knit family," Musgrove said. Mayor Smith said he knew some of the dead, identified as Lanette McCall, 47, of Cuba, Ala; Micky Fitzgerald, 45, of Little Rock, Miss.; Sam Cockrell, 46, of Meridian; Thomas Willis, 57, of Lisman, Ala.; and Charlie Miller, 58, of Meridian. Contributing: Wire reports