Inauguration 2005 Photo Blog
2:04 p.m. ET Audio: Long-Line Woes



washingtonpost.com's Christina Pino-Marina talks to a father and daughter who had to miss the swearing-in ceremony due to long lines at the security checkpoint.

1:58 p.m. ET Meanwhile, Back at the Saloon Soon after President Bush finished his inaugural address, crowds began descending on the Hawk and Dove Saloon. Seats filled quickly at the long, wooden bar and near the crackling fireplace. Those with a view of the large-screen TVs were especially prized. Soon, lines stretched out the door. Four years ago," says bartender Jackie Parker, "I swore I'd never work another Inauguration Day." Her husband, manager Paul Meagher, just laughed while mixing bracing coffee drinks and pouring pints of Texas Shiner Bock. "You renew those oaths every four years just like the president," he said. This is the Hawk's 10th inauguration, said Meagher who has been at the saloon for eight.



The bar has a reputation as a political hangout. Employees worked on both the Kerry and Edwards campaigns. Today though, the wood-paneled bar is full of patrons wearing fur and cowboy hats, chowing down on the specials like the Texas Chili and San Antonio Club. --Fritz Hahn





1:44 p.m. ET Texas Law and Order Amid the ubiquitous presence of police officers on Pennsylvania Avenue, one unit especially stood out. The men wore sunglasses, well-practiced, no-nonsense expressions and tan cowboy hats as part of their uniform of the Texas Highway Patrol.



Heath Harkins and Leroy Torres work together out of the Corpus Christi State Highway Patrol office, but today they stood in the middle of Pennsylvania Avenue. "It is a privilege and an honor to be up here," said Harkins, adding that he and Torres hoped to do some sightseeing in addition to their security duties.



But for a time on Thursday, they were the attraction. "Oh, I want to take a picture of the Texas Rangers," said a young woman coming up to them with a camera. They set her straight, and she took their picture anyway. --Susan DeFord

1:41 p.m. ET Audio: Unruly Scene









washingtonpost.com's Ben de la Cruz reports on an unruly scene at a security checkpoint where riot police have been called on to quell an uprising from protesters.



1:34 p.m. ET Homeland Security

Police line the inauguration parade route along Pennsylvania Avenue leading away from the Capitol. (Tim Shaffer -Reuters)

1:33 p.m. ET Security Everywhere The snipers atop roofs along the inaugural parade route did not intimidate the young friends who came to turn their backs on Bush in silent protest. "That's so awesome" Lena Seikaly, 18, of Falls Church exclaimed as she snapped photographs. "That's crazy. I've never seen a sniper before. I don't know if I can zoom in."



Seikaly's classmate at the University of Maryland in College Park, Hickham Yaktin, 18, of Greenbelt, also marveled at the security. "They patted me down pretty good," Yaktin said. "They even checked my hood." --Nicole Fuller













1:25 p.m. ET Moved to Tears

Casey Owens, a wounded Marine, salutes as his mother Janna Owens cries during the inaugural speech by President Bush. The president pledged to work to heal a country divided by the Iraq war. "We have known divisions, which must be healed to move forward in great purposes, and I will strive in good faith to heal them." (Jonathan Ernst - Reuters)

1:24 p.m. ET Not Enough Room Connie Hugya of Mitchellville, Md., said she practically breezed through security to get into the presidential parade route this morning - about 15 minutes from start to finish.



Hugya, who is here to see 14-year-old daughter Carmen Milligan march with the St. John's College High School Jr. ROTC unit, wasn't prepared to vie for the limited space available to non-ticket holders. "I didn't expect the whole thing to be lined with bleachers. I certainly didn't expect that and I'm not going to sit with the protesters."



So with an hour left before the parade was to kick off, Hugya picked herself up from a table at Au Bon Pain at 10th and Pennsylvania and went in search of the perfect spot. --Amanda Zamora