Obama Administration Announces Nationwide Muslim Outreach Program For Children Grades K-12 - Conservative Frontline
Washington, DC — At a press conference today, President Obama announced plans for the first ever federally funded Muslim outreach program. The program will be available nationwide for all elementary school students grade K-12 beginning February 1st, 2014. The program is designed to educate children about the fundamentals of the Muslim religion and Islamic belief.

President Obama spoke with reporters to explain why it is so important that these outreach programs exist. “The Muslim community deserves our full understanding and respect,” Obama said. “We have killed millions of Muslims overseas since the September 11th attacks. These folks are not all bad. In fact, most of them are hardworking citizens just like you and me. I encourage every student in America to participate in your school’s Muslim outreach program. Learn about the Muslim community, the beauty of the Sunnah and the magic of the Qur’an.”





35-year-old Paul Horner, a teacher at Starks Elementary School in Louisiana, told MSNBC he is excited about the new program. “I think anything a child can learn is good. We need more learning in this country,” Horner said. “These classes are not mandatory but children can use them as extra credit towards other classes. For example, if Becky has a D+ in math she can take a three week after-school class on the Qur’an and would then have an A in Math. That’s a win-win for everyone!”

The Muslim youth outreach program is designed to help young people from different cultures work together to break down ethnic barriers. Their goal is to help promote a greater respect for other cultures, understanding while at the same time learning about all that culture has to offer.

Khaled Matei, who is a member of the Muslim Brotherhood‘s Freedom and Justice Party, told CNN he is pleased with Obama and his actions. “I spoke with President Obama by telephone yesterday and personally thanked him for what he is doing for the Muslim community,” Matei said. “This is definitely a step in the right direction I explained to him. Praise Allah.”

If any parents of students would like to volunteer and teach the Muslim religion you can call the Nationwide Muslim Youth Outreach hotline at (202) 863-8500.

###