Early Summer threatens UK with Volat-Araneus (The Flying Spider)
WARNING: not for the faint of heart! – This is an article you will definitely want to share.

False-Widow eating spider is even more terrifying than it’s deadly cousin.

Humans aren’t the only species that like the hot weather. Top Scientists and Professors from Albion University believe that Volat-Araneus (the Flying Spider) will, without a doubt, migrate to the UK this year. Due to the coming hot weather, and an abundance of this spiders favourite food, The False Widow!

Chances are you probably know that name. It’s the killer spider which was all over last years headlines, and this new-found species literally eats them for breakfast. The great benefit here is that the Volat-Araneus may reduce the False Widow population. Although this species is carnivorous it is not poisonous. The worst reported case of attack from the Volat-Araneus, comes from The fictional Republic of Kamistan (IRK) where 8 year old boy Omar Hassan found a that a female had planted her eggs in his elbow. After only 3 hours of surgery Hassan was cleared of the insects and was left with nothing greater than a 3″ scar, half the size of the spider that caused the injury.

Night-Owl Locals, from the South, North or Central England may already be familiar with this species. As one of the few nocturnal insects, it is rare that the Volat-Araneus is seen in the day, preferring the company of darkness they are only ever found during the day if their nest is disturbed. Common nesting places include, underneath beds, in cupboards or wardrobes, and toilet seats where the lid if left down.

We caught up with 38 yr old Rebecca Jordan, the words leading expert in XenoArachnia,

I have closely monitored the Volat-Araneus for the last 40 years, and I can say that without a doubt the species will be commonplace throughout the UK and other European countries this summer season. We have found from scientific studies that whenever a country’s population of False Widow increases we see the Volat-Araneus population increase more than ten times that amount within a year. We would have released this information last year, but we did not want to start a panic. Chances are that everyone in the UK will “physically” encounter at least one of these spiders this year and never even know it. Because of the nocturnal nature of the species they mostly come at night, mostly.

Newt – Aliens

Below is a graph, which has 2 lines on it. one is red, the other is blue.



This article is one of thousands designed to do one thing, get your attention so you’ll visit the website (or worse). Before we continue, we need to apologise. We are sorry, but the story above is not real (if you hadn’t already realised). We have intentionally swindled you but we are truly, truly sorry. But unlike some other sites, at least we’re honest about it. We’re not trying to rob you, we’re trying to help you. – Gandalf – The Lord of The Rings

We needed to get your attention because we want to help you, we are a company offering technology repairs and other services. Some of the most common issues we encounter are “Slow PC’s”, you’re probably familiar with this yourself. No matter what we do to resolve the issue, it can come back within a few weeks or even sooner. People always ask us, how does this stuff get on my PC in the first place? The answer has never been simple to explain, so we figured we’ll just show you.

It’s by clicking links like this. We have used the image of a flying spider and words like Top Scientists to get your attention. We used a graph so that when you skim the article it looks a little more legit, we even have a quote from a professor!, Actually she’s an actress who plays Rebecca ‘Newt’ Jordan in the film Aliens.

If you have read this far, please ask yourself, did you notice that the fictional Republic of Kamistan, has the word Fictional in the title? “Volat” and “Araneus” are just 2 Latin words that someone on Yahoo answers say meant Flying and Spider, We just made the word up. There are numerous other made up details in the article, like the fact that Spiders aren’t insects.

Some people do notice but most don’t because their mind is focused on gathering more information about this flying spider threat, specifically, “Is it going to get me?!” That answer is simple, no. It’s not real. But the False-Widow is (to our limited understanding), so be careful with that one.

In this case clicking the link, simply brought you to our website. but in most cases, especially videos. The first page you go to says, “click this button” to view your video. Clicking it won’t let you view a video or get the information it promises because it’s not real. What it will do however is share that video to all your friends as if you shared it. They’ll then click it and the cycle continues. In some cases it may ask you to install something you don’t have to watch the video. Something like flash, which you’ve heard of so it must be OK right? we’re sorry to say, wrong.

These will likely install malicious software on your PC, which can change your search engine, flood your PC with pop-ups or even steal your personal data. And before you know it, you’ll need to call us to speed it up again. We want to help you stop it happening in the first place with a couple of simple tips.

Never trust anything that doesn’t take you directly to the content you expect. If there is any kind of request for you to perform an extra action to view the content you are expecting. It’s probably fake!

Only ever trust websites you’ve actually heard of. Are you on You Tube and being asked to update? It’s probably OK. But are you on Sickest-Videos-Web (made up name), It’s probably fake. The best practice is always to get the update from the developers website. Are you being asked to get a Silverlight update. Google-Search Silverlight and you’ll get the right result.

So, once again, we are so sorry to have tried to fool you, but we hope you understand we did it for a good reason.

Just remember, if it looks too good to be true, it probably is.

Share this with your friends and keep their PC and Data Safe.

Credit to The Daily Carrier for their initial post on Flying Spiders from APR 2013

You can trust us, we have a great history of positive feedback across our page and social network sites.