BREAKING: Driver Who Plowed Into Charlottesville Crowd Identified
Important 2nd update is at the bottom of the story.

Update: 3 people have died in the violence.

And we now have confirmation!

It’s now being reported that one person is, in fact, dead after ‘Unite the Right’ rally in Virginia

At least one person was killed and 19 others were injured Saturday when a car rammed into a group of counter-protesters during the “Unite the Right” rally in Charlottesville Virginia.

Although it was originally reported that the driver of the car was a far right sympathizer it’s now been confirmed that it was indeed a Democrat Party member and Antifa terrorist drove his car into free speech advocates in Charlottesville Virginia this morning.

It is common for revolutionary groups such as Antifa to use methods like this to implicate their enemies in order to evoke violence and start a civil war, which is what they have been working towards since Donald Trump won the presidency in November of 2016.

A car just rammed through crowd of protesters in #Charlottesville with Radical Islam Tactic! pic.twitter.com/pzAQFnBIpt via

.@qith8n — Kevin W. (@kwilli1046) August 12, 2017

Video of car hitting anti-racist protestors. Let there be no confusion: this was deliberate terrorism. My prayers with victims. Stay home. pic.twitter.com/MUOZs71Pf4 — Brennan Gilmore (@brennanmgilmore) August 12, 2017

Driver who killed one in #Charlottesville is a Democrat Antifa terrorist, not right wing like @CNN fake news is saying. #MAGA https://t.co/R9js5votf6 — Democrats Are ISIS (@iResistAll) August 12, 2017

Although President Trump, Vice President Mike Pence, and First Lady Melania have already clearly condemned the violence and the left will find a way to blame him. Blame him for the actions of a group who’s only objective is to assassinate him, and most of us, his supporters.

Our country encourages freedom of speech, but let's communicate w/o hate in our hearts. No good comes from violence. #Charlottesville — Melania Trump (@FLOTUS) August 12, 2017

I stand with @POTUS against hate & violence. U.S is greatest when we join together & oppose those seeking to divide us. #Charlottesville https://t.co/p76Y9xQCPL — Vice President Pence (@VP) August 12, 2017

This whole episode is such a mess that even the hockey team the Detroit Redwings are involved over the use of their logo.

On the signs, the team’s winged wheel logo spokes were altered to look more like swastikas than the official straight-line-spoke version but the similarities and where it was used sparked outrage both in the National Hockey League and among social media users.

“The Detroit Red Wings vehemently disagree with and are not associated in any way with the event taking place today in Charlottesville, Va.,” the team said in a statement Saturday. “The Red Wings believe that hockey is for everyone, and we celebrate the great diversity of our fan base and our nation. We are exploring every possible legal action as it pertains to the misuse of our logo in this disturbing demonstration.”

The NHL also condemned the use of the logo: “We are obviously outraged by the irresponsible and improper use of our intellectual property. … We will take immediate and all necessary steps to ensure the use is discontinued as promptly as possible, and will vigorously pursue other remedies, as appropriate.”

The sign holders were among thousands at the volatile Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville to protest the removal of a monument to Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee. One person was killed and at least 19 injured after a car drove into a crowd of protesters, hours after a state of emergency was declared due to the event.

It was unclear who or what group was carrying the modified Red Wings logos but the hockey fan site Russian Machine Never Breaks attributed the logo use to “a Michigan-based group of Identitarians,” known as the Detroit Right Wings.

The Free Press could not confirm Saturday if the Detroit Right Wings were actually the group in attendance in Charlottesville. Requests for comment on the Twitter page carrying the Detroit Right Wings name and the same modified Red Wings logo were not replied to Saturday afternoon. A Facebook page carrying the group’s name but not the logo was not official, according to someone who replied via text to the Free Press’ request for comment at that site.

A YouTube video posted by “Detroit Right Wings” on Aug. 5, which used the modified Red Wings logo as its avatar and was taken down around 3 p.m. Saturday, described the group as a “participant in regular activism related to the cause of preserving our people.” The video post, which had 245 views as of Saturday afternoon, included a link to a go fund me page to raise money for the group’s trip to the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville. As of early Saturday, the group had raised $328.

Dozens of Red Wings fans and others took to social media to react to the controversy Saturday.

In response to the team disavowing the use of the logo, @JWCDreamshaper wrote: “Alt-Right idiots from Michigan calling themselves the Detroit Right Wings. Basically morons who couldn’t think up their own logo.’’

Aside from references to the Detroit Right Wings that appeared Saturday on social media, the group leaves no known paperwork trail in metro Detroit: Its name appears nowhere in federal court records or in those in Wayne, Oakland and Macomb counties. There is no registered corporation in Michigan under that name, either, and a search on the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs website lists no conflicts with the name, meaning it’s available for incorporation now if someone were to seek it.

The group is not listed by the Southern Poverty Law Center or the Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith, both of which track hate groups across the nation.

As of Saturday afternoon, Detroit Right Wings had 25 tweets on its Twitter account, with 69 followers, 28 likes and 41 accounts it followed. The Twitter account also used the modified Red Wings logo.

I knew something like this would happen sooner or later. A people will only put up with so much bullying from a group who wants to change everything they hold dear in this nation. The left has even taken to the task of going about erasing our history, just like Isis did in the Middle East. You couple all this with the fanning of racism flames by a charlatan turned President such as Barack Hussein Obama, and people will react.

But take hold, because the violent ones aren’t those of us on the right. Anyone of us who attended the San Jose Trump Rally in the Summer of 2016 can attest to that.

UPDATE: It appears the researchers at /pol/ were wrong. Joel Vangheluwe was not, in fact, the driver. James Alex Fields Jr., a 20-year-old from Maumee, Ohio is under arrest for driving the car into the crowd of Antifa members, a reporter from The Hill has confirmed.

Taylor Lorenz was live-streaming the event for the Hill when she was attacked by Antifa. She was punched and knocked to the ground. She is at the Charlottesville Police Department providing witness testimony. Lorenz said that several officers don’t believe Fields drove into the Antifa crowd to hurt anyone, but was scared because they had swarmed his car and were becoming violent. Fields was apparently trying to get away from them.

In the end, leftist Antifa terrorists are to blame for this tragedy because they attacked innocent civilians driving by, and even members of the media.

Please share if you are sick of what 8 years of Obama did to our nation….

Jeff Rainforth contributed to this story.

FOLLOW us on Facebook at Freedom Daily!