Russia to honor the American Indians
Planning a memorial in front of U.S. Embassy in Moscow

MOSCOW, Russia –– Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation plans to erect a memorial dedicated to the “Genocide Of The American Indians” right next to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, Russia.

“The initiative to install the monument [near the US Embassy] is very timely as an act that will remind [people today] from where the history of the USA started,” stated member of the Civic Chamber Valery Korovin, who supported the proposal. “This monument must become the silent reproach to the modern American elites which had significantly deviated from the idealistic principles that were laid into the foundation of the American state.” According to Mr. Korovin, the Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation should also appeal to the U.S. Congress to consider the “rehabilitation” of American Indians “as the native people of the United States, to admit the fact of their genocide by the US Government, to carry out the act of national repentance and thus to close this dark chapter of the U.S. history.”

“As a state that carried out the highly moral act of recognition of the infringements on the rights of the peoples during the Great Patriotic War [the Russian name for the WW2] and that rehabilitated the Chechens, Ingush, Crimean Tatars and other peoples [of the former USSR that were sent to exile], Russia has the right to call on the United States to repentance. Without repentance by the American society it is not possible to talk about the leadership by the [USA and] the USA would have no moral ground to speak about rights and freedoms of this or other nations.”

Last week it was made known that the Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation—a Russian analogue to the U.S. House Committee on Oversight, which has consultative powers— is planning to put forward a proposal for the installation of a memorial by the site of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, dedicated to the “genocide of the American Indians.

The request for permission to install such a monument was sent to the Administration of Russian President Vladimir Putin, to the Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation and to the Moscow city authorities.

The idea of reminding the U.S. of her former sins is not new within Russian political class.

Crimes against humanity don’t fall under the statute of limitations.

Sergei Naryshkin, speaker of the Russian Parliament , brought the idea of putting the US to International Criminal Court for atomic bombings of Japanese cities.

Just last summer, for example, during the round-table devoted to the 70th anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by the U.S., the Speaker of the Russian Parliament and Head of the Russian Historical Society Sergei Naryshkin raised a possibility of creating a special International Criminal Tribunal on bombing of the two Japanese cities.

According to Mr. Naryshkin and a number of other Russian politicians, these bombings clearly constituted crimes against humanity that don’t fall under the statute of limitations.

“The modern-day U.S. administration wants to hide [from the world] not the tragedy of Hiroshima and Nagasaki—this is not possible to do—but the hypocrisy and cynicism of the American leaders of the time,” Mr Naryshking said during the round-table. He added that “memory about this [crime] is as important as the memory of the atrocities committed by both the Nazis and Japanese militarists.”