About Us!
My second job out of college was as an intern at O, The Oprah Magazine. For the next six years, I lived and breathed the publication; O practically raised me. Like many avid readers, I learned the power the magazine has to change your life. Whether it's a delightful nugget you can't wait to share with a friend or an introspective article that completely changes your perspective, every single page helps you not just feel better, but be better. Since 2000, the magazine has been carrying on the mission that Oprah began with The Oprah Winfrey Show: To inspire women to live their best lives.

So it was an honor for me to return to O to launch the brand new OprahMag.com. If you call it "living your best life," "self-care" or "wellness," the one thing we can all agree on is that we're living in a moment where it's more important than ever to put yourself first. There couldn't be a better time to expand the magazine's mission online.

In addition to content from the magazine, we'll have more original storytelling, hot takes on what's happening in our culture, plus reported features that dive into the issues you care about most. From entertainment, beauty, and style, to life, health, and relationships, every day our team is working hard to create a space for you to discover something new, whether it's about the world—or yourself.

I know you may have questions, so let me try to answer a few!



How is OprahMag.com different than Oprah.com?



Our sister site will remain a destination for all things Oprah and OWN. Content there will continue to feature The Oprah Winfrey Show library, OWN news, plus coverage of the network’s shows, articles and videos.

Does Oprah approve everything on this site?

She doesn't! While, just like with the magazine, Oprah is involved in the vision and overall DNA of her brands, we're working to carry on her mission—and now, that also includes her magazine's website. So while we may feature a reported story on a specific topic, a reaction to a TV show, or a personal opinion from a writer, that does not mean Oprah feels that way; it just means that, as a team, we're producing articles we hope will inspire you—or at the very least, spark a conversation.

I don't see everything from the magazine here that I love. How come?



Just like we'll have original stories here on our site that aren't in the magazine, there's still so much great content you'll only find exclusively in O each month. (And in my humble opinion, it's best read curled up with a cozy blanket and a mug of tea.)

Feel free to leave any questions and feedback below, and we'll try to get back to you ASAP. In the meantime? Take a look around; we hope you'll tell your friends, stay awhile, and come back. Because there are so many steps you can take to build a life you're proud of. But living your best life starts here.

To reaching higher and dreaming bigger,

Arianna Davis

Digital Director



Want to stay in touch with all things Oprah Mag?

Sign up for our newsletter!

Follow us on Instagram