Jung von Matt : advertising and marketing profile at adbrands.net
Jung von Matt (Germany)

Profile subscribers click here for full profile

Jung von Matt is one of Germany's biggest independent marketing groups, built around a highly regarded creative shop whose two founders were once described by news magazine Der Spiegel as the "pop stars of German advertising". There are now more than 25 agencies under the overall umbrella of Jung von Matt, spread across nine countries, although several of them work out of the same street in Hamburg. To differentiate between the agencies, each one is named not by city but by its biggest local river. The main agency in Hamburg, for example, is Jung von Matt/Alster.

Selected Jung von Matt advertising

Which clients does Jung von Matt handle? Find out more from the Adbrands Account Assignments database Who are the competitors of Jung von Matt? see Leading Agency Rankings in Germany Subscribers only:

Adbrands profile

Account assignments & selected contact information Adbrands Snapshots provide a summary analysis of the history and current operations of leading advertisers, agencies and brands worldwide, and identify key strengths and weaknesses. Adbrands Account Assignments tracks account management for the world's leading brands and companies, including details of which advertising agency handles which accounts in which countries for major markets. Subscribers may access the following website links here: Jung von Matt website Worldwide Jvm/Limmat (Switzerland) JvM/Strommen (Sweden) Kaspen/JvM (Czech Republic) JvMt/Donau (Austria)

Recent stories from Adbrands Weekly Update:

Adbrands Weekly Update 24th Aug 2017: Ads of the Week: "How Panda Are You?". Here's another great campaign from Jung von Matt for leading German supermarket Edeka, this time celebrating the store's tie-up with the WWF to promote conservation and environmental issues. "How Panda Are You?" is the idea - and JvM take that creative concept at face value, quite literally in fact. You might not grasp what's going on until the final frame - it's a reference to the WWF logo of course - but this is a charming idea. Even if it's a shame we don't get to see the full Panda, so to speak. German advertising can often be a little basic on the creative side, but JvM is one agency we can always rely on to go above and beyond the general standard.

Adbrands Weekly Update 17th Aug 2017: Ads of the Week: "Men Of Fire". We originally spotted this superb ad from Jung von Matt for supermarket Edeka a few months ago, but only in a horrendously over-dubbed version for German-speaking markets. We can't understand why an ad would be written and filmed in English with such care and attention, only to be badly lip-synced into another language for its main market. Such a waste of great work. Finally, though, someone has released the original English language version and it's too good to miss, especially its original mock-Shakespearean ode to the joys of grilled meat. Recognise the unusual-looking lead? That's British actor Christopher Fairbank, and an excellent job he does too.

Adbrands Weekly Update 20th Jul 2017: Ads of the Week: "Driver vs Dog". Here's a great spot for Hyundai's super-luxury Genesis sub-brand, out of Jung von Matt in Germany, but rolling out globally. It ticks those two boxes vital for every viral sensation: cute animals and celebrity glamour (even if there's no *genuine* celeb involved). It's man vs beast as a Hollywood chauffeur goes into battle against a fluffy doggo.

Adbrands Weekly Update 16th Feb 2017: Ads of the Week: "Eatkarus". It's not often we'd name an ad from Germany as the best we've seen this week (and probably also this month), but the latest from Jung von Matt for supermarket giant Edeka is just superb, with the subtlety and wit that is often lacking in that country's advertising. Especially impressive is the blend of Tim Burtonesque grotesque - which grabs you right from the opening shot - with emotional warmth and a very sound healthy eating message. It's uplifting in every way in fact. Great makeup effects too. Fine work.

Adbrands Weekly Update 21st Jul 2016: Ads of the Week: "Amazed Again". The new Mercedes-Benz campaign is rather lovely, brought to us by not one but two of Germany's most creative agencies. Mercedes' current agency Antoni inherited the concept from predecessor Jung von Matt so, uniquely, both shops share credit for the spot. That's not something that happens very often. Given the provenance, the spot is as good as you would expect, with some stunning, even slightly haunting images. "Bring back the wonder" is the German slogan, altered here in the English language version to the more anodyne "Unleash your senses".

Subscribe to Adbrands.net and access the profile and website links