Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House: Michael Wolff: 9781250158062: Amazon.com: Books
There are a couple of things to note in reference to this review. First, I seldom, if ever, read books in this particular genre, i.e. political stuff. Second, I am an independent as to politics. I vote for the person and not the party and over the past six decades plus of voting my record has been about 50/50 as to which party candidate I voted for. I pretty much hold both parties in contempt and go for the candidate rather than the party.



That being said...when I found that this work had been put on the “Trumpster Index Expurgatorius....well I had to purchase it and read it despite my distaste for this sort of work. I wondered why this man(?) so badly wanted to stop this books publication...what did he want to hide?



I, like many others here take works such as this with a grain of salt. But I will tell you that if even a small fraction of the information presented here is true (and I have no doubt it is) then it makes my blood run cold. Now I am not one of those who feel that the circus which is Trump will bring down our nation. Hey, we survived bad apples before such as Harding, Andrew Johnson, Pierce, Fillmore, Garfield, et al and of course we will NOT be able to fully assess Trumps impact upon our nation for at least fifty or seventy five years from now, but even leaving out the information in this book it is becoming pretty obvious where Trumps place in history will land.



The book is written in a chatty way (something I dislike) but the information I found pretty well covered most of the events as we have all seen played out over the past year or so. I had no reason to doubt much of the information presented here.



I do feel that the author probably placed too much of his own “spin” on some of the facts but most readers will be able to spot this quite quickly and make up their own mind.



I suspect that over the next decade or so we will see a plethora of books addressing this administration and this clown written by insiders and political pundits. This is good because as I write this review so much more has been discovered and by all signs there will be much more to come. I am glad I forked out the few dollars as I was at least (in a goulash way) entertained as I read it and I must admit rather frightened.



Those who are Trumpsters will, if they even read the book, will not be pleased. For the other 65 percent plus of the voter population...well, they probably will get a kick out of it.