Clyde Wayne Crews
Wayne Crews is vice president for policy and a senior fellow at the Competitive Enterprise Institute. His work explores the impact of government regulation of free enterprise. He studies antitrust and competition policy, safety and environmental issues, and the challenges of the information age like privacy, online security, broadband policy, and intellectual property.

Crews is the author of the annual report, "Ten Thousand Commandments: An Annual Snapshot of the Federal Regulatory State." He co-authored "This Liberal Congress Went to Market?," a Bipartisan Policy Agenda for the 110th Congress, and "Communications without Commissions: A National Plan for Reforming Telecom Regulation." Prior to the assorted government bailouts now taking place, he wrote the report, "Still Stimulating Like It’s 1999: Time to Rethink Bipartisan Collusion on Economic Stimulus Packages."

He contributed an essay on regulatory reform to The Fraser Institute book, “What America’s Decline in Economic Freedom Means for Entrepreneurship and Prosperity,” which won the Sir Antony Fisher International Memorial Award in 2015 for its contribution to public understanding of the free society. He is co-editor of the books "Who Rules the Net: Internet Governance and Jurisdiction" (2003) and "Copy Fights: The Future of Intellectual Property In the Information Age" (2002). He is co-author of "What’s Yours Is Mine: Open Access and the Rise of Infrastructure Socialism" (2003), and a contributing author to others.

Crews has been published and cited in The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post, Chicago Tribune, Forbes, Communications Lawyer, the International Herald Tribune, and others. He has appeared on numerous television and radio programs, including Fox News, Fox Business, CNN, ABC, CNBC, and PBS NewsHour.

He holds a Master of Business Administration from William and Mary and a Bachelor of Science from Lander College in Greenwood, South Carolina. He was a candidate for state senate as a Libertarian while at Lander. Prior to joining CEI, he worked at the Cato Institute, the U.S. Senate, and the Food and Drug Administration. He can do a handstand on a skateboard and loves motorcycles.