Deck Plans, Activities & Sailings
For the benefit of guests who pack their appetites, let’s start with BlueIguana Cantina, our taco and burrito hot-spot. (Or mild-spot, if that’s more your style.) Burger lovers should direct their taste buds to Guy’s Burger Joint, where they’ll be delighted by original burgers and fries designed by the guy himself — celebrity chef Guy Fieri.

Cruisers thirsting for something a little different will be well-served by our bar lineup, including Alchemy Bar, where highly-trained bartenders “prescribe” custom cocktails made with exotic, unexpected ingredients and compelling flavors. SkyBox Sports Bar will satisfy your thirst as well as your taste for competition, featuring live scores, televised sporting events and video game titles. The friendly-rivals RedFrog Rum Bar and BlueIguana Tequila Bar may let you choose colors, sides, and favorite cocktail styles... but both promise a little something cool to enjoy in the sun.

Carnival Triumph is more than just a cruise ship, it’s a cruise ship with onboard spaces inspired by cities from all four corners of the world. Experience delicious coffees, cakes, cookies and pastries at Vienna Café, encounter beach-casual fare at The South Beach Club, or explore a multi-course meal at London or Paris Dining Rooms. You’ll have your choice of spots for a drink, whether you find Hollywood Dance Club or the old-continent charm of Oxford Bar more your scene. And nobody can resist getting down to the New Orleans-style jazz of The Big Easy Bar!

Kids will have an onboard, onscreen blast at Underground Tokyo video arcade, plus loads of age-appropriate fun at one of three supervised youth spaces. The world of Dr. Seuss has stampeded onto Carnival Triumph, bringing along Seuss at Sea… this means extra wackiness, way more rhyming, plus a notable uptick in fun! Build-A-Bear at Sea will give kids a chance to make a cuddly new friend. Kids young and old will love sinking putts at the mini-golf course, and everyone becomes a kid by simply splashing into one of Carnival Triumph’s pools.