President Barack Obama signs bill for schools to provide nutritious food
Kids will have a harder time getting their hands on candy, chips and other non-nutritious foods -- say, pizza sticks -- at school.

That's the gist of a bill signed into law Monday by President Barack Obama at a Washington, D.C. elementary school.

The Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act, which passed Congress with bipartisan support, is designed to address an issue that is behind one in three children being overweight or obese -- the food they're eating in school.

"Often the food that is being offered isn't as healthy or nutritious as it should be," Obama said. "This bill is also about what's right for our country, because we feel the strains that treating obesity-related health conditions put on our economy.

"We've seen the connection between what our kids eat and how well they perform in school."

First Lady Michelle Obama, who has championed efforts to fight childhood obesity, also spoke at the ceremony, pointing out that many children get up to half their daily calories from school meals.

"I think that parents have a right to expect that their efforts at home won't be undone each day in the school cafeteria or in the vending machine in the hallway," she said. "I think that our parents have a right to expect that their kids will be served fresh, healthy food that meets high nutritional standards."

Ohio Sen. Sherrod Brown chairs the Senate Agriculture Subcommittee on Hunger, Nutrition, and Family Farms, and was a strong proponent of the bill.

"This important law helps fill the gaps by ensuring that no child goes hungry at school," he said in a statement. "The Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act will help get our children started early with good eating habits so that they can live long and healthy lives."

The act authorizes funds for federal school meal and children's nutrition programs, and is designed to increase access to healthy food for low-income children.

It gives the U.S. Department of Agriculture the authority to set nutrition standards for all foods sold regularly in school, including in vending machines, lunch lines and school stores.

In an interview on Friday, Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack assured that it does not mean schools can't have the occasional booster club bake sale or birthday parties with cupcakes.

The bill does provide additional funding -- 6 cents per child, per day -- to schools that meet updated nutrition standards for federally subsidized lunches – the first real reimbursement rate increase in more than 30 years, Obama said.

It also helps communities establish local farm-to-school networks, create school gardens and ensure that more local foods are used in the school setting.

Schools will be audited every three years to prove compliance. They also will be required to make information more readily available to parents about the nutritional quality of meals.

The White House provided an example of the "before and after" school menu.

A school lunch today might mean a hot dog on a bun with ketchup, and 1/8 cup each of raw celery and carrots with ranch dressing; canned pears and low-fat chocolate milk. Under the new act, that lunch would be whole wheat spaghetti with meat sauce and a whole wheat roll; a 1/2 cup each of green beans, broccoli and cauliflower; 1/2 cup kiwi; plus some low fat milk, and a small dab of low fat ranch dip and soft margarine.

Damon F. Asbury, director of legislative services for the Ohio School Boards Association in Columbus, had some concerns about the bill.

"There are a lot of unknown implications in terms of both costs and procedural changes that need to be made," he said. "The Department of Agriculture has authority to set standards" beyond what the act calls for now.

Asbury said he'd wanted school board members, superintendents and school nutritionists to have more input into the legislation "so they could address the practical implications for schools."

"There is increased reimbursement for school lunches, which is a big plus, but we don't think it's enough to offset the increased costs of implementing the new standards, and the monitoring and reporting."