Canada, more than 160 countries adopt UN migration pact
UN Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration sets out 23 objectives for international cooperation

Canada, more than 160 other countries adopt UN migration pact

Canada joined more than 160 United Nations member states in adopting a new negotiated agreement on international migration Monday.

The non-binding United Nations Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration sets out 23 objectives for improving international cooperation on all forms of migration, from refugees to skilled workers.

While underscoring the need to address the “adverse drivers and structural factors” that lead migrants to leave their country of origin, the objectives call for enhancing the “availability and flexibility of pathways for regular migration,” investing in skills development and facilitating the “mutual recognition of skills, qualifications and competences,” among other goals.

The document states that its purpose is to optimize the “positive impacts” of migration, which it calls “a source of prosperity, innovation and sustainable development in our globalized world.”

The Government of Canada said the pact is the “first multilateral framework for the global response to migration” and comes at a time when roughly 258 million people are on the move worldwide — a 49 per cent increase over 2000.

Of this number, 68.5 million forcibly displaced persons fleeing war, violence and discrimination.

In an interview with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC), Canada’s Minister of Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship, Ahmed Hussen, said the compact provides a useful guidelines for the international community on migration issues.

Hussen told CBC the agreement helps countries “foster inclusive and cohesive societies by empowering migrants” to play more proactive and positive roles in their host communities.

He also stressed that the agreement is non-binding, which means it serves more as a set of best practices for the international community.

The Government of Canada has set immigration levels targets that would see the arrival more than 1.3 million new permanent residents between 2018 and 2021. In 2019 alone, Canada has a target of 330,800 new admissions through its various economic, family and refugee immigration programs.

To find out if you are eligible for any Canadian immigration programs, fill out a free assessment form.

The compact’s adoption on December 10 — International Human Rights Day — took place against a backdrop of mounting backlash against immigration in many European countries and the United States, among others.

The U.S. government opposed the pact, warning it could compromise national sovereignty when it comes to immigration.

The agreement, however, affirms “the sovereign right of States to determine their national migration policy and their prerogative to govern migration within their jurisdiction, in conformity with international law.”

“If this compact contributes to more orderly migration and a more humane approach to migration, I think that’s a very positive thing,” said David Cohen, senior partner with the Campbell Cohen Canadian immigration law firm in Montreal. “Immigration is a net benefit for Canada, and the integrity of our immigration system is crucial.”

Objectives for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration:



Collect and utilize accurate and disaggregated data as a basis for evidence-based policies. Minimize the adverse drivers and structural factors that compel people to leave their country of origin. Provide accurate and timely information at all stages of migration. Ensure that all migrants have proof of legal identity and adequate documentation. Enhance availability and flexibility of pathways for regular migration. Facilitate fair and ethical recruitment and safeguard conditions that ensure decent work. Address and reduce vulnerabilities in migration. Save lives and establish coordinated international efforts on missing migrants. Strengthen the transnational response to smuggling of migrants. Prevent, combat and eradicate trafficking in persons in the context of international migration. Manage borders in an integrated, secure and coordinated manner. Strengthen certainty and predictability in migration procedures for appropriate screening, assessment and referral. Use migration detention only as a measure of last resort and work towards alternatives. Enhance consular protection, assistance and cooperation throughout the migration cycle. Provide access to basic services for migrants. Empower migrants and societies to realize full inclusion and social cohesion. Eliminate all forms of discrimination and promote evidence-based public discourse to shape perceptions of migration. Invest in skills development and facilitate mutual recognition of skills, qualifications and competences. Create conditions for migrants and diasporas to fully contribute to sustainable development in all countries. Promote faster, safer and cheaper transfer of remittances and foster financial inclusion of migrants. Cooperate in facilitating safe and dignified return and readmission, as well as sustainable reintegration. Establish mechanisms for the portability of social security entitlements and earned benefits. Strengthen international cooperation and global partnerships for safe, orderly and regular migration.

To find out if you are eligible for any Canadian immigration program, fill out a free assessment.

© 2018 CICNews All Rights Reserved