CGI Model
The Clinton Global Initiative (CGI) convenes leaders to drive action through its unique model. Rather than directly implementing projects, CGI facilitates action by helping members connect, collaborate, and make effective and measurable Commitments to Action.

The CGI model drives action among its members in the following four ways:

Inspiration In the CGI community, today's foremost thinkers meet tomorrow's groundbreaking solutions. Thought leaders and visionaries push the conversation forward, inspiring all members to be creative and innovative in their collective action.

Networking The diverse CGI membership offers a unique opportunity to interact with individuals across multiple sectors and industries. Members include CEOs of the world’s largest companies, leading NGOs and foundations, government representatives, and prominent philanthropists.

Knowledge Building At CGI, knowledge building creates the foundation for informed action. Industry leaders analyze their most effective programs, fresh voices put forth innovative approaches, and established experts debate different interventions. Members provide each other with a constant flow of new solutions and lessons learned.

Collaboration Spurred by a collective sense of urgency and shared responsibility, CGI members collaborate to best leverage their resources and expertise. Some partnerships develop organically from networking, while others grow through issue-specific member gatherings or CGI staff facilitation.

Commitments to Action

CGI member commitments represent bold approaches to address global challenges – implemented through new methods of partnership and designed to maximize impact. Commitments can be small or large, global or local. No matter the size or scope, commitments help CGI members translate practical goals into meaningful and measurable results. To support the development of commitments among members, CGI facilitates conversations, provides opportunities to identify commitment partners, showcases the actions taken by commitment-makers, and communicates the results of the work.

From 2005-2016, members of the CGI community have made more than 3,600 commitments which have improved the lives of over 435 million people in more than 180 countries.

CGI's Tracks

CGI members connect and collaborate year-round within nine broad and cross-cutting Tracks, each representing a topical global challenge or strategic approach. For a full list of the Tracks and their descriptions, click here.