New Kavanaugh accuser Julie Swetnick details parties where girls allegedly were drugged and raped
A third accuser of Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh publicly identified herself Wednesday and alleged that Kavanaugh and others in the early 1980s spiked the drinks of girls at high school parties with intoxicants to make it easier for them to be gang raped. The woman, Julie Swetnick, said Kavanaugh lined up with other boys, including his close friend Mark Judge, waiting to rape those girls at many parties — and that she once became a victim herself. The allegations were detailed in an affidavit, signed under penalty of perjury, that was released by Swetnick's lawyer, Michael Avenatti. Her statement was sent to a senior staffer on the Senate Judiciary Committee. Swetnick's stunning claims came on the eve of scheduled testimony at that committee by Kavanaugh, 53, and Christine Blasey Ford, who has said he "physically and sexually assaulted me" in the early 1980s. The now-51-year-old research psychologist Ford claims Kavanaugh held her down on a bed when she was 15, groped her and tried to pull off her clothes asJudge watched. Republicans who hold the majority on the committee have refused to subpoena Judge to testify despite calls to do so from Democrats, Ford's lawyers and Avenatti. Another woman, Kavanaugh's Yale University classmate Deborah Ramirez, has accused him of exposing himself and causing her to touch his penis at a boozy dorm party. The latest accusations from Swetnick against Kavanaugh, a federal appeals court judge, could make his already imperiled nomination to the Supreme Court even less likely to succeed. All 10 Democrats on the Judiciary Committee on Wednesday urged President Donald Trump to either "immediately withdraw the nomination or order an FBI investigation into all the allegations."

Kavanaugh, 53, called Swetnick's claims "ridiculous and from the Twilight Zone." "I don't know who this is and this never happened," said Kavanaugh, who earlier this week told Fox News "I've never sexually assaulted anyone." In a letter to Judiciary Committee leaders made public after Swetnick's claims, Kavanaugh vowed not to withdraw his nomination. But Avenatti, during an interview with MSNBC, said, "There should be an immediate investigation" of her accusations "and there should be no rush to confirm him to the U.S. Supreme Court." "The allegations in this declaration are shocking," Avenatti said. Trump blasted the claims in a tweet calling Avenatti "a third rate lawyer who is good at making false accusations like he did on me and like he is now doing on Judge Brett Kavanaugh." Avenatti immediately fired back: Trump's press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, told CNBC that the White House "stands with Kavanaugh." Later, when Trump was asked by a reporter in New York if he thinks "all three women are lying," Trump replied: "What's your next question." Judge's lawyer, Barbara Van Gelder, said, "Mr. Judge vehemently denies the allegations contained in the Swetnick affidavit." Judge has said said he no memory of events described by the other accuser Ford. Senate Republicans have cited his claim to justify the decision no to call him to testify Thursday. The Washington Post reported later that Judge's ex-girlfriend, Elizabeth Rasor, informed the Judiciary Committee through her lawyer on Wednesday that she is willing to speak to the committee and the FBI about her recollection of what Judge allegedly told her an incident involving group sex. The New Yorker, in a story about Ramirez's allegations, reported Sunday that "Rasor recalled that Judge had told her ashamedly of an incident that involved him and other boys taking turns having sex with a drunk woman. Rasor said that Judge seemed to regard it as fully consensual. She said that Judge did not name others involved in the incident, and she has no knowledge that Kavanaugh participated in it."

Source: Fox News

Swetnick, a 55-year-old certified systems engineer who did not immediately respond to a request for comment, identified herself in the affidavit as a resident of Washington, D.C. While Avenatti had generally described Swetnick's allegations in an email to the Judiciary Committee on Sunday, he had not previously identified her until Wednesday. A 1980 graduate of Gaithersburg High School in Maryland, she said she has held multiple clearances for work done at the Treasury Department, U.S. Mint, IRS, State Department and Justice Department, among other government agencies. Swetnick says in her affidavit that she saw Kavanaugh in the early 1980s "drink excessively at many" house parties in suburban Maryland. At the time, Kavanaugh and Judge were students at Georgetown Prep, a private Catholic all-boys school. She said Kavanaugh and Judge engaged in "abusive and physically agressive behavior toward girls," which "included the fondling and groping of girls without their consent" and "not taking 'No' for an answer." During the years of 1981 and 1982, she said, she learned of efforts by Kavanaugh, his friend Judge and others "to spike the drinks of girls at house parties I attended with grain alcohol and/or drugs so as to cause girls to lose inhibitions and their ability to say 'No.' "