CGI 2016 Annual Meeting - Speakers
Hawa Abdi Founder, Dr. Hawa Abdi Foundation

Hawa Abdi Diblaawe was born in 1947 in Mogadishu, Somalia. After her mother’s death, Abdi raised her four younger sisters in conditions of poverty, yet never lost sight of her dreams. With the support of her father and a Soviet scholarship, Abdi studied medicine in Kiev and became Somalia’s first female gynecologist. She then completed a law degree at the Somali National University, where she later became an assistant professor of medicine. She opened a clinic on her family’s ancestral land in the Afgooye Corridor using the profits from the land to provide free health care. When the Somali Civil War began in 1991, Abdi started housing her employees on her land, feeding them, and caring for them. Soon after, their friends and relatives came seeking shelter, and Abdi welcomed them, providing shelter to all those who came. In 2012, Abdi’s land housed more than 90,000 refugees, mostly women and children. Today, Abdi continues to fight for the women, children, and elderly people of the Hawa Abdi Village. With the help of her daughters, Deqo and Amina, both of whom are doctors, Abdi continues to keep a candle of light lit for the people of the Afgooye Corridor. Abdi has won numerous distinctions and awards, including the John Jay Justice Award, Vital Voices’ Women of the Year Award, and a nomination for the Nobel Peace Prize in 2012. Hawa Abdi Diblaawe was born in 1947 in Mogadishu, Somalia. After her mother’s death, Abdi raised her four younger sisters in conditions of poverty, yet never lost sight of her dreams. With the support of her father and a Soviet scholarship, Abdi studied medicine in Kiev and became Somalia’s first female gynecologist. She then completed a law degree at the Somali National University, where she later became an assistant professor of medicine. She opened a clinic on her family’s ancestral land in the Afgooye Corridor using the profits from the land to provide free health care. When the Somali Civil War began in 1991, Abdi started housing her employees on her land, feeding them, and caring for them. Soon after, their friends and relatives came seeking shelter, and Abdi welcomed them, providing shelter to all those who came. In 2012, Abdi’s land housed more than 90,000 refugees, mostly women and children. Today, Abdi continues to fight for the women, children, and elderly people of the Hawa Abdi Village. With the help of her daughters, Deqo and Amina, both of whom are doctors, Abdi continues to keep a candle of light lit for the people of the Afgooye Corridor. Abdi has won numerous distinctions and awards, including the John Jay Justice Award, Vital Voices’ Women of the Year Award, and a nomination for the Nobel Peace Prize in 2012.

Salam Abukhadrah Young Leader, Women Deliver

Salam Abukhadrah was awarded second class honours for academic performance at the University of Jordan, with GPA of 3.87. She finished her bachelor’s degree in June 2015 and was awarded an Erasmus mundus scholarship to do a joint degree master in political economics in London and Paris. In August 2014 she became an entrepreneur, starting her own business with another three women, the SheCab project for female taxi services. In April 2015, she was chosen to be a Women Deliver young leader. It's a three-year fellowship opportunity for young people under the age of 30 who are working to advance the health, rights, and well-being for women and girls. She was also chosen to be one of the She Entrepreneurs participants by the Swedish institute in the same year. Salam Abukhadrah was awarded second class honours for academic performance at the University of Jordan, with GPA of 3.87. She finished her bachelor’s degree in June 2015 and was awarded an Erasmus mundus scholarship to do a joint degree master in political economics in London and Paris. In August 2014 she became an entrepreneur, starting her own business with another three women, the SheCab project for female taxi services. In April 2015, she was chosen to be a Women Deliver young leader. It's a three-year fellowship opportunity for young people under the age of 30 who are working to advance the health, rights, and well-being for women and girls. She was also chosen to be one of the She Entrepreneurs participants by the Swedish institute in the same year.

Cary Adams Chief Executive Officer, Union for International Cancer Control

Born in London, Cary Adams has a BSc Honours degree in Economics, Computing and Statistics from the University of Bath, United Kingdom and a Masters degree in Business Administration. He is a Harvard Business School Alumni having attended the School’s Executive General Management programme in 2003. In 2009, Cary made a career change, moving from the management of international businesses in the banking sector to become CEO of UICC based in Geneva. Cary also served two terms as Chair of the NCD Alliance, a coalition of around 2,000 organisations working on non-communicable diseases. In 2014, he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in International Relations from the University for Business and International Studies in Geneva and an Honorary Doctorate in Health from Bath University in the UK, in 2015. In May 2015, Cary was awarded ‘CEO of the year’ at the International and European Association conference organised by the Associations Network. Born in London, Cary Adams has a BSc Honours degree in Economics, Computing and Statistics from the University of Bath, United Kingdom and a Masters degree in Business Administration. He is a Harvard Business School Alumni having attended the School’s Executive General Management programme in 2003. In 2009, Cary made a career change, moving from the management of international businesses in the banking sector to become CEO of UICC based in Geneva. Cary also served two terms as Chair of the NCD Alliance, a coalition of around 2,000 organisations working on non-communicable diseases. In 2014, he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in International Relations from the University for Business and International Studies in Geneva and an Honorary Doctorate in Health from Bath University in the UK, in 2015. In May 2015, Cary was awarded ‘CEO of the year’ at the International and European Association conference organised by the Associations Network.

Akinwumi Adesina President, African Development Bank Group

Akinwumi Ayodeji Adesina is the eighth elected president of the African Development Bank Group. He was elected to the position on May 28, 2015 by the Bank’s board of governors at its annual meetings in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire. He took office at the Bank’s headquarters in Abidjan on September 1, 2015 and will serve an initial five-year term. Adesina, 55, is a distinguished development economist and agricultural development expert with 25 years of international experience. He is the first Nigerian to serve as president of the Bank Group. Akinwumi Ayodeji Adesina is the eighth elected president of the African Development Bank Group. He was elected to the position on May 28, 2015 by the Bank’s board of governors at its annual meetings in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire. He took office at the Bank’s headquarters in Abidjan on September 1, 2015 and will serve an initial five-year term. Adesina, 55, is a distinguished development economist and agricultural development expert with 25 years of international experience. He is the first Nigerian to serve as president of the Bank Group.

Richard C. Adkerson Vice Chairman, President and CEO, Freeport-McMoRan, Inc.

Richard C. Adkerson is the chief executive officer of Freeport-McMoRan, a leading international natural resources company. He graduated from Mississippi State University with a Bachelor of Science, a Master of Business Administration, and honorary doctorate degrees, and was named its Alumnus of the Year in 2011. In 1988, he completed the Harvard Business School’s Advanced Management Program. He is past chairman of the International Council on Mining and Metals and serves on the Business Roundtable, the Business Council, and the Council of the Kissinger Institute on China and the U.S. He is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and the Arizona Commerce Authority. He is chairman of the National WWII Museum in New Orleans and recently chaired the Banner MD Anderson Cancer Capital Campaign in Phoenix. He has been named Best CEO in Metals and Mining by Institutional Investor magazine for the past seven years, Copper Man of the Year 2009, and is an inductee into the American Mining Hall of Fame. Richard C. Adkerson is the chief executive officer of Freeport-McMoRan, a leading international natural resources company. He graduated from Mississippi State University with a Bachelor of Science, a Master of Business Administration, and honorary doctorate degrees, and was named its Alumnus of the Year in 2011. In 1988, he completed the Harvard Business School’s Advanced Management Program. He is past chairman of the International Council on Mining and Metals and serves on the Business Roundtable, the Business Council, and the Council of the Kissinger Institute on China and the U.S. He is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and the Arizona Commerce Authority. He is chairman of the National WWII Museum in New Orleans and recently chaired the Banner MD Anderson Cancer Capital Campaign in Phoenix. He has been named Best CEO in Metals and Mining by Institutional Investor magazine for the past seven years, Copper Man of the Year 2009, and is an inductee into the American Mining Hall of Fame.

Ben Affleck Actor, Filmmaker and Founder, Eastern Congo Initiative

In addition to a successful career as an actor, writer and director, Ben Affleck is also a passionate advocate and philanthropist. In 2009, Ben founded Eastern Congo Initiative (ECI), a grant-making and advocacy organization focused on investing in and working with the people of eastern Congo. ECI believes that local, community-based approaches are essential to creating a sustainable and successful society in eastern Congo, and works to increase the quality and quantity of investments in the region. Since 2007, Ben has made nine trips to the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), with a focus on the eastern provinces. Ben has testified before Congress four times to advocate for U.S. and international engagement in Congo, most recently before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related Projects in March 2015. Ben has appeared in over thirty films, written five and directed three, of which Batman V Superman is the most recent. In addition to a successful career as an actor, writer and director, Ben Affleck is also a passionate advocate and philanthropist. In 2009, Ben founded Eastern Congo Initiative (ECI), a grant-making and advocacy organization focused on investing in and working with the people of eastern Congo. ECI believes that local, community-based approaches are essential to creating a sustainable and successful society in eastern Congo, and works to increase the quality and quantity of investments in the region. Since 2007, Ben has made nine trips to the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), with a focus on the eastern provinces. Ben has testified before Congress four times to advocate for U.S. and international engagement in Congo, most recently before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related Projects in March 2015. Ben has appeared in over thirty films, written five and directed three, of which Batman V Superman is the most recent.

Hanan Al Hroub 2016 Global Teacher Prize Winner, Varkey Foundation

Winner of the 2016 Global Teacher Prize, an initiative of the Varkey Foundation, Hanan Al Hroub grew up in the Palestinian refugee camp, Bethlehem, where she was regularly exposed to acts of violence. She went into primary education after her children were left deeply traumatized by a shooting incident they witnessed on their way home from school. Her experiences in meetings and consultations to discuss her children’s behavior, development and academic performance in the years that followed led Al Hroub to try to help others who, having grown up in similar circumstances, require special handling at school. With so many troubled children in the region, Palestinian classrooms can be tense environments. Al Hroub embraces the slogan "No to Violence" and uses a specialized teaching approach she developed herself. Al Hroub has shared her perspective at conferences, meetings and teacher training seminars. Winner of the 2016 Global Teacher Prize, an initiative of the Varkey Foundation, Hanan Al Hroub grew up in the Palestinian refugee camp, Bethlehem, where she was regularly exposed to acts of violence. She went into primary education after her children were left deeply traumatized by a shooting incident they witnessed on their way home from school. Her experiences in meetings and consultations to discuss her children’s behavior, development and academic performance in the years that followed led Al Hroub to try to help others who, having grown up in similar circumstances, require special handling at school. With so many troubled children in the region, Palestinian classrooms can be tense environments. Al Hroub embraces the slogan "No to Violence" and uses a specialized teaching approach she developed herself. Al Hroub has shared her perspective at conferences, meetings and teacher training seminars.

Madeleine K. Albright Chair, Albright Stonebridge Group

Madeleine K. Albright is a chair of Albright Stonebridge Group and chair of Albright Capital Management. Albright also chairs that National Democratic Institute. She was the 64th Secretary of State of the United States. Albright received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation’s highest civilian honor, from President Obama in 2012. In 1997, Albright was named the first female Secretary of State and became, at that time, the highest ranking woman in the history of the U.S. government. As Secretary of State, Albright reinforced America’s alliances, advocated for democracy and human rights, and promoted American trade, business, labor and environmental standards abroad. From 1993 to 1997, Albright served as the U.S. permanent representative to the United Nations and was a member of the President’s Cabinet. Albright earned a bachelor's degree with honors from Wellesley College and holds master’s and doctorate degrees from Columbia University’s Department of Public Law and Government. Madeleine K. Albright is a chair of Albright Stonebridge Group and chair of Albright Capital Management. Albright also chairs that National Democratic Institute. She was the 64th Secretary of State of the United States. Albright received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation’s highest civilian honor, from President Obama in 2012. In 1997, Albright was named the first female Secretary of State and became, at that time, the highest ranking woman in the history of the U.S. government. As Secretary of State, Albright reinforced America’s alliances, advocated for democracy and human rights, and promoted American trade, business, labor and environmental standards abroad. From 1993 to 1997, Albright served as the U.S. permanent representative to the United Nations and was a member of the President’s Cabinet. Albright earned a bachelor's degree with honors from Wellesley College and holds master’s and doctorate degrees from Columbia University’s Department of Public Law and Government.

Alice P. Albright Chief Executive Officer, Global Partnership for Education

Alice P. Albright was appointed as the first chief executive officer of the Global Partnership for Education’s Secretariat in February 2013. From July 2009 until January 2013, she served in the Obama Administration as the executive vice president and chief operating officer of the Export-Import Bank of the United States (Ex-Im Bank). While in that position, she led a significant expansion of Ex-Im Bank’s operations in response to the financial and economic crises. From 2001 to 2009, Albright served as the chief financial and investment officer for the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations (GAVI) and from 2003, additionally, as the head of GAVI's Washington, DC office. Albright led GAVI’s efforts to design and launch the International Finance Facility for Immunization, an award-winning program to enhance GAVI’s ability to finance the purchase of vaccines. During this period, she also co-chaired the working group that designed the Advanced Market Commitment mechanism. Alice P. Albright was appointed as the first chief executive officer of the Global Partnership for Education’s Secretariat in February 2013. From July 2009 until January 2013, she served in the Obama Administration as the executive vice president and chief operating officer of the Export-Import Bank of the United States (Ex-Im Bank). While in that position, she led a significant expansion of Ex-Im Bank’s operations in response to the financial and economic crises. From 2001 to 2009, Albright served as the chief financial and investment officer for the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations (GAVI) and from 2003, additionally, as the head of GAVI's Washington, DC office. Albright led GAVI’s efforts to design and launch the International Finance Facility for Immunization, an award-winning program to enhance GAVI’s ability to finance the purchase of vaccines. During this period, she also co-chaired the working group that designed the Advanced Market Commitment mechanism.

Sonita Alizadeh Artist and Activist, The Strongheart Group

With a poet's soul and activist's passion, Sonita Alizadeh uses her rap lyrics and powerful voice to fight child marriage. A refugee in Iran, Alizadeh faced her own forced marriage, set to happen in Afghanistan. In an effort to express her pain and share the experience of friends, she wrote “Daughters for Sale” and created a homemade music video. The song caught fire and was shared globally. Through the Strongheart Group, Alizadeh came to the United States where she is now a student and international spokesperson for the rights of girls to choose their own destiny. She believes that together we can end forced marriage in one generation, and is working to make that a reality. Alizadeh was named one of Foreign Policy Magazine’s Global Thinkers of 2015, one of BBC's 100 Women of 2015, and has been featured by CNN, NPR, BBC, Buzzfeed News, and over 150 publications in 20 countries. With a poet's soul and activist's passion, Sonita Alizadeh uses her rap lyrics and powerful voice to fight child marriage. A refugee in Iran, Alizadeh faced her own forced marriage, set to happen in Afghanistan. In an effort to express her pain and share the experience of friends, she wrote “Daughters for Sale” and created a homemade music video. The song caught fire and was shared globally. Through the Strongheart Group, Alizadeh came to the United States where she is now a student and international spokesperson for the rights of girls to choose their own destiny. She believes that together we can end forced marriage in one generation, and is working to make that a reality. Alizadeh was named one of Foreign Policy Magazine’s Global Thinkers of 2015, one of BBC's 100 Women of 2015, and has been featured by CNN, NPR, BBC, Buzzfeed News, and over 150 publications in 20 countries.

John R. Allen Co-Director, Center for 21st Century Security and Intelligence, Brookings Institution

General John R. Allen, U.S. Marine Corps (Ret.) was named the special presidential envoy for the global coalition to counter ISIL by President Obama on September 12, 2014. He served in that position until November, 2015. From April 2013 to May 2014, he served as senior to the Secretary of Defense on Middle East security leading the security dialogue and the Middle East peace process. Allen commanded the NATO International Security Assistance Force and United States Forces in Afghanistan from July 2011 to February 2013. Prior to that tour, he served as deputy commander of the U.S. Central Command. From 2007-2008, as the deputy commander in the multi-national force,West in the Al Anbar province of Iraq, he played a major role in the Sunni tribal “Awakening Movement” or Sahawa in Iraq. General John R. Allen, U.S. Marine Corps (Ret.) was named the special presidential envoy for the global coalition to counter ISIL by President Obama on September 12, 2014. He served in that position until November, 2015. From April 2013 to May 2014, he served as senior to the Secretary of Defense on Middle East security leading the security dialogue and the Middle East peace process. Allen commanded the NATO International Security Assistance Force and United States Forces in Afghanistan from July 2011 to February 2013. Prior to that tour, he served as deputy commander of the U.S. Central Command. From 2007-2008, as the deputy commander in the multi-national force,West in the Al Anbar province of Iraq, he played a major role in the Sunni tribal “Awakening Movement” or Sahawa in Iraq.

Muzoon Almellehan Student and Education Advocate, Malala Fund

Muzoon Almellehan was in ninth grade when she fled Dara’a, Syria with her family in 2013. The family of five traveled to Jordan where they lived in Za’atari and Azraq refugee camps. Almellehan enrolled in the camp schools and resumed her education. Almellehan soon saw that many refugee girls — some as young as 13 and 14 — were dropping out of class and getting married. Still a girl herself, Almellehan walked from tent to tent to talk to parents about the value of education and risks of early marriage, urging them to send their daughters to school. Almellehan's determination to make sure her Syrian sisters continued in school, even in the refugee camps, won international acclaim and brought attention to refugee girls' education and early marriage. Now resettled with her family in Newcastle, United Kingdom, Almellehan continues to advocate for education and refugee girls around the world. Muzoon Almellehan was in ninth grade when she fled Dara’a, Syria with her family in 2013. The family of five traveled to Jordan where they lived in Za’atari and Azraq refugee camps. Almellehan enrolled in the camp schools and resumed her education. Almellehan soon saw that many refugee girls — some as young as 13 and 14 — were dropping out of class and getting married. Still a girl herself, Almellehan walked from tent to tent to talk to parents about the value of education and risks of early marriage, urging them to send their daughters to school. Almellehan's determination to make sure her Syrian sisters continued in school, even in the refugee camps, won international acclaim and brought attention to refugee girls' education and early marriage. Now resettled with her family in Newcastle, United Kingdom, Almellehan continues to advocate for education and refugee girls around the world.

John Amos President, SkyTruth

John Amos is an expert in the use of satellite images and other remote sensing data to understand and communicate local, regional and global environmental issues. In 2001 he founded SkyTruth, a nonprofit organization dedicated to strengthening environmental conservation by illuminating environmental problems and issues through the use of satellite images, aerial photographs, and other kinds of remote sensing and digital mapping. As president, Amos directs day-to-day operations, develops and manages projects and programs, and is responsible for fundraising and administration. Prior to founding SkyTruth, he worked for ten years as an exploration geologist at Advanced Resources International and Earth Satellite Corporation, applying image processing, image analysis, and digital mapping techniques to conduct environmental, exploration and resource assessment studies for the energy and mining industries and government entities. John Amos is an expert in the use of satellite images and other remote sensing data to understand and communicate local, regional and global environmental issues. In 2001 he founded SkyTruth, a nonprofit organization dedicated to strengthening environmental conservation by illuminating environmental problems and issues through the use of satellite images, aerial photographs, and other kinds of remote sensing and digital mapping. As president, Amos directs day-to-day operations, develops and manages projects and programs, and is responsible for fundraising and administration. Prior to founding SkyTruth, he worked for ten years as an exploration geologist at Advanced Resources International and Earth Satellite Corporation, applying image processing, image analysis, and digital mapping techniques to conduct environmental, exploration and resource assessment studies for the energy and mining industries and government entities.

Tamara Andries Self-Advocate, Keystone Human Services International Moldova Association

Tamara Andries was born in a small village of Falesti, Moldova, where she lives with her parents and brother. Andries graduated from a vocational school where she learned accounting. However she has never been employed. Andries believes it is mainly because of her disability, but also because there are very few employment opportunities in her village. She became a self-advocate in 2014. As a self-advocate Andries learned to be active, to communicate with people outside of her family, to increase self-confidence, to overcome difficulties and limitations, and to set goals for herself and be responsible for her own life. Tamara Andries was born in a small village of Falesti, Moldova, where she lives with her parents and brother. Andries graduated from a vocational school where she learned accounting. However she has never been employed. Andries believes it is mainly because of her disability, but also because there are very few employment opportunities in her village. She became a self-advocate in 2014. As a self-advocate Andries learned to be active, to communicate with people outside of her family, to increase self-confidence, to overcome difficulties and limitations, and to set goals for herself and be responsible for her own life.

Loreen Arbus President, The Loreen Arbus Foundation

Loreen Arbus is currently the president of the Loreen Arbus Foundation and Loreen Arbus Productions, Inc. Her philanthropy supports a broad scope of interests, including advocacy for women and girls, as well as for the world’s largest minority, people with disability. Arbus holds the distinction of being the first woman to head programming for a U.S. network, a feat accomplished twice (both at Showtime and Cable Health Network/Lifetime). She has been twice nominated for an Emmy. She is the author of six books and numerous newspaper articles. She is a member of The Writers Guild, The Producers Guild, The Author's Guild and SAG-AFTRA. Arbus has received The Heart of Giving Award presented by President Bill Clinton in 2001 and was chosen as one (of 40) Leading Women Entrepreneurs of the World 2002. She serves on over a dozen nonprofit boards. Arbus lives in NY, LA and Buenos Aires. Loreen Arbus is currently the president of the Loreen Arbus Foundation and Loreen Arbus Productions, Inc. Her philanthropy supports a broad scope of interests, including advocacy for women and girls, as well as for the world’s largest minority, people with disability. Arbus holds the distinction of being the first woman to head programming for a U.S. network, a feat accomplished twice (both at Showtime and Cable Health Network/Lifetime). She has been twice nominated for an Emmy. She is the author of six books and numerous newspaper articles. She is a member of The Writers Guild, The Producers Guild, The Author's Guild and SAG-AFTRA. Arbus has received The Heart of Giving Award presented by President Bill Clinton in 2001 and was chosen as one (of 40) Leading Women Entrepreneurs of the World 2002. She serves on over a dozen nonprofit boards. Arbus lives in NY, LA and Buenos Aires.

Ana Marie Argilagos Senior Advisor, Ford Foundation

Ana Marie Argilagos is part of the Equitable Development team. Her work has focused on urban development strategies to reduce poverty, expand economic opportunity, and advance sustainability in cities and regions across the world. Before becoming a senior adviser at the Ford Foundation in 2014, she served as deputy chief of staff and deputy assistant secretary at the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). While there, she created the Office for International and Philanthropic Innovation (IPI) to deepen and scale collaboration between public and philanthropic sectors. The IPI model of sourcing innovation and leveraging partnerships from broad global networks is now being successfully replicated at other federal cabinet agencies and in cities across the US. Previous to joining HUD she spent eight years as a senior program officer at the Annie E. Casey Foundation in Baltimore and as a lecturer of urban planning at New York University’s Wagner School of Public Service. Ana Marie Argilagos is part of the Equitable Development team. Her work has focused on urban development strategies to reduce poverty, expand economic opportunity, and advance sustainability in cities and regions across the world. Before becoming a senior adviser at the Ford Foundation in 2014, she served as deputy chief of staff and deputy assistant secretary at the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). While there, she created the Office for International and Philanthropic Innovation (IPI) to deepen and scale collaboration between public and philanthropic sectors. The IPI model of sourcing innovation and leveraging partnerships from broad global networks is now being successfully replicated at other federal cabinet agencies and in cities across the US. Previous to joining HUD she spent eight years as a senior program officer at the Annie E. Casey Foundation in Baltimore and as a lecturer of urban planning at New York University’s Wagner School of Public Service.

Mohammed Ashour Co-Founder and CEO, Aspire Food Group

Mohammed Ashour is the co-founder and CEO of Aspire, a multi-national start-up focused on developing insect farming technology for applications in food, biomedicine and agrochemicals. Aspire was launched in 2013 after Ashour led a team from McGill University to win the prestigious US $1 million Hult Prize. In 2016, Ashour was named to the prestigious Forbes’ 30 under 30 list. Ashour is currently on leave from McGill University where he is pursuing a Doctor of Medicine and Master of Business Administration dual degree. Mohammed holds a Master of Science in neuroscience from McGill University and a Bachelor of Science in life sciences from the University of Toronto. Mohammed Ashour is the co-founder and CEO of Aspire, a multi-national start-up focused on developing insect farming technology for applications in food, biomedicine and agrochemicals. Aspire was launched in 2013 after Ashour led a team from McGill University to win the prestigious US $1 million Hult Prize. In 2016, Ashour was named to the prestigious Forbes’ 30 under 30 list. Ashour is currently on leave from McGill University where he is pursuing a Doctor of Medicine and Master of Business Administration dual degree. Mohammed holds a Master of Science in neuroscience from McGill University and a Bachelor of Science in life sciences from the University of Toronto.

Shawn Askinosie Founder and CEO, Askinosie Chocolate

In 2005, Shawn Askinosie left a successful career as a criminal defense lawyer to start a bean to bar chocolate factory and never looked back. Askinosie Chocolate is a small batch chocolate sourcing 100% of their beans directly from farmers. The only chocolate maker working directly with cocoa farmers on four continents, Askinosie travels to Ecuador, Honduras, the Philippines and Tanzania to source cocoa beans, allowing chocolate to be traced to the source and labeled authentic single origin. It also enables Askinosie Chocolate to profit share with the farmers, giving them a “Stake In the Outcome.” Askinosie and Askinosie Chocolate have been globally recognized with numerous awards, including O Magazine’s One of 15 Guys Who Are Saving the World, Specialty Food Association’s Top Business Leader of the Year in 2013 and six silver awards, Forbes’ One of the Best 25 Small Companies in America, two Good Food Awards, and seven International Chocolate Awards, including the Gold World Award for the Dark Chocolate + Licorice Bar. The Askinosie Chocolate mission is to serve their farmers, neighborhood, customers and each other by leaving the world a better place than they found it. The company is currently sustainably feeding over 1,600 students per day in Tanzania and the Philippines, without any donations. Askinosie is also Family Brother at Assumption Abbey and the co-founder of Lost & Found, a grief center serving children and families in Southwest Missouri. In 2005, Shawn Askinosie left a successful career as a criminal defense lawyer to start a bean to bar chocolate factory and never looked back. Askinosie Chocolate is a small batch chocolate sourcing 100% of their beans directly from farmers. The only chocolate maker working directly with cocoa farmers on four continents, Askinosie travels to Ecuador, Honduras, the Philippines and Tanzania to source cocoa beans, allowing chocolate to be traced to the source and labeled authentic single origin. It also enables Askinosie Chocolate to profit share with the farmers, giving them a “Stake In the Outcome.” Askinosie and Askinosie Chocolate have been globally recognized with numerous awards, including O Magazine’s One of 15 Guys Who Are Saving the World, Specialty Food Association’s Top Business Leader of the Year in 2013 and six silver awards, Forbes’ One of the Best 25 Small Companies in America, two Good Food Awards, and seven International Chocolate Awards, including the Gold World Award for the Dark Chocolate + Licorice Bar. The Askinosie Chocolate mission is to serve their farmers, neighborhood, customers and each other by leaving the world a better place than they found it. The company is currently sustainably feeding over 1,600 students per day in Tanzania and the Philippines, without any donations. Askinosie is also Family Brother at Assumption Abbey and the co-founder of Lost & Found, a grief center serving children and families in Southwest Missouri.

Hila Azadzoy Co-Founder and Head of Academics, Kiron Open Higher Education

Hila Azadzoy is part of the founding team at Kiron Open Higher Education gGmBH, an innovative social start up with the mission to remove the barriers for refugees to higher education by charging no tuition fees and making effective use of blended learning opportunities. As the head of academics Azadzoy is responsible for the continuous development of Kiron’s academic program, strategic partnerships and fundraising activities. Azadzoy holds a Master of Science in politics and economics and has launched her career at Human Rights Watch, with over three years of experience as a professional translator, working extensively with refugees. Hila Azadzoy is part of the founding team at Kiron Open Higher Education gGmBH, an innovative social start up with the mission to remove the barriers for refugees to higher education by charging no tuition fees and making effective use of blended learning opportunities. As the head of academics Azadzoy is responsible for the continuous development of Kiron’s academic program, strategic partnerships and fundraising activities. Azadzoy holds a Master of Science in politics and economics and has launched her career at Human Rights Watch, with over three years of experience as a professional translator, working extensively with refugees.

Madonna Badger Founder and Chief Creative Officer, Badger & Winters

Madonna Badger is the chief creative officer at Badger & Winters, an advertising, branding and design agency specializing in building brand love with women and in 2016 named an Advertising Age Small Agency of the Year. For over 20 years, it has worked with brands like Avon, Chanel, Cover Girl, Godiva, Nordstrom, Pepsi, P&G;, and Vera Wang. The agency has produced work for over 40 countries in 27 languages. Prior to founding Badger & Winters at age 29, Badger was at Calvin Klein, where she created the Mark Wahlberg and Kate Moss campaigns, and launched CK One. Badger, named one of Advertising Age’s 2016 Women to Watch has been featured in Vogue and WWD, named one of Daily Variety’s The Gotham 50, Crain’s Forty under Forty and one of Glamour’s Women Who Took Big Risks – And Reaped Big Rewards. This follows Badger's announcement that she and her agency would no longer create imagery that objectifies women, through the #WomenNotObjects campaign. Madonna Badger is the chief creative officer at Badger & Winters, an advertising, branding and design agency specializing in building brand love with women and in 2016 named an Advertising Age Small Agency of the Year. For over 20 years, it has worked with brands like Avon, Chanel, Cover Girl, Godiva, Nordstrom, Pepsi, P&G;, and Vera Wang. The agency has produced work for over 40 countries in 27 languages. Prior to founding Badger & Winters at age 29, Badger was at Calvin Klein, where she created the Mark Wahlberg and Kate Moss campaigns, and launched CK One. Badger, named one of Advertising Age’s 2016 Women to Watch has been featured in Vogue and WWD, named one of Daily Variety’s The Gotham 50, Crain’s Forty under Forty and one of Glamour’s Women Who Took Big Risks – And Reaped Big Rewards. This follows Badger's announcement that she and her agency would no longer create imagery that objectifies women, through the #WomenNotObjects campaign.

Chernor Bah Associate, Population Council

An advocate for global education, a girl champion and a former refugee, Chernor Bah is currently an associate at the Population Council, leading a collaborative initiative to provide solutions to adolescent girls affected by the Ebola outbreak. In 2012, he was appointed by the United Nations Secretary General to serve on the High Level Steering Committee for the Global Education First Initiative. From 2012-2015, Bah was the chair of the initiative’s Youth Advocacy Group - leading a dynamic group of young advocates for global education. Bah was also a co-founder at A World at School - a digital mobilization and campaign organization for global education. As a teenager, he founded and led the Children’s Forum Network, Sierra Leone’s Children’s Parliament and was an Executive Producer for the Voice of Children, leading young people’s participation in his country’s peace building process. He holds a master’s degree from the University of Notre Dame. An advocate for global education, a girl champion and a former refugee, Chernor Bah is currently an associate at the Population Council, leading a collaborative initiative to provide solutions to adolescent girls affected by the Ebola outbreak. In 2012, he was appointed by the United Nations Secretary General to serve on the High Level Steering Committee for the Global Education First Initiative. From 2012-2015, Bah was the chair of the initiative’s Youth Advocacy Group - leading a dynamic group of young advocates for global education. Bah was also a co-founder at A World at School - a digital mobilization and campaign organization for global education. As a teenager, he founded and led the Children’s Forum Network, Sierra Leone’s Children’s Parliament and was an Executive Producer for the Voice of Children, leading young people’s participation in his country’s peace building process. He holds a master’s degree from the University of Notre Dame.

Donnel Baird Chief Executive Officer, BlocPower

Donnel Baird is the founder of BlocPower, a tech startup focused on delivering clean energy to financially under-served US cities. Baird attended Duke University, served as a community organizer for three years in Brooklyn, and helped to manage ARRA investments in energy efficiency from 2009 to 2011. Baird graduated from Columbia Business School, where he was a Board of Overseers fellow. Donnel Baird is the founder of BlocPower, a tech startup focused on delivering clean energy to financially under-served US cities. Baird attended Duke University, served as a community organizer for three years in Brooklyn, and helped to manage ARRA investments in energy efficiency from 2009 to 2011. Baird graduated from Columbia Business School, where he was a Board of Overseers fellow.

Tony Banbury Chief Philanthropy Officer, Vulcan Inc.

Anthony Banbury is the chief philanthropic officer leading Vulcan’s local and global philanthropy. Banbury is responsible for pushing forward Paul Allen and Vulcan’s philanthropic efforts across wildlife conservation, climate change, global health, development, arts and culture. Drawing from his extensive experience responding to some of the world’s biggest crises, Banbury helps focus Vulcan’s philanthropic initiatives around the world to have the greatest possible impact. Banbury joined Vulcan from the United Nations, where he most recently served as the U.N. assistant secretary-general for field support. During his special assignments with the U.N. he played a leading role in the operational response to crises including the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, Indian Ocean tsunami, Syrian chemical weapons destruction negotiation and the Haiti earthquake. In addition, Tony served on the National Security Council at the White House from 2000-2003 and the U.S. Department of Defense from 1997-2000. Banbury attended Tufts University for his Bachelor of Arts in political science and the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy for his Master of Arts in International Law. He received the Distinguished Service Award for his service on September 11, 2001, the Bronze Palm to the Exceptional Civilian Service Award and the Exceptional Civilian Service Award for his work in the Balkans from the Secretary of Defense. Anthony Banbury is the chief philanthropic officer leading Vulcan’s local and global philanthropy. Banbury is responsible for pushing forward Paul Allen and Vulcan’s philanthropic efforts across wildlife conservation, climate change, global health, development, arts and culture. Drawing from his extensive experience responding to some of the world’s biggest crises, Banbury helps focus Vulcan’s philanthropic initiatives around the world to have the greatest possible impact. Banbury joined Vulcan from the United Nations, where he most recently served as the U.N. assistant secretary-general for field support. During his special assignments with the U.N. he played a leading role in the operational response to crises including the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, Indian Ocean tsunami, Syrian chemical weapons destruction negotiation and the Haiti earthquake. In addition, Tony served on the National Security Council at the White House from 2000-2003 and the U.S. Department of Defense from 1997-2000. Banbury attended Tufts University for his Bachelor of Arts in political science and the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy for his Master of Arts in International Law. He received the Distinguished Service Award for his service on September 11, 2001, the Bronze Palm to the Exceptional Civilian Service Award and the Exceptional Civilian Service Award for his work in the Balkans from the Secretary of Defense.

Memory Banda Girl Leader and Advisory Board Member, Rise Up

Memory Banda is an inspiring leader for girls’ rights in the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). Her TED talk on ending child marriage has been viewed over 1.1 million times, and she continues to work with girls in rural Southern Malawi to advocate for an end to child marriage. Like many girls in the village where they grew up, Banda’s sister was married and pregnant at age 11. Banda vowed to be different. At age 18, she led Malawi's campaign that culminated in landmark legislation outlawing child marriage through her work with Rise Up and the Girl Empowerment Network of Malawi. Banda spoke on the floor of the United Nations and with key delegates throughout the SDG process. She was a key young leader in the global movement to prioritize girls in the SDGs, resulting in their inclusion and prioritization throughout the final targets and indicators. Memory Banda is an inspiring leader for girls’ rights in the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). Her TED talk on ending child marriage has been viewed over 1.1 million times, and she continues to work with girls in rural Southern Malawi to advocate for an end to child marriage. Like many girls in the village where they grew up, Banda’s sister was married and pregnant at age 11. Banda vowed to be different. At age 18, she led Malawi's campaign that culminated in landmark legislation outlawing child marriage through her work with Rise Up and the Girl Empowerment Network of Malawi. Banda spoke on the floor of the United Nations and with key delegates throughout the SDG process. She was a key young leader in the global movement to prioritize girls in the SDGs, resulting in their inclusion and prioritization throughout the final targets and indicators.

Robert Bank President and CEO, American Jewish World Service

Robert Bank is president and CEO of American Jewish World Service (AJWS), the leading Jewish organization working to promote human rights in the developing world. An attorney and human rights activist who joined AJWS as executive vice president in 2009, Bank previously served in the leadership of GMHC—one of the world’s leading organizations combating HIV/AIDS. Robert’s leadership has been recognized with GMHC’s Lifetime Achievement Award and the Partners in Justice Award from AVODAH: The Jewish Service Corps. Robert Bank is president and CEO of American Jewish World Service (AJWS), the leading Jewish organization working to promote human rights in the developing world. An attorney and human rights activist who joined AJWS as executive vice president in 2009, Bank previously served in the leadership of GMHC—one of the world’s leading organizations combating HIV/AIDS. Robert’s leadership has been recognized with GMHC’s Lifetime Achievement Award and the Partners in Justice Award from AVODAH: The Jewish Service Corps.

Esteban Moctezuma Barragán Executive President, Fundación Azteca

Born on October 21, 1954 in Mexico City, Esteban Moctezuma Barragán is a prominent social leader who has been part of various fields in the country’s political and social development life. Since he was a child, Barragán used to go with his parents to do social work in low-income neighborhoods; therefore, very early in his life, he acquired a strong social awareness. Author of important works on education, globalization and public administration; he was secretary of the interior, senator and secretary of social development of the Mexican Government. In the last 12 years, he has led very important organizations for the culture of teachers, education and health. He is now the executive president of one of the most prestigious and important foundations in Mexico: Fundación Azteca. Born on October 21, 1954 in Mexico City, Esteban Moctezuma Barragán is a prominent social leader who has been part of various fields in the country’s political and social development life. Since he was a child, Barragán used to go with his parents to do social work in low-income neighborhoods; therefore, very early in his life, he acquired a strong social awareness. Author of important works on education, globalization and public administration; he was secretary of the interior, senator and secretary of social development of the Mexican Government. In the last 12 years, he has led very important organizations for the culture of teachers, education and health. He is now the executive president of one of the most prestigious and important foundations in Mexico: Fundación Azteca.

Toma Bedolla Founder and CEO, House of Genius

Toma Bedolla's experiences are broad and diverse, having provided leadership and support as chief executive officer of TravelSHARK, chief executive officer of Approbatics, as chief technology officer for Jason’s Deli. Bedolla studied physics at the Colorado School of Mines, climbed unnamed peaks in the Kunlun mountain range north of Tibet, played collegiate baseball and caddied full time on the PGA Tour. Bedolla strives to live his life to the fullest and to make the most of the opportunities as they present themselves. He aims to help others do the same and realize the potential that is in all of us. He spends his time exploring cross-pollinating entrepreneurship, advising and mentoring projects and individuals he believes in, getting to know his 2-year-old daughter, and exploring or tinkering with new ideas and perspectives every day. Toma Bedolla's experiences are broad and diverse, having provided leadership and support as chief executive officer of TravelSHARK, chief executive officer of Approbatics, as chief technology officer for Jason’s Deli. Bedolla studied physics at the Colorado School of Mines, climbed unnamed peaks in the Kunlun mountain range north of Tibet, played collegiate baseball and caddied full time on the PGA Tour. Bedolla strives to live his life to the fullest and to make the most of the opportunities as they present themselves. He aims to help others do the same and realize the potential that is in all of us. He spends his time exploring cross-pollinating entrepreneurship, advising and mentoring projects and individuals he believes in, getting to know his 2-year-old daughter, and exploring or tinkering with new ideas and perspectives every day.

Ross Beerman AllLife Group CEO, AllLife

Ross Beerman has worked both in South Africa and internationally in the financial services sector. He worked in corporate finance as well as mergers and acquisitions in the United States and returned to South Africa in 1998 to work in private equity. In 2004, Beerman co-founded AllLife with the intent to provide life insurance for people living with HIV, based on the premise that properly designed systems and processes, combined with great people, could cost effectively intervene to help clients manage their health and change their mortality. AllLife has delivered life insurance to tens of thousands of HIV-positive people and had a dramatic positive impact on their lives. By successfully delivering easily accessible life insurance products, AllLife is also helping to change the stigma and the perception of HIV every day. Ross Beerman has worked both in South Africa and internationally in the financial services sector. He worked in corporate finance as well as mergers and acquisitions in the United States and returned to South Africa in 1998 to work in private equity. In 2004, Beerman co-founded AllLife with the intent to provide life insurance for people living with HIV, based on the premise that properly designed systems and processes, combined with great people, could cost effectively intervene to help clients manage their health and change their mortality. AllLife has delivered life insurance to tens of thousands of HIV-positive people and had a dramatic positive impact on their lives. By successfully delivering easily accessible life insurance products, AllLife is also helping to change the stigma and the perception of HIV every day.

Jonathan Beninson Director of Government Relations, House of Genius

Jonathan Beninson believes that entrepreneurs are capable of solving all of the challenges that we face as humans. As a result, his passion is to drive global innovation by building communities that encourage and support entrepreneurs. Beninson is a serial social entrepreneur, mentor, author, impact investor, and an international speaker. His ventures and investments serve the global community while balancing investor returns. He has been featured in several publications around the world including the Wall Street Journal, New York Times, Barron’s, and Business Weekly. In his off time, Beninson mentors youth, female, and minority entrepreneurs around the world. He also advises businesses and governmental organizations on how to create entrepreneurial ecosystems. He is fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. When he is not working, you can find him behind a book or spending time with his family. You might also find him eating street food on a sidewalk in South East Asia. Jonathan Beninson believes that entrepreneurs are capable of solving all of the challenges that we face as humans. As a result, his passion is to drive global innovation by building communities that encourage and support entrepreneurs. Beninson is a serial social entrepreneur, mentor, author, impact investor, and an international speaker. His ventures and investments serve the global community while balancing investor returns. He has been featured in several publications around the world including the Wall Street Journal, New York Times, Barron’s, and Business Weekly. In his off time, Beninson mentors youth, female, and minority entrepreneurs around the world. He also advises businesses and governmental organizations on how to create entrepreneurial ecosystems. He is fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. When he is not working, you can find him behind a book or spending time with his family. You might also find him eating street food on a sidewalk in South East Asia.

Teodora Berkova Director of Social Innovation, Pearson

Teodora Berkova drives Pearson’s strategy and investments in the development of education solutions for underserved communities. This includes developing and implementing multi-year social innovation partnerships with international organizations and other stakeholders. Berkova joined Pearson from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), where she led knowledge management work on business models that deliver both social and commercial returns. Prior to that she worked as a corporate sustainability consultant in Lebanon, and in New York City with the East Harlem Tutorial Program, a non-profit organization that runs K-12 after-school programs and public charter schools for low-income students. Berkova has a bachelor’s degree in political studies and human rights from Bard College, and a master’s degree from Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs. Teodora Berkova drives Pearson’s strategy and investments in the development of education solutions for underserved communities. This includes developing and implementing multi-year social innovation partnerships with international organizations and other stakeholders. Berkova joined Pearson from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), where she led knowledge management work on business models that deliver both social and commercial returns. Prior to that she worked as a corporate sustainability consultant in Lebanon, and in New York City with the East Harlem Tutorial Program, a non-profit organization that runs K-12 after-school programs and public charter schools for low-income students. Berkova has a bachelor’s degree in political studies and human rights from Bard College, and a master’s degree from Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs.

Matthew Bishop Senior editor, The Economist Group

Matthew Bishop is an award-winning journalist and social entrepreneur, and is currently senior editor at The Economist Group. His roles at The Economist have included Business Editor, Wall Street Editor, Globalisation Editor, and New York Bureau Chief. He is the author of several books, including Philanthrocapitalism: How Giving Can Save the World (described as “important” by President Bill Clinton) and The Road From Ruin, which set out an agenda for the reform of capitalism after the 2008 crash. He also recently released "Economics: An A-Z Guide", which explains the basics of economics for non-experts.

Bishop is a member of the World Economic Forum’s Global Agenda Council on Global Governance. He was the Official Report author of the G8 Taskforce on Social Impact Investment and a member of the Advisors Group of the UN International Year of Microcredit. He co-founded and advises the #givingtuesday campaign and the Social Progress Index. Matthew Bishop is an award-winning journalist and social entrepreneur, and is currently senior editor at The Economist Group. His roles at The Economist have included Business Editor, Wall Street Editor, Globalisation Editor, and New York Bureau Chief. He is the author of several books, including Philanthrocapitalism: How Giving Can Save the World (described as “important” by President Bill Clinton) and The Road From Ruin, which set out an agenda for the reform of capitalism after the 2008 crash. He also recently released "Economics: An A-Z Guide", which explains the basics of economics for non-experts.Bishop is a member of the World Economic Forum’s Global Agenda Council on Global Governance. He was the Official Report author of the G8 Taskforce on Social Impact Investment and a member of the Advisors Group of the UN International Year of Microcredit. He co-founded and advises the #givingtuesday campaign and the Social Progress Index.

Paul Blavin Founder, FOR GOOD

Paul Blavin is co-founder and lead strategist of FOR GOOD. He started Blavin & Company, Freehab and Blavin Scholars, and was the executive producer of “The Hunting Ground” and Oscar and Grammy nominated original song “Til It Happens To You” (the video inspired by the song has over 32 million views), “Harry & Snowman”, and “Mully.” He is also a board member of The Teen Project, South Central Scholars, HYPE-LA, Anti-Recidivism Coalition. Paul Blavin is co-founder and lead strategist of FOR GOOD. He started Blavin & Company, Freehab and Blavin Scholars, and was the executive producer of “The Hunting Ground” and Oscar and Grammy nominated original song “Til It Happens To You” (the video inspired by the song has over 32 million views), “Harry & Snowman”, and “Mully.” He is also a board member of The Teen Project, South Central Scholars, HYPE-LA, Anti-Recidivism Coalition.

Andrea Bocelli Recording Artist and Founder, Andrea Bocelli Foundation

A mellow and recognizable voice like a signature, which resounds in over eighty million records, Andrea Bocelli has been declared everywhere in the world the testimony of the highest Italian vocal tradition. In his career, he has performed for four presidents of the United States, three popes, the British royal family and many prime ministers. Among his most recent recordings are the opera Aida under the conduction of Zubin Mehta and the pop album “Cinema.” Bocelli has always been committed to spreading messages of positivity, hope, and perseverance at a global level, and to supporting social causes in the area of scientific research, fight against poverty, and the universality of primary education. In 2011, he founded the Andrea Bocelli Foundation with the mission to empower people and communities. The Foundation works in particular in Haiti, where have been developed programs in the field of health, education and economic development. A mellow and recognizable voice like a signature, which resounds in over eighty million records, Andrea Bocelli has been declared everywhere in the world the testimony of the highest Italian vocal tradition. In his career, he has performed for four presidents of the United States, three popes, the British royal family and many prime ministers. Among his most recent recordings are the opera Aida under the conduction of Zubin Mehta and the pop album “Cinema.” Bocelli has always been committed to spreading messages of positivity, hope, and perseverance at a global level, and to supporting social causes in the area of scientific research, fight against poverty, and the universality of primary education. In 2011, he founded the Andrea Bocelli Foundation with the mission to empower people and communities. The Foundation works in particular in Haiti, where have been developed programs in the field of health, education and economic development.

Irina Bokova Director-General, UNESCO

Irina Bokova has been the director-general of UNESCO since 2009. She is the first woman and Eastern European to lead the organization. Bokova is actively engaged in international efforts to advance gender equality, quality education for all, and combat terrorist financing by preventing the illicit traffic of cultural goods. A leading champion in the fight against racism and anti-Semitism, Bokova has spearheaded UNESCO’s activities on Holocaust remembrance and awareness and appointed UNESCO’s first special envoy for Holocaust education. Other fields of action include enabling scientific cooperation for sustainable development, such as early warning systems for tsunamis or trans-boundary water management agreements and global advocacy for the safety of journalists and freedom of expression. Bokova joined the UN department at the ministry of foreign affairs of Bulgaria in 1977. In charge of political and legal affairs at the permanent mission of Bulgaria to the UN, she was also member of the Bulgarian delegation at the UN conferences on the equality of women in Copenhagen (1980), Nairobi (1985) and Beijing (1995). As member of Parliament, she advocated for Bulgaria’s membership in EU and NATO and participated in drafting Bulgaria’s new constitution. Irina Bokova has been the director-general of UNESCO since 2009. She is the first woman and Eastern European to lead the organization. Bokova is actively engaged in international efforts to advance gender equality, quality education for all, and combat terrorist financing by preventing the illicit traffic of cultural goods. A leading champion in the fight against racism and anti-Semitism, Bokova has spearheaded UNESCO’s activities on Holocaust remembrance and awareness and appointed UNESCO’s first special envoy for Holocaust education. Other fields of action include enabling scientific cooperation for sustainable development, such as early warning systems for tsunamis or trans-boundary water management agreements and global advocacy for the safety of journalists and freedom of expression. Bokova joined the UN department at the ministry of foreign affairs of Bulgaria in 1977. In charge of political and legal affairs at the permanent mission of Bulgaria to the UN, she was also member of the Bulgarian delegation at the UN conferences on the equality of women in Copenhagen (1980), Nairobi (1985) and Beijing (1995). As member of Parliament, she advocated for Bulgaria’s membership in EU and NATO and participated in drafting Bulgaria’s new constitution.

Jon Bon Jovi Chairman, JBJ Soul Foundation

Self-reliance, optimism, and community are key concepts Jon Bon Jovi embodies in his music and charitable efforts. These common threads have resulted in heightened awareness on issues that adversely impact our society, as well as millions of dollars raised. Bon Jovi is the frontman of the iconic, Grammy Award-winning band, Bon Jovi, who have set the bar for over three decades as one of the most successful rock bands in the world. Globally, they have sold more than 130 million albums, performing more than 2,900 concerts in over 50 countries for more than 37.5 million fans. Bon Jovi is also the chairman of the Jon Bon Jovi Soul Foundation, a non-profit organization dedicated to bringing about positive change and helping the lives of those in need, “one SOUL at a time.” The Soul Foundation funds partnerships that address the issues of hunger and shelter, benefiting temporary shelters, transitional housing for teens, permanent supportive housing—including housing for veterans and special needs populations—as well as providing home ownership opportunities. In October 2011, the foundation opened the first JBJ Soul Kitchen in Red Bank, New Jersey to address issues of food insecurity, and has since served over 55,000 meals. Staying true to Bon Jovi’s roots, the foundation aided in local recovery efforts in the days following Hurricane Sandy in 2012. The following year, Bon Jovi donated $1 million to the Hurricane Sandy New Jersey Relief Fund. Self-reliance, optimism, and community are key concepts Jon Bon Jovi embodies in his music and charitable efforts. These common threads have resulted in heightened awareness on issues that adversely impact our society, as well as millions of dollars raised. Bon Jovi is the frontman of the iconic, Grammy Award-winning band, Bon Jovi, who have set the bar for over three decades as one of the most successful rock bands in the world. Globally, they have sold more than 130 million albums, performing more than 2,900 concerts in over 50 countries for more than 37.5 million fans. Bon Jovi is also the chairman of the Jon Bon Jovi Soul Foundation, a non-profit organization dedicated to bringing about positive change and helping the lives of those in need, “one SOUL at a time.” The Soul Foundation funds partnerships that address the issues of hunger and shelter, benefiting temporary shelters, transitional housing for teens, permanent supportive housing—including housing for veterans and special needs populations—as well as providing home ownership opportunities. In October 2011, the foundation opened the first JBJ Soul Kitchen in Red Bank, New Jersey to address issues of food insecurity, and has since served over 55,000 meals. Staying true to Bon Jovi’s roots, the foundation aided in local recovery efforts in the days following Hurricane Sandy in 2012. The following year, Bon Jovi donated $1 million to the Hurricane Sandy New Jersey Relief Fund.

Bono Lead Singer of U2, Co-Founder of ONE and (RED), ONE Campaign

The lead singer of U2, Bono was born Paul David Hewson in Dublin. Acknowledged as one of the best live acts in the world, U2 have sold over 157 million albums and won numerous awards, including 22 Grammys®. Bono is also the co-founder of ONE and (RED). ONE is a global campaign and advocacy organization with more than 7 million members dedicated to the fight against extreme poverty and preventable disease, particularly in Africa. (RED) partners with the world's most iconic brands to raise public awareness and corporate contributions for the AIDS crisis, and to date has delivered more than $360 million to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria. Bono has received a number of awards for his music and activism, including the Legion D’Honneur in 2003, TIME Magazine’s Person of the Year in 2005 (along with Bill & Melinda Gates), and an honorary British knighthood in 2007. The lead singer of U2, Bono was born Paul David Hewson in Dublin. Acknowledged as one of the best live acts in the world, U2 have sold over 157 million albums and won numerous awards, including 22 Grammys®. Bono is also the co-founder of ONE and (RED). ONE is a global campaign and advocacy organization with more than 7 million members dedicated to the fight against extreme poverty and preventable disease, particularly in Africa. (RED) partners with the world's most iconic brands to raise public awareness and corporate contributions for the AIDS crisis, and to date has delivered more than $360 million to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria. Bono has received a number of awards for his music and activism, including the Legion D’Honneur in 2003, TIME Magazine’s Person of the Year in 2005 (along with Bill & Melinda Gates), and an honorary British knighthood in 2007.

Elias N. Bou Saab Minister of Education and Higher Education, Lebanon

Elias N. Bou Saab was named minister of education and higher education in Lebanon in February 2014. Minister Bou Saab, a native of Dhour El Choueir, co-founded the American University in Dubai, the first US accredited university in the Gul,f and has overseen its development into one of the premier institutions higher education in the region. Over the past two decades, Bou Saab has garnered vast experience in varied areas such as establishing new institutions/programs and scholarships, negotiating and implementing collaboration with many major US and European universities, and advising governments on higher education, and other investment projects throughout the Arab world. Bou Saab earned his Bachelor of Business Administration in marketing (magna cum laude) from The American College and his Master of Arts in international relations from Boston University. Elias N. Bou Saab was named minister of education and higher education in Lebanon in February 2014. Minister Bou Saab, a native of Dhour El Choueir, co-founded the American University in Dubai, the first US accredited university in the Gul,f and has overseen its development into one of the premier institutions higher education in the region. Over the past two decades, Bou Saab has garnered vast experience in varied areas such as establishing new institutions/programs and scholarships, negotiating and implementing collaboration with many major US and European universities, and advising governments on higher education, and other investment projects throughout the Arab world. Bou Saab earned his Bachelor of Business Administration in marketing (magna cum laude) from The American College and his Master of Arts in international relations from Boston University.

Dominique Boyer Chief Operating Officer, Sevis Finansye Fonkoze

Dominique Boyer is Fonkoze Financial Services’ (Fonkoze) chief financial officer. Boyer joined Fonkoze in 2009 as the head of internal audit and was promoted to COO in 2013. As COO, Boyer oversees Fonkoze’s business operations including management of over 750 staff and a network of 45 branches serving more than 200,000 clients mainly micro and small entrepreneurs. Boyer has more than 20 years of experience in management, accounting, internal and external audit of organizations in numerous sectors including banking, non-governmental organizations, government institutions and private businesses. Boyer has supervised the development, implementation and evaluation of financial and operations systems at multiple enterprises and organizations. She has extensive experience with multilateral and bilateral organizations such as USAID, World Bank and the United Nations. In addition to her current role, her private sector experience includes holding senior positions at KPMG and the Bank of Boston. Boyer spent six years as an accounting professor at Haiti’s leading university, Univerité Quisqueya. She has worked in Canada, Democratic Republic of Congo, Haiti and the United States. She is fluent in English, French and Haitian Creole. Dominique holds degrees from Collège Saint Laurent and Université du Québec à Montréal in finance and accounting Dominique Boyer is Fonkoze Financial Services’ (Fonkoze) chief financial officer. Boyer joined Fonkoze in 2009 as the head of internal audit and was promoted to COO in 2013. As COO, Boyer oversees Fonkoze’s business operations including management of over 750 staff and a network of 45 branches serving more than 200,000 clients mainly micro and small entrepreneurs. Boyer has more than 20 years of experience in management, accounting, internal and external audit of organizations in numerous sectors including banking, non-governmental organizations, government institutions and private businesses. Boyer has supervised the development, implementation and evaluation of financial and operations systems at multiple enterprises and organizations. She has extensive experience with multilateral and bilateral organizations such as USAID, World Bank and the United Nations. In addition to her current role, her private sector experience includes holding senior positions at KPMG and the Bank of Boston. Boyer spent six years as an accounting professor at Haiti’s leading university, Univerité Quisqueya. She has worked in Canada, Democratic Republic of Congo, Haiti and the United States. She is fluent in English, French and Haitian Creole. Dominique holds degrees from Collège Saint Laurent and Université du Québec à Montréal in finance and accounting

Tina Brown Founder and CEO, Women in the World and Tina Brown Live Media

Tina Brown is an award-winning journalist, editor, author, chief executive officer of Tina Brown Live Media, and founder of the Women in the World Summit. Prior to this, Brown launched and edited the award-winning digital news site The Daily Beast with Barry Diller’s IAC in October 2008. Between 1979 and 2001, she was editor-in-chief of Tatler, Vanity Fair, The New Yorker and Talk—and later Newsweek in 2011. She also authored the 2007 best-selling biography of the Princess of Wales, "The Diana Chronicles." In 2000, she was awarded the honor of commander of the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth for her services to journalism. Tina Brown is an award-winning journalist, editor, author, chief executive officer of Tina Brown Live Media, and founder of the Women in the World Summit. Prior to this, Brown launched and edited the award-winning digital news site The Daily Beast with Barry Diller’s IAC in October 2008. Between 1979 and 2001, she was editor-in-chief of Tatler, Vanity Fair, The New Yorker and Talk—and later Newsweek in 2011. She also authored the 2007 best-selling biography of the Princess of Wales, "The Diana Chronicles." In 2000, she was awarded the honor of commander of the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth for her services to journalism.

Matt Browne Senior Advisor, Tent Foundation

Matt Browne is a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress (CAP) where he leads the Global Progress program, an initiative that brings together progressive politicians, strategist and policy makers. Prior to joining CAP, Browne was managing director of APCO Worldwide's, Europe, Middle East and Africa government relations practice. Browne is a board member of Policy Network, an organization he helped found, and which he directed from 2002 to 2006. Browne is an experienced political campaigner, having advised over 30 progressive leaders, parties and movements across five continents. A regular commentator in the media, he writes a weekly column for the Huffington Post. Matt Browne is a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress (CAP) where he leads the Global Progress program, an initiative that brings together progressive politicians, strategist and policy makers. Prior to joining CAP, Browne was managing director of APCO Worldwide's, Europe, Middle East and Africa government relations practice. Browne is a board member of Policy Network, an organization he helped found, and which he directed from 2002 to 2006. Browne is an experienced political campaigner, having advised over 30 progressive leaders, parties and movements across five continents. A regular commentator in the media, he writes a weekly column for the Huffington Post.

Julio Brutus Caribbean Director, Clean the World

Pastor Julio Brutus made it his mission to serve others, especially the people of his homeland, Haiti. In July 2009, he joined Clean the World as their Caribbean director. In 2010, a 7.0 magnitude earthquake hit Haiti and three days later, Clean the World dispatched a team of doctors, nurses and medical supplies along with soap to aid those in need. Together with Clean the World, we have distributed 1.8 million bars of soap. Pastor Julio Brutus made it his mission to serve others, especially the people of his homeland, Haiti. In July 2009, he joined Clean the World as their Caribbean director. In 2010, a 7.0 magnitude earthquake hit Haiti and three days later, Clean the World dispatched a team of doctors, nurses and medical supplies along with soap to aid those in need. Together with Clean the World, we have distributed 1.8 million bars of soap.

Sean Campbell Partner, House of Genius

Sean Campbell is an entrepreneur, real estate developer, community builder and former Wall Street executive with a strong background in finance, real estate, media, and business development. He has spent twelve successful years in the New York financial community before following his passion to create, develop, and fund new businesses. In addition to managing, founding and leading several technology, media and real estate businesses, Campbell is currently founder and CEO of Formativ, a full serving real estate development company, as well as co-founder and co-developer of INDUSTRY, a world-class destination for technology and digital innovation.

Campbell received his Bachelor of Arts from the University of Maryland. He is on the Board of Directors at Denver Athletic Club, Board of Directors of 10.10.10., Partner at House of Genius, serves as the Development Chair for the River North (RiNo) Urban Improvement Committee, and is on the Advisory Board of Prime Health, and the Blackstone Entrepreneurial Network. Sean Campbell is an entrepreneur, real estate developer, community builder and former Wall Street executive with a strong background in finance, real estate, media, and business development. He has spent twelve successful years in the New York financial community before following his passion to create, develop, and fund new businesses. In addition to managing, founding and leading several technology, media and real estate businesses, Campbell is currently founder and CEO of Formativ, a full serving real estate development company, as well as co-founder and co-developer of INDUSTRY, a world-class destination for technology and digital innovation.Campbell received his Bachelor of Arts from the University of Maryland. He is on the Board of Directors at Denver Athletic Club, Board of Directors of 10.10.10., Partner at House of Genius, serves as the Development Chair for the River North (RiNo) Urban Improvement Committee, and is on the Advisory Board of Prime Health, and the Blackstone Entrepreneurial Network.

Michael Carey Co-Founder and Director, Soul of Haiti Foundation

Michael Carey is an Irish food sector investor and entrepreneur (including The Company of Food and East Coast Bakehouse), chairman of the Irish government food board (Bord Bia), and a regular writer and conference speaker. Carey is an active social entrepreneur with a particular interest in livelihood development in sub-Saharan Africa and Haiti as well as poverty/food initiatives in Ireland. Carey is a co-founder and director of the Soul of Haiti Foundation, an organization established in 2008 by a group of Irish entrepreneurs (all finalists in the Irish EY Entrepreneur of the Year Awards), focused on supporting job creation. The Soul of Haiti initiated projects are implemented in Haiti by Haven. Michael Carey is an Irish food sector investor and entrepreneur (including The Company of Food and East Coast Bakehouse), chairman of the Irish government food board (Bord Bia), and a regular writer and conference speaker. Carey is an active social entrepreneur with a particular interest in livelihood development in sub-Saharan Africa and Haiti as well as poverty/food initiatives in Ireland. Carey is a co-founder and director of the Soul of Haiti Foundation, an organization established in 2008 by a group of Irish entrepreneurs (all finalists in the Irish EY Entrepreneur of the Year Awards), focused on supporting job creation. The Soul of Haiti initiated projects are implemented in Haiti by Haven.

Sheryl Chamberlain Council Head, Hult Prize Foundation

Sheryl Chamberlain is a global technology leader who brings together diverse groups of people to jointly create innovative solutions that achieve new levels of success for a company. She has broad experience in leading strategy and operations with Fortune 1000 companies with a goal to accelerate revenue generation while improving performance. Moving easily between strategic planning and execution, she energizes and inspires others with a vision of what is possible. Her collaborative, open style builds trust and community while bringing people together to solve problems in new ways. Chamberlain ethically navigates the political and organizational structures bringing about future-focused, brand enhancing opportunities. Chamberlain's leadership has been recognized in winning 2016 Women in Technology Award, EMC Global Innovation Partner of the Year, the YWCA Tribute to Women, and the Diversity Council’s Leadership & Diversity Awards. Chamberlain is a member of the Alliance of Chief Executives, and an advisor to the Dallas Entrepreneur Center. She is on the board of the association for corporate growth, the diversity advisory board for Cloud Foundry Foundation. Sheryl Chamberlain is a global technology leader who brings together diverse groups of people to jointly create innovative solutions that achieve new levels of success for a company. She has broad experience in leading strategy and operations with Fortune 1000 companies with a goal to accelerate revenue generation while improving performance. Moving easily between strategic planning and execution, she energizes and inspires others with a vision of what is possible. Her collaborative, open style builds trust and community while bringing people together to solve problems in new ways. Chamberlain ethically navigates the political and organizational structures bringing about future-focused, brand enhancing opportunities. Chamberlain's leadership has been recognized in winning 2016 Women in Technology Award, EMC Global Innovation Partner of the Year, the YWCA Tribute to Women, and the Diversity Council’s Leadership & Diversity Awards. Chamberlain is a member of the Alliance of Chief Executives, and an advisor to the Dallas Entrepreneur Center. She is on the board of the association for corporate growth, the diversity advisory board for Cloud Foundry Foundation.

John Chambers Executive Chairman, Cisco

John Chambers, executive chairman of the board, is a working chairman with a focus on country digitization and building relationships with government and business leaders, shareholders, and board members. He is also an advisor on the company’s strategy, digital transformation and strategic partnerships. Chambers joined Cisco in 1991, became president and CEO in 1995, and served as chairman and CEO from 2006 to 2015. He helped grow the company from $70 million when he joined, to $1.2 billion when he assumed the role of CEO, to $47 billion when he stepped down as CEO. He has received numerous awards for his leadership and corporate social responsibility over his past 20 years at the helm of Cisco, including TIME Magazine’s 100 Most Influential People. In January 2016, Chambers became chairman of the U.S.-India Business Council (USIBC) and is a current member of the board of directors for Airware and OpenGov. John Chambers, executive chairman of the board, is a working chairman with a focus on country digitization and building relationships with government and business leaders, shareholders, and board members. He is also an advisor on the company’s strategy, digital transformation and strategic partnerships. Chambers joined Cisco in 1991, became president and CEO in 1995, and served as chairman and CEO from 2006 to 2015. He helped grow the company from $70 million when he joined, to $1.2 billion when he assumed the role of CEO, to $47 billion when he stepped down as CEO. He has received numerous awards for his leadership and corporate social responsibility over his past 20 years at the helm of Cisco, including TIME Magazine’s 100 Most Influential People. In January 2016, Chambers became chairman of the U.S.-India Business Council (USIBC) and is a current member of the board of directors for Airware and OpenGov.

Maxime D. Charles Country Manager / VP, Bnakers Association / EcoBio Haiti S. A.

Maxime Charles is a lawyer and the general manager of The Bank of Nova Scotia in Haiti. His legal and finance career includes teaching international law from 1985 to 1991 at the State University of Haiti, and fulfilling international assignments in Canada and the Caribbean for Scotiabank from 1992 to 1996. Charles is active in a number of professional and civic organizations, serving as a board member for the Arbitrage Commission of the Chamber of Commerce of Haiti and the Anti-Money Laundering Commission.

Charles is president of the Board of the Association of Professional Bankers, as well as the Board of FOKAL, an NGO engaged in the promotion of educational knowledge and liberties. He is also co-founder of EcoBio Haiti S. A., a socially responsible Haitian corporation involved in the production and export of essential oil, especially Vetiver. He has a law bachelor degree from State University of Haiti and a DEA (pre-Doctorate degree) from the University of Law and Economy of Aix-Marseille, France. Maxime Charles is a lawyer and the general manager of The Bank of Nova Scotia in Haiti. His legal and finance career includes teaching international law from 1985 to 1991 at the State University of Haiti, and fulfilling international assignments in Canada and the Caribbean for Scotiabank from 1992 to 1996. Charles is active in a number of professional and civic organizations, serving as a board member for the Arbitrage Commission of the Chamber of Commerce of Haiti and the Anti-Money Laundering Commission.Charles is president of the Board of the Association of Professional Bankers, as well as the Board of FOKAL, an NGO engaged in the promotion of educational knowledge and liberties. He is also co-founder of EcoBio Haiti S. A., a socially responsible Haitian corporation involved in the production and export of essential oil, especially Vetiver. He has a law bachelor degree from State University of Haiti and a DEA (pre-Doctorate degree) from the University of Law and Economy of Aix-Marseille, France.

Christopher Chavez Global Community Cultivator, House of Genius

Christopher Chavez directs expansion as the Global Community Cultivator of House of Genius, an international neighborhood of entrepreneurs, nonprofiteers, tinkerers, inventors, doers, and community builders who enhance the language of collaboration in their home cities and fields of interest. He is also the co-founder of prime produce, a guild for 21st century craft promoting slow entrepreneurship, and an entrepreneur in residence at The Met MediaLab. Christopher Chavez directs expansion as the Global Community Cultivator of House of Genius, an international neighborhood of entrepreneurs, nonprofiteers, tinkerers, inventors, doers, and community builders who enhance the language of collaboration in their home cities and fields of interest. He is also the co-founder of prime produce, a guild for 21st century craft promoting slow entrepreneurship, and an entrepreneur in residence at The Met MediaLab.

Catherine Cheney West Coast Correspondent, Devex

Catherine Cheney is the west coast correspondent for Devex. Based in the Bay Area, she covers solutions-oriented stories her audience of global development professionals can learn from as part of the Devex motto: “Do Good. Do It Well.” Since graduating from Yale University, where she earned bachelor's and master's degrees in political science and graduated as a Yale Journalism Scholar, Cheney has worked for a range of publications including World Politics Review, POLITICO, and NationSwell, a media company and membership network she helped build. Her work has taken her to countries including Germany, where she traveled on an International Center for Journalists fellowship, Tanzania, where she reported on human centered design for development, and Haiti, where she traveled with the Clinton Foundation. Cheney also runs the Bay Area chapter for the Solutions Journalism Network, a nonprofit that supports and connects journalists who report on responses to social problems. Catherine Cheney is the west coast correspondent for Devex. Based in the Bay Area, she covers solutions-oriented stories her audience of global development professionals can learn from as part of the Devex motto: “Do Good. Do It Well.” Since graduating from Yale University, where she earned bachelor's and master's degrees in political science and graduated as a Yale Journalism Scholar, Cheney has worked for a range of publications including World Politics Review, POLITICO, and NationSwell, a media company and membership network she helped build. Her work has taken her to countries including Germany, where she traveled on an International Center for Journalists fellowship, Tanzania, where she reported on human centered design for development, and Haiti, where she traveled with the Clinton Foundation. Cheney also runs the Bay Area chapter for the Solutions Journalism Network, a nonprofit that supports and connects journalists who report on responses to social problems.

Audrey Choi CEO, Institute for Sustainable Investing and Managing Director & Head, Global Sustainable Finance, Morgan Stanley

Audrey Choi is chief executive officer of Morgan Stanley's Institute for Sustainable Investing. She is also managing director and head of Morgan Stanley's Global Sustainable Finance Group. In these roles, she oversees the firm's efforts to support resilient communities and promote economic opportunity and global sustainability through the capital markets. In a career spanning the public, private and nonprofit sectors, Choi has become a thought leader on how finance can be harnessed to address public policy challenges. Prior to joining Morgan Stanley, Choi held senior policy positions in the Clinton Administration, the Commerce Department and the Federal Communications Commission. Previously, Choi was a foreign correspondent and bureau chief at The Wall Street Journal. She is currently a member of President Obama's US Community Development Advisory Board and on the boards of several national nonprofits focused on education, conservation and impact investing. Audrey is a graduate of Harvard College and Harvard Business School. Audrey Choi is chief executive officer of Morgan Stanley's Institute for Sustainable Investing. She is also managing director and head of Morgan Stanley's Global Sustainable Finance Group. In these roles, she oversees the firm's efforts to support resilient communities and promote economic opportunity and global sustainability through the capital markets. In a career spanning the public, private and nonprofit sectors, Choi has become a thought leader on how finance can be harnessed to address public policy challenges. Prior to joining Morgan Stanley, Choi held senior policy positions in the Clinton Administration, the Commerce Department and the Federal Communications Commission. Previously, Choi was a foreign correspondent and bureau chief at The Wall Street Journal. She is currently a member of President Obama's US Community Development Advisory Board and on the boards of several national nonprofits focused on education, conservation and impact investing. Audrey is a graduate of Harvard College and Harvard Business School.

Kelly Tallman Clements Deputy High Commissioner, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Kelly T. Clements joined United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as Deputy High Commissioner in 2015. Clements has been closely involved with refugee and displacement issues throughout her 25-year career. Before joining UNHCR, Clements served as deputy assistant secretary of state in the Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM) since 2010 where she was responsible for humanitarian issues in Asia and the Middle East. She previously led the Bureau’s strategic planning, policy development and financial management to protect and assist refugees, conflict victims and vulnerable migrants worldwide. In 2014, she was acting deputy chief of the mission at the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, Lebanon. From 1993 to 1996, Clements served at the U.S. permanent mission to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland on a foreign service appointment. She was special assistant to the under secretary of state for global affairs in 1997-1998. Clements served as a senior emergency officer for Europe, the Newly Independent States, and the Americas, and later as Balkans assistance coordinator; she was deployed to Albania in 1999. She worked for the UNHCR in Bangladesh in 1992. Clements holds a bachelor's degree in international studies and a master's degree in urban affairs from Virginia Tech. Kelly T. Clements joined United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as Deputy High Commissioner in 2015. Clements has been closely involved with refugee and displacement issues throughout her 25-year career. Before joining UNHCR, Clements served as deputy assistant secretary of state in the Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM) since 2010 where she was responsible for humanitarian issues in Asia and the Middle East. She previously led the Bureau’s strategic planning, policy development and financial management to protect and assist refugees, conflict victims and vulnerable migrants worldwide. In 2014, she was acting deputy chief of the mission at the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, Lebanon. From 1993 to 1996, Clements served at the U.S. permanent mission to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland on a foreign service appointment. She was special assistant to the under secretary of state for global affairs in 1997-1998. Clements served as a senior emergency officer for Europe, the Newly Independent States, and the Americas, and later as Balkans assistance coordinator; she was deployed to Albania in 1999. She worked for the UNHCR in Bangladesh in 1992. Clements holds a bachelor's degree in international studies and a master's degree in urban affairs from Virginia Tech.

Bill Clinton Founding Chairman, Clinton Global Initiative, 42nd President of the United States

Elected president of the United States in 1992 and 1996, President Bill Clinton was the first Democratic president in six decades to be elected twice. Under his leadership, the United States enjoyed the strongest economy in a generation and the longest economic expansion in its history. His administration resulted in moving the nation from record deficits to record surpluses; the creation of over 22 million jobs; low levels of unemployment, poverty and crime; and the highest home ownership and college enrollment rates in history. He also increased investment in education, expanded access to technology, encouraged investment in underserved communities, protected the environment, and countered the threat of terrorism while promoting peace and strengthening democracy around the world. After leaving the White House, President Clinton founded the Clinton Foundation with the mission to strengthen the capacity of people in the U.S. and throughout the world to meet the challenges of global interdependence. Elected president of the United States in 1992 and 1996, President Bill Clinton was the first Democratic president in six decades to be elected twice. Under his leadership, the United States enjoyed the strongest economy in a generation and the longest economic expansion in its history. His administration resulted in moving the nation from record deficits to record surpluses; the creation of over 22 million jobs; low levels of unemployment, poverty and crime; and the highest home ownership and college enrollment rates in history. He also increased investment in education, expanded access to technology, encouraged investment in underserved communities, protected the environment, and countered the threat of terrorism while promoting peace and strengthening democracy around the world. After leaving the White House, President Clinton founded the Clinton Foundation with the mission to strengthen the capacity of people in the U.S. and throughout the world to meet the challenges of global interdependence.

Chelsea Clinton Vice Chair, Clinton Foundation

Chelsea Clinton, Vice Chair of the Clinton Foundation, works alongside Foundation leadership toward a shared goal of making the Clinton Foundation one of the most effective and efficient global NGOs in the world. Clinton works in-depth across a number of the Foundation’s programmatic areas including: No Ceilings: The Full Participation Project working to advance the full participation of women and girls; the Clinton Global Initiative University, a program focused on empowering the next generation of change-makers; the Clinton Foundation’s Day of Action program which she founded; the Foundation’s various health programs and the conservation of Africa’s Elephants through the Clinton Global Initiative. Clinton currently teaches at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health and previously worked at McKinsey & Company and Avenue Capital. She also serves on the boards of the Clinton Foundation’s affiliated Clinton Health Access Initiative, the School of American Ballet, the Africa Center and the Weill Cornell Medical College. She is the Co-Chair of the Advisory Board of the Of Many Institute at NYU. Clinton holds a B.A. from Stanford, an MPH from Columbia's Mailman School of Public Health and both an MPhil and a Doctorate in International Relations from Oxford University. She is the author of It’s Your World: Get Informed, Get Inspired & Get Going, a book for young readers ages 10-14 which explores some of the biggest challenges facing our world today. She lives with her husband Marc, their daughter Charlotte, and their son Aidan in New York City. Chelsea Clinton, Vice Chair of the Clinton Foundation, works alongside Foundation leadership toward a shared goal of making the Clinton Foundation one of the most effective and efficient global NGOs in the world. Clinton works in-depth across a number of the Foundation’s programmatic areas including: No Ceilings: The Full Participation Project working to advance the full participation of women and girls; the Clinton Global Initiative University, a program focused on empowering the next generation of change-makers; the Clinton Foundation’s Day of Action program which she founded; the Foundation’s various health programs and the conservation of Africa’s Elephants through the Clinton Global Initiative. Clinton currently teaches at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health and previously worked at McKinsey & Company and Avenue Capital. She also serves on the boards of the Clinton Foundation’s affiliated Clinton Health Access Initiative, the School of American Ballet, the Africa Center and the Weill Cornell Medical College. She is the Co-Chair of the Advisory Board of the Of Many Institute at NYU. Clinton holds a B.A. from Stanford, an MPH from Columbia's Mailman School of Public Health and both an MPhil and a Doctorate in International Relations from Oxford University. She is the author of It’s Your World: Get Informed, Get Inspired & Get Going, a book for young readers ages 10-14 which explores some of the biggest challenges facing our world today. She lives with her husband Marc, their daughter Charlotte, and their son Aidan in New York City.

Jason Collins Goodwill Ambassador and Retired Player, NBA

Jason Collins is a retired American professional basketball player of the National Basketball Association. After graduating from Stanford University, Collins was selected in the first round of the 2001 NBA Draft. A 13-year veteran of the NBA, Collins played center for six teams including New Jersey, Memphis, Minnesota, Atlanta, Boston, Washington and the Brooklyn Nets. After the 2012-13 NBA season, Collins publicly came out as gay in a cover story for Sports Illustrated, becoming the first male active player in any of the four major American professional sports to announce that he is gay. In April 2014, Collins was featured on the cover of TIME Magazine’s “100 Most Influential People in the World.” Currently, Jason works for the NBA as an international Ambassador. He also serves on the President’s Co