House Backs Glade's Delay
TALLAHASSEE — A bill that delays cleanup of the Everglades sailed through the Florida House on Wednesday night and headed to the desk of Gov. Jeb Bush, who is expected to sign it into law.

The controversial measure, backed by the sugar industry, would forestall by a decade the 2006 deadline to curtail phosphorous runoff from farms south of Lake Okeechobee.

The plan passed the House in a 96-18 vote with little debate despite warnings from a cadre of congressional leaders earlier this week, including U.S. House Appropriations Chairman Bill Young, R-St. Petersburg, that it could endanger $4 billion in federal funds promised for the cleanup and restoration of the River of Grass.

U.S. Rep. Clay Shaw, the Fort Lauderdale Republican who chairs the Florida congressional delegation, said after the House vote that it appears the Legislature has "abandoned the Everglades."

"I hope [the governor] comes up here to Washington and talks to us before he signs the legislation. He owes us that much," Shaw said.

A federal judge who presided over the state-federal agreement to restore the Everglades has expressed concern over the Legislature's actions and has scheduled a hearing Friday on the measure.

Sugar industry representatives applauded the legislation, while criticizing environmentalists who worked hard to torpedo it.

"I'm sick and tired of environmental extremists hiding behind Everglades restoration because they don't like the sugar industry," said Robert Coker, vice president of U.S. Sugar. "Our track record is as good as anybody's."

David Struhs, secretary of the state Department of Environmental Protection, defended the plan.

"We are pleased with the broad, bipartisan support for a plan that reinforces Florida's pledge to improve water quality and congratulate House members for their endorsement," Struhs said. "By providing a plan, an enforceable schedule and the funding to complete the job, this bill reinforces Florida's commitment to Everglades restoration."