H.R.4909 - 114th Congress (2015-2016): National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017
Array ( [actionDate] => 2016-05-18 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: On passage Passed by recorded vote: 277 - 147 (Roll no. 216). [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

Here are the steps for Status of Legislation:

There are 3 summaries for H.R.4909. Passed House amended (05/18/2016) Reported to House with amendment(s) (05/04/2016) Introduced in House (04/12/2016) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Passed House amended (05/18/2016)

Highlights:

This bill authorizes FY2017 appropriations and sets forth policies regarding the military activities of the Department of Defense (DOD), military construction, and the national security programs of the Department of Energy (DOE).

The bill authorizes appropriations, but does not provide budget authority, which is provided by appropriations legislation.

The bill authorizes appropriations to DOD for:

Procurement;

Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation;

Operation and Maintenance;

Cooperative Threat Reduction;

Working Capital Funds;

the National Defense Sealift Fund;

Chemical Agents and Munitions Destruction;

Defense-Wide Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities;

the Defense Inspector General;

the Defense Health Program; and

the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund.

The bill also authorizes appropriations for Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO), which are exempt from discretionary spending limits. OCO appropriations authorized in the bill support base budget requirements as well as OCO activities.

The bill authorizes the FY2017 personnel strengths for active duty and reserve forces and sets forth policies regarding:

military personnel;

compensation and other personnel benefits;

health care;

acquisition policy and management;

DOD organization and management;

civilian personnel matters;

matters relating to foreign nations;

cooperative threat reduction; and

strategic programs, cyber, and intelligence matters.

The bill authorizes appropriations and sets forth policies regarding military construction; base realignment and closure (BRAC) activities; and DOE national security programs, including the National Nuclear Security Administration. The bill prohibits an additional BRAC round.

The bill includes provisions that affect the application of the Endangered Species Act to the greater sage grouse, the lesser prairie chicken, and the American burying beetle.

The bill also amends the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) to reorganize the UCMJ and revise the procedures and structure of the military justice system.

Full Summary:

National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017

(Sec. 3) Defines "congressional defense committees" as the House and Senate Armed Services and Appropriations Committees.

DIVISION A--DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AUTHORIZATIONS

TITLE I--PROCUREMENT

Subtitle A--Authorization of Appropriations

(Sec. 101) Authorizes appropriations to the Department of Defense (DOD) for Procurement at the levels identified in section 4101 of this bill.

Subtitle B--Army Programs

(Sec. 111) Authorizes the Army to enter into one or more multiyear contracts for AH-64E Apache helicopters beginning in FY2017.

(Sec. 112) Authorizes the Army to enter into one or more multiyear contracts for UH-60M and HH-60M Black Hawk helicopters beginning in FY2017.

(Sec. 113) Requires DOD, in consultation with the Army, to assess and report to Congress on the capabilities of the Army with respect to:

AH-64 Apache-equipped attack reconnaissance battalions;

air defense artillery;

chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear capabilities and modernization needs;

field artillery;

changes in doctrine and war plans consistent with DOD policy on cluster munitions and unintended harm to civilians;

fuel distribution and water purification;

watercraft and port-opening;

transportation capacity and responsiveness;

military police; and

tactical mobility and tactical wheeled vehicle capacity.

(Sec. 114) Increases the funding authorized by this bill to be appropriated to the Army for the Surface-To-Air Missile System--MSE Missile. Decreases the funding authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Energy for Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation R&D--Material Management and Minimization.

Subtitle C--Navy Programs

(Sec. 121) Provides economic order quantity authority for the construction of two Ford-class aircraft carriers and incremental funding authority for the nuclear refueling and complex overhaul of five Nimitz-class aircraft carriers.

(Sec. 122) Expresses the sense of Congress on the Navy's aircraft carrier procurement schedules.

(Sec. 123) Authorizes the Navy to enter into and incrementally fund a contract for design and construction of the LHA (Amphibious Assault Ship) replacement ship designated LHA 8.

(Sec. 124) Authorizes the Navy to enter into and incrementally fund a contract for design and construction of the replacement dock landing ship designated LX(R) or the amphibious transport dock designated LPD-29.

(Sec. 125) Authorizes the Navy to enter into a contract for the procurement of up to 45 Ship to Shore Connector craft.

(Sec. 126) Prohibits the Navy from selecting a single contractor for the Littoral Combat Ship or any successor frigate class ship program until the Navy certifies to Congress that a selection of a single contractor will be conducted using competitive procedures and for the limited purpose of constructing a frigate class ship.

(Sec. 127) Requires the Navy to report to Congress on the future capabilities for the P-8 Poseidon aircraft.

Subtitle D--Air Force Programs

(Sec. 131) Strikes the requirement for DOD to report annually to Congress on aircraft inventory.

(Sec. 132) Amends the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2013 to repeal the requirement for the Air Force to continue to preserve certain C-5 aircraft in a storage condition that would allow a recall of retired aircraft to future service in the Air Force Reserve, Air National Guard, or Active Force structure.

(Sec. 133) Amends the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2007 to repeal the requirement for certain F-117 aircraft to be maintained in a condition that would allow the aircraft to be recalled to future service.

(Sec. 134) Prohibits the Air Force from using FY2017 funds to retire the A-10 Aircraft and requires the Air Force to maintain a minimum of 171 A-10 aircraft designated as primary mission aircraft inventory.

Prohibits the Air Force from significantly reducing the manning levels for any A-10 aircraft squadron or division until the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation and the Secretary of the Air Force submit to Congress reports on the initial operational test and evaluation of the F-35 aircraft program, as well as the comparison test and evaluation that examines the capabilities of the F-35A and A-10C.

(Sec. 135) Prohibits the retirement of Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System aircraft in FY2018, except for aircraft that the Air Force determines to be non-operational because of mishaps, other damage, or being uneconomical to repair.

(Sec. 136) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the cost of the B-21 aircraft.

(Sec. 137) Prohibits the Air Force from using funds to retire, prepare to retire, or place in storage or on backup aircraft inventory status any U-2 aircraft.

Subtitle E--Defense-Wide, Joint, and Multiservice Matters

(Sec. 141) Amends the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2011 to terminate the requirement for quarterly reports on the use of combat mission requirements funds.

(Sec. 142) Requires the Army and the Navy to issue guidance regarding fire suppressant and fuel containment standards for certain vehicles.

(Sec. 143) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the munitions strategy for the combatant commands.

(Sec. 144) Requires the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to report on the sustainment support structure for the F-35 Lightning II aircraft program.

(Sec. 145) Requires the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics to brief Congress on the acquisition strategy for the Ground Mobility Vehicle for use with the Global Response Force.

(Sec. 146) Requires DOD, if the Army and the Marine Corps are each using different variants of 5.56mm rifle ammunition, to: (1) submit to Congress a report explaining the reasons for using different variants of the ammunition; and (2) ensure that, within one year of enactment of this bill, that the Army and the Marine Corps are using the same variant of the ammunition. Includes an exception for a state of emergency that requires the Army and the Marine Corps to use different variants of the ammunition.

TITLE II--RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION

Subtitle A--Authorization of Appropriations

(Sec. 201) Authorizes appropriations for Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation at the levels identified in section 4201 of this bill.

Subtitle B--Program Requirements, Restrictions, and Limitations

(Sec. 211) Requires DOD to establish a Laboratory Quality Enhancement Program, under which panels will:

review and make recommendations with respect to: (1) existing policies and practices affecting the science and technology reinvention laboratories to improve the research output of the laboratories and (2) new initiatives proposed by the science and technology reinvention laboratories;

support implementation of initiatives affecting the science and technology reinvention laboratories; and

conduct assessments or data analysis on other issues as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.

(Sec. 212) Amends the Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 2009 to modify the authority for defense laboratories to use funds for research and development of technologies for military missions. Sets the level of funding at 3% of funds available to the defense laboratory, eliminates the termination date for the authority, and allows certain federally funded research and development centers to utilize the authority.

(Sec. 213) Requires the Navy to notify Congress before initiating certain rapid prototyping, experimentation, or demonstration activities.

(Sec. 214) Directs DOD to: (1) implement a quality assurance and quality control program for any facility producing biological select agents and toxins, and (2) report to Congress on the potential consolidation of facilities that work with biological select agents and toxins.

Requires the GAO to report on DOD's: (1) progress in carrying out the quality assurance and quality control program, and (2) actions to address the findings and recommendations of the Army report titled "Individual and Institutional Accountability for the Shipment of Viable Bacillus Anthracis from Dugway Proving Grounds."

(Sec. 215) Requires DOD, in consultation with the Directors of National Intelligence and the Office of Personnel Management to: (1) develop and implement a new security clearance information technology architecture; and (2) issue guidance establishing the respective roles, responsibilities, and obligations of the Secretary and directors with respect to the development and implementation of the system.

Requires DOD to review laws, regulations, and executive orders relating to the maintenance of personnel security clearance information by the federal government.

(Sec. 216) Prohibits DOD from using FY2017 funds for research, development, and prototyping of the countering weapons of mass destruction situational awareness information system, known as ''Constellation'' and requires the Chief Information Officer to report to Congress on the requirements and program plan for the system.

(Sec. 217) Limits the availability of funds for the Defense Innovation Unit Experimental (DIUx) until DOD submits a specified report to Congress on the DIUx.

(Sec. 218) Limits the availability of funds for the Tactical Combat Training System (TCTS) Increment II program until the Navy and Air Force submit to Congress a required report on the baseline and alternatives to the TCTS Increment II program of the Navy.

(Sec. 219) Requires the Army to: (1) discontinue development efforts for any component of the Distributed Common Ground System (DCGS) of the Army after Increment 1 where commercial software exists that is capable of fulfilling at least 80% of the system requirements, and (2) review the acquisition strategy to ensure commercial software procurement is the preferred method for meeting program requirements.

Prohibits the Army from awarding any contract for the development of any capability for the distributed common ground system if the capability is available for purchase on the commercial market, except for certain minor capabilities.

(Sec. 220) Requires the Secretary of Defense to designate a senior DOD official as the official with principal responsibility for the development and demonstration of directed energy weapons and sets forth the responsibilities of the official for the programs.

Subtitle C--Reports and Other Matters

(Sec. 231) Requires DOD to develop a strategy to ensure that it has assured access to trusted microelectronics by not later than September 30, 2020.

(Sec. 232) Requires the Defense Information Systems Agency to establish a pilot program to evaluate commercially available information technology tools to better understand and characterize their potential impact on DOD networks and computing environments through prototyping, experimentation, operational demonstration, military user assessment, or other means to obtain quantitative and qualitative feedback.

(Sec. 233) Requires the Assistant Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force to jointly carry out a pilot program to demonstrate methods for the more effective development of research, development, test, and evaluation functions.

(Sec. 234) Permits DOD to carry out a pilot program on the modernization of spectrum warfare systems and electronic warfare systems.

(Sec. 235) Requires the Navy to establish an independent review team to review the Navy's data on, and mitigation efforts related to, the increase in F/A-18 physiological events since January 1, 2009.

(Sec. 236) Requires DOD to seek to enter into a contract with a federally funded research and development center to conduct a study on technologies with the potential to prevent and mitigate helicopter crashes.

(Sec. 237) Requires the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, acting through the Electronic Warfare Executive Committee, to report to Congress on DOD electronic warfare capabilities.

TITLE III--OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

Subtitle A--Authorization of Appropriations

(Sec. 301) Authorizes appropriations for Operation and Maintenance activities at the levels identified in section 4301 of this bill.

(Sec. 302) Increases the Operation and Maintenance--Defense-wide funds authorized by this bill be appropriated for Civil Military Programs (to be used in support of the National Guard Youth Challenge Program).

Subtitle B--Energy and Environment

(Sec. 311) Amends the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 to specify that requirements regarding the lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions associated with alternative fuels do not constrain any conventional or unconventional fuel procurement necessary for military operations.

(Sec. 312) Authorizes the Army to: (1) provide for the production, treatment, management, and use of natural gas located under Fort Knox, Kentucky, without regard to section 3 of the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands; (2) enter into a contract with an appropriate entity to carry out the activities; and (3) take ownership of any gas production and treatment equipment and facilities and associated infrastructure from an entity with which the Army has entered into a contract in accordance with the terms of the contract. Requires any natural gas produced under this authority to be used only to support activities and operations at Fort Knox.

(Sec. 313) Requires the Army, in carrying out the disposal of munitions in the stockpile of conventional ammunition awaiting demilitarization and disposal (commonly referred to as munitions in the "B5A account") to consider using cost-competitive technologies that minimize waste generation and air emissions as alternatives to disposal by open burning, open detonation, direct contact combustion, and incineration.

(Sec. 314) Expresses the sense of Congress that DOD should work with state and local health officials to prevent human exposure to perfluorinated chemicals (commonly referred to as PFCs).

(Sec. 315) Prohibits DOD from carrying out provisions of specified executive orders relating to: (1) preparing the United States for the impact of climate change, and (2) planning for federal sustainability in the next decade.

Subtitle C--Logistics and Sustainment

(Sec. 321) Authorizes a five-year pilot program to permit government-owned, contractor-operated industrial plants to participate in the Armament Retooling and Manufacturing Support (ARMS) Initiative. (The ARMS Initiative was created to allow the Army to rent portions of its ammunition plants that are not being used in production to commercial companies.)

(Sec. 322) Requires the Navy to submit to Congress quarterly assessments of Naval ship maintenance and loading activities carried out by private sector entities at specified ports.

(Sec. 323) Limits funding for the Defense Contract Management Agency (DCMA) until the DCMA Director briefs Congress on the agency's plan to foster the adoption, implementation, and verification of DOD's revised Item Unique Identification policy across DOD and the defense industrial base.

Subtitle D--Reports

(Sec. 331) Modifies and extends requirements for annual DOD reports related to energy management, including the Annual Report Related to Installations Energy Management and the Annual Report Related to Operational Energy.

(Sec. 332) Requires DOD to report to Congress on weapons, weapons systems, components, subcomponents, and end-items purchased from foreign entities that could be manufactured domestically in depots or arsenals as well as a plan for moving the workload into those arsenals or depots.

Authorizes a two-year pilot program to permit Army arsenals to adjust their labor rates charged to customers based upon changes in workload and other factors. Requires DOD to brief Congress on specified information related to labor rates.

(Sec. 333) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the travel expenses of members of the reserve components.

Subtitle E--Other Matters

(Sec. 341) Adds the Explosive Ordnance Disposal Corps to the list of basic Army branches.

(Sec. 342) Establishes the Explosive Ordnance Disposal Program to ensure close and continuous coordination between the military departments on matters relating to explosive ordnance disposal.

(Sec. 343) Requires the Department of Transportation to: (1) require a person to give public notice of the construction, alteration, establishment, or expansion of a structure if the notice will promote the interests of national security as determined by DOD; and (2) include national security interests in conducting certain required aeronautical studies and reports.

(Sec. 344) Requires the Army and Marine Corps to develop a joint acquisition strategy to provide more effective personal protective equipment and organizational clothing and equipment to meet the specific and unique requirements for female Marines and soldiers.

(Sec. 345) Requires DOD to enter into a contract with a federally funded research and development center for an independent study on the space-available travel system of DOD.

(Sec. 346) Exempts certain small business manufacturers of specialty motors from the requirements of specified federal regulations regarding energy conservation standards.

(Sec. 347) Limits the availability of funds for the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy until DOD establishes and implements a process for members of the Armed Forces to carry appropriate firearms on military installations.

(Sec. 348) Requires DOD to evaluate the need for proven safety technology in vehicles transporting Transportation Protective Services shipments, such as electronic logging devices, roll stability control, forward collision avoidance, lane departure warning systems, and speed limiters.

(Sec. 349) Requires DOD to brief Congress on the well-drilling capabilities of the active and reserve components.

(Sec. 350) Encourages DOD to enter into contracts with third-party vendors to provide certain members of the Armed Forces deployed overseas with free access to wireless high-speed Internet and network connections.

(Sec. 351) Requires DOD to implement a formal process to provide government agencies outside DOD with information on the availability of surplus, serviceable ammunition for the purpose of reducing the overall storage and disposal costs related to the ammunition.

(Sec. 352) Increases the funds authorized by this bill for Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities--Defense-Wide (to be used in support of the National Guard counter-drug programs). Decreases the funds authorized by this bill for specified Aircraft Procurement--Navy; and Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation accounts.

TITLE IV--MILITARY PERSONNEL AUTHORIZATIONS

Subtitle A--Active Forces

(Sec. 401) Authorizes specified end strengths for Active Duty personnel of the Armed Forces.

(Sec. 402) Establishes new minimum Active Duty end strengths for the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force.

Subtitle B--Reserve Forces

(Sec. 411) Authorizes specified end strengths for Selected Reserve personnel.

(Sec. 412) Authorizes specified end strengths for Reserves on Active Duty in support of the Reserves.

(Sec. 413) Authorizes specified end strengths for military technicians (dual status).

(Sec. 414) Establishes the maximum end strengths for the Reserve Components of the Army and Air Force for non-dual status technicians.

(Sec. 415) Authorizes the maximum number of Reserve Component personnel who may be on Active Duty or full-time National Guard duty during FY2017 to provide operational support.

(Sec. 416) Expresses the sense of Congress that an adequately supported, full-time support force consisting of active and reserve personnel and military technicians for the Army National Guard is essential to maintaining the readiness of the Army National Guard.

Subtitle C--Authorization of Appropriations

(Sec. 421) Authorizes appropriations for Military Personnel at the levels identified in section 4401 of this bill.

TITLE V--MILITARY PERSONNEL POLICY

Subtitle A--Officer Personnel Policy

(Sec. 501) Authorizes adjustments to the number and distribution of Marine Corps general officers, including: an increase in the number of general officers in the grade above major general, a decrease in the number of general officers in the grade of major general, and an increase in the number of deputy commandants.

(Sec. 502) Authorizes the Secretaries of the military departments to consider officers for involuntary separation below the grade of lieutenant colonel or commander as a single, consolidated year group without distinctions based on retirement eligibility.

(Sec. 503) Permits the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of Homeland Security (the department in which the Coast Guard is operating) to drop from the rolls of the armed forces a commissioned officer who:

has been absent without authority for at least three months,

may be separated by reason of a sentence to confinement adjudged by a court-martial, or

is sentenced to confinement in a federal or state penitentiary or correctional institution after having been found guilty of an offense by a court other than a court-martial or other military court, and whose sentence has become final.

Subtitle B--Reserve Component Management

(Sec. 511) Amends the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014 to extend for three years authorities for the transfer of officers between the Active and Inactive National Guard.

(Sec. 512) Amends the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 to extend the authority for the Air Force to use Active Guard and Reserve personnel and dual status military technicians to provide training and instruction regarding pilot training.

(Sec. 513) Authorizes DOD to order forces to Active Duty during the year of execution if DOD identifies manpower and associated costs for the year of execution and provides a 30-day notice to Congress.

(Sec. 514) Exempts military dual-status technicians from civilian employee furloughs.

(Sec. 515) Requires DOD to establish an electronic means by which members of the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces can track their operational active-duty service performed after January 28, 2008.

Subtitle C--General Service Authorities

(Sec. 521) Makes technical corrections to the annual authorization of personnel strengths.

(Sec. 522) Provides leave for dual military couples to adopt a child.

(Sec. 523) Revises the Army's deployability rating system and the manner in which the Army is required to track prioritization of deployable units. Requires the Army to maintain: (1) a system for identifying the priority of deployment for units of all components of the Army, and (2) a readiness rating system for units of all components of the Army that provides an accurate assessment of the deployability of a unit and the shortfalls of a unit that require the provision of additional resources.

(Sec. 524) Permits notaries to execute military testamentary instruments. Extends federal notary powers to civilian paralegals working within military legal assistance offices.

(Sec. 525) Makes technical corrections to provisions regarding voluntary separation pay and benefits.

(Sec. 526) Requires the Secretaries of the military departments to notify service members with dependents annually, and prior to deployment, of the child custody protections guaranteed under the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act.

(Sec. 527) Requires the Army to carry out a pilot program to consolidate the recruiting efforts of the Army, Army Reserve, and Army National Guard under which a recruiter in one of the components may recruit individuals to enlist in any of the components and receive credit toward enlistment goals for each enlistment regardless of the component in which the individual enlists.

(Sec. 528) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the current and future need for a centralized registration system under the Military Selective Service Act.

(Sec. 529) Authorizes 14 days of leave for a member of the Armed Forces who becomes a parent when the member's spouse gives birth.

Subtitle D--Military Justice, Including Sexual Assault and Domestic Violence Prevention and Response

(Sec. 541) Requires DOD military and civilian personnel working on military installations, who are otherwise required by law to report suspected instances of child abuse and neglect to their chain of command, to also promptly notify State Child Protective Services.

(Sec. 542) Extends through 2021 the requirement for the annual report of the Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office and requires the release to coincide with the release of the Family Advocacy Report.

(Sec. 543) Requires DOD to submit to Congress annually a report including the child abuse and domestic abuse incident data contained in the Family Advocacy Program central registry for the previous year and an analysis of the effectiveness of the Family Advocacy Program.

(Sec. 544) Requires DOD to establish a comprehensive data collection system for reports related to hazing in the Armed Forces. Requires the Secretary of each military department to improve training to better recognize, prevent, and respond to hazing.

(Sec. 545) Specifies the burden of proof that applies for investigations of prohibited retaliatory personnel actions.

(Sec. 546) Requires DOD to ensure that any individual investigating an allegation of retaliation is trained in the definition and characteristics of retaliation, and where applicable, the characteristics of sex-related offenses.

(Sec. 547) Requires the Secretary of each military department to establish a career military justice litigation track for judge advocates in the Armed Forces under the jurisdiction of the Secretary.

Subtitle E--Member Education, Training, and Transition

(Sec. 561) Revises the requirements for credentialing programs used in connection with programs that enable members of the Armed Forces to obtain professional credentials.

(Sec. 562) Authorizes DOD to establish cyber institutes at each of the senior military colleges and each of the Reserve Officer Training Corps institutions selected for partnership by the cyber institutes at the individual service academies to accelerate the development of expertise in critical cyber operational skills for future leaders of the armed forces and DOD.

(Sec. 563) Requires DOD and DHS to jointly report on the steps the departments have taken to: (1) maximize the extent to which Armed Forces service, training, and qualifications are creditable towards U.S. merchant mariner licenses and certifications; and (2) to promote awareness among Armed Forces personnel serving in vessel operating positions of the requirements for post-service use of training, education, and practical experience from service in the Armed Forces in satisfying requirements for merchant mariner licenses and certifications.

(Sec. 564) Permits DOD to hire staff for professional military education courses regardless of course length.

(Sec. 565) Permits a person who legally changes their name to reflect their gender identity after separation from the Armed Forces to receive a new certificate of discharge or acceptance of resignation order under the new name.

(Sec. 566) Permits DOD to carry out a pilot program to enhance efforts to provide job placement assistance and related employment services directly to members in the National Guard and Reserves.

(Sec. 567) Prohibits DOD from establishing, maintaining, or supporting a Reserve Officers' Training Corps unit at an educational institution that displays the Confederate battle flag except where the board of visitors has voted to take down the flag.

(Sec. 568) Requires the GAO to report to Congress on the demographic composition of service academies.

(Sec. 569) Requires the preseparation counseling provided to members of the Armed Forces being discharged to include information concerning the availability of treatment options and resources to address substance abuse, including alcohol, prescription drug, and opioid abuse.

(Sec. 569A) Requires the Department of Labor to include in the Transition Assistance Program information regarding the deduction of disability compensation paid by the Department of Veterans Affairs by reason of voluntary separation pay received by the member.

(Sec. 569B) Requires the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness to submit to Congress and make available to the public, a report evaluating the success of the Job Training, Employment Skills Training, Apprenticeships, and Internships (known as JTEST-AI) and SkillBridge initiatives, under which civilian businesses and companies provide training or internship opportunities to members of the Armed Forces who are being separated from the Armed Forces.

(Sec. 569C) Requires congressional notification in advance of appointments to service academies.

Subtitle F--Defense Dependents' Education and Military Family Readiness Matters

(Sec. 571) Authorizes appropriations for the continuation in FY2017 of DOD assistance to local educational agencies impacted by the enrollment of dependent children of military members and DOD civilian employees.

(Sec. 572) Authorizes DOD to provide support to nonprofit organizations that carry out camp or camp-like programs for children of military families who have experienced the death of a family member or other loved one or who have another family member living with a substance use disorder or post-traumatic stress disorder.

(Sec. 573) Specifies requirements for applying the amendments made by the Every Student Succeeds Act with respect to Impact Aid payments for federally connected children in FY2016, FY2017, and each succeeding year.

(Sec. 574) Permits a relocating spouse of a member of the Armed Forces to remain eligible for a noncompetitive appointment for the duration of the spouse's relocation to the permanent duty station of the member.

Subtitle G--Decorations and Awards

(Sec. 581) Requires the Secretaries of the military departments to review the service records of certain Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander veterans from the Korean War and Vietnam War to determine if the Medal of Honor is appropriate. Waives the statute of limitations for the award if the Secretary concerned determines that the records support the award of the Medal of Honor.

(Sec. 582) Waives the statutory time limitation to permit the President to award specified medals to a member or former member of the Armed Forces identified as warranting award of that medal pursuant to the review of valor award nominations for Operation Enduring Freedom, Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation New Dawn, Operation Freedom's Sentinel, and Operation Inherent Resolve that was directed by the Secretary of Defense.

(Sec. 583) Waives the statutory time limitation to allow the President to award the Medal of Honor to Gary M. Rose, who served in the Army during the Vietnam War.

(Sec. 584) Waives the statutory time limitation to allow the President to award the Medal of Honor to Charles S. Kettles, who served in the Army during the Vietnam War.

(Sec. 585) Waives the statutory time limitation to allow the Secretary of the Army to award the Distinguished Service Cross to First Lieutenant Melvin M. Spruiell, who served in the Army during World War II.

Subtitle H--Miscellaneous Reports and Other Matters

(Sec. 591) Requires the Army to: (1) ensure that the cremated remains of an individual, whose service has been determined to be Active Duty service, are eligible for inurnment with military honors in Arlington National Cemetery, and (2) report to Congress on the interment and inurnment capacity of Arlington National Cemetery.

(Sec. 592) Requires enlisted or retired enlisted members of the Armed Forces to be represented on any board, council, or committee established to make recommendations regarding military personnel issues.

(Sec. 593) Requires DOD to review the current body mass index test procedure used by the Armed Forces and other methods to measure body fat with a more holistic health and wellness approach.

(Sec. 594) Requires information to be provided during transition separation counseling concerning options for donating brain tissue at the time of the member's death for chronic traumatic encephalopathy research.

(Sec. 595) Recognizes women who have served in or are currently serving in the Armed Forces.

(Sec. 596) Expresses the sense of Congress that DOD should enhance access to intensive medical and mental health treatment of male victims of sexual assault, look for opportunities to use them as presenters at prevention training, and ensure medical and mental health providers are trained to meet the needs of male victims.

(Sec. 597) Expresses the sense of Congress that a statute currently exists that permits DOD to enlist individuals who are not otherwise eligible for enlistment if the enlistment is vital to the national interest.

Protect Our Military Families' 2nd Amendment Rights Act

(Sec. 598) Provides that, for the purpose of federal firearms laws, a member of the Armed Forces on active duty and the spouse of the member are residents of the state in which the permanent duty station of the member is located and that the spouse may satisfy the identification document requirements by presenting specified documents.

(Sec. 599) Requires DOD to establish a pilot program to demonstrate the feasibility of using portable, disposable alcohol breathalyzers and a cloud based server platform to collect data and monitor the progress of alcohol abuse prevention programs.

(Sec. 599A) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the transfer of skills into equivalent college credits or technical certifications for members of the Armed Forces leaving the military.

(Sec. 599B) Requires DOD to design and produce a military service medal, to be known as the "Atomic Veterans Service Medal," to honor retired and former members of the Armed Forces who are radiation-exposed veterans.

(Sec. 599C) Requires DOD to submit to Congress a report detailing the information, assistance, and efforts to support and inform active duty members of the Armed Forces with respect to the rights and resources available under the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act regarding student loans.

(Sec. 599D) Excludes certain medical reimbursements and other expenses from the determination of annual income with respect to pensions for veterans, surviving spouses, and children of veterans.

(Sec. 599E) Expresses the sense of Congress on the desirability of a service-wide adoption of the Gold Star Installation Access Card.

(Sec. 599F) Modifies requirements of the Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance program related to the effect that failing to notify a spouse in a timely manner regarding a member's election not to be insured under the program has on the validity of the election or a beneficiary designation.

(Sec. 599G) Extends through FY2018 the DOD Suicide Prevention and Resilience Program.

TITLE VI--COMPENSATION AND OTHER PERSONNEL BENEFITS

Subtitle A--Pay and Allowances

(Sec. 601) Requires the rates of basic pay to be increased in accordance with provisions under current law permitting adjustments to monthly basic pay, notwithstanding a determination by the President of the need for an alternative adjustment.

(Sec. 602) Extends the authority of DOD to temporarily increase the rates of basic allowance for housing in areas impacted by natural disasters or experiencing a sudden influx of personnel.

(Sec. 603) Prohibits the Secretary concerned from altering the per diem allowance for the duration of a temporary duty assignment of a member of the Armed Forces or an employee of DOD.

Subtitle B--Bonuses and Special and Incentive Pays

(Sec. 611) Extends certain bonus and special pay authorities for Reserve Forces.

(Sec. 612) Extends certain bonus and special pay authorities for health care professionals.

(Sec. 613) Extends certain bonus and special pay authorities for nuclear officers.

(Sec. 614) Extends specified special pay, incentive pay, and bonus authorities.

(Sec. 615) Extends specified bonus and special pay authorities.

(Sec. 616) Increases the statutory limits for the aviation incentive pay and retention bonus and allow the Secretary concerned the flexibility to increase the aviation incentive pay limit set forth in regulations issued by DOD.

(Sec. 617) Conforms the consolidated bonus amount to the current authorized amount of $20,000.

(Sec. 618) Makes technical and clerical amendments related to the 2008 consolidation of certain special pay authorities.

(Sec. 619) Corrects the computation of Combat-Related Special Compensation (CRSC) to match the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 enacted military retirement system reduction in the retirement base pay multiplier from 2.5% percent to 2% percent for the years of service formula to calculate retired pay to be restored by CRSC.

Subtitle C--Disability Pay, Retired Pay, and Survivor Benefits

(Sec. 621) Repeals a provision that added an additional definition of separation from government service for members of the military participating in the Thrift Savings Plan who have been discharged or released from service in the uniformed services.

(Sec. 622) Permits DOD to pay continuation pay at any point between the time the member completes 8 years of service and before the member reaches 12 years of service, in exchange for an agreement to continue serving for a period of not less than 3 additional years.

(Sec. 623) Extends the Special Survivor Indemnity Allowance at $310 per month through FY2018.

(Sec. 624) Provides equal benefits under the Survivor Benefit Plan for members of the Reserve Component who die from an injury or illness incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during Inactive-Duty training and members of the Armed Forces who die in the line of duty while on Active Duty.

(Sec. 625) Changes the calculation concerning a service member's retired pay in a division of property involving disposable retired pay.

Subtitle D--Commissary and Non-Appropriated Fund Instrumentality Benefits and Operations

(Sec. 631) Requires DOD to develop and implement a strategy to optimize management practices across the defense commissary system and the exchange system that reduce reliance on appropriated funding without reducing benefits or the revenue generated by nonappropriated fund entities or instrumentalities of DOD for the morale, welfare, and recreation of members of the armed forces.

Requires DOD to ensure that savings generated due to the optimization practices are shared by the defense commissary system and the exchange system through contracts or agreements that appropriately reflect the participation of the systems in the development and implementation of the practices.

(Sec. 632) Requires DOD to ensure that: (1) commissary stores accept the Military Star Card as payment, and (2) the Army and Air Force Exchange Service assumes any U.S. financial liability relating to the acceptance of the card. (The Military Star Card is a credit card administered under the Exchange Credit Program by the Army and Air Force Exchange Service.)

Subtitle E--Travel and Transportation Allowances and Other Matters

(Sec. 641) Authorizes DOD, on a case-by-case basis, to reimburse travel expenses at a higher amount for Reserve Component members traveling to training from rural areas.

(Sec. 642) Establishes a 10-year statute of limitations for DOD recovery of amounts owed to the United States by members of the uniformed services due to an overpayment of salaries and benefits or unpaid bills. Requires the Defense Finance and Accounting Service to quantify the lost revenue from this provision.

TITLE VII--HEALTH CARE PROVISIONS

Subtitle A--Reform of TRICARE and Military Health System

(Sec. 701) Requires DOD to establish TRICARE Preferred as a self-managed, preferred provider network option to replace TRICARE Standard and Extra. Establishes annual enrollment fees and fixed dollar copayments for Active Duty family members and retirees who join the armed services on or after January 1, 2018, and enroll in TRICARE Preferred or in TRICARE Prime (the managed care option). Authorizes DOD to establish an annual enrollment fee for TRICARE Preferred for beneficiaries who were in the Active Duty or retired categories prior to January 1, 2018.

(Sec. 702) Requires the Defense Health Agency (DHA) to be responsible for the administration of each military medical treatment facility, including:

budgetary matters,

information technology,

health care administration and management,

administrative policy and procedure, and

any other matters the Secretary of Defense determines appropriate.

Requires DOD to establish within the DHA a professional staff to carry out this section. Permits DOD to establish an Assistant Director for Health Care Administration within the DHA.

Requires the commander of each military medical facility to be responsible for: (1) ensuring the readiness of the members of the armed forces and civilian employees at the facility, and (2) furnishing the health care and medical treatment provided at the facility.

(Sec. 703) Establishes requirements for military medical treatment facilities in order to support medical readiness of the Armed Forces and the readiness of medical personnel.

Requires DOD to submit to Congress: (1) a report updating the Military Health System Modernization Study to address the restructuring or realignment of military medical treatment facilities required by this bill, and (2) an implementation plan for restructuring or realigning the military medical treatment facilities.

(Sec. 704) Requires DOD to ensure that urgent care is available through 11:00 p.m. at military treatment facilities at locations that DOD determines to be appropriate. Requires that, if urgent care is unavailable at the military treatment facilities, access to urgent care through the TRICARE network providers must be available through 11:00 p.m. Eliminates the preauthorization requirement for urgent care.

(Sec. 705) Requires DOD to expand the primary care clinic hours at military treatment facilities during the week and on weekends beyond the standard business hours of the installation.

(Sec. 706) Authorizes DOD to develop and implement value-based incentive programs as part of TRICARE contracts to encourage health care providers to improve the quality of care and the experience of the covered beneficiaries.

(Sec. 707) Revises the criteria for partnership agreements between the military and local or regional health care systems to increase access to health care and readiness.

(Sec. 708) Requires DOD to submit to Congress an implementation plan to establish a Joint Trauma System within the DHA to improve trauma care for members of the Armed Forces and other individuals who are eligible to be treated for trauma at a military medical treatment facility.

(Sec. 709) Requires DOD to establish a Joint Trauma Education and Training Directorate to ensure that the traumatologists of the Armed Forces maintain readiness and are able to be rapidly deployed for future armed conflicts.

Requires DOD to: (1) enter into partnerships with civilian academic medical centers and large metropolitan teaching hospitals that have certain civilian trauma centers, and (2) conduct an analysis to determine the number of traumatologists of the Armed Forces, by specialty, that must be maintained within DOD to meet the requirements of the combatant commands.

(Sec. 710) Requires DOD to ensure that military medical treatment facilities implement and consistently practice the following requirements: first call resolution, standardized appointment scheduling, increased provider productivity, and managed appointment utilization through maximizing use of telehealth and secure messaging.

(Sec. 711) Requires DOD to adopt the core quality performance metrics agreed upon by the Core Quality Measures Collaborative (a collaborative group of federal agencies, health plans, national physician organizations, employers, and consumers) to evaluate the performance of the military health system and the TRICARE network.

(Sec. 712) Requires DOD to study options for providing health care coverage to certain current and former members of the Selected Reserve.

Subtitle B--Other Health Care Benefits

(Sec. 721) Requires DOD to sell hearing aids to dependents of retired members of the uniformed services.

(Sec. 722) Require members of the National Guard to be treated as if they were on Active Duty for purposes of coverage under TRICARE while performing disaster response duty, if the period immediately follows a period of full-time National Guard duty, unless a Governor determines that it is not in the best interest of the member or state.

Subtitle C--Health Care Administration

(Sec. 731) Requires DHS to make a prospective payment to DOD for treatment or care provided to members of the Coast Guard, former members of the Coast Guard, and their dependents at facilities under the jurisdiction of DOD except for any period during which the Coast Guard operates as a service in the Navy.

(Sec. 732) Requires DOD to: (1) review the prescribing practices at military treatment facilities of pharmaceutical agents for the treatment of post-traumatic stress, (2) monitor the prescribing of pharmaceutical agents that are discouraged from use under the VA/DOD Clinical Practice Guideline for Management of Post-Traumatic Stress, and (3) implement a plan to address any deviations from the guidelines.

(Sec. 733) Specifies requirements for using melfoquine for the prophylaxis of malaria when providing health care to members of the Armed Forces.

(Sec. 734) Requires DOD to: (1) ensure that TRICARE reimbursement rates for providers of applied behavior analysis are not less than the rates that were in effect on March 31, 2016; and (2) conduct a specified analysis to set future reimbursement rates for providers of applied behavior analysis.

Increases the Defense Health Care funding authorized by this bill for Private Sector Care. Decreases the Operation and Maintenance funds authorized by this bill for the Office of the Secretary of Defense.

Subtitle D--Reports and Other Matters

(Sec. 741) Requires DOD to: (1) develop a methodology that identifies which member of the military services are at high risk of suicide based on association with units that have a high rate of suicide, and (2) provide additional mental health resources to members who have deployed with the units.

(Sec. 742) Authorizes appropriations to award grants to medical researchers and universities to support research into early detection of chronic traumatic encephalopathy.

(Sec. 743) Requires DOD to consider using active oscillating negative pressure treatment for members of the Armed Forces who incur blast-related injuries.

(Sec. 744) Requires DOD to carry out a long-term study of career helicopter and tiltrotor pilots to assess potential links between the operation of helicopter and tiltrotor aircraft and acute and chronic medical conditions experienced by the pilots.

(Sec. 745) Authorizes DOD to conduct a pilot program to evaluate whether, in carrying out the TRICARE pharmacy benefits program, extending additional discounts for prescription drugs filled at retail pharmacies will maintain or reduce prescription drug costs for DOD.

(Sec. 746) Requires DOD to study the feasibility of displaying average wait times at urgent care clinics, pharmacies, and emergency rooms of military medical treatment facilities.

(Sec. 747) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the feasibility of furnishing acupuncture services and chiropractic services under the TRICARE program to beneficiaries who are retired members of the uniformed services (not including any dependent of the retired member).

(Sec. 748) Specifies the requirements for the submission of reports to Congress regarding a longitudinal study on the effects of traumatic brain injury incurred by members of the Armed Forces serving in Operation Iraqi Freedom or Operation Enduring Freedom.

(Sec. 749) Requires the DOD Office of Health to collaborate with the National Institutes of Health to identify and provide specified information related to triple negative breast cancer.

(Sec. 750) Requires DOD to conduct specified studies on preventing the diversion of opioid medications.

TITLE VIII--ACQUISITION POLICY, ACQUISITION MANAGEMENT, AND RELATED MATTERS

Subtitle A--Amendments to General Contracting Authorities, Procedures, and Limitations

(Sec. 801) Revises authorities related to the DOD Test Resource Management Center to limit the application of existing law to the Major Range and Test Facility Base and those test and evaluation facilities that are used to support the acquisition programs of DOD. Prevents reporting requirements from being broadened to small laboratory and educational test and evaluation facilities. Defines the term "significant change" in test and evaluation facilities.

(Sec. 802) Amends the restrictions on undefinitized contractual actions. Requires DOD to consider the cost risk to the contractor as of the date that a qualifying proposal to definitize a contract was submitted if the contract was not then definitized within the statutory 180-day period. Applies the 180-day definitization period to foreign military sales contracts. Defines a qualifying proposal as a proposal that contains sufficient information to enable a meaningful audit of the definitization proposal.

(Sec. 803) Revises requirements related to DOD's accounting for and reporting of contracts for services.

(Sec. 804) Specifies that the source selection criteria to be used in the procurement of personal protective equipment or critical safety items are criteria that: (1) are predominately based on technical qualifications of the item and not predominately based on price, (2) do not use reverse auction or lowest price technically acceptable contracting methods, and (3) reflect a preference for best value source selection methods.

(Sec. 805) Removes the retroactive application requirement for the cap on the allowable compensation of contractor employees. (As a result, the cap would apply to compensation costs incurred after January 1, 2012, under contracts entered into on or after December 31, 2011.)

(Sec. 806) Revises requirements for the detection and avoidance of counterfeit electronic parts to require contractors and DOD to meet certain requirements using "suppliers that meet anticounterfeiting requirements" rather than "trusted suppliers."

(Sec. 807) Expands the permissible uses of special emergency procurement authorities to include support of international disaster assistance and support of a national emergency or natural disaster relief efforts in the United States as defined by the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act.

(Sec. 808) Requires DOD to comply with domestic source requirements for footwear furnished to enlisted members of the Armed Forces upon their initial entry into the Armed Forces. Requires DOD to furnish the footwear directly to members instead of providing a cash allowance. Permits a waiver to be granted in cases of medical necessity.

(Sec. 809) Establishes a procurement policy checklist to ensure accountability in the acquisition of services and specifies requirements for the checklist.

(Sec. 809A) Extends for one year the cap on the total spending for services contracts.

(Sec. 809B) Extends the authority for the enhanced transfer of technology developed at DOD laboratories.

Subtitle B--Provisions Relating to Major Defense Acquisition Programs

(Sec. 811) Changes the date that the comprehensive annual Selected Acquisition Reports are due to Congress.

(Sec. 812) Specifies that the Office of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation (CAPE) conducts or approves independent cost estimates (ICEs) for all major defense acquisition programs and major automated information systems. Authorizes CAPE to approve ICEs conducted by the military departments. Requires CAPE to develop policies, procedures, guidance, and a collection method to ensure that acquisition cost data are collected in a standardized format that facilitates cost estimation and comparison across acquisition programs. Requires assessments of risk and potential consequences in ICEs, instead of the current reporting of confidence intervals.

(Sec. 813) Removes the requirement for the milestone decision authority, prior to milestone B (initiates engineering and manufacturing development) approval, to determine affordability and funding levels for a major defense acquisition program relative to the Future Years Defense Program submitted during the year in which the determination is made.

(Sec. 814) Requires DOD to review the extent to which sustainment matters are considered in decisions related to the requirements, acquisition, cost estimating, and programming and budgeting processes for major defense acquisition programs.

(Sec. 815) Adds the Secretaries of the military departments to the list of people who receive and may comment on the annual report of the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation. Extends the annual report through January 31, 2021.

Subtitle C--Provisions Relating to Commercial Items

(Sec. 821) Expands the types of nondevelopmental items that may be considered commercial items to include items that the procuring agency determines were developed at private expense and sold in substantial quantities on a competitive basis to foreign governments.

(Sec. 822) Requires DOD procurement officials to conduct or obtain market research when determining price reasonableness for commercial items.

(Sec. 823) Permits contractors to submit information or analysis pertaining to the value of a commercial item when responding to solicitations. Permits contracting officers to consider value analysis, in addition to historic pricing data, when determining price reasonableness for commercial items.

(Sec. 824) Expands DOD centralized records relating to commercial item determinations to include market research and price reasonableness analysis. Eliminates the requirement that the records be publicly accessible.

(Sec. 825) Permits DOD to carry out a commercial solutions opening pilot program, under which innovative commercial items may be acquired through a competitive selection of proposals resulting from a general solicitation and the peer review of the proposals.

Subtitle D--Other Matters

(Sec. 831) Requires DOD to enter into a contract with an independent entity to conduct a review of the bid protest processes related to major defense acquisition programs.

(Sec. 832) Requires the GAO to report on the use by DOD of indefinite delivery contracts entered into during FY2015-FY2017.

(Sec. 833) Requires DOD to review contractual flow-down provisions related to major defense acquisition programs.

(Sec. 834) Requires the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics to review the policy, guidance, regulations, and training related to specifications included in information technology acquisitions to ensure that current policies eliminate the unjustified use of potentially anti-competitive specifications.

(Sec. 835) Specifies the roles and functions of officials involved in Coast Guard major acquisition programs, including: the Chief Acquisitions Officer, the Acquisition Directorate, and the Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard.

Prohibits the Coast Guard from awarding a contract for the design of an unmanned aerial system (UAS) for use by the Coast Guard. Requires the Coast Guard to use and operate only UASs that have already been acquired by either DOD or DHS.

Permits the Coast Guard to extend major acquisition program contracts if the GAO finds that extending a current contract would be more cost effective than awarding a new contract.

Requires the Commandant to report to Congress on how the Commandant can play a more appropriate role in the acquisitions process with regard to policies, requirements, and implementing a more customer-oriented acquisition system.

Requires the Secretary for the department in which the Coast Guard is operating to submit to Congress an analysis of multiyear procurement authorities for the procurement of at least five Fast Response Cutters (beginning with hull 43) and Offshore Patrol Cutters (beginning with hull 5).

(Sec. 836) Waives congressional notification requirements regarding the acquisition of a higher quantity of tactical missiles and munitions than is specified in law.

(Sec. 837) Authorizes the Navy to close out specified older contracts to assist in obtaining a clean financial audit.

(Sec. 838) Requires certain auxiliary ship components to be procured from a manufacturer in the national technology and industrial base.

(Sec. 839) Permits DOD to reduce from $400 million to $0 the threshold for the amount that must be credited to the Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund during FY2017.

(Sec. 840) Exempts audits for the National Nuclear Security Administration from the prohibition on the performance of non-defense audits by the Defense Contract Audit Agency.

(Sec. 841) Requires DOD to select service providers for auditing services and audit readiness services based on the best value, as determined by the resource sponsor for an auditing contract, rather than based on the lowest price technically acceptable service provider.

(Sec. 842) Modifies the justification and approval process for sole-source contracts valued at $20 million or greater.

(Sec. 843) Requires DOD to brief Congress on the use and implementation of the two-phase design-build selection procedures for defense contracts.

(Sec. 844) Prohibits any DOD function performed by DOD civilian employees and tied to a certain military base from being converted to contractor performance until DOD assesses whether it has carried out sufficient outreach programs to assist small business concerns owned and controlled by women or socially and economically disadvantaged individuals that are located near the military base.

(Sec. 845) Requires the GAO to include in its annual report to Congress a list of the most common grounds for sustaining bid protests during the year.

(Sec. 846) Revises the effective dates for amendments related to the Under Secretary of Defense for Business Management and Information that were included in the Carl Levin and Howard P. "Buck" Mckeon National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015.

(Sec. 847) Specifies that it is DOD policy to avoid using lowest price technically acceptable source selection criteria in inappropriate circumstances that potentially deny DOD the benefits of cost and technical tradeoffs in the source selection process. Limits the use of lowest price technically acceptable source selection criteria to specified situations.

Requires DOD, to the maximum extent practicable, to avoid using lowest price technically acceptable source selection criteria when the procurement is predominately for the acquisition of information technology services, systems engineering and technical assistance services, audit or audit readiness services, or other knowledge-based professional services.

Requires DOD to report to Congress on the use of lowest-price technically acceptable source selection criteria.

(Sec. 848) Requires the GAO to study and report on DOD procurement contracts awarded to minority-owned and women-owned businesses during FY2010-FY2015.

TITLE IX--DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

Subtitle A--Goldwater-Nichols Reform

(Sec. 901) Expresses the sense of Congress regarding the principles that should be adhered to in any reform of the Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986.

(Sec. 902) Repeals a requirement for DOD to conduct a comprehensive examination of the national defense strategy.

(Sec. 903) Establishes the Commission on the National Defense Strategy for the United States to examine and make recommendations with respect to the national defense strategy for the United States.

(Sec. 904) Revises the requirements for the defense strategic and policy guidance that the Secretary of Defense is required to provide to the heads of DOD components. Requires the Secretary of Defense to provide:

written strategic guidance every four years to DOD components that expresses the national defense strategy;

written policy guidance annually to DOD components that provides program and budget guidance for the development of the force;

written policy guidance every two years or more frequently, as needed, to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that provides contingency planning guidance; and

a copy of all written guidance described above to Congress.

(Sec. 905) Requires the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to prepare a new National Military Strategy or update a previous one during each even-numbered year. Requires the strategy to support the objectives of national security and defense strategic guidance issued by the President and the Secretary of Defense, and, at a minimum, focus on:

developing military ends, ways, and means to support national security objectives;

assessing strategic and military risks, and developing risk mitigation options;

establishing a strategic framework for the development of operational and contingency plans;

prioritizing joint force capabilities, capacities, and resources; and

establishing military guidance for the development of the joint force.

(Sec. 906) Amends the requirements for an independent study of the national security strategy formulation process to add a requirement to address the workforce responsible for conducting strategic planning and examine how Congress fits into the strategy formulation process.

(Sec. 907) Extends from two to four years the term of office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Prohibits the reappointment of the Chairman to additional terms, except during a time of war. Limits the combined period of service of an officer serving as Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to eight years.

(Sec. 908) Specifies that the responsibilities of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Staff include providing advice to: (1) the President and the Secretary of Defense on ongoing military operations, and (2) to the Secretary on the allocation and transfer of forces among combatant commands.

(Sec. 909) Allows U.S. military forces within the continental United States to be assigned to a military department as directed by the Secretary of Defense.

(Sec. 910) Specifies that the grade of an officer serving as the commander of a service or functional component command may not be higher than lieutenant general or vice admiral. Requires the total number of officers in the grade of general or admiral on active duty to be reduced by five positions.

(Sec. 911) Establishes a unified combatant command for cyber operations to prepare cyber operations forces to carry out assigned missions.

(Sec. 912) Reduces the joint duty assignment tour length to a minimum of two years for officers of all ranks, and removes the statutory requirement for services to maintain a tour length average.

(Sec. 913) Revises the definitions used for joint officer management, including the definitions of "joint matters," "integrated forces," and "joint duty assignment."

(Sec. 914) Requires DOD to enter into a contract for an independent assessment of combatant command structure, and to provide recommendations for improving the overall effectiveness of combatant command structures.

Subtitle B--Other Matters

(Sec. 921) Modifies the requirements for the annual report from the Office of Corrosion Policy and Oversight.

(Sec. 922) Authorizes the Joint Special Operations University to employ civilian faculty members.

(Sec. 923) Establishes guidelines for using military personnel for functions currently being performed by civilian personnel or contractors.

(Sec. 924) Requires the DOD Inspector General to publicly release reports of administrative investigations that confirm misconduct of members of the Senior Executive Service, schedule C employees, or commissioned officers in the Armed Forces in pay grades O-6 promotable and above.

(Sec. 925) Removes responsibility for recovering personnel who are missing during current operations or activities from the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency.

(Sec. 926) Amends the National Security Act of 1947 to require the President's appointment of the National Security Adviser to be subject to Senate confirmation if the National Security Council staff exceeds 100 employees.

Subtitle C--Department of the Navy and Marine Corps

(Sec. 931) Redesignates the Department of the Navy as the Department of the Navy and Marine Corps. and redesignates the Secretary of the Navy as the Secretary of the Navy and Marine Corps. Requires other specified statutory offices to be redesignated.

(Sec. 932) Makes conforming amendments consistent with the redesignation of the Department of the Navy as the Department of the Navy and Marine Corps.

(Sec. 933) Amends other provisions of law and other references consistent with the redesignation of the Department of the Navy as the Department of the Navy and Marine Corps and the redesignation of the Secretary of the Navy as the Secretary of the Navy and Marine Corps.

(Sec. 934) Specifies the effective date for this subtitle.

TITLE X--GENERAL PROVISIONS

Subtitle A--Financial Matters

(Sec. 1001) Permits DOD to make transfers between amounts authorized for FY2017 in division A of this bill, subject to specified limitations and a congressional notification requirement.

(Sec. 1002) Reduces the unobligated balance of the Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund by $475 million.

(Sec. 1003) Requires DOD to submit to Congress a report ranking all military departments and defense agencies in order of how advanced they are in achieving auditable financial statements as required by law.

Subtitle B--Counter-Drug Activities

(Sec. 1011) Extends the authority of DOD to provide assistance to support counterdrug activities of foreign governments.

(Sec. 1012) Authorizes the Secretary of Defense to review and approve the curriculum and program structure of each of the National Guard counterdrug schools.

(Sec. 1013) Extends by one year the authority to support the unified counterdrug and counterterrorism campaign in Colombia.

(Sec. 1014) Requires DOD to coordinate unmanned aerial systems training missions along the southern border of the United States in order to support DHS's counter-narcotic trafficking efforts.

(Sec. 1015) Increases the amounts authorized by this bill for Drug Interdiction and Counterdrug Activities--Defense-wide. Decreases the Operation and Maintenance funds authorized by this bill for administration and servicewide activities of the Defense Logistics Agency.

(Sec. 1016) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the effectiveness of the U.S. Southern Command Operation to limit threats to U.S. national security by detecting and monitoring drug trafficking, specifically heroin and fentanyl.

Subtitle C--Naval Vessels and Shipyards

(Sec. 1021) Expands from six to ten months the definition of "short-term work" with respect to the overhaul, repair, or maintenance of naval vessels.

(Sec. 1022) Requires shipbuilding contracts to include warranty of work for a period of at least one year. Permits a contracting officer to waive this requirement if a limited liability of warranted work is in the best interest of the government.

(Sec. 1023) Extends through 2018 the authority for DOD to transfer specified funds to the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund. Permits the Navy to use the fund for the multiyear procurement of critical components to support continuous production. Revises the definition of a national sea-based deterrence vessel.

(Sec. 1024) Prohibits the Navy from using funds to retire a cruiser or dock landing ship or to place in a modernization status more than six cruisers and one dock landing ship. Limits the availability of funds for the Office of the Secretary of Defense until the Navy enters into contracts for: (1) the modernization of four cruisers and one dock landing ship, and (2) the procurement of combat systems upgrades associated with six cruisers.

(Sec. 1025) Prohibits the Navy from performing any overhaul, repair, or maintenance work that takes longer than six months in foreign shipyards.

Subtitle D--Counterterrorism

(Sec. 1031) Requires the Secretary of Defense to provide monthly counterterrorism operations briefings to Congress.

(Sec. 1032) Prohibits DOD from using funds to transfer or release detainees at U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, (Guantanamo) to or within the United States, its territories, or possessions.

(Sec. 1033) Prohibits DOD from using funds to construct or modify any facility in the United States, its territories, or possessions to house any detainee transferred from Guantanamo for the purposes of detention or imprisonment in the custody or under the effective control of DOD.

(Sec. 1034) Prohibits DOD from using funds to transfer, release, or assist in the transfer or release of any individual detained at Guantanamo to Libya, Somalia, Syria, or Yemen.

(Sec. 1035) Prohibits DOD from using funds for the closure or abandonment of Guantanamo, the relinquishment of control of Guantanamo to Cuba, or the implementation of a material modification to the Treaty Between the United States of America and Cuba that constructively closes Guantanamo.

(Sec. 1036) Modifies congressional notification requirements for sensitive military operations.

(Sec. 1037) Requires DOD to submit to Congress a comprehensive strategy for the detention of current and future individuals captured and held pursuant to the Authorization for Use of Military Force pending the end of hostilities. (The law authorized the President to use force in response to the terrorist attacks that occurred in the United States on September 11, 2001.)

(Sec. 1038) Requires the Director of National Intelligence to: (1) complete a declassification review of certain intelligence reports regarding the past terrorist activities of detainees transferred from U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; and (2) make available to the public any information declassified as a result of the review.

(Sec. 1039) Prohibits any order, ruling, finding, or other determination of a military commission from being construed or implemented to prevent members of the Armed Forces from carrying out otherwise lawful duties based on the member's gender.

Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Authorities and Limitations

(Sec. 1041) Reinstates DOD's authority to provide transportation to allied military personnel and civilians in contingencies or disaster responses on a non-interference basis, without charge, and expands the authority to include allied and civilian cargo, as well as passengers. Authorizes DOD to enter into a contract or other arrangement with one or more commercial providers to provide commercial insurance products to non-DOD shippers using the Defense Transportation System.

(Sec. 1042) Prohibits funds from being used to deactivate, decommission, or place in reduced operating status any mine countermeasures ships. Permits a waiver if the Navy certifies that the operational test and evaluation for replacement mine countermeasures capabilities are available in sufficient quantity and capacity to meet combatant commander requirements.

(Sec. 1043) Extends the authority of the Department of Transportation to provide aviation insurance and reinsurance upon the request of another U.S. government agency.

(Sec. 1044) Requires the Navy to change the mandatory possession or wear date of the alternate combination cover or the unisex combination cover from October 31, 2016, to October 31, 2020. Prohibits the Navy from implementing or enforcing any change to Navy female service dress uniforms until it submits to Congress an evaluation of Navy female service dress uniforms.

(Sec. 1045) Amends the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015 to specify that, if a required report determines that the reallocation and auction of certain spectrum would harm national security by impacting existing terrestrial federal spectrum operations at the Nevada Test and Training Range, the Federal Communications Commission must establish rules for licensees of the spectrum sufficient to mitigate harmful interference to the operations.

(Sec. 1046) Authorizes transportation on military aircraft on a space-available basis for disabled veterans with a service-connected, permanent disability rated as total by DOD.

(Sec. 1047) Specifies that it is DOD policy that flyovers of public events in support of community relations activities may only be flown as part of an approved training mission at no additional expense to the federal government. Specifies requirements for reports and the approval process.

(Sec. 1048) Applies the Freedom of Information Act to the National Security Council.

(Sec. 1049) Requires DOD, in transferring certain excess personal property to federal and state agencies, to give first preference to DHS and then to federal and state agencies that agree to use the property primarily for strengthening border security along the U.S. southern border. Applies to unmanned aerial vehicles, the Aerostat radar system, night-vision goggles, and high mobility multi-purpose wheel vehicles (commonly known as humvees).

Subtitle F--Studies and Reports

(Sec. 1061) Continues various DOD reporting requirements.

(Sec. 1062) Modifies reporting requirements for the DOD Rewards Program to specify the requirements for reporting the designation of countries for which rewards or payments-in-kind may be paid.

(Sec. 1063) Requires DOD to notify Congress within 15 days of notifying the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and/or the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service of any theft, loss, or release of biological select agents or toxins.

(Sec. 1064) Requires DOD to report to Congress on common service support contributed from each of the military services toward special operations forces.

(Sec. 1065) Requires DOD and the Department of State to jointly report to Congress on military units that have been assigned to policing or citizen security responsibilities in Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador.

(Sec. 1066) Requires DOD to submit to Congress a biennial report on counterproliferation activities and programs.

(Sec. 1067) Amends the requirement for the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to submit to Congress the annual Integrated Priorities List of the combatant commands to require the Chairman to also submit the integrated priorities list requirements for ballistic missile defense by the geographic combatant commands and the prioritized capabilities list for ballistic missile defense developed by the Commander of the U.S. Strategic Command.

(Sec. 1068) Requires the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to: (1) conduct and report to Congress on a comprehensive review of all DOD uses of spectrum, and (2) to certify at the time of submission of the report that they understand any potential impacts to DOD use of spectrum that could result from a spectrum auction, reallocation, or sharing arrangement as of that date.

Requires DOD to notify Congress as to whether DOD has concurred or otherwise objected to the most recent version of the 10-year plan developed by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration no later than 30 days after the date of the non-concurrence or objection.

Limits the availability of DOD funding for operation and maintenance for headquarters operations until the report and certification are submitted to Congress.

(Sec. 1069) Requires the National Guard to submit to Congress and specified officials a report setting forth the personnel, training, and equipment required by the National Guard during the next year to carry out its mission, while not federalized, to provide prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery activities in support of civilian authorities in connection with natural and man-made disasters.

(Sec. 1070) Requires the Air Force to brief Congress on the process and reasoning for using proximity to primary medium commercial hub airports as part of the mission criteria for the Air Force Installation and Mission Support Center headquarters strategic basing process.

(Sec. 1071) Requires the Navy to submit to Congress an assessment of all operational minehunting Synthetic Aperture Sonar technologies suitable to meet the requirements for use on the Littoral Combat Ship Mine Countermeasures Mission Package.

(Sec. 1072) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the impact of changes to existing carrier air wing force structure and the impact a potential reduction to nine carrier air wings would have on overall fleet readiness if aircraft and personnel were to be distributed throughout the remaining nine air wings.

(Sec. 1073) Requires the Air Force and the Army to report quarterly to Congress on parachute jumps conducted at Fort Bragg and Pope Army Air Field, North Carolina, and air support provided by the Air Force for the jumps.

(Sec. 1074) Requires DOD to brief Congress on the status of the Installation Geospatial Information and Services of DOD as it relates to DOD real property inventory, and the extent to which DOD has used the cadastral geographic information systems-based real property inventory.

(Sec. 1075) Requires DOD to report to Congress on adjustment and diversification assistance.

(Sec. 1076) Requires DOD to brief Congress on efforts to protect the personally identifiable information of members of the Armed Forces, their families, and DOD employees.

Subtitle G--Other Matters

(Sec. 1081) Makes technical and clerical amendments to existing laws.

(Sec. 1082) Modifies and extends through January 31, 2021, the ''Support for Non-Federal Development and Testing of Material for Chemical Agent Defense.'' Requires the report to include details regarding instances where DOD provides biological select agents or toxins to a non-federal entity for development of biological defenses.

(Sec. 1083) Increases the monetary cap for the cost of equipment, services, and supplies for humanitarian demining assistance and stockpiled conventional munitions assistance provided by DOD.

(Sec. 1084) Authorizes DOD to liquidate unpaid debts owed to the United States by a foreign government or international organization as a result of DOD providing logistic support, supplies, or services to that foreign government or international organization. Permits DOD to liquidate the debts by offsetting the debt against any amounts owed by DOD to the foreign government or international organization for logistic support, supplies, or services obtained by DOD pursuant to specified transactions.

(Sec. 1085) Amends the requirements for airlift service to specify that both contracts and subcontracts for airlift service are covered by the requirements.

(Sec. 1086) Requires DOD and the Departments of Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, and Agriculture to jointly develop a national biodefense strategy and associated implementation plan. Requires the GAO to review the strategy and implementation plan to analyze gaps and resources mapped against the requirements of the National Biodefense Strategy and existing U.S. biodefense policy documents.

(Sec. 1087) Requires the Army to carry out a program to support the socio-cultural understanding needs of the Army, to be known as the Global Cultural Knowledge Network. Prohibits DOD from deploying social scientists to a conflict zone as a part of the network.

(Sec. 1088) Delays from January 1, 2017, to October 1, 2017, the implementation date for the conversion of certain military technician (dual status) positions to civilian positions. Specifies that the positions to be converted will be reviewed and determined by leadership from the Army Reserve, the Air Force Reserve, the National Guard Bureau, and the State Adjutants General. Requires DOD to report to Congress on the feasibility of converting any remaining military technicians (dual status) to personnel performing Active Guard and Reserve Duty.

(Sec. 1089) Expresses the sense of Congress commending the dedication and contribution of the people of Connecticut to the Navy and the submarine force.

(Sec. 1090) Requires the Department of Energy to issue a final decision on any application for the authorization to export natural gas not later than 30 days after completing an environmental review or the date of enactment of this bill. (The requirement applies to proposals that must also obtain authorization from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission or the United States Maritime Administration to site, construct, expand, or operate LNG export facilities.)

(Sec. 1091) Expresses the sense of Congress regarding the reporting of the MV-22 mishap in Marana, Arizona, on April 8, 2000.

(Sec. 1092) Requires the Army to transfer excess .45 caliber M1911A1 pistols to the Civilian Marksmanship Program.

(Sec. 1093) Expresses the sense of Congress regarding the importance of Panama City, Florida, to the history and future of the Armed Forces.

(Sec. 1094) Requires religious organizations that are recipients of or offerors for a federal government contract to be provided protections and exemptions consistent with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.

(Sec. 1095) Exempts DOD and the National Nuclear Security Administration from implementation of Executive Order 13673 (Fair Pay and Safe Workplaces).

(Sec. 1096) Requires DOD to determine and disclose the transportation costs incurred by DOD for certain congressional trips outside the United States.

(Sec. 1097) Permits U.S. Customs and Border Protection to waive certain polygraph examination requirements for qualifying veterans.

(Sec. 1098) Requires DOD to ensure that the Transportation Worker Identification Credential (TWIC) is accepted as a valid credential for unescorted access to DOD installations by transportation workers.

Exempts TWIC-carrying transportation workers who also have a current DOD Secret Level Clearance issued by DOD from further vetting when seeking unescorted access at DOD facilities.

Requires DOD to document and report to Congress on each instance when a credentialed transportation worker is denied unescorted access to a military facility.

(Sec. 1098A) Prohibits DOD from using funds for the destruction of anti-personnel landmine munitions until DOD reports to Congress on the development of replacement anti-personnel landmine munitions. Includes an exception for any anti-personnel landmine munitions that are unsafe or could pose a safety risk if not demilitarized or destroyed.

(Sec. 1098B) Prohibits DOD from transferring individuals detained at Guantanamo to a foreign country unless it certifies that the U.S. and the foreign country have entered into a written memorandum of understanding regarding the transfer of the individual and the memorandum of understanding has previously been transmitted to Congress.

(Sec. 1098C) Expresses the sense of Congress regarding American veterans who are disabled for life.

(Sec. 1098D) Requires DOD to: (1) study the effects of military helicopter noise on National Capital Region communities and individuals; and (2) develop recommendations for the reduction of the effects of military helicopter noise on individuals, structures, and property values in the region.

Maritime Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Committee Act

(Sec. 1098E) Amends the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 to establish a Maritime Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Committee to advise the Secretary of Labor in formulating maritime industry standards and regarding matters pertaining to the administration of the Act related to the maritime industry.

(Sec. 1098F) Expresses the sense of Congress regarding U.S. Northern Command Preparedness.

(Sec. 1098G) Requires DOD to post on its public website the costs, including the relevant legacy costs, to each taxpayer of each of the wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria.

(Sec. 1098H) Provides U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services additional authority to approve H-2B (temporary nonagricultural worker) visa application renewals for contractors performing work on Guam in direct support of all military-funded construction, repairs, renovation, and facilities services, or to perform services or labor on Guam as a healthcare worker.

(Sec. 1098I) Requires DOD to review and update its regulations to ensure that the regulations comply with federal consumer protection law regarding the collection of debt.

(Sec. 1098J) Expresses the sense of Congress regarding the importance of the role played by women in World War II.

(Sec. 1098K) Authorizes the Army to acquire from any person any excess rifle, ammunition, repair parts, or other supplies which were provided to any country on a grant basis and transfer the items to certain individuals.

(Sec. 1098L) Establishes as additional functions of the Deputy Director for Management of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) requirements to:

adopt and oversee government-wide standards, policies, and guidelines for program and project management;

chair the Program Management Policy Council;

establish standards and policies for executive agencies consistent with widely accepted standards for program and project management planning and delivery;

engage with the private sector;

conduct portfolio reviews of agency programs and programs identified as high risk by the Government Accountability Office; and

establish a five-year strategic plan for program and project management.

Requires certain federal agencies to designate a Program Management Improvement Officer to implement program management policies and develop a written strategy for enhancing the role of program managers. Exempts DOD from this requirement if it is substantially similar or duplicative of specified existing requirements.

Establishes the Program Management Policy Council within OMB to act as the principal interagency forum for improving practices related to program and project management.

Requires the Office of Personnel Management to issue regulations that: (1) identify key skills and competencies needed for an agency program and project manager, (2) establish a new job series for program and project management, and (3) establish a new career path for program and project managers.

Requires the GAO to report to Congress on the effectiveness of policies on program and project management.

United States Naval Station Guantanamo Bay Preservation Act

Subtitle H--United States Naval Station Guantanamo Bay Preservation Act

(Sec. 1099A) Sets forth findings regarding the U.S Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

(Sec. 1099B) Prohibits the modification, abrogation, or other related actions with respect to commitments contained in the Guantanamo Lease Agreements, or the U.S. jurisdiction over U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, without specified congressional actions.

(Sec. 1099C) Defines the term "Guantanamo Lease Agreements" for the purpose of this subtitle.

TITLE XI--CIVILIAN PERSONNEL MATTERS

(Sec. 1101) Provides DOD with direct-hire authority for DOD industrial base facilities located in the United States, as well as the Major Range and Test Facilities Base, for two years.

(Sec. 1102) Permits DOD industrial base facilities located in the United States and Major Range and Test Facilities Base centers to hire temporary employees into permanent positions outside of the requirements of the competitive service.

(Sec. 1103) Extends for one year the authority to grant allowances, benefits, and gratuities to civilian personnel on official duty in a combat zone.

(Sec. 1104) Authorizes advance payment of basic pay for current civilian employees who relocate within the United States and its territories to a location outside of the employee's current commuting area.

(Sec. 1105) Makes permanent the alternative personnel program for scientific and technical personnel.

(Sec. 1106) Modifies the Information Technology Exchange Program to rename the program the "Cyber and Information Technology Exchange Program" and increase from 10 to 50 the number of personnel that may be exchanged.

(Sec. 1107) Consolidates per diem localities in the Dayton, Ohio area.

(Sec. 1108) Modifies the circumstances under which employees of a land management agency in a time-limited appointment are eligible to compete for a permanent appointment at any federal agency.

(Sec. 1109) Prohibits a federal employee from being placed on administrative leave, or other paid non-duty status without charging leave, for more than 14 total days for reasons relating to misconduct or performance.

(Sec. 1110) Requires the head of an agency to make a permanent notation in an individual's personnel file if the individual resigns from government employment while the subject of a personnel investigation and an adverse finding against the individual is made as a result of the investigation.

(Sec. 1111) Requires an appointing authority to review and consider the information relating to a prospective employee's former government service in the candidate's official personnel record file prior to making any determination regarding the appointment or reinstatement of the employee to such a position.

(Sec. 1112) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the structure and number of its civilian workforce and contractors.

(Sec. 1113) Authorizes DOD, with the agreement of a private-sector organization and the consent of the employee, to arrange for the temporary assignment of a DOD employee to the private-sector organization, or from the private-sector organization to a DOD organization.

TITLE XII--MATTERS RELATING TO FOREIGN NATIONS

Subtitle A--Assistance and Training

(Sec. 1201) Authorizes DOD to provide supplies, services, transportation, and other logistical support to coalition forces supporting U.S. operations in Iraq and Afghanistan during FY2017.

(Sec. 1202) Extends the authority for training of general purpose forces of the Armed Forces with military and other security forces of friendly foreign countries to December 31, 2019.

(Sec. 1203) Extends through FY2020, the authority to provide assistance to the military and civilian first responder organizations of countries that share a border with Syria in order to enhance the capability of the countries to respond effectively to potential incidents involving weapons of mass destruction in Syria and the surrounding region.

Requires DOD to notify Congress within 48 hours of determining that assistance provided to certain countries is expected to exceed $4 million. Limits the funding for the assistance to $20 million per year.

(Sec. 1204) Extends through FY2020 the authority to provide support to foreign forces, irregular forces, groups, or individuals engaged in supporting or facilitating ongoing military operations by U.S. special operations forces to combat terrorism.

(Sec. 1205) Modifies and codifies certain reporting requirements for DOD programs to provide training, equipment, or other assistance or reimbursement relating to security cooperation authorities.

(Sec. 1206) Requires DOD to enter into an agreement with a federally funded research and development center, or another appropriate independent entity, with expertise in security cooperation to conduct an assessment of the Strategic Framework for Department of Defense Security Cooperation.

(Sec. 1207) Expresses the sense of Congress regarding an assessment, monitoring, and evaluation framework for security cooperation.

(Sec. 1208) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the implementation of provisions under current law that prohibit funds from being used to assist units of foreign security forces that have committed a gross violation of human rights.

Subtitle B--Matters Relating to Afghanistan and Pakistan

(Sec. 1211) Extends the Commanders' Emergency Response Program in Afghanistan. Authorizes ex gratia payments for damage, personal injury, or death that is incident to combat operations of the Armed Forces in Iraq.

(Sec. 1212) Extends the authority for reimbursement of coalition nations for support provided to the United States for military operations in Afghanistan. Limits the overall amount available for reimbursement to $1.1 billion, of which $900 million is available for reimbursement to Pakistan.

Extends congressional notification and certification requirements regarding reimbursements to Pakistan. Specifies that certain reimbursements to Pakistan are ineligible for a national security waiver unless DOD makes specified certifications regarding the activities of Pakistan with respect to the Haqqani Network.

(Sec. 1213) Extends the authority to acquire products and services produced in countries along a major route of supply to Afghanistan.

(Sec. 1214) Extends the authority to transfer defense articles and provide defense services to the military and security forces of Afghanistan. Extends the quarterly reporting requirement for this authority. Exempts excess defense articles transferred from DOD stocks to the military and security forces of Afghanistan from specified authorities and limitations in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961.

(Sec. 1215) Expresses the sense of Congress regarding U.S. policy and strategy in Afghanistan.

(Sec. 1216) Extends the Afghan Special Immigrant Visa program through December 31, 2017, and modifies the eligibility requirements for the program.

(Sec. 1217) Requires DOD's semiannual report on enhancing security and stability in Afghanistan to include a description of the status of the implementation of the Afghan Personnel and Pay System.

(Sec. 1218) Expresses the sense of Congress that Dr. Shakil Afridi is an international hero and that the government of Pakistan should release him immediately from prison.

(Sec. 1219) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the extent to which the Combined Security Transition Command-Afghanistan has adequate access to financial records of the government of Afghanistan to audit the use of funds authorized or otherwise made available to assist Afghanistan.

Subtitle C--Matters Relating to Syria and Iraq

(Sec. 1221) Extends through FY2017 the Syria Train and Equip Program and associated reprogramming requirements. Requires DOD to certify, with each reprogramming request, that the required number and type of U.S. Armed Forces have been deployed to support:

the strategy for Syria required under current law,

a plan to retake and hold Raqqa, Syria; and

the elements of the Syrian opposition and other Syrian groups and individuals trained and equipped to defend themselves from attacks by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the forces of the Syrian government.

(Sec. 1222) Authorizes DOD to provide specified funds to the military and other security forces of, or associated with, the government of Iraq, including Kurdish and Sunni tribal security forces or other local security forces with a national security mission, through 2017.

Restricts the availability of funds for the Iraqi Train and Equip Fund until after DOD submits to Congress a plan to retake and hold Mosul, Iraq.

Authorizes funds, which are not subject to the restriction, for stipends and sustainment to the Iraqi Kurdish Peshmerga, the Sunni tribal security forces, or other local security forces with a national security mission.

Requires a specified portion of the funds to be available for the Iraqi Kurdish Peshmerga. Requires DOD and the State Department to provide Congress with an assessment of the extent to which the government of Iraq is meeting certain conditions relating to the political inclusion of ethnic and sectarian minorities within the security forces of Iraq.

Prohibits U.S. assistance authorized under this section from being provided to Iraq 90 days after the enactment of this bill unless DOD certifies that Iraq has taken actions to safeguard against U.S. assistance being transferred to or acquired by violent extremist organizations.

(Sec. 1223) Extends the authority to support operations and activities of the Office of Security Cooperation in Iraq. Permits the Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, to authorize the office to conduct training activities in support of the Iraqi Border Police.

(Sec. 1224) Requires DOD to report to Congress on the political, economic, and security conditions in Iraq and Syria that would be necessary and sufficient to prevent the formation of future terrorist organizations in Iraq and Syria.

(Sec. 1225) Requires DOD and the State Department to jointly submit to Congress a semiannual report on the political and military strategies to defeat ISIL. Requires the GAO to submit a report that: (1) reviews the accountability measures taken by