Congressional Record
Formatting necessary for an accurate reading of this text may be shown by tags (e.g., <DELETED> or <BOLD>) or may be missing from this TXT display. For complete and accurate display of this text, see the PDF.

[Pages H8512-H8537] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] TEXAS LOW-LEVEL RADIOACTIVE WASTE DISPOSAL COMPACT CONSENT ACT Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, by direction of the Committee on Rules, I call up House Resolution 258 and ask for its immediate consideration. The Clerk read the resolution, as follows: H. Res. 258 Resolved, That at any time after the adoption of this resolution the Speaker may, pursuant to clause 1(b) of rule XXIII, declare the House resolved into the Committee of the Whole House on the state of the Union for consideration of the bill (H.R. 629) to grant the consent of the Congress to the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact. The first reading of the bill shall be dispensed with. General debate shall be confined to the bill and shall not exceed one hour equally divided and controlled by the chairman and ranking minority member of the Committee on Commerce. After general debate the bill shall be considered for amendment under the five-minute rule. Each section of the bill shall be considered as read. During consideration of the bill for amendment, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole may accord priority in recognition on the basis of whether the Member offering an amendment has caused it to be printed in the portion of the Congressional Record designated for that purpose in clause 6 of rule XXIII. Amendments so printed shall be considered as read. The Chairman of the Committee of the Whole may: (1) postpone until a time during further consideration in the Committee of the Whole a request for a recorded vote on any amendment; and (2) reduce to five minutes the minimum time for electronic voting on any postponed question that follows another electronic vote without intervening business, provided that the minimum time for electronic voting on the first in any series of questions shall be fifteen minutes. At the conclusion of consideration of the bill for amendment the Committee shall rise and report the bill to the House with such amendments as may have been adopted. The previous question shall be considered as ordered on the bill and amendments thereto to final passage without intervening motion except one motion to recommit with or without instructions. The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. Ewing). The gentlewoman from Ohio [Ms. Pryce] is recognized for 1 hour. Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, for the purpose of debate only, I yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Hall], my good friend, pending which I yield myself such time as I may consume. During consideration of this resolution, all time yielded is for the purposes of debate only. General Leave Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days within which to revise and extend their remarks on this resolution. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gentlewoman from Ohio? There was no objection. Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, House Resolution 258 provides for consideration of H.R. 629, the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact Consent Act, under another completely fair and open rule. The rule provides for 1 hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by the chairman and ranking minority member of the Committee on Commerce. Under the rule, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole may give priority recognition to those Members who have preprinted their amendments in the Congressional Record prior to their consideration. And to expedite consideration of H.R. 629, the rule also allows the Chair to postpone recorded votes and reduce to 5 minutes the voting time on any postponed question, as long as the first in any series of votes is not less than 15 minutes. Finally, as is customary, the minority will be provided with a motion to recommit with or without instructions. Mr. Speaker, in 1980 Congress passed legislation to provide a system for States to take responsibility for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste. Examples of low-level radioactive waste include waste that is disposed of [[Page H8513]] by hospitals, by universities conducting research, and by electric utilities. This waste poses relatively few risks and typically does not require any special protective shielding to make it safe for workers and communities. Congress recognized, when it passed the Low-level Radioactive Waste Policy Act of 1980, that while the Federal Government should handle high-level waste, States should be primarily responsible for disposal of low-level wastes generated within their borders. Through the 1980 act, Congress encouraged States to either build their own disposal sites or enter into compacts with other States to share waste disposal facilities. That is exactly what the States of Texas, Vermont, and Maine have done. Mr. Speaker, this is a straightforward rule which deals with a straightforward process, the ratification of an interstate compact under the law as Congress wrote it. All the hard work has already been done by the States of Texas, Vermont, and Maine, who negotiated the compact and gained the approval of their respective States. The Governors and legislatures in the States of Texas and Vermont have approved the compact, and Maine secured its citizens' support through a public referendum. The compact provides that the State of Texas will host the waste facility, but it does not name a specific site. And while Congress does not have to give its consent for interstate agreements to have validity, congressional approval is desirable in this instance to assure that compact members will be able to reject waste from nonmember States. Mr. Speaker, that is all we are doing today, telling the States of Texas, Maine, and Vermont whether or not we accept their mutual agreement. It is nothing new. Congress has already given its consent to 9 such compacts, including 41 States. Today if we pass this rule and the underlying legislation, Congress will be ratifying compact number 10. In the Committee on Rules, we heard from the bill's proponents who, in fairness, mentioned the concerns of a few other Members who were not present to give their testimony. While no specific amendments were mentioned to the committee, the open process that this rule provides should offer concerned Members ample opportunity to debate and offer germane amendments that they feel will improve the bill. Or, perhaps through the motion to recommit, the bill's opponents will choose to make their views known. The point is, this rule gives them that option. As one of my Democratic colleagues on the Committee on Rules pointed out last night, this issue has been around for a long time. And to be fair to the States involved, the underlying bill deserves to be debated in this body and receive an up-or-down vote. {time} 1415 Therefore, I encourage my colleagues to support the open rule before us so that the House can move forward and debate the merits of the underlying legislation. I urge a ``yes'' vote on this open rule. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. I thank my colleague, the gentlewoman from Ohio [Ms. Pryce] for yielding me the time. This is an open rule. It will allow full and fair debate on H.R. 629, which is the Texas Low Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact Consent Act. The bill approves an agreement between the States of Texas, Maine, and Vermont to establish a disposal facility in Texas for low level radioactive waste. Under this rule amendments will be allowed under the 5-minute rule, the normal amending process in the House. The Texas Low Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact has supporters and opponents among the Members of the House, as does the bill. However, all Members on both sides of the aisle will have the opportunity to offer amendments under this open rule. And because it is an open rule, and because 2 years ago when the House took up an identical bill, we also had an open rule that was approved by voice vote, Mr. Speaker, I would urge adoption of this resolution, which is an open rule before us today. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton]. Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman for yielding me the time. I rise in support of the rule. As has been pointed out by majority and minority members of the Committee on Rules, this is an open rule. The Commerce Clause of the Constitution gives the Congress the right to regulate interstate commerce between the States. The States of Texas, Vermont, and Maine have chosen to form a compact as a result of the Low Level Nuclear Waste Act and the amendments back in 1985. If ratified and signed by the President, this act would give those States the right to ship their low level radioactive nuclear waste to a site in Texas that is unspecified in the bill. There are some opponents. The gentleman from San Antonio who represents the congressional district, the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] is here and does oppose this site that apparently is going to be chosen. This bill deserves to be debated on the floor. It was debated on the floor in the 104th Congress and passed with 243 in the affirmative and 176 in the negative. It did not go to the Senate because it was on the suspension calendar and it failed to get the two-thirds vote. We are not on the suspension calendar this afternoon. We have an open rule so that any Member can offer amendments to the bill. I would hope that the rule itself will be noncontroversial and that we can pass it by unanimous consent and then get into the actual debate of the bill. I rise in support of the rule and hope that all Members will support it. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Maine [Mr. Baldacci]. Mr. BALDACCI. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to support this rule on H.R. 629, the bill to give congressional consent to the Texas Low Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact. The Committee on Rules has recommended an open rule for allowing for 1 hour of general debate. I fully expect a vigorous discussion of the compact. I look forward to that debate and to answering any questions that may arise. This compact is important for Vermont. It is important for Texas. And it is important for Maine. This would be the 10th compact that Congress has ratified since 1985, when Congress enacted the low level radioactive waste disposal policy. Congress gave the States a mandate, an unfunded one, I might add, to develop methods for managing low level waste. The three States have diligently complied with that mandate. The Governors and legislatures of Vermont and Texas have approved the compact. The Governor, the legislature, and the people of Maine have approved the compact. I urge Members to support the rule. Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla]. Mr. BONILLA. Mr. Speaker, I thank my friend, the gentlewoman from Ohio [Ms. Pryce] for yielding the time to me. There is no Member of Congress that is more engaged or focused on this issue today than myself, Mr. Speaker. I rise in opposition to the rule and the bill. I will be getting into more details during general debate as to the reasons why we should defeat this bill. This is a clear case of constituents in my area being victimized without having a say in where this low level radioactive waste dump site is going to be constructed. This is a country that I have grown up in always understanding that if something is going to happen in a person's neighborhood, it ought to be with their approval or at least they have some kind of input in the process. That is not the case at all. We have been debating and arguing about this issue for so many years now. It has finally come to a head here where the proponents have worked very hard to try to turn Members around to vote differently than they did the last time this came to the floor. That is why I am working hard today to oppose the rule and the bill. I do commend members of the Committee on Rules and the gentleman from New York [Mr. Solomon] for providing an open rule. It is the fairest kind of rule that we can have. But my [[Page H8514]] point is that this bill should not even be before us today. That is why I will be opposing the rule and opposing the bill after we finish the vote on this rule. I look at, this is just a handful of the petitions that have been signed by men, women, and children in my congressional district. Up to a dozen counties and towns have already expressed their strong opposition to this dump site. Again, it is a sparsely populated area in west Texas, part of the area that I represent that spans 58,000 square miles. People out there are entitled to their constitutional rights, to their property rights. They should not be victimized by just being told this has to be built in their backyard, and we are going to fight hard to defeat this rule and bill today. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Doggett]. Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Speaker, to set the record correct at the beginning, this is a bad idea that has been defeated by a majority of this House once in the last Congress. I believe my colleague, the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton], got it backward on the result. There were 176 Members of this Congress that said they wanted to dump radioactive waste on Texas and the district of the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla], and there were 243 of us that said we do not want to be the Lone Star dump, and the bill was defeated. Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Speaker, will the gentleman yield? Mr. DOGGETT. I yield to the gentleman from Texas. Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I just want to say, the gentleman is correct. I did have it backward. The gentleman from Austin, TX is correct on the numbers. Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Speaker, that is the first concession by an Aggie to a Longhorn in this body in a long time. I appreciate it. This bad idea has been defeated once on the floor of this Congress and the question is, should we reconsider today and decide that the last Congress was wrong and that it is time to dump radioactive waste on Texas? In Texas we have a very short answer to that. Don't mess with Texas. We find it on pickup trucks and Cadillacs and Fords and Volkswagens all over the State of Texas. That is exactly what is being proposed here today, messing with Texas. We are pretty proud down there in the Lone Star State of the fact that we have a lone star as a symbol of our independence as Texans. But, by golly, we do not want the Lone Star State turned into the lone dump State, and that is what is about to happen if this bill is approved. Lest anyone think this is just a Texas issue, let me emphasize that of late, since the vote in the last Congress, and there are of course not 243 Texans here, that since the vote in the last Congress even some of the Yankees who are in this compact have come to the conclusion that dumping on Texas is a pretty lousy idea. Indeed, within the last week the largest contributor of nuclear waste to this dump, up in Maine, appropriately titled the Maine Yankee nuclear power plant, has written to Speaker Gingrich and to various Members of this Congress saying do not do it. They recognize that it is going actually to cost citizens in Maine more money, not less money, if this compact is approved. I think that it is a bad idea, not only for Texans but for those in the compact at the other end of the country in New England, those served by the Maine Yankee nuclear power plant and by anyone who sits in between New England and west Texas that might have this nuclear waste shipped through their area. This compact has been lobbied through the Texas legislature by some of the most high-powered lobbyists around. They lobbied the legislature of Texas to accept this compact on the grounds that it would protect Texas, and that Texas would be teamed up with two little States way up in New England that probably could not generate very much waste to be dumped there, and we would be a lot better off there than being teamed up with some State like New York or Massachusetts or California that might send a whole lot of waste down to Texas. There is only one problem with that reasoning. This is not a Texas- Vermont-Maine compact. It is mislabeled. It is a Texas-Vermont-Maine compact plus any other State that a group of appointed, unelected commissioners, accountable to no one but themselves, may choose to add to the compact. In fact, the economics of this compact are going to cause exactly the opposite result of what those who promoted the compact told the Texas legislature and the people of Texas. This compact could be expanded to include waste from anywhere, of any type, at any time that this group of unelected compact commissioners decides that they want to dump it on the district of the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla]. That waste does not have to be approved by people in Sierra Blanca, TX, or anywhere else. It is a bad idea. Don't mess with Texas or any place in between. Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Green]. (Mr. GREEN asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. GREEN. Mr. Speaker, it is with some trepidation I follow my colleague from Texas because obviously, let me correct something, I was in the legislature in 1991 when the legislature passed the compact enabling legislation, again, to limit the ability as the Federal Government and this Congress allowed States to limit their access for waste, Texas, Maine, and Vermont. Now, granted, some future legislature, I do not know if it is appointed officials but the legislature in Texas decides to appoint officials, they could delegate that authority, but that is just not the case. The legislature in Texas, after studying it, adopted this site in west Texas. It was not picked by Washington. It was not even picked by those of us who served in the 1991 legislative session because all we did was enable the legislature to do that, to do the study. Granted, nobody wants waste, particularly low level, but we have to have a place for it. The compact allows Texas, Maine, and Vermont to work together to have that site. That site was picked in Hudspeth County. We did not pick that site in Congress. The local folks in Texas did that, and the legislature actually ultimately did. That is the best reason why this ought to be passed today. We are not going to debate the site. Sure, I would rather have the site in Maine or Vermont but Texas agreed to do it by those local officials. This is just an affirmation of the compact that this Congress allowed for low level. We are going to hear a lot today, not only on this rule. It is an open rule. We will hear a lot about transportation, a lot about the site in west Texas. Again, it is away from an urban area. The closest urban area is El Paso. This is the best of a bad world, but we have to have a place to put this low level waste. This is, again, the local decision by the State of Texas to do that. That is why 23 of the Members from Texas are supporting this bill, this rule and this bill today. We will hear a great deal more as we go into the full debate. That is why I am proud to be a cosponsor of the bill. I have for a number of years because we have to have a reasonable place to put it. We cannot just deny it and let it be out there in limbo, having this warehoused on sites, whether it be hospitals or whether it be on power plant facilities. We have to have a permanent solution for it, someplace where we can put it together safely instead of having it in storage facilities behind hospitals, in urban areas. That is not possible. We are going to hear the concern about the transportation, whether it be from my colleagues in Dallas or in Houston. I represent an urban area. We have more volatile substances on our freeways right now in Houston than this low level waste. So I would hope that the Congress, after considering this bill today, would pass it favorably so we can have a compact between Texas, Maine, and Vermont to have a reasonable place for our low level waste. Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Sam Johnson]. {time} 1430 Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to second what [[Page H8515]] my colleague in the Texas legislature and here, the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Green], has said. It was a Texas decision. It was made by the Texas legislature. I was there with him when that decision was made. Texas made the decision to have a compact and Texas deserves to have the Congress affirm it. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Kucinich]. Mr. KUCINICH. Mr. Speaker, 30 years ago the nuclear utility industry was telling Americans it would provide power that was too cheap to meter. Soon Americans found out it was power too expensive to use. Now we are told that we have power that is too hot to handle and power refuse that is too dangerous to store. Mr. Speaker, I offer these comments in the context of the rule and the debate which will follow so that my colleagues can have the benefit of the experience that I had as a State Senator in Ohio who led the effort against the siting of a multistate radioactive waste dump in the State of Ohio. There was an effort to bring in waste from Iowa, Indiana, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Missouri, 2.25 cubic million feet of radioactive waste, into the State of Ohio. And in the course of examining this proposal, what we found out was this. That the waste itself, called low-level, in fact exists for thousands of years. So the word ``low-level'' is a misnomer; and that inevitably the cost involved here will be passed on to consumers or taxpayers, as nuclear utilities will either not handle the cost or find ways for the States or the taxpayers of the States to absorb. Furthermore, there is no known technology which can safely store this radioactive waste for more than 25 years. These casks which they are put in will deteriorate and crack and the waste will leach out into the outside environment. There is no way to prevent a release to the outside. We found this out through months and months of public hearings. We found out that not only does the technology not exist but the Department of Energy itself will admit that the best they can do with these casks is to keep the radioactive waste for 25 years. We found out that there was no safe way to transport millions upon millions of cubic feet of radioactive waste across this country. So let it not be said this is simply a State issue. This is a national issue, because the movement of radioactive waste, thousands upon thousands of miles, goes through our neighborhoods, through our communities, and our people are at risk when we have an unstable radioactive waste in containers that cannot always be safely affirmed. Furthermore, there is no safe place to site radioactive waste. The fact of the matter is that there is a difference in the amount of risk that is out there. It is unsafe whether it is sited near Lake Erie or near the Rio Grande. We need a national policy which puts the nuclear utilities on notice that they have to come up with the solution and they have to pay for it, not the taxpayers or the ratepayers. The real question here is a public interest question of whether or not the nuclear utilities are going to be served or whether or not the public interest is going to be served. This is not an issue where the States can make this decision in a vacuum. The decision is made by this Congress and it affects the entirety of the United States. Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Nevada, [Mr. Ensign]. Mr. ENSIGN. Mr. Speaker, we have heard from the proponents of this bill that Texas said ``yes,'' but we have also heard that the local people where this nuclear waste will be stored said ``no.'' We have also heard that people object to the transport of low-level nuclear waste. Let us switch this argument just temporarily to low level versus high level, because those people who are going to be voting to put low-level nuclear waste in the State of Texas, their concerns on transport and the like should also be the same concerns when it comes to high-level nuclear waste, which will be coming to this floor in approximately 2 weeks. Mr. Speaker, all those opposed to this bill should also be opposed to the high-level transport of nuclear waste, which is much more dangerous than the transport of low-level nuclear waste across this country. I would urge everyone to take a close look at both bills and to vote ``no'' on both bills. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from Texas [Ms. Jackson-Lee]. (Ms. JACKSON-LEE of Texas asked and was given permission to revise and extend her remarks.) Ms. JACKSON-LEE of Texas. Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that we all need to look closely at and, obviously, there are many ways that we may view this. I think that we have an obligation to our hospitals, our research laboratories, and our universities to emphasize that this is low-level radioactive waste. It is trash-like material, some consisting of paper and plastics and construction materials that are contaminated with low levels of radioactive materials. I need to assure and emphasize that the storing of these materials will be governed by Federal regulations, and that there is a life that will be tested as to the impact that these materials will have on the surrounding community. But the most important point, because we are champions, those of us who have supported this compact, mind my colleagues, just a compact that is approved by Congress, that gives permission, the States have already engaged in a cooperative effort, but the real issue are the citizens, and the decision of where and how has not yet been decided. In fact, no site will be selected without public hearings that give concerned citizens the opportunity to express their views on the location of the facility, and the State of Texas should ensure, as they are, that these hearings will be held. Environmental agencies will conduct the appropriate review and resolve environmental concerns in accordance with current law and regulations. No radioactive waste from States other than Texas, Maine and Vermont would be stored at the facility. The real key is that we have to find solutions to these very difficult problems. We must relate those to the surrounding communities and we must be fair to the surrounding communities. At the same time, we must recognize the problems that our hospitals and research laboratories and universities are facing. This is a rule that we should support and, finally, Mr. Speaker, we should support the final passage of this bill and work with local officials to ensure that the local citizens are protected. I would ask my colleagues to support this legislation. Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton]. Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman for yielding me this time. I just want to refocus the debate. We are debating an open rule. We are debating an open rule, where any Member can come before the Chamber and offer an amendment germane to the bill. So we should support the open rule. On some of the other issues that have been raised, this is low-level nuclear radioactive waste, not high-level. The gentleman from Ohio, who talked about regulating the transportation of these wastes, this does not do anything with transportation. It simply gives, under the commerce clause of the Constitution, the rights of the States of Texas, Vermont and Maine to have a compact. In regard to that, if they do not ratify the compact, any State can transport its low-level nuclear waste to Texas. Ohio was in a compact with Indiana, Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri and Wisconsin, for example. So I hope we will vote for the open rule, have a debate on whether the States should have a right to have a compact, and then have the vote on the bill. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Texas, [Mr. Reyes]. Mr. REYES. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding me this time, and I rise in opposition to the rule. I find it ironic that there are a number of my fellow Texans that are fighting for this rule and fighting for this bill. If it is such a good deal, why do they not put it in their district? We must prevent this bill from becoming law and we can do that by voting against the rule and sending this [[Page H8516]] bill back where it came from. By defeating the rule we can send a very clear message that it is bad public policy to dump radioactive waste in communities that are primarily populated by minorities. By defeating the rule we can keep our word to the Mexican Government under which we signed the 1983 La Paz agreement. By defeating this rule we can prevent radioactive waste from being transported through 12 States and more than 2,000 miles to be dumped on a small community in far west Texas. By defeating this rule we can do what the Maine Yankee Nuclear Power Reactor wants us to do, and that is not to pass this compact. I urge all of my colleagues to defeat this rule. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Vermont [Mr. Sanders]. Mr. SANDERS. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding me this time. I rise in strong support of the rule and in strong support of the legislation. It seems to me that we have two issues that we are discussing. The first is process. And in terms of process, what the Members should understand is that we have three State legislatures, Texas, Vermont and Maine, which overwhelmingly voted to enter this compact. We have three Governors, and I might add one is a Republican, one is a Democrat, and one is an Independent, who today strongly support going forward with the compact. We have six U.S. Senators from Texas, Maine and Vermont strongly in support of the compact. We have the two Members from Maine, the entire Vermont delegation, me, in support of the compact. I know that will carry a lot of weight. We are undivided on this issue, and we have two-thirds of the Texas House delegation in support of this compact. So for those Members who believe in devolution, in giving power to the States, it seems to me we should treat this compact in the same way we have treated 9 other compacts involving 41 States. Texas, Maine and Vermont want to be treated the same way as 41 other States have been treated. The second issue, and actually the more important issue, has to do with good environmental policy. I happen to believe that passage of this amendment makes absolute environmental sense. The evidence is very, very strong that the geology of Vermont and Maine is such that it would be a serious environmental problem if we continued to keep the waste in those States. The real issue, I must tell my colleagues, and I say this as an opponent of nuclear power, if I had my way, we would close down every nuclear power plant in this country as soon as we could, safely, but the problem is we have low-level waste. And to turn our backs on that problem and ignore that problem and to say that it will go away is wrong. The environmental debate today should be what is the safest way of disposing of low-level radioactive waste, and I would argue strongly that the passage of this legislation and depositing it in a safer location in Texas is the direction that we should go. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Hall]. Mr. HALL of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I rise today of course in strong support of this rule. The Texas low-level waste compact is a very simple and straightforward piece of legislation. It is not all as strange as has been made out here. It simply seeks approval of an agreement between three States, Texas, Maine and Vermont, on the management of States' low-level waste. It is important, I think, to note, because it has been brought up by so many of the speakers, that opponents raise issues that cannot be addressed in H.R. 629, such as location. This is not a place to address location. Geological and environmental review are by law designated to the State jurisdiction. In Texas, the review process has been closely scrutinized by the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission, the EPA of the State of Texas, the State held town hall meetings, open debate on the floor of the Texas legislature, and intense negotiation by State leaders. I agree with the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Doggett] when he says, ``Don't mess with Texas.'' Don't mess with Texas. Don't mess with the legislature of Texas that has already decided this thing. Don't mess with Bulloch, who herded it through the State Senate. Don't mess with Speaker Laney, who herded it through the house. Don't mess with the Governors of these three States. Don't mess with the TNN-RCC. Don't mess with the town hall meetings. {time} 1445 I think this has been decided at the State level. Nothing in this compact agreement designates where in the State of Texas the site is going to be located. As a matter of fact, it is in absolutely no way site specific. The location and regulation of the site are solely State issues left up to the whole State, which in this case is Texas. By approving this compact, Texas will be required to accept waste only from Maine and Vermont. And without a compact, I say to the others from Texas, we can find ourselves having to accept waste from any number of States. So never before has Congress rejected a low-level waste compact. I strongly urge my colleagues to honor the good-faith agreements between Texas, Maine, and Vermont by supporting this rule and by supporting the bill. Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. HALL of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time. Ms. PRYCE of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. Mr. Speaker, let me remind my colleagues that we are here debating a completely open rule providing for the consideration of H.R. 629. It does not get any fairer than that around here. Whether or not my colleagues support the Texas compact, which is the issue dealt with by the underlying legislation, the rule itself is eminently fair, both opponents and proponents. Therefore, I once again strongly urge my colleagues to support this open rule. Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time, and I move the previous question on the resolution. The previous question was ordered. The resolution was agreed to. A motion to reconsider was laid on the table. The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. Barrett of Nebraska). Pursuant to House Resolution 258 and rule XXIII, the Chair declares the House in the Committee of the Whole House on the State of the Union for the consideration of the bill, H.R. 629. {time} 1447 In the Committee of the Whole Accordingly the House resolved itself into the Committee of the Whole House on the State of the Union for the consideration of the bill (H.R. 629) to grant the consent of the Congress to the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact, with Mr. Ewing in the chair. The Clerk read the title of the bill. The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the bill is considered as having been read the first time. Under the rule, the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Dan Schaefer and the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hall, each will control 30 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Dan Schaefer. Mr. DAN SCHAEFER of Colorado. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume. (Mr. DAN SCHAEFER of Colorado asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. DAN SCHAEFER of Colorado. Mr. Chairman, H.R. 629, the Texas Low- Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact Consent Act, would grant the consent of Congress to the low-level radioactive waste disposal agreement reached between the States of Texas, Maine, and Vermont. When Congress passed the Low-level Radioactive Waste Policy Act in 1980, it was a part of a broader agreement whereby the States are responsible for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste while the Federal Government is responsible for high-level waste disposal. Since the 1980 act was passed, 41 States, as has been stated before, have received the consent of Congress for disposal compacts. Low-level radioactive waste includes a host of materials, from medical isotopes, to university research wastes, to the industrial [[Page H8517]] waste generated at nuclear power plants. The vast majority of these wastes do not even require the use of special containers to protect against threats to human health. In most cases, the radioactivity in these materials will decay to the point where there is no significant risk to human health after about 100 years. With the decision to put low-level waste responsibilities at the State level, the obligations of the Federal Government are fairly limited. Clearly and certainly, it is our responsibility to ensure that the compacts comply with the Federal Low-level Waste Act. During our consideration of H.R. 629 in the Committee on Commerce, it was clear that the compact meets this test. The State legislatures and Governors of Texas, Maine, and Vermont have met their obligation under the Low-level Radioactive Waste Policy Act. It is now our responsibility to support the States in this decision. I want to thank the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton] and certainly the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Hall], ranking member on the Subcommittee on Energy and Power, the sponsors of this legislation, for their very strong leadership and capable effort in moving the bill to this point. I strongly support H.R. 629 and encourage its adoption by the full House. Mr. HALL of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to yield 15 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] and and that he be permitted to yield time. The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Texas? There was no objection. Mr. BONILLA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Reyes]. Mr. REYES. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] for yielding me the time. Mr. Chairman, I rise today to oppose H.R. 629, which will allow radioactive waste to be dumped in the far west community of Sierra Blanca. There are many reasons to vote against this bill. First, it violates the 1983 La Paz agreement between Mexico and the United States. This agreement directs both Governments to adopt appropriate measures to prevent and eliminate sources of pollution within a 60-mile radius of the border. The State of Texas asserts that they must merely inform the Government of Mexico. But many people disagree. There is widespread objection to this site at all levels of the Mexican Government. The Mexican State of Chihuahua, which adjoins the proposed site, opposes the Sierra Blanca site. The Embassy of Mexico expressed deep concerns about the proposed site. The chairman of the Mexican Senate's Committee on the Environment has written his American counterpart to object. The city councils of El Paso and Juarez have both issued a position statement in strong opposition to the site. But if that is not compelling enough argument against this bill, there are others. If H.R. 629 passes, radioactive waste from Maine and Vermont will travel through the States of Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia, Tennessee, Arkansas, and all the way across the State of Texas until it gets dumped into the community of Sierra Blanca and far west Texas. Who would want radioactive waste shipped through their district? I do not, and neither should my colleagues. If my colleagues are still not convinced, there is more. How about the fact that this site is earthquake prone? Supporters of H.R. 629 are so concerned about that that they felt it necessary to send out a ``Dear Colleague'' trying to explain why we should put radioactive waste there anyway. Or how about the fact that this waste remains active for literally thousands of years, low level? You decide. How will that affect the water table in west Texas? I do not think we need to draw a picture up to that one. If my colleagues need another reason to vote against this bill, last week the public affairs director of the Maine Yankee nuclear power reactor said, and I quote this, ``The Texas compact no longer makes economic sense for Maine Yankee ratepayers.'' If the company that wants to dump its radioactive waste on the constituents of the district of the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] does not support the compact, why should we? Supporters of H.R. 629 will tell us that this bill does not endorse a specific site in Texas. The fact is that the Texas Legislature has already identified Sierra Blanca as a site for this dump, and a vote for H.R. 629 is a vote to support this site. This is the same legislation that was overwhelmingly defeated in the 104th Congress. But here we are again, fighting again to keep this Congress from dumping on the people of west Texas. There have been reports to my office that supporters of this bill have said that no one lives where they want to put this dump. Representatives from the nuclear power districts of east Texas, 800 miles and 14 hours from Sierra Blanca, and from the States of Vermont and Maine, over 2,000 miles away, are the major proponents of the dump, and they have erroneously claimed that citizens of Sierra Blanca support this compact. They do not, and neither should my colleagues. Supporters of this bill want to dump radioactive waste on the communities that are primarily populated by low-income minorities. Do my colleagues think we would be on this floor today debating this bill if the dump site were going to be at Lake Tahoe or Monterey, CA, or Newport, RI, or Martha's Vineyard? Of course not. The Hispanic Caucus is unanimous in its opposition to this bill. Last week, we sent a letter to the Speaker asking him to stop this bill from coming to this floor. Obviously, he chose not to do that. Do my colleagues think this bill would be on the floor if the dump were going to be in Marietta, GA? Obviously not. The Texas State Conference of the NAACP also passed a resolution in opposition to this compact. I have only been a Member of this Congress for 9 months, Mr. Chairman, but I know a bad bill when I see one. If my colleagues think it is OK to dump radioactive waste in communities where 75 percent of the people are Hispanic, then they should risk on voting for this bill. But if they agree with me that my constituents and the constituents of the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] are as important as theirs and a life on the border is worth as much as a life away from the border, then they should vote on this bill. Send a message to the corporate CEO's who think they can dump their waste on my constituents and on the constituents of the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] halfway across the country. And that is not OK to do that. I urge all my colleagues to consider those facts and vote ``no'' on H.R. 629. Mr. HALL of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from Texas [Ms. Eddie Bernice Johnson]. (Ms. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON asked and was given permission to revise and extend her remarks.) Ms. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I am changing sides on this issue. I was in the Texas Senate when they debated this in Texas. One thing I have come to realize, we have got to identify some place to put this low-level waste. It is much more dangerous to have it scattered everywhere, behind every hospital, behind doctors' offices, and all over the place. We do not know exactly where it will be in Texas. That will be a Texas decision. But many local citizens have come to my office and pleaded to allow it to happen, because without this legislation, it is going on now and it can come from anywhere and everywhere. With this legislation, it is limited to Vermont and Maine, small States, cannot have too much to dump there. The one thing we have to understand in this country is that we utilize many medicines and many other elements to promote human life and health that are dangerous in storage. We have to store it somewhere, and we are trying to pick the least populous areas to store it. These areas under discussion are the least populous areas in the country. If I thought for a moment that it would subject local citizens to a worse status of health and danger than what they are now, I would not be standing here asking my colleagues to support this measure. I know that it will not. These will be under the most safe conditions that we can provide with [[Page H8518]] rules to operate. Without rules to operate, it can very well be and continue to be very dangerous, because when we have these in our most populous urban areas and we talk about environmental justice, this is one way that we can protect environmental justice, by picking areas and using just those. {time} 1500 Mr. DAN SCHAEFER of Colorado. Mr. Chairman, I yield 4 minutes to the sponsor of the bill, the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton]. (Mr. BARTON of Texas asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Dan Schaefer, for yielding me this time. Mr. Chairman, I want to reiterate that we are here this afternoon debating whether three States of the United States have the right to enter into an interstate compact. The Constitution of the United States says they have that right, the Governors of the three States say they have that right, the legislatures of the three States say they have that right, and I would point out that 41 other States of the Union have entered into such State compacts. We are not here to debate whether the site that is probably going to be selected in Texas is the appropriate site; we are not here to debate whether there are some overriding socioeconomic issues that may preclude this site being picked; we are simply here to say these three States have the same rights that all of the other States of the Union have. Governors of the State of Texas, both Democrat and Republican, Governor Bush, the Republican Governor today, Governor Ann Richards, the prior Governor, have supported this compact. It was defeated on the House floor in the last Congress on the suspension calendar, which is why we are coming today to the floor on a nonsuspension calendar. I do want to try to address some of the issues that have been raised so far in the debate. The gentleman from El Paso pointed out that earthquakes may be a problem. I would like to point out, if we want to be site-specific, that this is in an earthquake zone that has not had an earthquake in recorded history. There is no geological fault under the site, but if there is, the site has been designed to withstand an earthquake of a magnitude of 6.0 on the Richter scale directly under the site. Mr. BONILLA. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield? Mr. BARTON of Texas. I yield to the gentleman from Texas. Mr. BONILLA. Mr. Chairman, is the gentleman aware that there have been two tremors in the last 4 years, and sometimes in parts of the country where there have not historically been earthquakes, these tremors can be a sign of something that is ahead? Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, the gentleman is correct, there have been tremors, but my understanding is that there have not been tremors in this area. Even if there were, the largest earthquake that has ever been recorded in Texas history is 6.4 on the Richter scale. This site could withstand an earthquake of 6.0 on the Richter scale directly under the site. According to the study that has been done, any seismic activity anywhere close to Hudspeth County has been active from 750 years to 12 million years. The halflife radioactivity of low-level nuclear waste that is going to be transported and stored here is less than 100 years, and 85 percent of it has a halflife of less than 10 years. Now, the gentleman from El Paso also talked about it is in violation of the La Paz agreement. It is not in violation of the La Paz agreement. The La Paz agreement says that the United States and Mexico should consult on these issues. We have consulted with the national government and with the local governments. The EPA and the State Department as late as July of this year have said there is no violation of any international agreement in this compact that is pending before us today. There have also been concerns expressed about the facts that this has been located in a dominant Hispanic area. That is a true statement. The population of Hudspeth County is 66 percent Hispanic. I would point out that of the 10 sites that were considered, there were a number of them that had a higher ethnicity of Hispanic population. The three variables that were used, though, were not ethnicity. They were rainfall, this has the lowest rainfall; population density, this is right at one-half of a person per square mile, which is the second lowest density, and there are a total of less than 3,000 people in the county. So this has the lowest rainfall, one of the lowest population densities, and there have been no earthquakes in recorded history in this site. There is support for this on this site in Texas. I include for the Record a letter from the county judge. Hudspeth County Courthouse, Sierra Blanca, TX, July 23, 1996. Dear Member of Congress: We are writing to encourage you to vote in favor of the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact, H.R. 558 without amendment. As officials from the community nearest to the proposed facility, our primary duty is to protect the health and safety of our citizens and of future generations. In fulfillment of this duty, we have invested substantial time and effort in examining technical reports and talking with state officials and others involved in identifying and investigating a location for a low-level radioactive waste disposal facility in our county. We are convinced that the facility planned for the site is safe. This judgment is borne out by the ``Environmental Safety Analysis'' made by the state agency in charge of licensing the disposal facility in our state. That agency found that the site will not ``pose an unacceptable risk to the public health'' or cause ``a long-term detrimental impact on the environment.'' Far from causing problems for our community, the disposal facility will bring to our area needed economic and social benefits. Hudspeth County has already received grants of over $2 million for the State of Texas for use in community projects of our own choosing. When Congress consents to the Texas Compact, the county will receive an additional $5 million in development funds from the states of Vermont and Maine. And, when the facility begins operation, the county will receive $.8 million annually from its gross revenue-- equal to more than one-third of the county's total annual budget. These funds are very much needed in our effort to raise the standard of living, education, and medical care system for residents of our county. Fundamentally, where and how to site a commercial low-level radioactive waste disposal facility is a state and local issue. In July of this year, the State of Texas will convene a series of public hearings, several in our community, which will allow any member of the public to comment and raise questions about any aspect of the proposed facility and its location. This is where the decision on the location and safety of the disposal facility should be made--not in the halls of Congress thousands of miles away from our community. We have heard that some members of Congress, at the urging of certain advocacy groups who do not represent our community, object to the location of the disposal facility based on the ethnic composition and the economic status of our county. We are the direct representatives of this ethnically diverse and economically underdeveloped community, and we are convinced that the facility will be safely built. In addition, in December 1995, approximately half of the adult population of Sierra Blanca signed a petition supporting Congressional consent for the Texas Compact. By consenting to the Texas Compact, Congress will: eliminate the need for two low-level radioactive waste disposal sites in more populous, more humid northeast states; alleviate the need to store low-level radioactive waste of hundreds of generating locations in the three member states; approve a facility that the most directly affected citizens find both safe and beneficial; and ensure that the State of Texas and its partners in the Texas Compact will be able to control the amount of waste coming into a facility located in our community. Please vote for S. 419 without amendment. Please contact us if you have any questions or would like more information. Sincerely, James A. Peace, County Judge. Mr. REYES. Mr. Chairman, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Austin, Texas [Mr. Doggett], a gentleman who has been involved in this issue since he has arrived in Congress in the right way. Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Chairman, my hometown of Austin, TX, is a mighty long way from Sierra Blanca, hundreds of miles, much further than traveling across the States of Vermont and Maine to reach this area of Texas. But I can tell my colleagues that there are literally thousands of people in central Texas that are greatly concerned about the idea that Texas would suddenly become the great dumping place for the Nation's toxic nuclear waste. Mr. Chairman, there has been some suggestion that this is somehow low-level, and therefore, no risk. Nothing could be further from the truth. We are not talking about just a box full of hospital gloves. Indeed, it has been estimated that we could take all of the [[Page H8519]] medical waste in this country and all of the academic-generated waste, and it would be about 5 ten-thousandths of the waste that is going to be placed in this dump. Ninety percent of it comes from nuclear powerplants. That is one of the reasons it is so significant that the Maine Yankee Nuclear Power Plant, the largest generator of waste from the State of Maine, now says it is a bad idea, that it is going to cost the ratepayers of Maine tens of millions of dollars if this compact is approved. Indeed, the type of waste that is involved here, I do not see anything in the compact limiting it to a mere 100 years, as one of the last speakers said, although my guess is that for most folks around here, just 100 years of dangerous toxic radioactive nuclear waste is a mighty long time. In fact, it is more than a lifetime. But the type of waste that can be placed in this dump includes tritium, which has a halflife of 12 years and a hazardous life of 120 to 240 years, and iodine 129, which has a halflife of 16 million years and a hazardous life of hundreds of millions of years. It is because of the gravity of this situation that the Austin City Council went on record unanimously opposed to this dump. It is the same thing that was done by 18 county governments in Texas and by 9 Texas cities. Most recently, this past weekend the Texas Conference of the NAACP went on record against the location of this dump, and more Texans, as they learn about this, are saying, do not allow Texas to become the Nation's dumping ground. Much has been said to the effect that this has nothing to do with the specific site. It has nothing to do with the specific site unless one happens to live in Sierra Blanca, because Sierra Blanca has already been designated. After elimination of more politically sensitive sites, it has been designated, after having been rejected on geological grounds, it has been selected as the most politically palatable place within the State of Texas to place this particular dump. There are more than a few problems at this site, and that is probably why it was rejected initially in the State of Texas: earthquakes, seepage, closeness to the Mexican border. Can my colleagues imagine what would happen if Mexico proposed to locate a radioactive waste dump 16 miles from our border? There would be outrage, and there should be over this proposal. Mr. HALL of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Edwards], the deputy whip. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of the Texas compact. If this were an issue that only affected the districts of my friend, the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] or my friend, the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Reyes], both of whom I greatly respect, then I would in no way want to involve myself in this fight. This issue is more than that. It affects the citizens, all the citizens, of three States in this Union: Texas, Vermont, and Maine. It is on behalf of those citizens that I wish to speak today. The fact is that 9 other compacts have passed this Congress affecting 41 States. This is not a new issue before this Congress. Since this compact most directly affects those citizens in those three States, I think it is fair to ask the position of those States' political leaders. All six U.S. Senators from the three States support this compact, all three Governors, the vast majority of U.S. House Members from the three States support it. As a Texan I can say not only has the Texas Legislature overwhelmingly approved this compact in 1993, but former Governor Ann Richards, a Democrat, supported this compact as Governor, as well as her successor, Republican Governor George W. Bush. Mr. Chairman, I know and respect the fact that some people do not want any low-level nuclear waste or any waste put anywhere. In a dream world, frankly, that would be my position. But in the real world, as long as we can save Americans' lives using x rays in hospitals, and yes, as long as we have nuclear powerplants, there will be low-level nuclear waste. The question is not will we put it somewhere; the question is where. My contention is that if the State of Texas through its Governor, its legislature, its two U.S. Senators and a vast majority of its U.S. House Members support a low-level site in Texas, it seems that other Members of this House would at least lend weight to that position. Those of us who live in Texas have no intention of locating an unsafe depository of low-level waste in our home State. We live there. The fact is, this is not a free choice. If we do not pass this compact, we are going to have threatening waste and unsafe conditions all across these three States. For those reasons, I urge support of this compact. Mr. DAN SCHAEFER of Colorado. Mr. Chairman, I yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from Maine [Mr. Baldacci]. Mr. BALDACCI. Mr. Chairman, I would like to engage in a colloquy with the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton], if that is all right. Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to engage in a quality colloquy with the gentleman from Maine. Mr. BALDACCI. Mr. Chairman, owners of the sole nuclear plant in Maine this summer decided to shut it down 10 years ahead of schedule. Events in Maine relating to the compact have taken a dramatic and unexpected turn recently. I thank the gentleman for the opportunity to clarify some of the concerns that have been expressed. My first issue concerns the heightened interest in the ability of compact member States to responsibly dispose of low-level waste generated in their States before completion of the Texas facility. I ask the gentleman if it is his understanding and intent that pursuant to an agreement by the Governors of Maine, Vermont, and Texas, each State can continue to ship waste to sites outside of the host State until the Texas facility is open and accepting low-level waste? Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield? Mr. BALDACCI. I yield to the gentleman from Texas. Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, the gentleman is correct. This interpretation and expectation have been articulated by the Governors of the three party States. It is our intent that generators in the gentleman's State and in any other of the compact States will be allowed to send low-level radioactive decommissioning waste to a non- compact site before the host site is ready. In fact, States in other compacts currently ship their waste to sites outside the host State while the siting process continues. Mr. BALDACCI. I thank the gentleman for that clarification. My second concern relates to the disposal of oversized pieces of low- level reradioactive waste created during the dismantling of a nuclear powerplant. What provisions will be made to assure that when a facility opens in the host State, section 4.01 of the compact will be fully implemented? Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, if the gentleman will yield, I have been assured that the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Authority will pursue the acquisition of the necessary licenses concurrent with the site licensing process. It is our intent that when the facility opens, it will be in possession of all of the licenses needed to operate, including those for the disposal of oversized low- level waste. Mr. BALDACCI. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman. Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong support of H.R. 629, with those concerns being addressed. Experience has taught us all just how difficult waste management issues can become, and none is more difficult than those involving radioactive waste. I would like to remind my colleagues that have been speaking in opposition that their State does generate this waste and their State does need a place to be able to place this waste. The concern that has been raised by Maine Yankee Power Plant has to do with the dramatic turn of events and whether the economies make sense, since there will be a closing, decommissioning, and dismantling of the plant. Maine is in favor of this, the elected representatives of Maine are in favor of this, the Governor of the State of Maine is in favor of this, and this is an insurance policy for the right environmental safeguards for the disposal of this waste. It is very important to understand that the compact under consideration contains real and significant advantages for all three States. With this compact, Texas will be able to limit [[Page H8520]] the amount of low-level radioactive waste coming into its facility from out-of-State sources. Maine and Vermont together produce a fraction of what is generated in Texas, and for Maine and Vermont, the compact relieves either State from the need to develop its own facility. Given the relatively small amount of waste produced in Maine, developing such a facility will be a disproportionate expense. These benefits are among the reasons that the compact received overwhelming support from the Governors and the legislatures in all three States. We should now act to approve H.R. 629, without amendments. It represents the States' best efforts linked to comply with a Federal mandate, an unfunded Federal mandate, not directly linked to the development of any specific site in Texas. It contains major benefits for all three States. I also have the letter that has been signed by all three Governors, Governor Bush, Governor Dean, and Governor King from Maine, and I enter it into the Record at this time. State of Maine, Office of the Governor, Augusta, ME, September 22, 1997. Hon. George W. Bush, Governor, State of Texas, Austin, TX. Hon. Howard Dean, M.D., Governor, State of Vermont, Montpelier, VT. Dear Governors Bush and Dean: As you know, the State of Maine has been forced to review the feasibility of the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact with the State of Maine and Vermont (``Texas Compact'') now pending in Congress. Our review has been prompted by the unexpected development of the premature closing of the Maine Yankee electronic generation nuclear facility located in Wiscasset, Maine and the fact that the shipment of decommissioning waste will commence next year, ten years prior to the timeframe upon which the Compact was based. It continues to be the strong preference of Maine to proceed with the Texas Compact as currently drafted, and to fulfill our obligations under that agreement. However, these unexpected developments place Maine at risk of duplicative expenditures for low-level nuclear waste disposal in the following three areas. First, we have been forced to recognize the possibility that as Maine Yankee's decommissioning proceeds, the only available disposal facility licensed to accept major portions of the waste stream is the facility at Barnwell, South Carolina, to which generations in Maine, Vermont and Texas can currently send low level radioactive waste. However, upon ratification of the Compact agreement, the Texas Compact Commission will acquire the authority under Section 3.05(7) to disapprove shipments by waste generators in any of the three States to the Barnwell facility. Such an outcome could impose substantial costs, unnecessarily, or Maine Yankee and the Maine citizens who are paying for decommissioning. Second, our obligation to make payments totaling twenty- five million dollars to the State of Texas under Section 5.01 of the Compact is unconditional, as long as Maine remains a member of the Compact, even if substantial portions of Maine Yankee's waste stream are ultimately disposed of in South Carolina. This places Maine citizens at risk of not getting the benefit of their bargain with Texas and Vermont, in the absence of any equitable adjustments in Maine's monetary obligations under the Compact. Third, while the Texas facility has applied for discretion in the size or form of shipments that are accepted for final disposal, the proposed facility is presently unable to guarantee acceptance of oversize decommissioning waste components, intact or in large sections, as required under Section 4.01 of the Compact pertaining to disposal of all decommissioning waste in the Compact region. A failure to provide disposal capacity for this portion of the decommissioning waste stream in a timely manner at the Texas facility could compel Maine Yankee to dispose of waste at another licensed facility, causing duplicative costs. With these aspects of our dilemma in mind, we request the following clarifications of intent, that we believe are fully consistent with the intent and letter of the Compact, but require affirmative action by the Texas Compact Commission to implement. These include the following three items: 1. The Compact agreement currently requires that there be no discrimination in prices charged to generators in Maine and Vermont compared with Texas at Section 4.04(4). It is consistent to also assure that there will be no discrimination between host and non-host generators regarding access by Compact States to disposal facilities outside of Texas. For this reason, appointees to the Texas Compact Commission should endorse a principle of non-discriminatory access by generators in all Compact States to disposal facilities outside of Texas. It is critical to effective implementation of this principle that final appointments to the Compact Commission and timely review of any petition under Section 3.05(7) occur as expeditiously as possible. 2. There is a realistic risk that Maine citizens could be compelled to pay twice for the disposal of Maine Yankee's decommissioning waste, in the form of up-front payment of construction costs for the Texas facility as well as the disposal fees charged by Barnwell for actual disposal. In consideration of this risk, the State of Texas agrees to undertake reasonable efforts in good faith to mitigate this problem in consultation with the States of Maine and Vermont. Efforts to mitigate, or reduce the impact on Maine citizens of up-front payments for unused disposal capacity will require the consent of the Texas Compact Commission, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. 3. In order to accommodate the projected decommissioning waste stream at Maine Yankee that may occur as early as 1998, the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Authority must pursue as expeditiously as possible the licensing of all disposal shipments, specifically including the disposal of oversize decommissioning components. Until the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission approves such a permit application, the Texas facility will be unable to fulfill the requirement established at Section 4.01 of the Compact for disposal of all decommissioning waste located in the party states. We are confident that you recognize that none of these requested actions involve a change in the language of the Compact, nor of the basic expectations of the three states that negotiated Compact in 1993. These three points of agreement merely clarify the mutual intent of the Governors for implementing the Compact in a manner that assures an equitable outcome for all three states. Thank you for your gracious consideration of these vital issues for our States and our joint effort in Congress and in the years to come. Sincerely, Angus S. King, Jr., Governor, State of Maine. {time} 1515 Mr. HALL of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bentsen]. (Mr. BENTSEN asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. BENTSEN. Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of H.R. 629, the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Compact Consent Act. I believe this bill is vital to protecting our State from increasing amounts of out-of-State waste by entering into the compact. By ratifying this agreement, Texas will receive added protection to stop other States from shipping their low-level radioactive waste into the State. Texas will maintain complete control over the disposal site. Only Texas will decide whether or not another State may join in the compact. Upon congressional ratification, Maine and Vermont shall contribute a total of $25 million to Texas and another $25 million due when the disposal facility begins operations. Governor Bush, former Governor Ann Richards, and the Texas Legislature have overwhelmingly supported this compact. By entering into this compact, Texas can keep out-of-compact waste from entering the State. Currently 42 States have entered into these compacts to prevent further importation of out-of-State waste. Furthermore, this facility will provide for the safe disposal of radioactive materials from biomedical research conducted at the Nation's largest medical center, the Texas Medical Center in Houston, and from industrial and electric power generators in our State. I appreciate the concerns raised by the opponents, but the fact remains that something must be done about this waste. I believe it is better for Texans and, in particular, the Texas Legislature to determine where to store such waste and whose to accept. Without this legislation, Texas would lose control over both the interstate and intrastate transfer of low-level radioactive waste, and I believe that would be far worse for our State's citizens. Currently, my citizens live with the incineration of hazardous waste in their neighborhoods, and the EPA wants to increase the capacity of this incineration by importing PCB's from around the world. Without this compact, Texas could find itself in the same position as it relates to low-level radioactive waste, as the private sector seeks to import it from all over the Nation, rather than limiting the transfer to Maine and Vermont. H.R. 629 should be passed without amendments because Texas, Maine, and Vermont spent years negotiating mutually acceptable terms of this agreement. Subsequently the legislatures and Governors of all three States approved identical compact legislation. Any amendments would require the three States to begin efforts anew. I urge my colleagues to support this important piece of legislation. [[Page H8521]] Mr. BONILLA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 4 minutes to the distinguished gentleman from California [Mr. Torres]. (Mr. TORRES asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. TORRES. Mr. Chairman, I stand today here in opposition to H.R. 629. I simply cannot understand why we talk about various Governors of States, the State of Texas, its legislature, really underscoring and underlining and accepting what I seem to believe could be opening the door to further dumping. I am not sure I understand this limiting. First of all, I think H.R. 629 violates a 1983 La Paz agreement between Mexico and the United States wherein they are prohibited both Governments from dumping 60 miles from the border. As we see this map here, this waste material, radioactive, is going to come all the way from Maine across Vermont, New Hampshire, down to Massachusetts, to New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia, and all the way across down to Tennessee through Arkansas, through the State of Texas, and then finally settle down here in Sierra Blanca, radioactive material in the vicinity of a population numbered at some 700,000 people 20 miles from the border, from the river. This is against that treaty, Mr. Chairman. I do not see the sanity in opening up this kind of door for Texas. I am not from Texas, I come from California. But we have had the same problems there. Our State is replete with the sight of waste dumps, toxic landfills, incinerators, you name it, in those communities of less resistance. Who are those communities? Usually the communities where minorities live, usually the east side of town, the other side of the tracks. That is what we talk about when we say environmental justice. We need environmental justice. I think this is environmental injustice. If Texas allows itself to open up the door to this kind of prevalent danger, I do not understand the facts here. Why was this legislation defeated in the last session of Congress, the 104th Congress? I think I understand why the 104th Congress defeated this kind of measure. It is implicit, Mr. Chairman, as to the dangers, to the consequences of this. Supporters of this bill want to dump radioactive waste on a community that is primarily minorities, again, here on the border, as if we do not have enough problems already on the border, on the river, with the kind of maquiladora dumping on the river, infesting all the way down to Brownsville. Mr. Chairman, we do not need this kind of legislation. I urge my colleagues here to defeat it today very soundly, just like the 104th session of Congress did. Mr. DAN SCHAEFER of Colorado. Mr. Chairman, I yield 5 minutes to the distinguished gentleman from Vermont [Mr. Sanders]. Mr. SANDERS. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding me the time. Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong support of H.R. 629. Mr. Chairman, the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act and its 1985 amendments make commercial low-level radioactive waste disposal a State and not a Federal responsibility. As we have heard, all that Texas and Maine and Vermont are asking for today is to be treated as 9 other compacts were treated affecting 41 States. This is not new business. We have done it 9 times, 41 States, and Texas, Maine, and Vermont ask us to do it today. Mr. Chairman, let me touch for a moment upon the environmental aspects of this issue. Let me address it from the perspective of someone who is an opponent of nuclear power, who opposes the construction of power plants and, if he had his way, would shut down the existing nuclear power plants as quickly and as safely as we could. One of the reasons that many of us oppose nuclear power plants is that when this technology was developed, there was not a lot of thought given as to how we dispose of the nuclear waste. Neither the industry nor the Government, in my view, did the right thing by allowing the construction of the plants and not figuring out how we get rid of the waste. But the issue we are debating here today is not that issue. The reality, as others have already pointed out, is that the waste is here. We cannot wish it away. It exists in power plants in Maine and Vermont, it exists in hospitals, it is here. The gentleman from Texas [Mr. Reyes] a few moments ago said, ``Who wants radioactive waste in their district?'' I guess he is right. But do Members know what, by going forward with the nuclear power industry, that is what we have. So the real environmental issue here is not to wish it away, but to make the judgment, the important environmental judgment, as to what is the safest way of disposing of the nuclear waste that has been created. That is the environmental challenge that we face. The strong environmental position should not be and cannot be to do nothing, and to put our heads in the sand and pretend that the problem does not exist. It would be nice if Texas had no low-level radioactive waste, or Vermont or Maine or any other State. That would be great. That is not the reality. The environmental challenge now is, given the reality that low-level radioactive waste exists, what is the safest way of disposing of that waste. Leaving the radioactive waste at the site where it was produced, despite the fact that that site may be extremely unsafe in terms of long-term isolation of the waste and was never intended to be a long- term depository of low-level waste, is horrendous environmental policy. What sense is it to say that you have to keep the waste where it is now, even though that might be very environmentally damaging? That does not make any sense at all. No reputable scientist or environmentalist believes that the geology of Vermont or Maine would be a good place for this waste. In the humid climate of Vermont and Maine, it is more likely that groundwater will come in contact with that waste and carry off radioactive elements to the accessible environment. There is widespread scientific evidence to suggest, on the other hand, that locations in Texas, some of which receive less than 12 inches of rainfall a year, a region where the groundwater table is more than 700 feet below the surface, is a far better location for this waste. This is not a political assertion, it is a geological and environmental reality. Furthermore, even if this compact is not approved, it is likely that Texas, which has a great deal of low-level radioactive waste, and we should make the point that 80 percent of the waste is coming from Texas, 10 percent from Vermont, 10 percent from Maine, the reality is that Texas will go forward with or without this compact in building a facility to dispose of their low-level radioactive waste. If they do not have the compact, which gives them the legal right to deny low-level radioactive waste from coming from anyplace else in the country, it seems to me they will be in worse environmental shape than they are right now. Right now, with the compact, they can deal with the constitutional issue of limiting the kinds of waste they get. From an environmental point of view, I urge strong support for this legislation. Mr. DAN SCHAEFER of Colorado. Mr. Chairman, I yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from Maine [Mr. Allen]. Mr. ALLEN. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding time to me. Mr. Chairman, I would like to begin by asking for a colloquy with the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton]. Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield? Mr. ALLEN. I yield to the gentleman from Texas. Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I am glad to engage in another quality colloquy. Mr. ALLEN. Mr. Chairman, if the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton] can clarify one further point, it is my understanding that if the State of Maine suffers negative economic consequences owing to the circumstances of early closure of Maine Yankee, the Governors have agreed that the commission will use all good faith efforts to enable Maine to have such damages mitigated. Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, it is my understanding that the Governors of the gentleman's State and my State and Vermont have agreed that all reasonable good faith efforts would be executed by the State of Texas and the commission, if any such damages occur, to assist Maine in achieving such mitigation. [[Page H8522]] Mr. ALLEN. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman. Mr. Chairman, I want to say a couple of things. First of all, there is broad support within the State of Maine for this particular compact. In our State, not only has the Governor supported it, supported the compact and does support it; not only has it passed the State legislature; but it has passed a statewide referendum. People in Maine support this particular compact, even though, of course, as always, there is some opposition. Mr. Chairman, we have been working for years to get to this particular point. Several speakers before me have mentioned Maine Yankee. Maine Yankee is in an unusual circumstance. Just recently, Maine Yankee closed down 10 years ahead of schedule. The President of Maine Yankee would not be doing his job if he did not look at the economic consequences and say, there may be some risks here that we did not anticipate. There were some risks. The most important risk was this. What if the Texas facility is not built and not on line and not ready for Maine's decommissioning waste of Maine Yankee, and yet we cannot send it to Barnwell, SC, which is the only other site? I believe, as a result of conversations with the Governor's office and with Maine Yankee and others over the last few days, that that risk is mitigated, and it is mitigated in particular by the undertaking of the Governors of the three States to work in good faith to solve those particular problems if and when they arise. {time} 1530 So I believe, I am convinced, that now the costs of this compact are in line with the costs of disposal of this waste in Barnwell, SC. Let me say this. The gentleman from Vermont early on said there are two issues here. One is process. This has the broad support of people in Texas, Vermont, and Maine. But second, it makes good environmental policy. This is good environmental sense. We cannot wish away low-level radioactive waste. It has to go somewhere. If it does not go somewhere and if it is not stored in a safe, secure site, then it is going to be distributed all over this country. As a country, as we think about how we deal with low-level radioactive waste, and this is low-level, this is not spent nuclear fuel rods, this is low-level waste, we need to figure out how to dispose of it. We need to look for places where the geology is right, where the hydrology is right, where the population is sparse. And although I am not involved in the choice of a particular site in Texas, I know that Maine has hydrological and geological problems that would make it a problem in our State. It is vital as we go forward that there not be one site at Barnwell, SC, to deposit low-level radioactive waste. We need to have two. It makes good economic sense, and it makes good, sound environmental policy. So I would close simply by saying that I urge all of my colleagues to support this bill. It makes sense for people in Maine, Vermont, and Texas, and around the country. Mr. DAN SCHAEFER of Colorado. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sam Johnson. Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I would like to point out that this property is State-owned property. We had a big discussion about that when I was in the State legislature. I know that the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Green] remembers that. And it was picked because of its location and because it was State-owned. Mr. Chairman, after 30 years, 85 percent of the waste is nonradioactive. That is what we are talking about. We are talking about low-level waste. We are not talking about high-level waste. The specific site is limited to 30 years, this place. And I would say to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Reyes] that at that location it takes 20,000 to 40,000 years for anything to seep down to the Rio Grande. Also, I would ask the question about my colleague from California who has a compact but does not want this one. His State has got a compact with North Dakota, South Dakota, and Arizona. The gentleman had a big, long line that said transportation is a big problem. Guess what? California has not gotten their site ready yet, so where are they sending their waste? South Carolina, all the way across the country. If transportation is a problem, then California has got it. Mr. Chairman, I would tell my colleagues, transportation is not a problem. Transportation has an excellent safety record for transportation of commercial low-level waste. During the last 20 years, there have only been four minor accidents and never been a radiologically related injury or death associated with a transportation accident of such waste. For the past 20 years, they have been transporting this waste to South Carolina. Licensing, inspection, and enforcement regulations from the Federal Government ensure that transportation requirements are met. All waste coming into Texas is going to be dry, solid form, and they are going to have a tracking system to track the waste from the source of generation through disposal, accounting accurately for each part of it. So I would suggest to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Doggett], if he does not want Texas to have a compact, then any State can ship waste to Texas. Mr. BONILLA. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume. [Mr. BONILLA asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.] Mr. BONILLA. Mr. Chairman, years ago when the country first started learning about toxic waste, nuclear waste, radioactive waste, there were jokes that kind of circulated around the country that if one visited a nuclear plant or grew up in an area like Three Mile Island, people would chuckle and say, ``Do you glow in the dark?'' Mr. Chairman, I can assure my colleagues that while that was a joke in some other communities, this is no laughing matter for the constituents that I represent in west Texas. Imagine, just because they happen to live in a rural area, why would they have any less right to having a safe environment than somebody who grew up in downtown New York? Just because they chose a quiet area where they want to get away from all of that other stuff, and suddenly they wake up one day and the school bus that their kid is riding in down the highway passes a nuclear waste dump site, and they suddenly wonder every day if their child going to become infected or contaminated by some of the waste going through the system and through the water supplies possibly if something goes wrong. There is a possibility. The gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton] points out that there has never been an earthquake in this area. But there have been tremors. There has been movement in the ground that makes the residents out there shake in their boots at the prospect that something might happen. Mr. Chairman, I ask my colleagues to put themselves in their shoes. Imagine if they were sending their child to school every day wondering, ``Did I make the right decision in settling in this area?'' Would they ever think the day would come as an American that their constitutional rights to be heard about something that is going to be built in their backyard might be violated and they would not, as an American, have any say as to whether or not this dump was going to be constructed in their very own backyard? Mr. Chairman, I have got at least 12 county commissioners, courts, local governments, who have written me and spoken to me very strongly about their opposition to this dump being created in their backyard, people like county judge Jake Brisbin in Presidio and former mayor Alfredo Gutierrez in Del Rio who were concerned about this issue. People talk about the La Paz agreement with Mexico. Sometimes we think that we hold the upper hand with our neighbors to the south on environmental issues. But the thing we have to ask ourselves is when the Speaker of the House, as he has in the right way, sat down with the President of Mexico and said, ``Do not build those Carbon 1 and Carbon 2 burning plants near the border because they will pollute our air. Why don't you put scrubbers on the facility?'' And the Mexican Government will not do it. And now, in turn, they are asking us not to build a low-level radioactive waste site nearing the [[Page H8523]] Mexican border because it could threaten their country as well. Mr. Chairman, we have to learn to coexist along the border and comply with the La Paz agreement so that we do not have threats that exist to people on either side of the border. For those of my colleagues who think that this compact affects only Texas, Maine, and Vermont, I have a map. The gentleman from California [Mr. Torres] pointed out one route that the waste could take coming down here. But whether it takes a route that the gentleman pointed out that comes through the middle of the country, or whether it took a detour and went through Chicago, maybe Iowa or Nebraska or another detour throughout the South like Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, there are many different superhighways that exist in this area, and this stuff could be coming through the neighborhoods of my colleagues. One of my friends pointed out earlier as well that there may be only 20 percent of this radioactive waste which is, in fact, radioactive. Mr. Chairman, I would ask my colleagues, if they had to drink the water in their house and they knew that only 20 percent of the liquid in that glass was radioactive, would they drink it? Is that not enough to scare them to death about how this could affect the future of the children growing up in their community? I ask all of my colleagues, when they think about all those funny things that were said over the years about glowing in the dark, it is not just the people in Texas who are going to be suffering from this. If my colleagues live in any of these States enroute here in moving that waste though the country and down to west Texas, they have to ask themselves the same question. If there is a truck accident or train accident or something happens along the way and suddenly just 20 percent of that load spills in their community, what are they going to say to their people when they have to come back and explain to them, ``Yes, I approved that radioactive facility down in Texas, but I never thought the stuff would be coming through my town? '' Well, Mr. Chairman, how about if it does? What are my colleagues going to say when there is an accident? This is not just a case of my people glowing in the dark in the future if there is an accident. I ask Members to think about it. It could be their people, too. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. HALL of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Green]. (Mr. GREEN asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. GREEN. Mr. Chairman, let me briefly respond to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] in talking about glowing in the dark. I think that is raising questions that really are not the issue, because right now in our hospitals, in portable buildings in our hospitals, in the ceilings of our hospital, they are storing that. So, it is not as the gentleman is trying to allege, that this is glowing in the dark. We are talking about low-level waste that is already being stored in urban areas, not in safe, contained areas like is contemplated for west Texas. Mr. Chairman, let me talk about the transportation issue. There is more dangerous cargo now on Interstate 10 that goes through the gentleman's district, and not too far, than ever will be considered in low-level waste. There are more volatile chemicals flowing down Interstate 10 from El Paso to San Antonio than will ever be in there. Mr. Chairman, let me address the La Paz issue a little bit. Let me quote from Reuters News. Alejandro Calvillo, an officer of Greenpeace Mexico, is quoted as saying that, ``Mexico's National Water Commission and Nuclear Safeguard Commission recently concluded that the dump posed no health hazard for Mexico.'' That was Reuters, September 5, 1996. Mr. Chairman, another quote regarding the La Paz agreement. The Texas facility promotes another purpose of the La Paz agreement to ``prevent, reduce and eliminate sources of pollution'' because it is properly engineered and environmentally sound. Mr. Chairman, that is why this provision is a good place to do it. The Federal Government, Congress, allowed in 1985 for the interstate compact. Texas, Maine, and Vermont agreed to do it. The legislature in Texas, and I know because I served there up until 1991, agreed to this compact. In 1993, they agreed, after a great deal of studies, to have the siting. The gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] talked about all those local elected officials that are contacting him. Maybe they ought to call their State representatives and senators and the Governor's office, because those are the people who made that decision to go to his county. We always believe that decisions are made best that are made locally. This was a local decision and not on the floor of this Congress. Mr. Chairman, that is why it is important. If we do not pass this bill and that site opens, the constituents of the gentleman out there will have waste from all over the country coming to this site. Maybe instead of the gentleman from California [Mr. Torres] shipping his wastes from California to South Carolina, perhaps they will be able to stop halfway and leave it in the gentleman's district in west Texas. I am sure they will be able to make a deal with them. That is what is so important about this bill. It allows a compact for a number of States to participate and allows Texas to say, we are the biggest State in the compact, we have to have a place to put our low- level waste that we are now warehousing on site. Mr. Chairman, we need to pass this bill, H.R. 629, today to make sure we can do that. That is why I urge an ``aye'' vote for this bill. Mr. HALL of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume. Mr. Chairman, I thank all my colleagues for their input here. We are along toward the end of a long, hard trail, and a lot of these arguments that are being made are good arguments. I can understand them and understand where they are coming from. They are less legal arguments than they are emotional arguments. I even respect these Members who have come to the aid of a colleague. I respect the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla], who has done a good job with this situation in that he came in late. When this first transpired, the gentleman was not the Congressman from that area. He has done a good job since becoming their Congressman and representing them and setting his best foot forward. {time} 1545 All of this is late. Most of this happened before the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Bonilla] got to be the Congressman for the area that they have designated. These arguments should have been made before the TNRCC and before all the community hearings. They should have been made before the town hall meetings. Even the recent colloquy between the Governors that gave the option for input from people who had an interest, there has been all the input in the world into this. There has been opportunity for everyone to be heard. I think everyone has been heard from the three States today. I think this low-level radioactive waste policy act is a very good example of State and Federal cooperation. This compact fulfills the Congress' side of the bargain. This is just the part we have to do. The States have already done their part. Other States have their compacts. I think 40 other States have them. In 1980 and again in 1985, Congress enacted legislation that set up a program under which States would have primary responsibility and primary control over the disposal of low- level radioactive waste. This is what the States wanted. This is what they asked for. This is what they were entitled to. It makes sense because so many important local activities depend on having safe and ready disposal of low-level waste. While this issue is often discussed in terms of utilities' needs for disposal facilities, let me tell my colleagues, it also concerns hospitals, university research programs. It concerns industries across the State of Texas and across this Nation, industries that spawn jobs, and jobs spawn dignity; industry and jobs in the area where this site is, where substantial amounts have been spent. Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues to pass this. I will not pretend that finding the site has been easy or is easy or that all the questions about how to [[Page H8524]] build the right facility are known. These are questions that have to be resolved in the course of obtaining a license to operate the facility and cannot be settled by us. The Texas compact meets the law's requirements. It is needed by the people of these three States. I strongly urge that we support it. We ought to encourage States to conform with Federal policy, which is exactly what Texas, Maine, and Vermont have done by entering into this compact. I urge Members' support of these States' actions by voting for H.R. 629. Mr. DAN SCHAEFER of Colorado. Mr. Chairman, I yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton]. The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Texas [Mr. Barton] is recognized for 8\1/2\ minutes. (Mr. BARTON of Texas asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. BARTON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, we have heard quite a bit of emotion this afternoon on the floor about the issue generically of nuclear waste and specifically low-level nuclear waste. We have heard the concerns about transporting the waste. We have heard the concerns about storing the waste. We have heard the concerns about possibly seeing some of the waste get into the water table because of an earthquake. Let us reverse that as we close the argument. We do not live in a zero risk environment. Every day thousands of Americans are diagnosed with cancer. If we do not have a way to dispose of the radiation treatments that are used to treat colon cancer, they are not going to be treated and those people are going to die. If we do not have a way to diagnose if somebody has some sort of a defect that is treated by diagnostic piece of equipment like an x ray or radionuclide that they put into the bloodstream, those people will not know that they have that medical disability and they, too, will develop the disease and they will die. The fact of the matter is that we need disposal sites for low-level radioactive nuclear waste. That is a fact. We want to protect human life. We want to do everything we can to give people a quality of human life. Forty-one States currently have developed compacts with other States. Three States today want the same right that those 41 other States have today, Vermont, Texas, and Maine. If we want to talk about the transportation problem, almost all of the waste that is going to be stored in Texas is going to be generated in Texas. Less than 50 truckloads a year, less than 1 per week, is going to be transshipped from Maine or Vermont. As the gentleman from Texas, [Mr. Sam Johnson] pointed out, in the almost 30 years that we have tracked the transportation of low-level nuclear waste around this country, there have only been four accidents, only four accidents,