Stopping Unwanted Sales Calls
The National Do Not Call Registry gives people a way to stop getting unwanted telemarketing calls at home. Registering your landline or mobile phone number is free.

How the Do Not Call Registry Works

Register your phone number at donotcall.gov or call 1-888-382-1222 (TTY: 1-866-290-4236).

If you register online, you will receive a confirmation email from donotcall.gov.

10 Years of Do Not Call

You must click on the link in the email within 72 hours after you get it for your registration to be effective.

Your phone number should show up on the Registry about a day after you complete the registration process. Most telemarketing calls will stop once your number has been on the Registry for 31 days. You can verify that your number is on the Registry by checking the website or calling the toll-free number. Your number will stay on the Registry unless you decide to remove it, or you give up the number. You can remove your number by calling 1-888-382-1222 from the number you want to delete.

Calls Not Covered By Do Not Call

The Do Not Call provisions of the Telemarketing Sales Rule do not cover all telemarketing calls. You still may get:

Calls from political organizations, charities, and people conducting surveys

Calls from companies with which you have an existing business relationship. (A company may call you for up to 18 months after you buy something, or for three months after you inquire about something or submit an application.)

Calls from companies you’ve given permission to call you

Still Getting Unwanted Sales Calls?

Most legitimate companies comply with the Telemarketing Sales Rule. That is, they scrub their lists as required, and don't place calls to numbers on the National Do Not Call Registry. If a company isn’t playing by the Rule, and doesn’t respect your wishes not to be called, there’s a good chance that what they’re selling isn’t a bona fide product or service.

If you've put your number on the Registry, verified that your number has been on it for 31 days, and you’re still getting sales calls to the phone number you've registered, file a complaint with the FTC. You’ll need to provide the date of the call and the phone number or name of the company that called you.