New Albany names street after Obama
Buy Photo New signage at the intersection of Security Parkway and Grantline in New Albany, Ind shows the newly named Barack Obama Way. Jan 18, 2017 (Photo: Alton Strupp/The CJ)Buy Photo

New Albany has renamed one of its streets in honor of President Barack Obama before he leaves office Friday.

The city replaced a street sign on the Reas Lane extension with a sign that renamed the street for the nation's 44th President. New Albany Mayor Jeff Gahan said he wanted to claim that section of town for the Commander-in-chief because Obama's stimulus plan has helped the city create new jobs and facilitate economic development.

“Every city, town, and burg wants to claim a little part of a successful United States President, and we are no exception," Gahan said in a statement. "Make no mistake, our brand new business park north would not exist without the direct efforts of our 44th president. He pushed hard and passed an economic stimulus plan which let the City of New Albany move forward with developing 40 acres of vacant land into New Albany’s fifth industrial park."

MORE TOP NEWS

► READ MORE: Jerry Abramson is back! Ex-mayor takes position at Bellarmine

► READ MORE: Suit alleges JCPS student assaulted, face fractured

► READ MORE: Obama pardons former Thortons executive

► READ MORE: Inauguration trip divides Sacred Heart alumnae

► READ MORE: Charter/Time Warner rebranding as Spectrum

► READ MORE: Bevin’s picks for U of L board almost a repeat

► READ MORE: Parents call worksheet on ‘Sharia law’ Muslim ‘propaganda’

► ON THE GO? Download the CJ app for iPhone, Android and iPad

The Grant Line Industrial Park is located up the street from Indiana University Southeast. The industrial park's west side secured its first tenant, FireKing Security Group, late last year. The industrial park has over $41 million in planned investments and has already created 64 new jobs, said Gahan, a Democrat.

The Board of Public Works and Safety approved the renaming of the street late last year.

The city received a $1.7 million economic development grant from Obama's stimulus plan, which Gahan said allowed the city to finish extending Reas Lane, widen Durgee Road and parts of Grant Line Road and improve Security Parkway among other projects.

Madeleine Winer is the Southern Indiana communities reporter for the Courier-Journal. Contact her at 502-582-4087 or mrwiner@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/2k1LeHq