Requesting verfication on this Bush "quote"
I'll give you an example of a quote that was passed around in many sites. Rowlings, the author of the Harry Potter series, was quoted as an avowed Satanist:



"I worship the Devil, Beelzebub, Satan, Lucifer -- in all his unholy forms. And I owe all my success, all my glory, all my power, to my sweet, beautiful Lucifer. I'll give myself, body and soul, to the Dark Master. And in return, he will give me absurd wealth and power over the weak and pitiful of the world. And he did! Well, of course the books are designed to corrupt young mind. That's what Lucifer demands of us -- all of us! Because my master's power is only now at its zenith. Only now can I reveal the true purpose of my work. Only with the release of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, due in North American theatres on Nov. 15, is it too late for all you impotent mortals to do anything to stop it!"



This quote and condensed quotes (that are less flamboyant that the one I quoted) have circulated all over the internet. Suffice to say, the fundies took it as gospel truth and used it as ammo against Harry Potter. I just had to research on this...and true enough, this was quickly discredited. It originated in the satirical Onion website (or its like).



http://www.truthorfiction.com/rumors/j/jkrowlings.htm



That's just an example of an unverified quote that was proven false. As for the one I asked about Bush as well as the others I'm curious about (the Rockfeller & Kissinger quotes that suggest Machievellian powerful control over the media as well as the population), I haven't found anything to verify or falsify them...I'll just keep them in the X-files for now The problem with some of these interesting quotes is that they're rarely substantiated by reliable sources. Usually it's those off-beat sites that pass these quotes around. That doesn't necessarily make these quotes false, but they're not sound enough to count as "smoking guns" or "court-room evidence exhibits".I'll give you an example of a quote that was passed around in many sites. Rowlings, the author of the Harry Potter series, was quoted as an avowed Satanist:"I worship the Devil, Beelzebub, Satan, Lucifer -- in all his unholy forms. And I owe all my success, all my glory, all my power, to my sweet, beautiful Lucifer. I'll give myself, body and soul, to the Dark Master. And in return, he will give me absurd wealth and power over the weak and pitiful of the world. And he did! Well, of course the books are designed to corrupt young mind. That's what Lucifer demands of us -- all of us! Because my master's power is only now at its zenith. Only now can I reveal the true purpose of my work. Only with the release of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, due in North American theatres on Nov. 15, is it too late for all you impotent mortals to do anything to stop it!"This quote and condensed quotes (that are less flamboyant that the one I quoted) have circulated all over the internet. Suffice to say, the fundies took it as gospel truth and used it as ammo against Harry Potter. I just had to research on this...and true enough, this was quickly discredited. It originated in the satirical Onion website (or its like).That's just an example of an unverified quote that was proven false. As for the one I asked about Bush as well as the others I'm curious about (the Rockfeller & Kissinger quotes that suggest Machievellian powerful control over the media as well as the population), I haven't found anything to verify or falsify them...I'll just keep them in the X-files for now