Mollie Tibbetts: 'We follow through on everything,' investigators say of search
CLOSE Jake Tibbetts, brother of missing University of Iowa student Mollie Tibbetts, is hopeful for her safe return. Kelsey Kremer, kkremer@dmreg.com

Officials are searching for Mollie Tibbetts, 20. Tibbetts was last seen in Brooklyn on July 18, 2018. (Photo: Special to the Register)

Officials searching for Mollie Tibbetts, a University of Iowa student who has been missing for a week, say they continue to follow up on every lead they receive.

Mitch Mortvedt, assistant director of the Iowa Division of Criminal Investigation, a state agency investigating the case, said Thursday that there have been "a couple" searches of properties based on tips, but that to his knowledge none of them have required police to secure warrants because property owners have been cooperative.

One of those searches took place Wednesday night in southern Poweshiek County along Iowa Highway 21, but it did not result in anything, he said.

"There was nothing of investigative value last night that was discovered with the search," Mortvedt said. The search was the subject of speculation Wednesday and Thursday on social media.

Investigators are tracking a variety of angles, including searching Tibbetts' Fitbit, a physical activity tracker, and social media and other electronics. The FBI is assisting Iowa law enforcement agencies like the DCI and Poweshiek County Sheriff's Office because they have additional forensic expertise that is helpful in sifting through electronic data.

Dalton Jack and Mollie Tibbetts of Brooklyn in happier times, attending a football game. (Photo: Photo courtesy of Dalton Jack)

Tibbetts, an avid runner, was seen running the night she disappeared, while dog-sitting at the home of her boyfriend and her boyfriend’s brother in Brooklyn.

Law enforcement believes they have a "pretty good timeline," Mortvedt said, declining to give specifics due to the nature of the ongoing investigation.

Investigators have ruled out Tibbetts' boyfriend and brothers as suspects. They "did not have any involvement, Mortvedt said Thursday.

More: 'She hated to be sad and hated others to be sad': Brotherly love for missing sister

Mortvedt said that he's not sure how many of those searches are being conducted each day, but "we're going through and following out each tip."

"We follow through on everything," Mortvedt added.

Tips continue to flow in each day but ave slowed since the early days of the investigation, Mortvedt said.

Jake Tibbetts holds a photograph of his sister Mollie Tibbetts from a high school speech competition. He is proud of her fearless nature and is hopeful that she will be found. (Photo: Photo by Mike Kilen)

He said law enforcement appreciates people calling in with tips if they have any.

"You don’t know which one it’s going to be to bust it wide open," Mortvedt said of potential leads.

Tibbetts' boyfriend Dalton Jack told the Register Tuesday that she sent a Snapchat message to him that night which he opened at about 10 p.m., and the photo sent looked like she was indoors.

Volunteer search efforts that quickly combed the area were abandoned earlier this week in favor of FBI and DCI experts who are retracing areas she frequently ran with a more expert eye to possible evidence.

Buy Photo Car magnets printed by Live Now Designers in Brooklyn, Iowa, pictured on July 22, 2018. Community members continue to search for Mollie Tibbetts, a 20-year-old Iowan who was last seen on July 18, 2018. (Photo: Matthew Leimkuehler/The Register)

Read or Share this story: https://dmreg.co/2NNPXvm