Anthony Weiner is sentenced to 21 months in prison
“THE internet is the predator’s venue of choice,” said Anthony Weiner in 2007 when he was a New York congressman trying to pass a bill that updated sexual predator laws. A decade later, the one-time mayoral candidate was convicted and sentenced in a federal court to 21 months in prison for transferring obscene material using social media to a minor.

Just six years ago, Mr Weiner’s prospects looked bright. He was a congressman who was admired for his criticism of Republicans who did not vote for a bill that provided aid for first-responders to 9/11. His wife, Huma Abedin, was Hillary Clinton’s closest advisor. He was considered to stand a reasonable chance of becoming New York City’s mayor.

Get our daily newsletter Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.













But in 2011 Mr Weiner sent a graphic photo of his genitals using Twitter that accidentally went public. At first, he claimed he had been hacked, but it soon emerged that he had been exchanging explicit messages with six women over three years. He stepped down as congressman. But New Yorkers, who had a soft spot for the talented and charismatic Mr Weiner, gave him another chance. In 2013 he said he was running for mayor. During the campaign he was forced to admit he had been exchanging lewd messages with another woman, this time using the name Carlos Danger. His career hit a new low when the woman chased him into a McDonald’s at his own primary night party. A documentary, “Weiner”, which portrays his failed campaign, is both gripping and excruciating. Near the end of it, he says “I still have the virtually unlimited ability to fuck up things, day by day.”

Yet despite this self-awareness, the loss of his job, and the near-loss of his wife, who had continued to stand by him, Mr Weiner had not learnt his lesson. In 2016 he was caught sending a lewd photo of himself to a further woman while his little son lay next to him. And then in May he pleaded guilty to charges that he knowingly and for months sent sexually explicit messages to a 15-year-old girl. His wife filed for divorce that same day. The 21-month sentence carries with it three years of supervision once Mr Weiner leaves prison. He will also have to register as a sex-offender.

In a letter to the judge, pleading for leniency, Mr Weiner wrote that his actions ruined his marriage and “crushed the aspirations” of his wife. The scandal may also have helped crush Hillary Clinton’s presidential aspirations. During investigations into his sexting, federal prosecutors uncovered a stash of e-mails on a laptop shared by Mr Weiner and his wife. This prompted James Comey to reopen an investigation into Mrs Clinton’s usage of a private e-mail server just two weeks before the 2016 presidential election.

Mr Weiner told the court, in tears, that he was “a very sick man for a very long time”. His lawyer pointed out that his “sickness was not fundamentally or even really at all about a sexual obsession with teenagers.” From 2009 to September 2016, he exchanged messages with hundreds of women of all ages. During sentencing Denise Cote, the presiding judge, praised Mr Weiner for seeking help for his “hypersexuality”. She added that steps were being taken “to limit his access to social media.”