FACT CHECK: McConnell's Dark Money Group Dumps Over a Million Dollars More into Missouri for Josh Hawley
MISSOURI — Today, Mitch McConnell’s dark money group One Nation dumped over a million dollars more into Missouri to mislead voters about Claire’s record. To date, dark money groups associated with McConnell have spent over $4 million in Missouri propping up their golden boy Josh Hawley, who clearly can’t stand on his own.

Despite their millions of dollars in attack ads, secret dark money can’t change the facts:

There are no sanctuary cities in Missouri, but Claire has voted to crack down on sanctuary cities.

Claire has long fought to secure our border, working with Border Patrol agents to crack down on illegal immigration. Claire cosponsored legislation to provide $600 million for border security; introduced a bill to allow the hiring of 1,000 new Border Patrol agents; and introduced an amendment that would require Customs and Border Protection to hire 500 additional officers per year and provide additional funding for those hires until they meet their staffing needs.

After meeting with agents at the U.S.-Mexico border and hearing how they need new technology, Claire fought for a bipartisan bill to get them new technology and took action after reports that agents were using faulty equipment.

Claire played a key role in bipartisan negotiations on immigration reform and helped craft a deal that would have provided $25 billion for increased border security. Republican Senator Susan Collins called Claire’s role in these negotiations “instrumental.”

Just last week Claire introduced legislation to crack down on employers who knowingly hire illegal immigrants.

90% of the money spent in support of Josh Hawley has been from outside groups, including over $4 million from One Nation. To date, over $16 million of secret dark money has been spent to support Josh Hawley.

“Mitch McConnell’s dark money groups are getting desperate,” said McCaskill for Missouri Press Secretary Eric Mee. “Claire has a strong record of securing our border and working with Border Patrol Agents to get them the resources they need to stop illegal immigration. This ad is just smoke and mirrors designed to prop up a candidate who clearly has no record to stand on himself.”

For background click here.