Jerry Karnas: Rubio doing climate change flip-flop
In 2007, who said this?

"Global warming, dependence on foreign sources of fuel, and capitalism have come together to create opportunities for us that were unimaginable just a few short years ago. Today, Florida has the opportunity to pursue bold energy policies not just because they are good for the environment but because people can make money doing it. The demand towards such advances will create an industry to meet it. Florida should be the Silicon Valley of that industry."

And on Feb. 5, 2013, who said this?

"First of all, the climate is always changing. That's not the fundamental question, the fundamental question is whether man-made activity is what's contributing most to it. I understand that people say there is a significant scientific consensus on that issue, but I've actually seen reasonable debate on that principle. The secondary question is, is there anything government can do about that, that will actually make a difference? The United States is a country; it's not a planet."

If you answered "Marco Rubio" to both, you win. If you also noticed the two quotes express opposite viewpoints — well, you'd be right there, too. Why did Rubio flip-flop on climate change? Why is it important?

Sen. Rubio is having a big month. He is on the cover of Time Magazine as the "Republican savior" and gave the Republican response to President Obama's State of the Union. He's emerging as a key figure in the Republican Party.

In 2007, Rubio was speaker of the Florida House of Representatives, and climate change was a hot topic. He helped Gov. Crist pass an historic climate change law — the most progressive energy bill in the history of Florida. The bill lowered emissions, created jobs and reduced our dependence on oil.

In the run-up to the 2010 elections, the climate-denier crowd gained more traction in the Republican Party. Rubio subsequently ran from his climate record so he could win the Republican Senate primary. And he isn't alone among Republicans in disavowing climate change leadership records. Mitt Romney and John McCain did it, too.