Gov. Rick Scott signs budget, vetoes college tuition increase
TALLAHASSEE – Gov. Rick Scott vetoed $368 million in lawmaker pet projects Monday and blocked a 3 percent tuition hike for Florida colleges and universities.

The tuition increase passed earlier this month was a small piece of the overall $74.1 billion budget, which includes restoring $300 million in cuts to universities from last year, $50 million in incentive awards for faculty and another $85 million in campus construction dollars.

Scott has railed against tuition hikes for the past year, and the veto was expected – although lawmakers have claimed they have the constitutional authority to mandate the hike through the budget and the governor can't legally veto it. But Scott's move is similar to when then-Gov. Charlie Crist vetoed a 5 percent tuition hike in 2007 without a challenge from lawmakers.

House and Senate Republicans gave no indication Monday they planned to press the issue.

"While many will disagree with some of Governor Scott's line item vetoes, that is his constitutional role as Chief Executive," Senate President Don Gaetz, R-Niceville, said in a statement.

Scott said if lawmakers challenged him in court he would defend the action forcefully and that he hoped college and university presidents would also avoid seeking tuition hikes on their own through the Board of Governors.

"I worry about the cost of education," Scott said. "I am absolutely committed to keeping tuition low. This is not a political decision; this is a decision for Florida families. Tuition cannot continue to go up the way it's been going up."

Universities can still go to the board, which oversees the State University System, to ask for an increase in the so-called "differential" tuition.

Before the start of the legislative session, university presidents vowed not to seek an increase in differential tuition if lawmakers restored the $300 million that had been taken out of university budgets last year and lawmakers also made additional investments in the university system.