Rick Scott Citizens Property Insurance: Scott signs bill to reform, shrink Citizens Property Insurance
TALLAHASSEE — — Gov. Rick Scott Wednesday signed into law sweeping changes to the state's largest property insurer that will try to shrink the company by moving more homeowners into the private market.

"It's a hell of a victory. It's a step in the right direction, and it's a significant step," said state Sen. David Simmons, R-Altamonte Springs, the sponsor of SB 1770.

The new law, which takes effect July 1, creates a clearinghouse for Citizens' Property Insurance, so homeowners can compare Citizens' rates to coverage available through the private market. A homeowner who receives a comparable rate from a private company will be forced to take it.

The law also bans Citizens from insuring newly built coastal homes — the most high-risk dwellings in hurricane-prone Florida — and reduces the maximum home value for a policy to $700,000.

Finally, the measure requires Citizens to have an inspector general, who they cannot fire, to keep an eye on spending by company executives, and to comply with state purchasing rules. A report last year by Scott's Chief Inspector General Melinda Miguel found that travel expenses by Citizens' executives were excessive by state standards.

Scott has also taken issue with big salary hikes, large severance packages and the company's firing of investigators who had uncovered misconduct. In a sharply worded letter, he said a national search for an inspector general would begin immediately.

"This new Inspector General will be accountable to the Cabinet and will not be an entity Citizens can fire, as they did with their old compliance officers," Scott said. "A strong Inspector General is needed to provide independent oversight at Citizens and to end the fraud, waste, and abuse which has plagued Citizens for too long."

But the major thrust of the new law is to start shrinking Citizens, a company once billed as the "insurer of last resort" which is now the state's largest property insurer with 1.3 million policies. Of those, more than 300,000 are in Broward and Palm Beach counties.