Sheriff Israel breaks ranks with sheriffs on Stand Your Ground law
The Florida Sheriffs Association recently announced its "unanimous'' support for the Stand Your Ground law. But that's because Sheriff Scott Israel wasn't present for the vote.

Here's what the organization said after a meeting of most of the sheriffs:

FSA President, Sheriff Grady Judd, today announced, “The right to self-defense is well-established in law. The Florida Sheriffs confirmed this position by voting unanimously, at the 2013 Florida Sheriffs Association Summer Conference, to support the Stand Your Ground law as it is currently written. Our current judicial system is comprised of multiple checks and balances to ensure fair and equitable application of all laws, including Stand Your Ground.”

Florida’s Stand Your Ground Law

A person who is not engaged in an unlawful activity, and who is attacked in any other place where he or she has a right to be has no duty to retreat and has the right to stand his or her ground and meet force with force, including deadly force if he or she reasonably believes it is necessary to do so to prevent death or great bodily harm to himself or herself or another or to prevent the commission of a forcible felony.

F.S. §776.013(3)

The vote was from 57 of the 66 sheriffs in Florida.

Sheriff Israel said if he'd been present, he would have voted "no.'' Here's his response to our inquiry:

I was not at the Florida Sheriffs Association (FSA) conference last week in Marco Island, as it conflicted the many National Night Out Against Crime events which took place across Broward County at the same time. However, had I attended the FSA conference, I would have voted against the FSA statement on the Stand Your Ground law. I support an individual’s right to use armed self-defense when faced with the immediate threat of death or serious bodily injury, and without requiring any duty to retreat in one’s own home. However, if there is a safe opportunity in other settings to retreat and deescalate potentially deadly violence, it should be done. For this reason, I support legislative changes to more narrowly restrict the use of the Stand Your Ground defense.