Flake Releases “Tax Rackets” Oversight Report
Washington, D.C. – U.S. Sen. Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.) today released his seventh oversight report, Tax Rackets: Outlandish Loopholes to Lower Tax Liabilities, singling out a series of egregious tax loopholes benefiting a select few that could cost an estimated $50 billion over the next decade. As Tax Day approaches and Congress considers long-overdue tax reforms, the report is intended to highlight loopholes that create fake markets for unnecessary or unwanted goods and services; encourage more borrowing, spending, and taxing by local governments; and shift the tax burden to the middle class. Among the outlandish loopholes featured in the report are:

Click here to download the full report

Alpaca Tax Fleece – With no significant market for alpaca wool in the United States, these pet-like animals are being advertised and sold as walking tax shelters. Owners are able to deduct the cost of the alpacas, and because they are low-maintenance and require little space, the animals are also ideal for claiming a home with a small backyard as a farm. Some anecdotal examples of the alpaca tax fleece highlighted in the report include step-by-step tax deduction guides from alpaca associations, reports of individuals buying alpacas for tax breaks while still “boarding” the animals with the sellers, and one individual who zeroed out her taxable income by purchasing and deducting $300,000 worth of “college fund alpacas” which, in turn, allowed her children to collect $680,000 in grant money to attend top-tier universities





– With no significant market for alpaca wool in the United States, these pet-like animals are being advertised and sold as walking tax shelters. Owners are able to deduct the cost of the alpacas, and because they are low-maintenance and require little space, the animals are also ideal for claiming a home with a small backyard as a farm. Some anecdotal examples of the alpaca tax fleece highlighted in the report include step-by-step tax deduction guides from alpaca associations, reports of individuals buying alpacas for tax breaks while still “boarding” the animals with the sellers, and one individual who zeroed out her taxable income by purchasing and deducting $300,000 worth of “college fund alpacas” which, in turn, allowed her children to collect $680,000 in grant money to attend top-tier universities Telemarketing Tax Break – A carve-out in the tax code allows publishers to deduct as a current business expense the costs of establishing, maintaining, or increasing the circulation of a newspaper, magazine, or other periodical – including the cost of hiring extra employees for a limited time to get new subscriptions through telephone calls. This preferential treatment in the tax code allows publishers to deduct the full cost of these expenses in just a single year. Conversely, this provision of the tax code does not apply to other subscription-reliant business such as software companies and streaming entertainment services, which must classify these same expenses as “capitol expenses” and the spread deduction for them over multiple years. The Joint Committee on Taxations estimates the exemption for publishers will cost $300 million over five years.

Lucky Loophole – Not only can “professional gamblers” deduct gambling losses, they can also deduct the cost of gambling trips as businesses expenses incurred as part of their job. This allows them to deduct the cost of travel to a casino or racetrack, meals, entertainment, fees for race handicapping information, and “other expenses associated with the activity of gambling.” Generous deductions for gambling losses have also created a black market for losing lottery tickets, which are bundled in the hundreds and even thousands, and sold online under such headers as “Tax Write Off” and “TAX REFUND TIME!!!” The Congressional Research Service estimates that the loss in tax revenue resulting from the gambling loss write-off could be more than $2.8 billion annually

Chicken Poop Tax Credit – Congress amended Section 45 of the code in 1999 to make energy produced from poultry manure and other organic waste (generally referred to as open-loop biomass) eligible for federal tax credits. The idea for the tax credit was hatched by a flock of politicians representing the Delmarva Peninsula, an area comprised of Delaware, the eastern shore of Maryland, and the peninsula of Virginia, which produces more than 500 tons of chicken droppings every year. The manure has long been used as fertilizer, but the run-off is causing pollution in the Chesapeake Bay, prompting a search for alternative uses. However, because the power is generated by burning the chicken waste, many environmentalists have criticized the process as simply turning water pollution into air pollution. While the IRS does not track the specific amount paid for poultry poop power, all open-loop biomass sources receive $200 million in tax subsidies a year and that cost is expected to increase.

“Tax Rackets makes the case for a simpler, flatter and fairer tax code that would reduce tax bills for most, and ensure greater prosperity and opportunity for all,” said Flake. “The report demonstrates how the complexity of our outdated tax code provides shelters for nearly any industry, interest, activity or individual; and it reveals the consequences of these tax incentives, which include misallocation of resources and higher taxes for average Americans. Scrubbing the tax code for other unfair tax expenditures would undoubtedly identify many more loopholes costing hundreds of billions of dollars that could be closed with the savings more evenly distributed.”

To download the full report, click here.

To view the promo video for the report, click here.

Background:

In January, Boston Globe columnist Jeff Jacoby highlighted Flake for taking up the mantle of former U.S. Sens. Tom Coburn, William Proxmire, and Barry Goldwater in the decades-long effort to curb wasteful spending in Washington. Read the column here.

Flake has already released six oversight reports highlighting wasteful and egregious federal spending, including: Wastebook: PORKémon Go (2017) – identified 50 examples of outrageous and wasteful federal spending amounting to more than $5 billion. Twenty Questions: Government Studies That Will Leave You Scratching Your Head (2016) – identified 20 hard-to-justify, taxpayer-funded studies that diverted more than $35 million that Flake argued would have been better spent researching treatments for cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, and viral infections such as Zika and Ebola. Wastebook: The Farce Awakens (2015) – identified 100 examples of wasteful federal spending amounting to more than $100 billion. Tackling Paid Patriotism (2015) – joint report with U.S. Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) that identified $6.8 million paid by the Pentagon to professional sports teams to honor American soldiers at sporting events. The report resulted in taxpayers recouping nearly $850,000 for improper payments. Jurassic Pork (2015) – highlighted the continued cost of pork projects in the post-earmark-ban era. Science of Splurging (2014) – identified millions of dollars in wasteful and egregious spending by the Environmental Protection Agency.



Flake also previously published PorkChops, a series highlighting wasteful and egregious federal spending, and the Egregious Earmark of the Week, an 8-year-series that contributed to the successful effort to ban congressional earmarks.

###