What's A Blind Trust, Anyway, And Why Won't It Work For President-Elect Trump?
With just nine days before the inauguration of the 45th President of the United States of America, President-elect Donald Trump held a press conference to discuss recent news reports and his plans for transition. It was his first formal press conference in nearly six months.

Front and center at the press conference were Trump's plans to distance himself from his businesses after he took office. Sheri Dillon, a tax attorney with the law firm of Philadelphia-based Morgan Lewis, took to the stage to talk about the strategy to disengage Trump from his businesses. If her name sounds familiar, it's because Dillon, along with tax attorney William Nelson (no, not that Willie Nelson), drafted a letter last year confirming that Trump's "personal tax returns have been under continuous examination by the Internal Revenue Service since 2002, consistent with the IRS’s practice for large and complex businesses."

During the press conference, Dillon stressed that the conflict of interest laws do not apply to the President (here's the cite: 18 U.S. Code §208). Whether the strict interpretation that Trump's team is applying to the law is overbroad is arguable: it's likely that the exemption wasn't intended to be a free pass but was instead an effort to recognize that the President's actions touch so many different parts of the nation that there could always be a potential conflict. Trump explained his position, saying, "They don't want presidents getting tangled up in minutia. They want a president to run the country. So I could actually run my business. I could actually run my business and run government at the same time. I don't like the way that looks, but I would be able to do that if I wanted to."

Despite the fact that Trump's team doesn't believe that the law applies to him, Dillon explained the steps to that Trump would be taking to transfer management of the Trump Organization to his sons, Eric and Donald, Jr. First, she noted that Trump’s investments and business assets (including the Trump Organization) "have all been or will be conveyed to a trust prior to January 20th." Additionally, Trump, along with his daughter, Ivanka, will be resigning from all officer and other positions with the Trump Organization entities.

With respect to his investments, Dillon claims that Trump has already disposed of his assets in publicly traded or easily liquidated investments. The resulting assets, which Dillon characterized as "cash, cash equivalents, and treasuries and perhaps some positions in a government approved diversified portfolio, one that is consistent with the regulations from the Office of Government Ethics" will be held in trust together with his business assets (such as Trump Tower and Mar-A-Lago).

As part of the trust agreement, there will be no new foreign deals conducted by any of Trump's businesses during Trump’s presidency. Deals at home will be allowed after what Dillon characterized as a "vigorous vetting process." Finally, information about profit and loss would only be available to Trump for the company as a whole and not broken down by business. These steps, Dillon says, are not required but are being taken to prevent any appearance that Trump or his businesses are exploiting the office of the presidency.

Of course, this brings up the question: Why not just sell everything and form a blind trust? That, Dillon asserted, is impossible since "you cannot have a totally blind trust with operating businesses."

So what is a blind trust? Here's where we get into the legal bits. The reality is that many Americans don't really know what a trust is, much less a blind trust. That's because, of course, most of us don't directly and knowingly deal with trusts in our daily lives (even though they're all around us - that's a post for another time).

But here's what you need to know. A trust is a contract that allows a third party, or trustee, to hold assets on behalf of another person or entity. Depending on the purpose and type of trust, the contract may not have to be written and doesn't have to be expressed in a formal document: your grandmother might have created a trust by simply writing "In Trust For" on a bank account or other asset.

A trust can be revocable, meaning that the person who created the trust (often called the grantor or settlor) can modify or terminate it at any time, or a trust can be irrevocable, meaning that the grantor cannot modify or terminate the trust (an irrevocable trust can typically only be modified or terminated with the permission of the beneficiary and/or by a court).

A trust can hold almost anything from liquid assets like cash to intangible interests in property and companies. The laws that govern trusts vary by state, but most states have rules about disclosures to beneficiaries. Those disclosure rules can require the trustee to provide detailed accountings, including transactions involving trust assets, to beneficiaries. In some instances, the trustee is required to obtain permission before taking certain steps, such as buying and selling assets or making distributions. That gives a lot of power to trust beneficiaries.

In contrast, a blind trust keeps certain kind of information - like asset makeup and management - secret from trust beneficiaries. With a blind trust, the beneficiaries do not know the assets held in trust and they have no power to participate in the management or distribution of those assets. The control of the blind trust is held by a trustee (or trustee) who typically has complete discretion over the trust management.

This kind of trust can be a valuable tool for public officials to prevent a conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest. If, for example, I were a politician who owned a lot of Apple stock inside of a blind trust - but didn't know that I owned Apple stock and couldn't advise on whether to buy or sell that stock - my dealings with Apple, including discussions about new laws and taxes that might impact the company would not be unduly influenced.

With a blind trust, the potential for investment isn't limited to cash or "safe" assets. Investments can include public holdings, real estate, and private companies. However, you can't take it with you: you have to allow your trustee to convert existing assets into new assets without any knowledge about what those new assets are or how they are invested. You can't keep your existing assets because you know too much about those assets. New assets inside a blind trust work like a clean slate. You can see, then, how a blind trust (think "I see nothing, I know nothing") would be desirable for public officials. That's why Bill Clinton relied on blind trusts while he served as President. Ditto for George W. Bush before him.

The Obamas did not utilize blind trusts but had a relatively bland mix of assets (cash, homes, etc.) that were not deemed a conflict of interest. But just as the Obamas don't have an extensive array of assets, Trump has the opposite problem. He doesn't have just one or two investments that could be potential sources of conflict. Rather he has a mix of assets, including real estate like Trump Tower and Mar-a-Lago, and other investments all over the world, with the potential to be sources of conflict. He can't simply transfer those assets into a blind trust because, as Dillon noted, "President Trump can't unknow he owns Trump Tower."

Trump's success is largely a result of his own branding. Anyone who has ever run their own business gets that: the Taxgirl brand, for example, is successful because I'm Taxgirl. If I sell my name, it's not the same business. That's the kind of dilemma - albeit on a massively larger scale - that Trump faces. The Trump name is what makes Trump Tower the Trump Tower. It still has a value without Trump's name on it, but the value is starkly limited.

However, simply giving up control of the assets, in keeping with the plan that his advisors have touted, isn't a total panacea either. Remember that the key to the success of a blind trust is that you can, as a public official, make choices that won't have the appearance of being influenced by your holdings - you don't know what those holdings are. Transferring control of the assets solves one problem (management) but doesn't change the fact that Trump still knows what he owns. He knows how his actions, as President, can affect his business interests even if he's no longer in charge. That isn't a problem you can solve by simply turning over the keys.

These are complicated issues for sure, and it is encouraging to see that the President-elect is taking seriously the concerns about his holdings and the potential for conflict. But is it enough? Questions about the release of his tax returns persist; Trump maintained during the press conference that he has no plans to release his tax return because, he says, the American people don't care at all, reiterating, "I don't think they care at all." But that's where he's wrong. The interest in his assets, the turnover of his company, and the concern about potential conflicts prove that the American people care about transparency.