Putin Admits Sanctions Sapping Russia
Vladimir Putin admits it. Western sanctions have taken a toll on Russia. Only not in the way most people are thinking.

“Sanctions are hurting us. We hear that they are not a problem really, but they are, particularly with technology

transfers in oil and gas," he said during last week's VTB Capital's Russia Calling investment forum. "We are coping.”

Germany and the U.K. are leading the charge to slap Russia with even more sanctions. This time over Russian support for Syrian government air strikes in the rebel-held city of Aleppo. Russia and the Bashar Assad government say that the city is besieged with jihadis and ISIS. But the West says that many of the bombing raids are knocking out "moderates" trying to topple Assad. Russia's stated position on Syria is that it wants to keep Assad in power, at least until there is some negotiated settlement between Assad and non-terrorist groups vying for political power. This may be wishful thinking all around.

On Thursday, Italy's prime minister Matteo Renzi said, “It is difficult to imagine...further sanctions against Russia.”

Staunch anti-Russian European Council chief David Tusk of Poland revealed his hand today in speaking of two separate issues. “It’s clear that Russia’s strategy is to weaken the E.U. -- we have no illusions of that,” he told reporters. The E.U. is Russia's most important trading partner. Weaker demand from Europe is bad for the Russian economy in many respects, not just on the oil and gas front.

Tusk also said that the proposed sanctions were Russia's fault. “Increasing tensions with Russia is not our aim; we are simply reacting to steps taken by Russia.”

European leaders spent two days in Brussels debating about what to do with Russia. Leaders said “all available options” were on the table, which include sanctions. The U.K., France and Germany wanted to take a harsher tone with Russia. Italy led those nations who thought otherwise.

Washington and Brussels already have sectoral sanctions on Russia. These were imposed because of Russia's incursion into Ukraine starting in 2014. Russian banks and its oil and gas sector have been sanctioned by the West.

Putin's comment at the VTB Capital event made it clear that Russia's oil and gas sector was being hurt by bans on technological support by major international oil companies.

When asked how the Russian government would react to sanctions based on Russia's military support of Assad, Putin was adamant. "Any economic sanctions based on political ideas would be damaging to relations. These sanctions are damaging enough for everyone. One shouldn’t press someone and blackmail someone politically with more sanctions. If we fall under this blackmail then Russia becomes an economic dependent of someone else's foreign policies. We will not allow this to happen because we cannot survive that dependence,” he said.