Galerie D'art Nader Haiti Haitian Art
About Galerie D'art Nader

Galerie Nader is a name that has been associated with fine arts for nearly five decades. Dealing art on a small scale at the beginning, Georges S. Nader decided to open his first gallery in Port-au-Prince Haiti in 1966. His reputation and particularly the intuition he has to detect talent made the gallery an instant success nationally and internationally. Soon, Nader became one of the nation’s best-known dealers and collectors, and was trusted to select works for the finest collections in Europe, North and South America. Georges S. Nader has promoted Haitian art all over the world through exhibitions and publications.

Upon retiring as an art dealer, he handed on the torch to his son Georges Jr., a graduate from New-York University, who then opened Galerie Nader in Petion Ville. Georges Jr. turned his establishment into the largest art gallery of the Caribbean. Following in his father's footsteps, he applied himself to promote Haitian art abroad while giving the necessary personal and business support to talented local artists, which allowed them to create this Haitian legacy. With his constant determination to promote and preserve Haitian culture, heritage, and patrimony; Georges Jr. started a project called “Haiti Cherie” located in Jacmel, Haiti. This unique concept serves to portray a unified front of the Haitian culture by combining a variety of the best local products such as Haitian paintings, handcrafts, local coffee, rum, beer and music into a common space.

The Nader’s collection, considered as the largest collection of Haitian art in the world, includes over 17,000 artworks. Out of this large collection, the family has carefully selected around 1,000 paintings of great historical value from the most renowned Haitian artists to exhibit in a National Art Museum they plan to build in collaboration with the public sector. These masterpieces will be displayed in an effort to commemorate this national patrimony.