Amazon Recall Leaves Eclipse Viewers Scrambling
Amazon has recalled select protective solar eclipse glasses, admitting it can’t confirm the specs’ safety.

The retail giant on Saturday issued a widespread repeal amid reports of counterfeiters, urging customers to toss products that may not provide the necessary level of protection during next week’s total solar eclipse.

On Aug. 21, folks from Oregon to South Carolina will be shrouded in darkness for about two minutes, marking the first time in more than four decades that North America has experienced such a massive solar event.

But many are now scrambling to find new eyewear following the sudden recall—only a week before the eclipse. (Aren’t you glad you signed up for that Prime membership, with free two-day shipping?)

“Out of an abundance of caution and in the interests of our customers, we asked third-party sellers that were offering solar eclipse glasses to provide documentation to verify their products were compliant with relevant safety standards,” an Amazon spokeswoman told Geek.

“The offers from sellers who provided this safety documentation remain available to customers,” the company statement said. “The listings from sellers who did not provide the appropriate documentation have been removed and customers who purchased from them were notified last week.”

Amazon may have been a bit overzealous in its efforts, though: According to Portland news outlet KGW, retailers claiming to sell verified, NASA- and American Astronomical Society-approved products were also caught in the storm.

“We recently started getting reports from knowledgeable members of the eclipse-chasing community that some of the products being shipped by sellers on Amazon and some other sites appeared to be counterfeit,” AAS press officer Richard Tresch Fienberg told Geek in an emailed statement. “Some gave images of the sun that were obviously too bright to be comfortable. Others gave images that were too dark to be useful on eclipse day.”

Amazon “made the problem worse,” he continued, by contacting all customers who bought filters—safe or not—and telling them the same thing: “Don’t use the viewers to look at the sun, and we’ll refund your money,” according to Fienberg.

“Instead of going after the bad guys they [Amazon] appear to be covering their backside and saying that no vendors can be trusted,” he wrote. “This is hurting legitimate companies’ reputations and potentially costing them a lot of money. It has caused mass confusion within the eclipse-chasing community and the public more generally.”

Now, confirmed safety glasses are selling at huge markups, available on short notice for anywhere between $7.99 per pair to $250 for a pack of three solar shades.

“We are trying to get Amazon to fix this problem, rather than to keep making it worse, but so far we have not gotten a satisfactory response,” Fienberg said.

Unless you want to melt your retinas (exposure to excessive amounts of ultraviolet radiation over a short period actually causes a sunburn of the eye), you absolutely must use protection during the eclipse.

But whether you’re short on cash or can’t guarantee retrieval before Aug. 21, try one of these clever hacks to experience the solar phenomenon without permanently damaging your optical organs.

Those in the “path of totality”—Salem, Ore.; Idaho Falls, Idaho; Lincoln, Neb.; Kansas City or St. Louis, Mo.; Nashville, Tenn.; Columbia or Charleston, S.C.—can keep a well-protected eye out for about two minutes of complete darkness. Every part of the country will be able to see at least a partial solar eclipse.

Global live streams will also be available via NASA and CNN.

And don’t worry if you miss this month’s shadowing of the sun: The next total solar eclipse is scheduled for April 8, 2024.

Editor’s Note: This story was updated at 7:30 a.m. Eastern with comment from the American Astronomical Society, and again at 12:10 p.m. Eastern with comment from Amazon.

Let us know what you like about Geek by taking our survey.