Fracking-like drilling near Everglades raises environmental alarms
WASHINGTON — — A Texas company has been caught using fracking-like blasting methods to drill for oil near the Everglades, raising alarms from state officials and inflaming a long-simmering controversy over energy exploration in the midst of a cherished ecosystem.

U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson urged federal officials to investigate. The state fined the company and demanded a temporary halt to five new exploratory wells.

And the fracking-like episode drew widespread attention to an emerging oil rush at the western edge of the Everglades, rousing opposition from environmentalists across the state who worry about the impact on water quality and wildlife.

"This is our watershed," said Vickie Machado, of Fort Lauderdale, a Florida organizer for Food & Water Watch. "They are using millions of gallons of clean water, mixing it with chemicals with known carcinogens, and pumping it underground to break up the protected rock formations out there. The potential is pretty scary."

State officials last month cited the Dan A. Hughes Co., of Beeville, Texas, for using an "enhanced extraction procedure" in December akin to fracking without a permit in defiance of a cease-and-desist order to stop the practice. The Department of Environmental Protection said the enhanced procedure, which some call fracking, "had not previously been used in Florida."

Fracking, short for hydraulic fracturing, blasts open rock formations through high-pressure injections of chemicals and water while filling fissures with sand to hold them open, drawing out trapped oil or natural gas. Environmentalists scorn the practice and some communities are considering banning it, largely because it produces large amounts of toxic wastewater.

The Hughes Co. last year asked the state for permission to use high-pressure injection of dissolving acids at a production well in Collier County. The environmental-protection officials, concerned about this new procedure, told the company not to move forward but later found that it did anyway.