Why The Satanic Temple Indiana adopted a stretch of highway in Boone County
CLOSE More than 800 people are killed each year on Indiana's highways. Here are some ways to stay safe. Dwight Adams/IndyStar

A member of The Satanic Temple Indiana cleans a part of U.S. 421 during the organizations Adopt-A-Highway effort (Photo: The Satanic Temple Indiana)

Sept. 13, 2018 update: INDOT posted an Adopt-A-Highway sign featuring the temple's name in September. The group shared a photo of the sign on its Facebook page.

An Adopt-A-Highway sign along U.S. 421 in Boone County lists its sponsor: The Satanic Temple Indiana Chapter. (Photo: Photo courtesy of The Satanic Temple Indiana Chapter)

July 12, 2018: Community members wearing inverted crosses and pentagrams while picking up trash could soon become a common sight along a stretch of U.S. 421 in Boone County.

This week, The Satanic Temple Indiana completed the first cleanup of the organization's "Inverted Crossroads" Adopt-A-Highway campaign.

The inverted cross is a commonly used Satanic symbol.

While the idea of Satanic Temple members raising devil horns while cleaning the highway may raise a few eyebrows, temple officials said this is something they've wanted to do for years. They hope to build toward a more inclusive state and encourage others to do good within their communities.

The construction continues: Commuters confront Downtown I-65 closure

A viral interaction: A video showing alleged racial profiling in Indianapolis went viral.

"I hope other people and other groups see this. If anything, we just want to show that all religious groups and all people are equal," Mara Gorgo, co-chapterhead of The Satanic Temple Indiana, told IndyStar. "If another group sees this and they're like, if The Satanic Temple can do it we can do it, I want them to. I want them to go out there and get their own stretch of highway and get their name on a sign.

"We definitely want to push equality. If anywhere, we could really use it here, so we're really proud to be able to do that for indiana."

The group is tending to two miles of U.S. 421, just south of State Road 32 in rural Boone County.

Gorgo said shortly after becoming a chapter in Janurary, group members began looking for ways to get active and give back. The Adopt-A-Highway program was at the top of their list, and once they inquired about making it happen, things quickly fell into place.

"It's been great. The state was really receptive to us and they've been really wonderful to work with. There haven't been any hiccups or side eyes," she said. "Even with the response from the community. Certainly we've gotten a couple of weird comments here and there ... but overwhelmingly, great support from the community. I'm really proud of Indiana."

Members of The Satanic Temple Indiana clean a part of U.S. 421 during the organizations Adopt-A-Highway effort (Photo: The Satanic Temple Indiana)

While INDOT requires four cleanings for a spot to become adopted, Gorgo said The Satanic Temple plans to be there on almost a monthly basis. She added that the Adopt-A-Highway sign bearing the organization's name should be going up in the coming weeks.

From there, Gorgo hopes to launch more efforts and further understanding of their group. Along with the highway cleanup, The Satanic Temple Indiana participates in Indy Pride, and is preparing to participate in Fort Wayne Pride later this month.

According to The Satanic Temple website, the organization's mission is to "encourage benevolence and empathy among all people, reject tyrannical authority, advocate practical common sense and justice, and be directed by the human conscience to undertake noble pursuits guided by the individual will."

The group also has seven fundamental tenets. Among them are the beliefs that the freedoms of others should be respected; beliefs should conform to a scientific understanding of the world; and that the struggle for justice is an ongoing and necessary pursuit.

"We are not sacrificing animals. We are not eating babies. We are not worshipping the devil ... we are a group of nonbelievers," she said."We don't believe in God or the devil. We believe in being good people and doing good things. We believe in empathy and benevolence, and we try and promote that within our ranks and hope that with our community service, we can go show Indiana and other communities that we're good people."

Call IndyStar reporter Justin L. Mack at 317-444-6138. Follow him on Twitter: @justinlmack.

IndyStar digital producer Ethan May contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: https://indy.st/2Jekqjv