Notices / INTERPOL expertise / Internet / Home
Notices

INTERPOL Notices are international requests for cooperation or alerts allowing police in member countries to share critical crime-related information.

Notices are published by INTERPOL’s General Secretariat at the request of ﻿National Central Bureaus (NCBs) and authorized entities, and can be published in any of the Organization’s official languages: Arabic, English, French and Spanish.

In the case of Red Notices, the persons concerned are wanted by national jurisdictions for prosecution or to serve a sentence based on an arrest warrant or court decision. INTERPOL's role is to assist the national police forces in identifying and locating these persons with a view to their arrest and extradition or similar lawful action.



In addition, Notices are used by the United Nations, International Criminal Tribunals and the International Criminal Court to seek persons wanted for committing crimes within their jurisdiction, notably genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.

Types of Notice

﻿Red Notice

To seek the location and arrest of wanted persons with a view to extradition or similar lawful action. ﻿Yellow Notice

To help locate missing persons, often minors, or to help identify persons who are unable to identify themselves. Blue Notice

To collect additional information about a person’s identity, location or activities in relation to a crime. Black Notice

To seek information on unidentified bodies. Green Notice

To provide warnings and intelligence about persons who have committed criminal offences and are likely to repeat these crimes in other countries. Orange Notice

To warn of an event, a person, an object or a process representing a serious and imminent threat to public safety. ﻿INTERPOL–United Nations Security Council Special Notice

Issued for groups and individuals who are the targets of UN Security Council Sanctions Committees. Purple Notice

To seek or provide information on modus operandi, objects, devices and concealment methods used by criminals.

Publication

Only those notices approved for public dissemination appear on this website (the full list of Notices is available to authorized users via INTERPOL's Information System).

Any individual who is subject to an INTERPOL Notice should be considered innocent until proven guilty.

Any unauthorized alteration of any portion of any INTERPOL Notice is considered as a violation and subject to legal prosecution.

Legal basis

A Notice is published only if it fulfils all conditions for processing the information. For example, a Notice will not be published if it violates Article 3 of the ﻿INTERPOL Constitution, which forbids the Organization from undertaking any intervention or activities of a political, military, religious or racial character.

Notices are processed in line with ﻿INTERPOL’s Rules on the Processing of Data, which ensure the legality and quality of information, and the protection of personal data.

The legal basis for a Red Notice is an arrest warrant or court order issued by the judicial authorities in the country concerned. Many of INTERPOL’s member countries consider a Red Notice to be a valid request for provisional arrest.

Furthermore, INTERPOL is recognized as an official channel for transmitting requests for provisional arrest in a number of bilateral and multilateral extradition treaties, including the European Convention on Extradition, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Convention on Extradition, and the United Nations Model Treaty on Extradition.

Diffusions

Similar to the Notice is another request for cooperation or alert mechanism known as a 'diffusion'. This is less formal than a notice but is also used to request the arrest or location of an individual or additional information in relation to a police investigation. A diffusion is circulated directly by an NCB to the member countries of their choice, or to the entire INTERPOL membership and is simultaneously recorded in INTERPOL’s Information System.