How Nostradamus Predicted the Notre Dame Fire

The dreadful sight of Notre Dame Cathedral on fire on Monday 15th April 2019, after the first alarm had sounded at 6.20pm, looked like a Nostradamus prophecy come to life. A burning sun, a falling spire and orange flames.

As we’ll see in a moment, that is because it was. A quatrain written 500 years ago by the French astrologer predicted it. This image of Nostradamus comes from one of the best astrology/biography sites online, Biography.com.

The Head of Aries, Jupiter and Saturn

This is the original prediction by Nostradamus in French and English, from the only Nostradamus translation I use – by British author Ned Halley – with astrology clues which point to the first alarm at 6.20pm Monday 15th, April 2019. Source: The Guardian

What is astonishing in this Nostradamus prediction, written centuries ago and translated decades ago – is the use of the word ’emotions’ which is the exact word used on Twitter by French President Emmanuel Macron to describe France’s response.

Notre-Dame is aflame. Great emotion for the whole nation. Our thoughts go out to all Catholics and to the French people. Like all of my fellow citizens, I am sad to see this part of us burn tonight. https://t.co/27CrJgJkJb — Emmanuel Macron (@EmmanuelMacron) April 15, 2019

“Notre-Dame is engulfed with flames. Emotion of the whole nation. Thoughts are with Catholics and all the French. Like all citizens, I am sad to see this part of us burn.”

As you can see below, President Macron’s first name – Emmanuel – which refers to God – appears in the second line.

This comes from the only translation I use for Nostradamus: the Millennium edition.

Chef d’Aries, Jupiter et Saturne,

Dieu eternel quelles mutations?

Puis par long siecle son maling temps retourne,

Gaule et Italie, quelles emotions?

The head of Aries, Jupiter and Saturn,

God eternal, what changes can be expected?

Following a long century, evil will return

France and Italy, what emotions will you undergo?

The Notre Dame Nostradamus Horoscope

Set for the moment the alarm sounded (either for smoke or heat, according to the public prosecutor Rémy Heitz, this is an astrological chart which confirms the Nostradamus prediction. Chiron is at the ‘head’ or beginning of the zodiac sign Aries, a fire sign. Chiron is at 3 Aries here, exactly quincunx the Moon at 3 Virgo. Uranus is close by at 2 Taurus.

Jupiter is at 24 Sagittarius, the sign which rules religion, making patterns with Pluto at 23 Capricorn and Venus at 23 Pisces. Capricorn is a symbol of structure, tradition and the establishment. Pisces rules Christianity – the two fishes.

Saturn is at 20 Capricorn, conjunct the South Node at 21 Capricorn – again this is a picture of hierarchy, monuments and tradition. The North Node at 21 Cancer in the sign of patriotism, family, home and country stands opposite.

Nostradamus and The Great Fire of London

Astrologer and psychic Nostradamus published Les Propheties in 1555 – The Prophecies. He predicted The Great Fire of London in 1666:

The blood of the just will be lacking in London

Burnt up in the fire of ’66

The ancient Lady will topple from her high place

Many of the same sect will be killed.

On September 2nd, 1666, a fire in Thomas Farriner’s bakery on Pudding Lane in London turned into a three-day disaster. The Great Fire of London. What is remarkable about this, is that similar astrology cycles were also in place. We have to wonder how Nostradamus was working. He cast horoscopes but also used scrying to see his clear visions of the future. Was he looking at an historic Capricorn cycle and seeing not only 1666 but also 2019?

Nostradamus and Hitler

Nostradamus wrote “The greater part of the battlefield will be against Hister. Into a cage of iron will the great one be drawn, when the child of Germany observes nothing.” He was out by one letter of the alphabet, but this is one of his most famous visions. Both these translations come from the Millennium Edition of his work. It is important to work with the right translation of the Prophecies because a great deal can hang on one word. Ned Halley’s book (pictured with the quatrain in question) is the best Nostradamus source I have found. This screen shot shows the French quatrain (four-line prediction) and its English translation by Halley, below.

Italy, the Vatican, the Catholic Church and Cardinal Pell

Nostradamus was right. When Notre Dame burned, as Chiron moved into Aries and Jupiter in Sagittarius (religion) and Saturn in Capricorn (the elite) made unusual patterns – the Catholic Church, the Vatican and all Italy were also powerfully affected. The fire destroyed the cathedral just weeks after Cardinal Pell, Australia’s most senior Catholic, and a leading figure at the Vatican, was found guilty of sex abuse charges against boys within his ‘care.’

Evil did return to us. The ‘long century’ is really interesting here, because this is of course the Millennium and we are now at the year 2019. Nostradamus was seeing a vision of something that was not just about the building, but the structure.

God eternal, what changes can be expected?

Following a long century, evil will return

France and Italy, what emotions will you undergo?

French President Emmanuel Macron, who arrived at the scene early, said his thoughts were with “all Catholics and all French people. The BBC reported his quote: “Like all of my countrymen, I am sad tonight to see this part of us burn.”

Deep Emotion and a Dramatic Fire

Given that Nostradamus was writing in the mid 1500’s, his use of the word ’emotions’ is striking, not only because as we saw earlier, Macron used it – but also because UNESCO used it too. Again, this is from Twitter:

“Deep emotion in the face of this dramatic fire at the cathedral.”

"Deep emotion in the face of this dramatic fire at the cathedral #NotreDame de Paris, inscribed as #WorldHeritage in 1991. @UNESCO is closely monitoring the situation and is standing by France's side to safeguard and restore this invaluable heritage." https://t.co/WsGoSym4gD — UNESCO (@UNESCO) April 15, 2019

“It’s a devastating image because Notre Dame, Paris and France play a key role in the history of European Christendom, that is second only to Rome and the Vatican,” Massimo Faggioli, a professor of theology and religious studies at Villanova University, told Al Jazeera. “This is really a fire at the heart of Christianity.”

One of the most striking images of Notre Dame that we have, before the fire took the spire forever, is of renovation work (which authorities blame for the blaze) lifting a stone angel high above Paris. The angel below (pictured in the brilliant French website, The Local) has an enigmatic smile. Did Nostradamus see this too? During the airlift of the statue (one of 19) it must have looked as if angels had taken flight and deserted Notre Dame itself.

When the fire engulfed the cathedral, collapsing the roof, destroying a spire it sent onlookers into tears, said NBC News.

Stranger Than the Da Vinci Code

Truth can be stranger than fiction and life can be stranger than (even) The Da Vinci Code. This split-image Twitter meme turned up on my timeline days before the tragic Notre Dame blaze. It shows one of the most notorious Australians on the planet – Julian Assange. It also shows a very famous painting which has disappeared and, just before the Notre Dame disaster, was allegedly found to be fake. It was owned by a wealthy Russian collector. These three events – the questions about a Leonardo fake, the shock arrest of Assange and the even more shocking Notre Dame blaze – all took place within days of each other. If you add the Nostradamus prediction, you have a plot that even Hollywood would find improbable. What here is truth and what is fiction? Perhaps the astrological chart above can tell us.

What Next For France?

The astrology chart for France is here, and I used it in a prediction about this country, back on 12th April 2017. Here is a flashback to that horoscope forecast, which many of you commented on at the time. This was posted about two years ago when Macron was up against Le Pen. I have reposted it here for those of you asking me about the astrology of Paris.

May 2019 to April 2020 Predictions for France

“May 2019 to April 2020 will be a different matter. Shocking. Confronting. Challenging. Enthralling. Exciting. Electrifying. At that point the nation will go through the full impact of the long Euro and EU break-up. At that point, Marine Le Pen is going to go the full French Revolution. She may be in power by then, or truly out of it – but her destiny in the summer of 2019, which will crackle with electrical storms across Paris, will be history-making. She will be part of the biggest shake-up for the French currency and economy in our lifetime and there will be shock upon shock. Quel surprise.”

Over to You

Over to you. Many astrologers, psychics and Tarot readers come to this website and your thoughts on the astrology chart of the Notre Dame Fire are welcome. These events in recent days are shocking – and rather odd. What are you seeing? Which questions should we be asking?

I have no doubt at all that Nostradamus foretold this fire – he worked as a clairvoyant (the French translation is ‘clear sight’ and Paris was his city. Did he peer into April 2019, with those Aries, Jupiter and Saturn patterns and see an angel being airlifted – literally flying from Notre Dame? Did it symbolise the departure of God and the angels from the Catholic Church to him? So many questions. But even sceptics would have to admit this – the astrology is working. Just as it should. Astrology is history, and history is astrology. Here we have Nostradamus once again proving that point.

Read Part Two of this special feature on Nostradamus and Notre Dame here.