Rocket Launch: SpaceX CRS-10
Feb 18, 2017 10:01 AM

Kennedy Space Center

Rocket Launch: SpaceX CRS-10

MISSION

Witness history in the making as SpaceX sends the Falcon 9 rocket on the first launch from Kennedy Space Center’s LC-39A since 2011! This launch pad was the site of the Apollo 11 journey to land humans on the moon and where the first and last space shuttle missions left Earth in the 30-year Space Shuttle Program. Now SpaceX will join in the rich history, as the Falcon 9 rocket launches the Dragon spacecraft on a resupply mission to the International Space Station (ISS) and lands the first stage of the rocket back on the Cape Canaveral landing site. Join us and be a part of an important milestone in our quest for space exploration!

This mission is the 10th of 14 resupply missions by SpaceX for NASA in support of NASA’s Commercial Resupply Services (CRS) program. Dragon will deliver food and supplies to the crew aboard the ISS. The Falcon 9 rocket’s reusable first stage will attempt a controlled landing on Landing Zone 1 (LZ1) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station.

LAUNCH VIEWING

Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex offers the closest public viewing of launches. with the purchase of a launch transportation/viewing ticket. Availability of viewing opportunities and locations is dependent upon the scheduled launch time and is subject to NASA and U.S. Air Force approval.

Launch viewing opportunities for CRS-10 are available at Apollo/Saturn V Center and the main visitor complex with bleacher seating and launch commentary. Launch viewing/transportation tickets to Apollo/Saturn V Center are available for $20, in addition to daily admission. Tickets for Apollo/Saturn V Center are available online and by calling 855-475-8415. The main visitor complex viewing area is accessible with daily admission. Restrooms, dining and shopping are available at both viewing areas.

Follow us on Twitter and Facebook for launch viewing updates.

Launch date, time, and viewing opportunities are subject to change. Launches can be affected by technical and mechanical issues as well as range operations and weather, either in advance or at the last minute. Learn more about our Launch Scrub Policy.

LAUNCH VEHICLE:

Falcon 9 is SpaceX’s two-stage rocket manufactured to successfully transport satellites and their Dragon spacecraft into orbit. Currently the only rocket fully designed and developed in the 21st century, Falcon 9 delivers payloads to space aboard the Dragon spacecraft or inside a composite fairing. Safety and mission success were critical in the design of the Falcon 9 rocket. With a minimal number of separation events and nine first-stage Merlin engines, the SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket is designed so that even if two of the engines shut down, the rocket can still operate. In 2012, SpaceX became the first commercial company to rendezvous with the International Space Station. Although these flights have not transported crew, SpaceX continues to work toward their goal of one day carrying astronauts to space in Crew Dragon’s pressurized capsule using the Falcon 9.