UPDATED: Onochie claims Atiku listed as ‘aide’ to Nigeria’s Saraki; Atiku's camp reacts ▷ Legit.ng
- An aide to Saraki, Olu Onemola, has reacted to claims that the opposition candidate was listed as Saraki's aide to obtain visa to the United States

- Lauretta Onochie, a media aide to President Muhammadu Buhari, had claimed that Atiku Abubakar was listed as Saraki's aide before he was allowed to visit the U.S

- Atiku in company of Saraki and others had on Thursday, January 17 visited the United States of America

- Onochie, while claiming to quote the United States Bureau of African Affairs, said the department had noted that it would not apprehend Atiku because of its diplomatic ties with Nigeria

- However in a tweet, Onemola flagged the news as fake even when it was clear Onochie was specifically quoted

An aide to Senate President Bukola Saraki, Olu Onemola has debunked the claim that the PDP presidential candidate was listed as legislative aide to Saraki to obtain visa to the United States of America.

Legit had earlier quoted a report by Lauretta Onochie, an aide in the presidency claiming that the United States Bureau of African Affairs had reportedly said that Atiku Abubakar, was listed as an aide of Senate president Bukola Saraki.

The Bureau of African Affairs which is part of the US Department of State is charged with advising the Secretary of State on matters of Sub-Saharan Africa, was quoted by Onochie to have said Atiku was in Washington DC on diplomatic arrangements.

Onochie had claimed that the Bureau of African Affairs had said that Atiku was booked for the visit to the U.S as an ‘aide’ to Nigeria’s Senate president Bukola Saraki

“We cannot apprehend Atiku because of our diplomatic ties with Nigeria, he’s being booked as an ‘aide’ to Nigeria’s Senate president,” AF said.

READ ALSO: NAIJ.com upgrades to Legit.ng: a letter from our Editor-in-Chief Bayo Olupohunda

It would be recalled that Atiku who for 12 years was reportedly unable to enter the US following allegation of corruption against him, arrived Washington on Thursday, January 17, in company of Nigeria’s Senate president, Bukola Saraki.

Onochie tweet below

While debunking the claim Olu Onemola had taken umbrage at the report rather than the source., Lauretta Onochie, who Legit had conspicuously quoted.and adequately referenced.

However, while refuting the report, Onemola's tweet did not address the status of Atiku's visa but only tweeted an inscription of the PDP candidate as 'Presidential Candidate' at a business round table.

While Legit cannot independently confirm Onochie's claim at the time of writing the report, the presidential aide was sufficiently quoted as the source.

Onemola's reaction below:

Atiku had stayed at the Trump International Hotel in Washington DC but has since returned to the country..

A 2010 report titled “Keeping foreign corruption out of the United States”, the United States Senate committee on Homeland Security and governmental Affairs chaired by Carl Levin had named Atiku as one of four Politically Exposed Persons, PEP, to watch out for.

The subcommittee report HAD narrated how Jennifer Douglas Abubakar, a US citizen and fourth wife of Atiku between 2000 to 2008 had helped her husband bring over $40 million in suspect funds into the United States, including at least $1.7 million in bribe payments from Siemens AG, a German corporation, and over $38 million from little known offshore corporations, primarily LetsGo Ltd. Inc., Guernsey Trust Company Nigeria Ltd., and Sima Holding Ltd.

“Over half of the suspect funds, nearly $25 million, were wire transferred by the offshore corporations into US bank accounts opened by Douglas,” the committee report read.

“For most of the time period examined, the US banks with those accounts were unaware of Ms. Douglas’ PEP status and allowed multiple large wire transfers into her accounts from the offshore corporations.

“As, over time, each of the banks began to question the wire transfers into her accounts, Douglas indicated that all of the funds came from her husband and professed little familiarity with the offshore corporations actually sending her money,” the report added.

“Bank records indicate that Douglas used most of the funds placed into her accounts to support a lavish lifestyle in the United States, paying credit card bills and household expenses in the range of $10,000 to $90,000 per month, including substantial legal and accounting bills.

“She also transferred funds to accounts she opened for the Gede foundation, a nonprofit corporation she established in 2002, and the American University of Nigeria (AUN), a university that Abubakar founded in 2003, and whose name reflects its association with American University in the United States.”

“An additional $14 million of the suspect funds were wire transferred by two of the offshore corporations, LetsGo and the Guernsey Trust Company, to American University to pay for consulting fees related to AUN.

“American University officials told the Subcommittee that they understood the funds came from Abubakar and never inquired why the wire transfers were sent by unfamiliar offshore corporations.

“At least another $2.1 million was wire transferred by the Guernsey Trust Corporation to accounts controlled by Edward Weidenfeld, a US lawyer who provided legal services to Douglas, Abubakar, and AUN."

"Weidenfeld explained that the funds paid for the Abubakars’ legal expenses and an account set up for AUN, and that he had assumed the funds came from Abubakar.”

READ ALSO: Atiku’s visit to U.S illegal - APC chapter

Meanwhile, Legit.ng had previously reported that the All Progressives Congress (APC) chapter in the U.S, described as illegal the visa granted by the U.S to the presidential candidate of Peoples Democratic Party (PDP), Atiku Abubakar.

NAIJ.com (naija.ng) -> Legit.ng We have upgraded to serve you better.

Nigeria Latest News: Buhari vs Atiku - 2019 Elections | - on Legit TV