Former Somers football player awarded Purple Heart
CLOSE First Lt. Victor Prato, a Somers native, was awarded the Purple Heart by President Donald Trump on Dec. 21, 2017. Dan Scavino Jr.

Victor Prato, 25, was injured in Afghanistan.

First Lt. Victor Prato, a Somers native, was awarded the Purple Heart by President Donald Trump on Dec. 21, 2017, after he was injured in a car bomb in Afghanistan. (Photo: Sarah Sanders)

First Lt. Victor Prato received quite the holiday honor on Thursday.

President Donald Trump awarded the 25-year-old Somers native with the Purple Heart after he was injured in a car bomb while deployed in Afghanistan in November.

Prato, who played football for Somers High School and Princeton University, received the honor as he recovers from soft tissue injuries at Walter Reed National Medical Center in Bethesda, Maryland, according to the White House. Prato, a member of the Army's 127th Airbone Engineer Battalion, was injured by an improvised explosive device.

"One of the most powerful moments of my life watching @POTUS give the Purple Heart to this American Hero," wrote press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders on Twitter, where she posted a photo of Prato. "Amazed by the strength and resilience of the men and women in our Armed Forces."

Prato graduated from Somers High School in 2011. He was a lineman on the football team and went on to play at Princeton, where he was a member of the university's ROTC program.

Somers football coach Tony DeMatteo said students and staff at the school sent Prato a video on Thursday wishing him a merry Christmas.

"If there is a way to recover from this injury, he's the person that will do it," DeMatteo said.

"One of the greatest kids I've ever coached," he said. "He was a tremendous student, respected by everyone in the school. Led by example. I couldn't say enough about the kind of person that he is and how proud I am of him."

DeMatteo said his coaching staff found out about Prato's injury in November from John Crowley, a West Point graduate who played football with Prato at Somers and commanded his company in Afghanistan.

"It's a credit to the town of Somers and the kind of kids we have," DeMatteo said. "I'm just as proud of John, as well."

Dan Scavino Jr., a Hopewell Junction resident who serves as Trump's assistant and director of social media, posted a video on Twitter of the ceremony at the hospital, where the president visited other sick and wounded service members.

Trump told reporters as he was leaving the White House en route to the medical center that he was going to "say hello to some of the bravest people anywhere in the world."

"We're just going to wish them a merry Christmas, a happy New Year," he said. "We love those people."

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Twitter: @MattSpillane

Read or Share this story: https://www.lohud.com/story/news/local/westchester/somers/2017/12/22/former-somers-football-player-awarded-purple-heart-trump/976420001/