SeaWorld still facing 'Blackfish' backlash
SeaWorld Entertainment Inc., troubled by a backlash over its use of its signature orcas, swung to a loss in its latest quarter as the company once again grappled with negative public perception cutting into attendance.

Company officials said that overall attendance has plunged some 353,000 guests over the first half of the year, compared with the same period a year ago. The decline was mostly due to shrinking domestic and international attendance to the parks in Orlando, Fla., and San Diego.

The theme-park operator said that its Orlando park was impacted by reduced national advertising and competitive pressures, while the park in San Diego was hurt by "public perception issues" which have "resurfaced" since the company reduced spending on marketing.

Shares in the company, down 28% over the past six months, plunged 13% to $11.90 in premarket trading.

In a bid to reverse its fortunes, SeaWorld plans to increase spending on national advertising and "reinvesting in our reputation messaging to target perceptions in key markets, particularly California," said Chief Executive Joel Manby in prepared remarks.

SeaWorld has faced criticism from lawmakers and animal-rights activists over its treatment of captive orcas, also known as killer whales. Public outcry was fanned by the 2013 documentary "Blackfish," an exposé of SeaWorld's practices that inspired debate throughout national media.

And while SeaWorld has ended its breeding program and theatrical shows featuring killer whales, it still will have orcas for decades to come. It has nearly 30 killer whales across its locations and said they typically live up to 50 years. Some animal-rights organizations have called for SeaWorld to release its remaining stock.

SeaWorld has said it wants to highlight its animal-rescue efforts and add more educational and advocacy work to its parks.

But the debate has impacted the company's results.

For the latest quarter, the company swung to a loss of $175.9 million, or $2.05 a share, down from a year-earlier profit of $17.8 million, or 21 cents. The loss for the period includes a $269.3 million noncash goodwill impairment charge linked to its Orlando park.

Revenue was nearly flat, edging up 0.4% to $225 million. Amid the latest results, the company cut its annual guidance for adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization to a range between $280 million and $310 million, from prior guidance of $330 million to $360 million.

Aside from the scrutiny stirred by its use of killer whales, the company also faced pressure amid its December 2014 ouster of its chief executive and the launch of a restructuring plan. Last year, the company announced plans to lay off 320 employees.

Write to Ezequiel Minaya at ezequiel.minaya@wsj.com