It’s hard to imagine Meghan Markle wanting ‘misogynistic’ Donald Trump at her wedding
Now that Meghan Markle is engaged to marry Prince Harry, she’s probably going to have to keep quiet about her views that U.S. President Donald Trump is “divisive” and “misogynistic”.

But she should hope that royal protocol won’t require her to invite a person she finds so objectionable to her wedding, which will take place in the spring of 2018.

Negative comments that Harry’s bride-to-be made about America’s president during the 2016 presidential campaign have resurfaced and could receive renewed attention in light of Monday’s engagement announcement, the Independent reported.

The American TV actress and activist is a “proud” feminist who spoke about her commitment to gender equality at a United Nations conference on International Women’s Day 2015. She has also served as a U.N. Women’s Advocate for Political Participation and Leadership.

So, it should come as no surprise that Markle wasn’t a fan of Trump’s candidacy, given the controversial things he has said or done with regard to women as a real estate mogul, reality TV star, political candidate and, now, as president of the United States.

Back in May 2016 — before Markle began dating Prince Harry, and before the Access Hollywood recording was made public or multiple women came forward to accuse then-candidate Trump of sexual misconduct — Markle was on “The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore.”

Get more celebrity news and photos delivered to your inbox for free on weekdays.

Sign up for our Coffee Break newsletter here.

The host asked Markle, the star of the TV legal drama “Suits,” what she thought of the momentum surrounding Trump’s candidacy.

Given the UK is such a close ally of the US, I'm shocked Donald Trump hasn't tweeted his congratulations to Prince Harry and Meghan Markle on their engagem- Ah. Nevermind. I hope the Obamas have a great time at the wedding! pic.twitter.com/YdWh50403K — Greg Hogben (@MyDaughtersArmy) November 27, 2017

She replied: “It’s really the moment that I go, we film ‘Suits’ in Toronto and I might just stay in Canada.”

She continued, “I mean come on, if that’s reality we are talking about, come on, that is a game changer in terms of how we move in the world here.”

She added, “Yes, of course Trump is divisive. Think about just female voters alone. … I think it was in 2012, the Republican Party lost the female vote by 12 points. That’s a huge number and with as misogynistic as Trump is and so vocal about it, that’s a huge chunk of it.”

She also indicated her support for Hillary Clinton, and not just because she’s a woman. “Trump has made it easy to see that you don’t really want that kind of world that he’s painting,” Markle said.

Prince Harry is reportedly critical of Trump in private, the Independent said, although Kensington Palace has denied the claims.

Reading this on your phone? Stay up to date with our free mobile app. Get it from the Apple app store or the Google Play store.

Members of the royal family always try to remain impartial on political matters, according to protocol. So that means Markle won’t be able to say anything uncomplimentary about the U.S. president going forward.

Trump, meanwhile, has not tweeted out any kind of congratulations to Harry, Markle or the royal family. His tweets Monday were focused on tax reform and on blasting regular targets, CNN and MSNBC’s Joe Scarborough and Mika Brzezinski.

It’s hard to imagine Trump attending the wedding, even if he were to receive a surprise invitation. For one thing, Trump was expected to visit the United Kingdom this fall, but the state visit was put on hold due to the expectation that there would be massive protests in London.

More recently, Prince Harry met Melania Trump at the Invictus Games in Toronto. That meeting in September seemed to go pleasantly enough, though their photo op together prompted discussion.

In his photo with Melania Trump, Harry held his jacket with one hand and his fingers pointed in an “unusual way,” the Independent said. Conspiracy theorists claimed he was making the sign of the devil horn with his fingers.

Mrs. Trump reportedly told Harry he was welcome to visit the White House whenever he was in the United States. But it’s unclear if Harry accepted her invitation.

The prince was known to have a friendly relationship with Barack and Michelle Obama. If he did visit a Trump White House, it’s hard to imagine him taking his new wife with him.

Like our Facebook page for more conversation and news coverage from San Jose, the Bay Area and beyond.

It also remains to be seen if Melania Trump, whom the prince and his fiancee may find less objectionable, will be invited to their wedding.

The first lady also didn’t issue any kind of statement with regard to Harry’s engagement Monday, with her FLOTUS Twitter account focused on posting photos of Christmas decorations in the White House.