Definition of Politically Correct by Merriam-Webster
He later realized that his response was not politically correct.

Recent Examples on the Web

Jay and Cam’s less than politically correct coaching style earns them a class on sensitivity; Mitch runs into Phil’s nemesis at an unlikely place. Seattle Times Staff, The Seattle Times, "TV Picks for Wednesday: ‘Christmas in Rockefeller Center’ on KING," 28 Nov. 2018

Edelman’s perspective is decidedly pro-millennial, a generation that has been derided for killing comedy with its overly politically correct disposition. Nick A. Zaino Iii, BostonGlobe.com, "Comic Alex Edelman took the long way back to Boston," 12 July 2018

Some change their doctrines to be more modern or politically correct. Chris Stirewalt, Fox News, "Texas tussle stretches Senate map," 18 Apr. 2018

Countless Americans -- including many in West Virginia -- embraced Trump in 2016 because of his rejection of politically correct language, including on issues related to race. Eugene Scott, Washington Post, "Don Blankenship has taken opposition to political correctness to a new extreme, and that’s dangerous for the GOP," 4 May 2018

Thankfully, administration isn’t buying the politically correct grousing. The Editorial Board, WSJ, "Higher Ed Needs More Cowboys," 12 July 2018

Some people think the school was being overly politically correct by apologizing. Lisa Gutierrez, kansascity, "Principal apologizes to black students for 'party like it's 1776' prom tickets | The Kansas City Star," 21 May 2018

So powerful is the draw of political tribalism that people are now increasingly able to turn their tastes on a dime in order to conform with what is politically correct. Chris Stirewalt, Fox News, "Roseanne Barr and the new political correctness," 29 May 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'politically correct.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.