Fanyogo “Gin And Ginger” Is Not Registered And Will Not Be Registered By NAFDAC – NAFDAC
April 4, 2019,

The attention of the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC) has been drawn to the images of Fan Milk “FanYogo Gin & Ginger” purported to contain 12.5% alcohol being circulated widely to the general public via social media. The Management of NAFDAC wishes to use this medium to reassure the general public that the said product is not registered by the Agency, is not known to the Agency and is not in circulation in Nigeria. The Agency has carried out a thorough investigation at the facility of Fan Milk PLC. and can confirm that no such product is being developed by the company and no stock of packaging materials of the said “FanYogo Gin & Ginger” were found in the premises.

The company, Fan Milk PLC, known to NAFDAC as a producer of milk products, has also issued a letter to NAFDAC in which they have referred to the image circulating in the news and social media as a “false, mischievous and malicious image”. The communication to NAFDAC includes the following statements which we share below for the reassurance of the general public.

The product or image in question is not among any of the current Fan Milk Nigeria products currently produced in Nigeria and anywhere within the West Africa Cluster. FanYogo is one of the brands produced by Fan Milk Ghana Limited, one of our sister companies. The purported “FanYogo Gin & Ginger” will not be registered in Nigeria. The image came to fore just as Fan Milk Ghana started a public poll to decide the release of a new flavor. The images are the imagination of some mischief makers that have seized the opportunity to distort the social media space. The poll has since been shut down considering that children may be exposed to the images.

The NAFDAC management wishes to reassure the general public that the Agency is fully alive to her responsibilities of assuring the safety, wholesomeness and quality of processed foods and other regulated products offered for sale to the public.

NAFDAC………safeguarding the health of the Nation!!!

Director General