Profile
Our history

Nairobi City Water and Sewerage Company (NCWSC) was incorporated in December 2003 under the Companies Act cap 486. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of Nairobi City County.

It has its headquarters in Kenya, Nairobi City Kampala Road, Industrial Area and has its area of jurisdiction divided into six administrative regions, namely, Northern, Eastern, North Eastern, Central, Southern and Western regions which are further devolved into 25 zones.

The mandate of the Company is to provide clean water and sewerage services to the residents of Nairobi County, in a financially sustainable manner and within the Government regulations. The City has an estimated population of 3.8million and projected to grow to 4.5 million by 2019. The 2002 Water Act brought about reforms in the Water Sector that were aimed at facilitating access to clean water and sewerage services to all Kenyans. The reforms saw the creation of regional Water Boards which were tasked with the responsibility of overseeing the operations of water and sewerage/sanitation utilities in their respective areas of jurisdiction, besides major asset development.

Within this structure, NCWSC was under Athi Water Services Board (AWSB). The Water Act 2002 is under review with the draft Bill providing for establishment of Water Works Development Boards in place of the Water Service Boards. To enhance the Nairobi City Water and Sewerage Company’s efficiency, the senior management team of the Company has been recruited competitively from the job market.

Both Directors and senior management staff are bound by code of ethics that assures suppliers of due diligence in keeping with the Company’s goal of strengthening its corporate governance. Since the Company is run on commercial principles, staff and management are integrated into a competitive and productive environment that is customer-focused and results-oriented. The Company is also ISO 9001 certified to ensure the consumers on the quality management systems adopted within the Company.

Currently, of the three million residents of Nairobi, only 50 per cent have direct access to piped water. The rest obtain water from kiosks, vendors and illegal connections. Of the existing customers, about 40 per cent receive water on the 24-hour basis.

The Nairobi City Water and Sewerage Company is committed to ensuring that all stakeholders receive water regularly and efficiently and that the water reaching the customers is of highest quality. The Company aspires to be a role model among other water companies established across the Africa.