Blimp1 is a critical determinant of the germ cell lineage in mice
To examine the fate of PGCs in these Blimp1 mutant embryos, we stained them for TNAP23 and counted the clearly identifiable PGCs containing a cytoplasmic spot. At the early bud and early head fold stages of late E7.5 embryos, we detected approximately 25 TNAP-positive PGCs in wild-type embryos. These numbers were reduced to about 17.5 cells in heterozygotes (Blimp1+/-), and a maximum of five PGCs were counted in individual Blimp1 null (Blimp1-/-) embryos (Fig. 5a). The relative differences in the number of PGCs in control and mutant embryos are statistically significant, but the total number of PGCs is an underestimate because at these earlier stages, many of the PGCs still form a tight cluster in which individual cells are difficult to count (see below, including Figs 5g and 6a, for further analysis).

Figure 6: Aberrant phenotype of Blimp1 deficient cells. a, Posterior views showing fluorescent TNAP staining of Blimp1 wild-type (+ / + ), heterozygote (+ / - ) and homozygote (- / - ) embryos. Arrowheads point to PGCs migrating out from the cluster. Scale bar, 50 µm. b, Single-cell cDNA analysis reveals aberrant gene expression in Blimp1-/- PGC-like cells at E7.5 (early bud to late bud stage). PGCs were identified by expression of stella and Blimp1 transcripts. The mutant Blimp1 transcript (denoted by an asterisk) served as a marker only and does not give rise to functional protein (see Supplementary Fig. 4e). Full size image

At E8.5 (Fig. 5b), the relative numbers of PGCs in homozygous mutants were also very low when compared with control mice. Only a few PGC-like cells were detected near the base of the allantois, and virtually none seemed to be migrating appropriately. Analysis of the numbers of PGCs shows no significant differences in the slopes of the regression lines when comparing wild-type and heterozygous embryos (P = 0.581) (ref. 7), suggesting that the dose-dependent effect of Blimp1 is primarily on the genesis of the founder PGC population and not on their subsequent survival or proliferation. A recent study of Blimp1 mutant embryos confirms this observation28. Furthermore, we did not detect any abnormalities of the allantois in E8.5 embryos (Fig. 5e, f), suggesting that the Blimp1-positive cells are destined for the germ cell fate and are set apart from other epiblast cells that give rise to the allantois and other somatic tissues.

To confirm that the effect of the Blimp1 mutation on germ cell formation is direct and not a consequence of its expression in the visceral endoderm (which is important for early embryonic patterning22), we performed ‘tetraploid rescue’ experiments in which Blimp1-/- embryonic stem cells were injected into wild-type host tetraploid blastocysts. The tetraploid host cells contribute almost exclusively to extraembryonic tissues, including the visceral endoderm, while the injected ES cells only contribute to the embryo proper29. We determined the number of PGCs in E7.5 embryos using an anti-stella antibody10, and detected an average of 35 PGCs in control embryos and 6.5 stella-positive cells in Blimp1-/- embryos (P = 0.0001) (Fig. 5g). The numbers of TNAP-positive cells at E8.5–E9.5 (Fig. 5h and Supplementary Fig. 5) were also significantly lower in mutants compared with control wild-type mice. The few TNAP-positive PGC-like cells that we detected near the base of the allantois did not seem to be migrating appropriately in the mutants. Taken together, these results demonstrate that the PGC-intrinsic activity of Blimp1 is essential for the formation of PGCs, and cannot be substituted for by the expression of Blimp1 within the visceral endoderm.