BEYOND LABOR: THE ROLE OF NATURAL AND SYNTHETIC OXYTOCIN IN THE TRANSITION TO MOTHERHOOD
Endogenous oxytocin is a key component in the transition to motherhood affecting molecular pathways that buffer stress reactivity, support positive mood, and regulate healthy mothering behaviors (including lactation). Synthetic oxytocin is widely used throughout labor and postpartum care in modern obstetrics. Yet research on the implications beyond labor of maternal exposure to perinatal synthetic oxytocin is rare. In this article, we review oxytocin-related biological pathways and behaviors associated with the transition to motherhood, and evidence supporting the need for further research on potential effects of intrapartum oxytocin beyond labor. We include a primer on oxytocin at the molecular level.

Consequences of routine childbirth interventions on human maternal behavior have been understudied. Synthetic oxytocin (Pitocin ® , Syntocinon ® ) stimulates uterine smooth muscle contractility and is widely used in the United States for labor induction, augmentation, and third stage management. While the judicious use of synthetic oxytocin has many benefits, the biological and behavioral effects of synthetic oxytocin beyond the immediate clinical uses remain largely unknown. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Vital Statistics report, induction has more than doubled from 1990 (10%) to 2010 (23%). 1 The best current estimate of the augmentation rate in the U.S. is 57%. 2 While endogenous oxytocin is well known for its role in labor and lactation, a large body of evidence documents numerous oxytocin-mediated molecular and endocrine pathways that buffer stress reactivity, support emotional and mental well-being, and promote pro-social and bonding behavior. 3 , 4 These behaviors are critical for successful transition to motherhood. Given the predominance of synthetic oxytocin in clinical practice, research is needed on how synthetic oxytocin may impact the intrinsic regulation of endogenous oxytocin and subsequent oxytocin-related outcomes. In this review, we examine the hypothesis that exposure to synthetic oxytocin during childbirth may play a role in maternal stress reactivity, mood, and mothering behaviors (including lactation).

Within all cells, not just neurons, three other important functions of the OTR lead to an array of possible cellular actions. 1) Through intracellular G-protein activation, phospholipase C causes an even greater amount of Ca+ release into the cell from internal stores. This Ca+ can serve as an independent signal for various functions within the cell, especially nerves. 2) Another function is the creation of eicosanoids or prostaglandin that can directly increase pain, inflammation, and likely uterine contraction as well. 3) Thirdly, OTR activation may lead to a broad category of cellular events by activating a specific kinase, an enzyme that catalyzes the addition of a phosphate group on a specific target molecule or protein. In this instance, protein kinase C is activated and requires Ca+. The “downstream” effects of OTR activation will depend on what type of cell the receptor is located on. This kinase may initiate a specific action itself or cause another kinase to activate, and then another, creating a literal cascade of events. 7 These events can ultimately lead to modifying gene transcription, regulation of the cell cycle, apoptosis and/or neurogenesis. The end result for each oxytocin-initiated pathway depends on the type of cell involved (uterine, brain, heart etc.) and the type of response initiated within that cell. OTR activation has the potential for inducing long-lasting biological alterations.

However, when the OTR is on a neuron, the response may be the subsequent release or inhibition of other hormonal neurotransmitters and modulators, such as serotonin, endogenous opioids and corticotrophin-releasing factor. 3 These nervous system interactions are key to understanding how oxytocin released in the brain influences a variety of mental states and behavior. It may also help to explain how the nervous system is stimulated in response to a human or animal’s environment (both external and internal) and subsequently leads to the release or inhibition of oxytocin. Additionally, oxytocin binds to other types of receptors, such as vasopressin receptors exerting agonist or antagonist effects, thus extending and diversifying the consequences of oxytocin’s actions.

To affect target tissues, a receptor must be present and oxytocin presumably must bind to that receptor before it can exert cellular action. Oxytocin receptors (OTR) are found throughout the body, with particularly high concentrations in the limbic regions of the brain, spinal column, heart, intestines, immune tissue, uterus, and breast. The OTR belongs to a large family of receptors called G-protein coupled receptors, manufactured by the cell and inserted into the cell membrane where they are available for hormone-binding. 7 G-protein Coupled Receptors loop in and out of the cell membrane seven times and are coupled to a G-protein located on the inside of the cell. Many varieties of G-proteins are known, each initiating a different cascade of events (second messengers) within the cell, which provides specificity to the hormone’s action. The OTR is coupled to a G-qα. This type of G-protein leads to a rise in intracellular calcium (Ca+) and a muscle cell contraction, of particular importance to milk let-down and uterine contractions (see ). 7 , 8

Oxytocin is a small neuropeptide consisting of nine amino acids. 7 Throughout the human lifespan, specific neurons manufacture oxytocin; these cells are abundant in distinct areas of the mammalian hypothalamus called the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei. Oxytocin from these cells is carried to and released from the posterior pituitary gland into the circulation, and from there is distributed throughout the body. Within the central nervous system, oxytocin reaches nearly all parts of the brainstem, midbrain, cortex, and spinal column. In addition to hypothalamic production, peripheral organs and tissues also may secrete oxytocin, but the pituitary is believed to be the predominant source of oxytocin in circulation. 7

Profound changes occur in the oxytocin system during the perinatal period. 5 , 6 To prevent preterm birth, oxytocin neurons are kept quiescent during pregnancy through inhibitory mechanisms. The peptide oxytocin continues to accumulate in the posterior pituitary, and at term those inhibitory mechanisms are removed for labor to occur. Oxytocin also becomes more available at term through the reduction of enzymatic activity that metabolizes oxytocin in the brain. Based on animal studies, the expression of oxytocin receptors (OTR) increases throughout pregnancy in key areas of the brain that regulate mood, stress and attachment behavior. In humans, the availability of OTR in uterine muscle also increases dramatically at term, preparing for the surges of oxytocin about to be released during birth.

CHALLENGES IN STUDYING OXYTOCIN ON THE MOLECULAR LEVEL—BRAIN VERSUS BODY

In the intrapartum setting, the half-life of Pitocin® is believed to be only a few minutes,9 and intrapartum plasma levels correlate with Pitocin® dose and rate of administration,10 yet the dose delivered intravenously may or may not result in an effective uterine contraction pattern. Similarly, oxytocin levels in plasma cannot always be interpreted as being meaningful in a particular effect on brain activity. In order to understand how perinatal oxytocin exposure has the potential for lasting biologic consequence, it is helpful to understand some of the constraints that can limit research or the interpretation of research in this field. Many research studies examining endogenous oxytocin in animals and humans rely on blood measurement of the hormone in response to a treatment or intervention, e.g. a stressful event or a social interaction. There are several challenges in the interpretation of these measurements.

Firstly, central nervous system oxytocin is secreted continuously acting within the brain and spinal cord, but oxytocin is also released in pulses into the bloodstream through the posterior pituitary. Pulsatile release of oxytocin occurs when oxytocin neurons of the posterior pituitary depolarize, which are usually in response to specific stimuli (e.g., uterine stimuli or cues from an infant).11, 12 This activation of neurons pulses oxytocin into the blood stream. Data collected in rats suggest correlations between endogenous peripheral (blood stream) and central oxytocin levels, although the degree and significance of these correlations vary.13

In addition, there is controversy regarding whether peripherally administered oxytocin (i.e. Pitocin® given intravenously or intramuscularly) crosses the blood-brain barrier. Whether any oxytocin that does cross changes neuronal action significantly within the nervous system has yet to be determined.14 In theory, oxytocin cannot pharmacologically cross due to its relatively large size and hydrophilic nature, however, some animal studies do report low levels of oxytocin found in the brain following administration in blood15 Interestingly, some electrophysiology-based animal studies suggest that maternal oxytocin plays a neuroprotective role within the fetal brain during the birth process, which means it would have to cross both the placental barrier and fetal blood-brain barrier.16 The findings from these studies suggest that maternal oxytocin inhibits certain excitatory (GABA) fetal neurons from firing (depolarizing), thereby protecting them during periods of hypoxia (i.e. birth process). However, whether or not synthetic or endogenous oxytocin penetrates the maternal brain directly has yet to be proven. While oxytocin does leave the posterior pituitary and is released into circulation, this occurs following neuronal activation (action potential). Getting the peripherally circulating hormone into the brain would require either 1) an active transport mechanism to penetrate the tight junctions guarding the microvasculature of the central nervous system (which has yet to be proven), or 2) it would require a more porous barrier to allow for diffusion.17 The blood-brain barrier (maternal or fetal) may become more porous in states of illness or stress.

Lastly, the brain may receive information about peripheral levels of oxytocin through feedback from peripheral nervous system. Peripheral nerves may communicate information about oxytocin levels to the brain, presumably via a feedback loop (e.g. cervical dilation, adrenal gland activity, touch/ nipple stimulation). There are also well-studied effects of intranasal administration of synthetic oxytocin on mood and social behavior, yet it remains unknown whether the intranasal route allows oxytocin to enter the brain directly or extraneuronally, or whether it stimulates feed forward effects on endogenous oxytocin via ascending or afferent neuropathways (i.e. the vagus or 10th cranial nerve), which are well known to have OTRs.14 18 Peripheral feedback effects of oxytocin, which may be relayed to the brain, are difficult to monitor, but further complicate the study of synthetic oxytocin. Whether the maternal brain will reliably respond to exogenous oxytocin by decreasing or increasing the synthesis or release of endogenous oxytocin is unknown. In the clinical setting, this type of feedback might be seen when Pitocin® is used to initiate an induction of labor but then can sometimes be shut off while the woman continues to labor without the drug. Likely, feedback from peripheral nerves messaging about cervical dilation to the brain is in action, which promotes the woman’s endogenous oxytocin release, and this is more probable than the idea that Pitocin® penetrates the maternal brain directly.

However, given all these variables, altered maternal plasma levels persisting beyond the end of labor have been suggested in one study that evaluated postpartum oxytocin levels in response to breastfeeding two days after birth in women who had different intrapartum and postpartum exposures to synthetic oxytocin (n=40).19 Compared to all other study groups, women exposed to Pitocin® in labor combined with an epidural demonstrated significantly lower oxytocin levels during breastfeeding. Overall, the total quantity of synthetic oxytocin administered during parturition was negatively correlated to levels of oxytocin in plasma two days following birth. All of these women had vaginal births and newborns had normal Apgar scores. In these studies the mean duration of labor did not differ significantly between groups, nor did blood loss, or newborn weight. The women all initiated breastfeeding within minutes of birth and had the same average number of feeds in the days prior to the blood sampling. If replicable, this finding suggests that in some cases exposure to Pitocin® may have maternal consequences that last beyond the birth experience.