Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial of Inactivated Poliovirus Vaccine in Cuba
Study Design

The study population consisted of infants born in the four principal maternity hospitals in Havana from July 10 through November 10, 2001. Infants were eligible for inclusion if they were healthy, were born at full term (after at least 37 weeks of gestation), weighed at least 2.5 kg at birth, and had 1- and 5-minute Apgar scores of at least 7. Infants not meeting these criteria and those requiring hospitalization during the study were excluded.

After the infants had been selected from a list of consecutive births and their eligibility had been determined, their parents or guardians were invited to participate and written informed consent was obtained. The infants were then randomly assigned to one of two groups by the Cuban Ministry of Public Health Epidemiology Division with the use of Epidat 2.1 software. Group A received a combination pentavalent vaccine (DPT-Hib-IPV). Group B, the control group, received a tetravalent vaccine containing the DPT and Hib vaccines (DPT-Hib). Both groups received the vaccine at 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age.

A third group (group C) was included to assess a schedule of two doses of DPT-Hib-IPV given at 8 and 16 weeks of age. Unfortunately, the interval that was free of Sabin-vaccine virus in Cuba was too short to allow the assessment of a group receiving a full three-dose schedule (at 8, 16, and 24 weeks of age); nevertheless, we believed that inclusion of the group receiving a two-dose schedule could yield programmatically useful data. The infants in group C did not undergo randomization with the infants in the other two groups because they had to start receiving vaccine earlier than the infants in groups A and B in order to receive the challenge OPV dose on time (i.e., during the national OPV campaign on March 12 and 13, 2002).

Minor adverse events, such as injection-site discomfort, were monitored for 7 days after vaccination. Other adverse events were recorded with the use of a protocol established by the national surveillance system for vaccine-associated adverse events in Cuba.

The study was approved by the institutional review boards of the Pedro Kourí Institute in Havana and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta. The Cuban Ministry of Public Health was responsible for operational aspects of the study, and the Pedro Kourí Institute conducted laboratory analyses. The institutions of the Cuba IPV Study Collaborative Group and their representatives take responsibility for the overall content and integrity of this article.

Statistical Analysis

Our target sample size (100 per group) allowed for attrition and was based on the lowest predicted seroconversion rate for the group receiving IPV at 6, 10, and 14 weeks (60%) according to data from Thailand.10 To achieve a probability of 0.85 that the estimate from this study was in error by 10% or less, we needed to enroll at least 50 infants in each group receiving IPV. This calculation was based on the normal approximation to the binomial distribution. The proportions of subjects shedding virus after challenge in the control and intervention groups were compared with the use of a two-tailed Fisher's exact test. Assuming a predicted rate of excretion after challenge in the IPV and control groups of 60% and 85%, respectively, we calculated a minimum sample size of 55 infants for each group, so that we would have a power of 90% to detect a significant difference at the 0.05 level.

Vaccines

PENTAct-HIB is a combination vaccine produced by Sanofi Pasteur containing H. influenzae type b vaccine, DPT vaccine, and IPV. It is an injectable suspension formed by reconstituting lyophilized polyribosylribitol phosphate–tetanus-toxoid conjugated vaccine (PRP-T) (Act-HIB, Sanofi Pasteur) with a syringe filled with a DPT–IPV liquid combination (Tetracoq). TETRAct-HIB is a combination vaccine produced by Sanofi Pasteur containing H. influenzae type b vaccine and DPT. It is an injectable suspension formed by reconstituting lyophilized PRP-T (Act-HIB) with a syringe or ampule (0.5 ml) of DPT (DTCoq). The vaccines were masked for groups A and B (but not C). The study vaccines were donated by the manufacturer, which did not participate in study implementation, data analyses, or the preparation of the manuscript. The OPV in the national campaign was a live attenuated vaccine containing at least 106, 105, and 105.8 median tissue-culture infective doses (TCID 50 ) to poliovirus types 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

Sample Collection

Serologic specimens were taken from infants immediately before administration of the first vaccine dose and approximately 4 weeks after the last dose of study vaccine (preceding the national OPV campaign on March 12 and 13, 2002). Serologic specimens were stored at −20°C at the Pedro Kourí Institute and tested collectively to determine antibody titers for poliovirus types 1, 2, and 3. To evaluate the effect of IPV on intestinal excretion of poliovirus after challenge, a stool specimen was obtained from each study infant 2 or 3 days before administration of the OPV challenge and 7 days afterward. The initial stool specimen was collected to verify our assumption that no child was excreting poliovirus before receiving the challenge dose.

Determination of Neutralizing Antibodies

Neutralizing antibodies were determined by the method recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO).16 Microneutralization was performed on microtiter plates with the use of serial dilutions, by a factor of two, of serum beginning at 1:8. At each dilution, 25 μl of serum was mixed with 25 μl of Eagle's medium containing 100 TCID 50 (range, 32 to 320) of Sabin poliovirus type 1, 2, or 3. The virus–serum mixture was incubated for 4 hours at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% carbon dioxide. One hundred microliters of HEp-2 (Cincinnati subline) cell suspension (200,000 cells per milliliter) was added and incubated as before for 5 days. Each serum sample was tested in triplicate. Each test batch was accompanied by a cell control, a “serum toxicity” control (for the possible cytopathic effect of the serum alone), and virus dose and titration controls with the use of an in-house reference serum validated against the international standard.

Seroconversion was defined as an increase by a factor of four in antibody titer from prevaccination to postvaccination values, with correction for maternal antibody decay at an estimated half-life of 30 days. If the predicted end-point titer for maternal antibody decay was 7 or less (the cutoff value for detection), a second serum titer of 14 or more would indicate seroconversion. The association between prevaccination and postvaccination antibody titers was assessed by a two-tailed Spearman rank-order correlation coefficient test.

Isolation and Identification of Poliovirus in Stool