Fire Inquiry Prompts Focus On Inspections
Crucial valves in the sprinkler system at a Brooklyn apartment building where a fire killed three firefighters on Friday may have been closed for years, perhaps even since the building was built in 1983, city officials said yesterday. They said the sprinklers in a twin building were also improperly shut down.

As relatives, colleagues and friends gathered at funeral homes to remember the fallen firefighters Saturday afternoon and evening, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani ordered an immediate check of the sprinkler systems at about a dozen other Housing Authority buildings. He also ordered an investigation into whether requirements for inspections and other fire prevention procedures should be strengthened, and said all new apartment buildings should be required to have sprinklers.

Officials were also looking into the malfunction of a supposedly self-closing steel door, which remained ajar and allowed a fireball to engulf the three men in the 10th-floor hallway of the building, a residence for the elderly at 17 Vandalia Avenue near Starrett City.

''This was not a case of mechanical failure, where the sprinkler had broken down and nobody repaired it,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''This was a good system that was working that was turned off.''

The City Department of Investigation will also consider the question of criminal liability in the case, he said.

''When you have the loss of three lives and when there is a possibility something could have been done to prevent it, you've got to leave that option open,'' the Mayor continued. ''There's no question it was turned off. No one has a reason for why it was turned off. The question is, did anybody inspect that? Who knew about it? Why were they closed? And that we don't have answers to at this point.''

Sprinklers are not required in the building, which was built with Federal funds but is managed by the City Housing Authority. The Fire Department checks the sprinklers every five years, and last did so in 1996. The Housing Authority is supposed to conduct monthly checks of the system.

Ruth Colon, a spokeswoman for the Housing Authority, declined to provide any information about the building, including when it was last inspected.

In any case, it appears that the inspections by both fire and housing officials were incomplete. Although inspectors often remove the head of an individual sprinkler to determine whether water is reaching it, officials said only the main valve seemed to have been checked.

While that valve, which is connected to the water source, was open, five valves on the first floor intended to bring water to the residential areas of the building were shut tight. Officials found those valves, hidden beneath a trapdoor that had been painted over and had to be chiseled open, only by consulting the original blueprints for the building.

''We just think that the person responsible for making sure that that system was open from beginning to end did not make sure that system was open,'' said the Fire Commissioner, Thomas Von Essen. ''Whoever was responsible for doing it did not do it.''

Officials believe that the fire began while Jacqueline Pinder, 67, was smoking in bed. The three firefighters who died were part of a specially trained rescue squad and had gone to find Ms. Pinder, unaware that she had found refuge in a neighbor's apartment.

A Fire Department official who spoke on the condition of anonymity said that, in part because of Ms. Pinder's fire door remaining open, the hallway temperature had reached 2,000 degrees. The firefighters' protective suits can withstand heat only up to 700 degrees, the official said.

Ms. Colon said she believed that the intense heat from the fire prevented the door from functioning properly. Fire Department sources said that explanation made no sense, adding that tenants sometimes disabled the self-closing doors because they can be inconvenient. Investigators have not yet been able to interview Ms. Pinder, as she remains in critical condition at Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx.

''No clue,'' Ms. Colon said when asked why the fire door stayed open and all but one sprinkler valve shut. ''This is the mystery that we are trying to find: why was the main one open and every other one was closed? We are investigating every possibility.''

Funerals for the victims, Lieut. Joseph P. Cavalieri and Firefighters James F. Bohan and Christopher M. Bopp, are scheduled for tomorrow and Tuesday. Visitations began yesterday and are planned for today as well. Six firefighters who were injured in the blaze were all listed in good condition and expected to be released from area hospitals over the weekend. Angel Morales, 69, who pulled Ms. Pinder into safety in his apartment, was also listed in critical condition at Jacobi Medical Center. Two other tenants were hospitalized Friday; details on their conditions were unavailable.

At the apartment building yesterday, police, fire, and housing department officials were cleaning up soot and soggy rugs, as relatives of the elderly residents swarmed in to check on their loved ones.

Ms. Colon said the city had relocated nine residents of the building to vacant Housing Authority apartments, but others with water damage were staying with friends or elsewhere.

''It was a tragedy, but they're lucky that more people weren't killed,'' said Andrew Malave, 40, whose mother lives on the eighth floor, two below the fire. ''With all these elderly people, these sprinklers should not be turned off.'' Mr. Malave and other residents and their relatives wondered whether the sprinklers were shut because of recent construction in the building, including repairs to the elevators. ''Nothing here ever works,'' said Gloria Bryant, 73, who has lived in the building for three years. She said that there was a fire in the building a year ago and the fire alarms failed, but it was a small blaze and was contained. ''Something is always wrong,'' she said.

Jake Sanders, 69, who lives on the third floor, spent Friday night and yesterday downstairs at the apartment of a friend, Norman Armstead, because his place was flooded. ''Something is going to have to be done,'' Mr. Sanders said. ''The bed is wet, the floor is wet, and the water is still dropping. I can't live under conditions like that. It's not healthy.''

Outside, Firefighter Mike Fazio was helping assess the damage, remembering Mr. Bopp, who was in his training academy class. ''The whole thing is horrible, really crushing,'' said Mr. Fazio, who last saw Mr. Bopp at a Christmas party last week. ''It's been hard on everybody and everybody's families. Everybody is still in shock from this.''