For His Next Adventure, a Rothschild Explores Fashion
In addition to the adventures that earned him comparisons to the explorer Sir Richard Francis Burton in The New Yorker, he has written books like “The Live Earth Global Warming Survival Handbook: 77 Essential Skills to Stop Climate Change” and hosted a Sundance television show, “Eco-Trip: The Real Cost of Living.”

Now Mr. de Rothschild has started a business. It is called, aptly, the Lost Explorer.

“I’ve been an adventurer for 15 years,” he said. “I’ve done loads of expeditions with loads of different partners, loads of different brands, and I’m always getting approached by brands where I’m like, ‘Oh, I could do it with them, but I’m not sure if I’m really aligned with their ethos.’ So why wouldn’t I build my own conversation, my own company, my own brand that comes from the things that I believe in, the things that I want to do, and I can trust the process?”

The Lost Explorer is in the Venice neighborhood of Los Angeles. Among the eight people who work for the company are Jonathan Kirby, a former Levi’s designer, and Len Peltier, who was Levi’s creative director. Also on board is Chris Spira, a luxury goods consultant and a partner at True Capital, a London asset management firm.

The company plans to release its first line of outerwear in October: a wool-based collection that includes two mountain jackets, a pair of trousers and a shirt. Shortly afterward, if things go according to schedule, it will follow with two more pieces, a merino-cashmere shirt and a merino-Ventile shirt. Most of the collection reimagines pieces of clothing that Mr. de Rothschild has collected on his travels.

“There’s a very English side of David, and so he tends to pull things from late 1800s, early 1900s,” Mr. Peltier said. “He also has beautiful things from other countries. When he was in Mongolia, he picked up some pieces. It’s quite a variety. We have a closet we jokingly call ‘the cabinet of curiosities.’ ”

Mr. de Rothschild has opted not to create a lookbook for his pieces, and he will sell them online or via pop-up shops in London and New York. The idea is to group the pieces by fabric and material rather than by season or style.