Where the N.R.A. Speaks First and Loudest
And they often side with Mr. Trump in divisive cultural disputes — some of which have potent racial undercurrents — like his feuding with Black Lives Matter activists and the professional football players who knelt during the national anthem.

With broadcast television-quality production and three dozen original series, NRATV has the ability to reach millions of people through the channels that distribute it like Apple TV, Roku and Amazon Fire TV. And it has significant resources at its disposal as part of the N.R.A.’s far-reaching “membership support” program. In recent years, that operation alone spent $35.5 million, according to its most recent publicly available tax filing.

But it is just the newest piece of a larger news media operation inside the N.R.A. that receives little attention compared with the group’s political and lobbying activity. The organization produces at least seven print and online magazines that have a combined circulation of more than 11 million, according to the N.R.A. Its biggest social media channels on Facebook and Twitter count about 8.7 million followers. On YouTube, five N.R.A.-controlled channels have shared videos that have received nearly 102 million views.

Andrew Arulanandam, a spokesman for the N.R.A., declined to discuss the media effort, the size of its online audience or its programming in the wake of the Parkland shooting. As a matter of policy, he said, the N.R.A. does not discuss proprietary matters.

NRATV is a budding business for the organization, which has brokered sponsorship arrangements with gun makers like Kimber, Mossberg and Ruger to feature their firearms on its programs. Its series cover a range of topics and interests intended to appeal to gun owners of all kinds, like “Armed and Fabulous,” which profiles rifle-slinging women; “Frontlines,” a newsmagazine hosted by Oliver North; and “Under Wild Skies,” which follows hunters in pursuit of big-game trophies.

But politics and provocation are NRATV’s specialty. It has singled out news outlets and attacked individual journalists like Don Lemon of CNN, who was targeted in an ad that accused the anchor and his network of smearing Mr. Trump and colluding with Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign. In one video released this month, Ms. Loesch, a former Tea Party activist and Breitbart editor, pretended she was about to burn a copy of The New York Times.