Daylight Saving Time Isn’t Saving Much Energy
They’re also increasingly popular places to live. There are now more than 43.4 million houses in these boundary areas, up from 30.8 million in 1990. “The growth has just been staggering,” said Volker C. Radeloff, a professor of forest ecology at the University of Wisconsin and lead author of the study.

Call it a case of misaligned incentives. Homeowners and local governments have plenty of reasons to push deeper into the wilderness: these are beautiful places to live, and communities reap the tax revenue from new development. And if a fire does break out, it’s usually the state and federal governments that pick up the tab.

“This is not a story about how people are stupid, most people understand the fire risk quite well,” said Dr. Radeloff. “But as long as the costs of firefighting are borne by the federal government or the state, it makes a lot of sense to live in these areas.”

As more people move in, that increases the odds that fires will start in the first place, from a carelessly tossed cigarette or a downed power line. (Most wildfires in the United States are caused by people, not lightning strikes.) Then, when wildfires do spread, having so many houses at the forest’s edge makes fighting those fires even harder.

There’s another problem: In recent years, many experts have argued in favor of letting smaller wildfires burn through forests periodically in order to prevent a buildup of vegetation that helps fuel the biggest and most destructive blazes. But doing so becomes nearly impossible when there are so many houses in the vicinity of those forests.

The study calls for rethinking everything from fire-prevention strategies to zoning rules to help limit wildfire risk. You’d think policymakers would be eager to listen after last year’s record-breaking wildfire season, which cost federal taxpayers some $2 billion in firefighting costs alone.

But there’s little indication that big changes are on the horizon. In Bloomberg Businessweek, Christopher Flavelle wrote an eye-opening article about how California is rushing to rebuild destroyed homes exactly where they were. One telling detail: “State officials have proposed shielding people in fire-prone areas from increased insurance premiums — potentially at the expense of homeowners elsewhere in California — in an effort to encourage them to remain in areas certain to burn again.”