6 Things to Know About Senator Kamala Harris' Husband, Douglas Emhoff
This piece was updated on January 21 when Sen. Harris announced she was running for president.



After California Sen. Kamala Harris officially announced her campaign for the 2020 Democratic presidential race on Martin Luther King, Jr. Day— it's natural to have some questions about this potential candidate.

First off: what's her background? What committees does she sit on? How does she feel about the current record-setting government shutdown? (We've got your answers here, if you're curious.) But aside from all of that, like us, you might be wondering about more personal details, like: Who is Kamala Harris' husband?

Well, for starters, his name is Douglas Emhoff. While this information is far less important than Harris' leadership plans for our country, it is important to consider that the partner to the potential first Black and South Asian-American female president could eventually become the first "First Man" of the United States—FMOTUS, if you will. (Doesn't quite have the same ring to it, does it?)

With that in mind, we found out a few fun facts about Emhoff.

He's a lawyer.

Emhoff looks on at Sen. Harris’ 2016 swearing-in ceremony. Tom Williams Getty Images

Born in New York and a graduate of University of Southern California's law school, Emhoff describes himself on his Twitter account as "a dad, hubby, lawyer, (and) wannabe golfer." He's currently a litigator and partner at DLA Piper Law Firm, where he works out of both their California and D.C. offices with a specialty in entertainment and intellectual property law.

According to the firm's site, his accomplishments include "representing the rights holders of a famous animated character in copyright and trademark disputes," and the defense of a "prominent former NFL and Olympic athlete in a civil action brought by the SEC."

He has two children.

Happy Birthday @KamalaHarris⁩! You are always there for us with a big hug, bright smile, infectious laugh and just the right words, all with delicious food and an amazing soundtrack! We love you so so much (and are VERY proud of you)! Doug, Cole & Ella. pic.twitter.com/7evystcTz1 — Douglas Emhoff (@douglasemhoff) October 20, 2018

The 54-year-old—who was born just seven days before his wife, on October 13—has two kids from a previous relationship. According to a March 2018 Vogue article about Harris, his son Cole is a graduate of Colorado College, while younger daughter Ella studies at Parsons School of Design. The magazine reports that the two affectionately call their stepmother "S-Mamala."

He and Kamala Harris met on a blind date.

The two were set up by one of the senator's close friends. After nearly a year of dating, the San Francisco Chronicle reported that they were engaged on March 27, 2014. The proposal was intimate and low key, with Emhoff getting down on one knee at Haris's California apartment and presenting her with a diamond and platinum engagement ring.

They had a courthouse wedding.

Since the politician had said she did not believe in long engagements, they were married a little over four months after their engagement in a private ceremony at the Santa Barbara Courthouse, according to The Chronicle. They wrote their own vows, and to recognize Emhoff's faith, the two honored a time-tested Jewish tradition and broke a glass. It was also a family affair with her niece reading the poem, "Touched by an Angel" by Maya Angelou and Harris' sister, Maya Harris West, acting as officiant.

This August 22 will mark their five-year wedding anniversary. "Happy anniversary to the man who always knows how to make me laugh," she said in a celebratory Instagram post last year. "Love you."

He has a few fun hobbies.

According to Vogue, as noted in his Twitter bio, Emhoff loves to golf and play fantasy football. He even had a team named Nirvana after the 90s grunge band. But in addition to his hobbies, he's known to help out his wife—whose favorite past-time is cooking. "I've gotten pretty handy in the kitchen as her sous-chef," he told the magazine. Point proven by Harris' adorable caption in the Instagram post featured above.

He is more than ready to support Harris as our first "First Man."

If his Twitter account is any indication, the lawyer is the ultimate hype-man we all deserve in a partner. Ninety-percent of his tweets are related to Harris, from promoting her new book:

Kamala seeing her book in the airport bookstore for the first time. On to LA... pic.twitter.com/dGhDvNZfV9 — Douglas Emhoff (@douglasemhoff) January 13, 2019

...to spotting her on T.V.

That moment when you walk by the tv in your office lobby and see your wife speaking to ⁦@jaketapper⁩ on that tv... pic.twitter.com/rglvdvAksY — Douglas Emhoff (@douglasemhoff) January 9, 2019

....and capturing her on the campaign trail with Stacey Abrams.

To, of course, responding to his wife's announcement that she's entering the 2020 race.

Go Time. See you all in Oakland on 1/27! In It To Win It! https://t.co/uKSzSemCZy — Douglas Emhoff (@douglasemhoff) January 21, 2019

Now that's relationship goals. If his social media feed is any indication, Emhoff is ready to support his lady as she paves her own way in politics. And since Harris has confirmed her presidential bid, there's no doubt we can look forward to watching him cheer her on.

For more ways to live your best life plus all things Oprah, sign up for our newsletter!