Frequently Asked Questions
Here are our answers to some questions that commonly come up about OpenSecrets.org and the Center for Responsive Politics. If we don't address your question here, e-mail us and we'll try to answer it.

We've been doing this work for more than twenty-five years and have become known over time by the media, academics, activists, voters and political professionals as a reliable source for money-in-politics data and analysis. Our work is cited thousands of times every year. Being accurate and nonpartisan in our research are our top goals, since our reputation rests on that. The original source of most of our data is the federal government, so in the sense that there is distance between CRP and the collection of the data, inaccuracies may result. Some agencies are better collectors of data than others; some filers with those agencies are more thorough than others. On our end, we try to be vigilant about errors and correct them whenever they're discovered.

Thanks for asking! You can make a tax-deductible contribution to the Center online , or you can mail a contribution to our office in Washington . Either way, we'd be very grateful. Along with foundation grants, it's contributions from individuals like you that keep this research going. Tell a friend!

No, about half our staff works with the data full time, processing it or doing research. We've developed sophisticated computerized systems over the years to collect the data and process it more quickly, but some key tasks still rely on human talent. For example, a significant amount of research goes into determining the industries of campaign contributors and how contributors are related to one another. Our hard-working staff also works with journalists, academics, activists and others to design and complete custom research projects, and we have a money-in-politics reporter who analyzes our data for stories posted in our OpenSecrets News .

The Center for Responsive Politics has operated since 1983 thanks to a combination of grants from private foundations and contributions from individuals like you, along with some revenue from research fees and data contracts. We do not accept money from companies, trade associations or labor unions. You can review our list of major funders here , and you can make a tax-deductible donation of your own here . We're always interested in talking with people who might be interested in supporting CRP and OpenSecrets.org, and telling them more about what we do and the impact our nonpartisan work has.

Where do you get the raw data? Nearly all our data originates with an official government source, then we add value to it with additional processing and research. Campaign finance data comes from the Federal Election Commission. Information on 527 committees comes from the Internal Revenue Service. Lobbying data comes from the Senate Office of Public Records. Travel and personal financial disclosures come from various information-collectors in Congress. The Revolving Door database is, at this point, largely updated using press reports and official announcements about individuals' movements in and out of the public and private sectors.

What does the date associated with your data mean? Is the data through or as of that date, was it released on that date, or what? We regularly update our data, but because the raw information sometimes comes from different sources or from filers who report on different schedules, it's often difficult to put a single date stamp on it. The way we deal with this is by saying, basically, "Here's what data we could find when we went looking on this date." The data is generally not through that date, because of the lag in disclosure, which can be a month, a full quarter of a year or longer. Rather, it was released, or available, on that date from the government office that collects it. When you see data on a page, pay close attention to the date associated with it, which is generally at the bottom of the page or sometimes off to the side.

In tracking campaign contributions from industries, why do you include contributions from individuals, and not just PACs? CRP is the only organization that invests in categorizing campaign contributions by industry in a way that includes individuals' contributions, not just money from political action committees. Here's the logic behind our methodology: Since corporations and other organizations are prohibited from making political contributions from their treasuries, one must look at the contributions from people associated with the institution to gauge its political persuasion and how it might be trying to exert influence in Washington. Also, the Federal Election Commission requires disclosure of a donor's employer and occupation if they contribute more than $200, which suggests the government is concerned about individuals' economic, or industrial, interests. We know that not every contribution is made with the donor’s economic or professional interests in mind, nor do we assert that every donor considers their employer’s interests when they make a contribution. But our research over more than 20 years shows enough of a correlation between individuals’ contributions and their employers’ political interests that we feel comfortable with our methodology. We have also observed that the donors who give more than $200, and especially those who contribute at the maximum levels, are more commonly top executives in their companies, not lower-level employees.

Why isn’t my candidate listed? Once a candidate files with the Federal Election Commission, they're eligible to appear on OpenSecrets.org. (Candidates who don't file have typically raised or spent less than $5,000, and since we're an organization that specializes in tracking money in politics, we do not track them. This is often the case for third-party or independent candidates.) We try to incorporate candidates into the website soon after they file with the FEC, so if you notice someone is missing, e-mail [email protected]. Links to the FEC's site or to press reports about the candidacy are helpful. Keep in mind that we track only federal candidates, for Congress and the presidency.

Why don't you list third-party candidates? We do list third-party candidates if they're registered with the Federal Election Commission, which means their campaign has at least $5,000 in financial activity. So many third-party or independent candidates don't raise or spend enough money to have to register with the FEC. Since we're an organization that specializes in following the money in federal politics, we do not track these candidates. In congressional races, we typically display on OpenSecrets.org all the candidates in the race who are registered with the FEC. In presidential races, where the more viable candidates have to raise tens of millions of dollars, we tend to exclude those from the website who have raised far less. We're trying to balance being comprehensive with providing an easy-to-find path to information that our visitors are most likely seeking.