Obama to sign military pay bill
The bill will keep service members from having their paychecks delayed. | REUTERS Obama to sign military pay bill

President Barack Obama plans to sign a last-minute bill authorizing paychecks for troops and some Defense Department workers and contractors if the government shuts down, the White House said Monday.

The House-passed bill to ensure the military is paid was approved without dissent in the Senate on Monday — a rare bipartisan agreement as Congress stumbled toward midnight when the fiscal year ends and current appropriations expire.

Story Continued Below

The measure would also ensure continued pay for civilian employees of the Defense Department and Pentagon contractors whom Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel determines “are providing support to members of the Armed Forces.”

It was unclear Monday evening how Hagel might apply that authority — whether he would spare only a few civilians and contractors from furloughs, or large numbers of them. A Pentagon spokesman said he could not comment on “pending legislation.”

The spokesman restated the Pentagon’s position that “there is enough time for Congress to prevent a lapse in appropriations, and we hope that Congress will work with the administration to complete a continuing resolution to fund critical government functions prior to Oct. 1.”

Put forward by House Republicans, the troop-pay bill is considered good politics for the GOP, since analysts suggest the party could bear the brunt of the blame for any government disruption.

Following the bill’s passage, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) took to the Senate floor to offer Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid a backhanded compliment, praising the Nevada Democrat for not holding pay for service members “hostage.”

“The soldiers and sailors and airmen and Marines who risk their lives for this nation should not have their paychecks held hostage to any government shutdown in Washington,” said Cruz, who has led the charge in urging his fellow conservatives to demand that any bill to fund the government past Monday include provisions delaying Obamacare.

Democrats, meanwhile, said the bill to fund the troops wouldn’t make a government shutdown any more palatable — and insisted they hadn’t given up any leverage by easing some of the potential pain for the military.

“There’s no shortage of pain here,” said Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Carl Levin (D-Mich.).

Sen. Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.), another member of the Armed Services Committee, agreed. “It’s important to the country that we show support for the troops,” she said, “but there’s still going to be pain out there.”

“I don’t think it makes it easier for the Republicans to shut down the government over us not agreeing to repeal Obamacare after we had an election last November that decided it,” McCaskill said.

And Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.), who chairs the Senate Appropriations Committee, noted the bill was no cure-all for the Defense Department. “There will be many aspects of the military, of DoD, that won’t get paid,” she said.

On Friday, Pentagon officials described the potential effects of a shutdown on the military, saying pay for service members could be delayed and many civilian employees would be furloughed, potentially losing out on their pay entirely.

Kate Brannen and Reid Epstein contributed to this report.