Here is how to make the famous Nigerian Jollof rice
The Nigerian jollof rice is one of the most famous dishes in

It's a special dish that can be found everywhere from your neighbour's place, weddings, big restaurants to even the president's kitchen.

Jollof rice is so untouchable that daring to disparage it is considered a treason and enough grounds to be no longer be considered Nigerian. Trust me, it is that serious.

Now, that we discussed how special this meal is, let's get back to preparing it. Here is how you can make the famous Nigerian Jollof rice:

Recipe ingredients

You need parboiled rice, vegetable or coconut oil (you can also use olive oil), water, tomatoes, onions (use at least two), pepper, salt, seasoning cubes(two is fine), thyme, curry, and chicken or whatever you decide to use.

Time

One hour

Cooking instructions

You start with the tomatoes, blend them, then pour into a pot and cook at high heat. Cook until the water in the tomatoes dries up.

Next, you heat a medium sized pot, add your oil before pouring in the chopped onions and the cooked tomatoes. Stir very well.

Let this fry at very low heat while you stir at short intervals. Do this until the oil separates from the tomato. To move on to the next step, taste to ensure that the raw tomato taste is gone.

ALSO READ: Here's how other African countries cook rice

Then, pour the chicken stock, the drained parboiled rice, curry powder, salt, and pepper before adding water. Make sure the water is at the same level as the rice. This is to reduce the chances of your food getting burnt and ensure that all the water dries up by the time the rice is cooked.

Stir properly and taste to make sure that it's all good before covering the pot. Leave it to cook on low to medium heat.

Give it some time before you check to see if the water has completely dried. Your food is ready once the rice is well cooked, not too soft or hard, just right.

You can serve with chicken, turkey, fish, fried plantains, moi moi (beans pudding), salad or coleslaw.

Nutrition

One serving of jollof rice is said to contain 275 Calories, Total Fat 8g, Sodium 219mg.

About Jollof rice

It is believed to have originated from the region of Wolof speaking people in northwestern Senegal, The Gambia, and southwestern coastal Mauritania.

Jollof rice is hands-down one of the well known African dishes inside and outside the continent.