1216 mucchettipftexas

Emails, Michael Mucchetti, chief of staff, U.S. Rep. Lloyd Doggett, Dec. 20-27, 2016

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, December 20, 2016 11:32 AM

To: Mucchetti, Michael

Subject: Inquiry for a fact check

We are interested in the congressman’s statement as quoted below.

“Our university campuses by federal law do not check the immigration status of their students just as our public schools don’t.”

after 8:17 mark of interview by KEYE TV 12/15/16 (in the full interview, smaller video, to right)

1:50 p.m.

It comes from a statement by Texas State President Denise Trauth. See below.

Best,

Michael

(Selby)

3:12 p.m.

The tweet is what he based his statement on, correct?

It looks to me like he said something distinct from what the president said. That is, he said universities, in accord with law, don’t check the immigration status of students. Trauth says below the university doesn’t report to authorities on undocumented immigrants.

?

G.

From: Mucchetti, Michael

Sent: Tuesday, December 20, 2016 5:05 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Reply to your inquiry

Hi Gardner,

Yes, the tweet was consistent with his understanding of the law. The only difference is that Trauth went a step further than Doggett. She says current law doesn’t require reporting undocumented immigrants to authorities. His point is that current federal law doesn’t even require universities to check.

(Selby)

5:12 p.m.

Could you cite or point us to the law Doggett was referring to? It would help to share whatever it is that bars universities from checking legal status.

It looks to me at moment like Texas universities routinely know who’s lacking legal residency thanks to students who are enrolled with “affidavit” status. I am attaching the latest Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board publication on how those laws work.

?

G.

(Selby)

2 p.m.

Dec. 23, 2016

Michael:

We didn’t find a law that keeps universities from checking a student’s immigration status. Meantime, it looks like certain queries in the standard Texas application bear on that.

I expect to complete our fact check next week at earliest.

Cheers,

g.,

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Mucchetti, Michael

Sent: Tuesday, December 27, 2016 10:17 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Update

Hi Gardner, Again, it’s your characterization that he said federal law “bars universities from checking legal status” or “a law [] keeps universities from checking a student’s immigration status,” but that is not what he said.

From: Mucchetti, Michael

Sent: Tuesday, December 27, 2016 11:26 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Re: Update

Just to repeat from our prior messages, Congressman Doggett did not say that any federal law prohibits or bars universities from checking status. He was saying that educational institutions are not required by federal law to check status—that like our public schools, public universities, in accord with federal law, do not check.