Arborist avenges the city-mandated death of his beloved tree, Clyde, by planting hundreds of giant sequoias throughout the town (x-post r/trees) : ProRevenge
Hi, I'm an arborist. This means I am a professional in the cultivation, management, and study of trees. I love trees. I think they're some of the most beautiful, majestic, ancient living beings on our planet.

Today I am here to tell you a story of death, new life, and revenge. Three years ago today, the city council of Redondo Beach California ordered the death of my 30 year old pepper tree. It's roots had begun to penetrate the pavement in front of my house. The city noticed and issued the death warrant of my tree. They furthermore made me pay for the damages to the sidewalk and for the tree removal.

I loved Clyde. I'm beginning to get older, and planting something that I knew would live well beyond my lifetime was something very special. I took very good care of him. I drained his soil, I gave him a crutch to lean on when he was a young lad, and I watched him grow. Just as Clyde was becoming a strong healthy individual, expanding his root system, developing a canopy, and making his own way in life, the mayor took it upon himself to uproot my beautiful child.

Mayor Steve Aspel. You killed my child.

For this, you will pay. Two years and seven months ago, I secretly planted 45 California Redwoods and 82 Giant Sequoias in various parks, yards, and state properties around your city.

Today, each of their root systems will be at least 30 feet in diameter, and deeply embedded in the soil. You may have noticed the trees growing in front of city council, or that new one that sprouted up in your backyard. That's a Giant Sequoia, and its growth will begin accelerating rapidly in the coming months.

You killed Clyde, but I have replaced him with over 100 living giants. And giant they will become. In a few years, they'll begin breaking heights of 100-300 feet and live well beyond 2,500 years. That's way longer ago than Jesus was born. To remove even one of them at this point will cost well over $1500... And I'm stiffing you with the bill, just like you did to me 3 years ago today.

Good day to you, sir. May your city be overrun by trees. And may Clyde rest in peace.

Edit: I now realize I posted this in the completely wrong subreddit. However, I want to thank you all for the warm reception of my post despite it being wildly off topic. You guys seem like a very kind Reddit community!

Also, I'd like to share a quick image album I made of my favorite Giant Sequoia, "General Sherman". This will give you a taste of what will soon be sprouting up in Steve's yard.

https://imgur.com/gallery/ShEHk

link to original: https://www.reddit.com/r/trees/comments/6hotz8/i_secretly_planted_a_giant_sequoia_tree_in_my/