(PDF) The Prevalence of False Allegations of Rape in the United States from 2006-2010
Crown Prosecution Service Inspectorate (HMCPSI) into the

investigation and prosecution of rape oences in England and W ales

deemed that 164 allegat ions out of 1,379 were false allegation s of rape

(11.8%; [11]). In the study conducted by Lea et al. [14] no clear

statistics were reported. But, base d on the information provided by the

researchers we calculated that 38 ou t of 379 (10%) allegations of rape

were considered to be false. Nineteen (5%) allegations were considered

to b e false because the complainants had retracted the allegat ion, and

had admitted that the allegation was false. e other 19 (5%)

allegations were considered to be false because police ocers said that

the allegations were false. Jordan [12] reported that 68 out of 164

(41.5%) allegat ions were false. irteen allegations were considered to

be false because the complainan ts had retracted the allegat ion, and had

admitted that the allegation was false. Fiy-ve allegations were false

according to police ocers; 26 allegations were believed to be false by

police ocers, and were retracted by the complainants, and the

remaining 29 were classied as false allegations based o n the police

investigation. K elly et al. [13] found that 216 out of 2643 (8%)

allegations of rap e were classied as false allegations. In 120 out of the

216 false allegations an explanation of the reason for classifying the

allegation as false was given. In 53 cases according to the police ocers

the complainants had retracted the allegation, and had admitted that

the allegation was false. I n 28 cases the complainant had retracted the

allegation. In three cases the complainant refused to cooperate with the

police. e remaining 56 allegations were classied as false based on

the police investigation.

More recent gures on the prevalence of false allegations of rape are

lacking, because although the studies were published in the 21 st

century, the dat a gathering process was conducted in the 20 th century

for three out of four studies [11-14] gathered the data more than ten

years ago. e most recent data in the study were from 2002. As far as

gures go for the U .S., t hey refer to data reported in 1992 [15].

Dershowitz [15] r eported based on gures p rovided by the Uniform

Crime Reporting (UCR) Program of the Federal Bureau of

Investigations (FBI) that in the U.S. 8% of all allegations of rap e were

unfounded. Since t hen guidelines of law enforcemen t agencies in the

U.S. to collect and label data have changed. D ue to the changes it is to

be expected that recent gures are more valid.

e Unfound Category and the New Po licy

False allegations are categorized by law enforcemen t agencies in the

U.S. as unfounded crimes. In 1992 the unfounded crime category

comprised more than false allegations alone, and was sometimes used

to clear out crimes [16]. If an oence was classied as unfounded it was

not counted as an unsolved crime. Since then the guidelines have

changed, and are more strict to avoid that true allegations are

misclassied as false.

e new guidelines of the Unifo rm Cr ime Reporting (UCR)

Program of the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) and the

International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) to unfound

allegations of rape are the same, it is, therefore, redundant to cite them

both. e UCR guidelines of the FBI state that a law enfor cement

agency in the U.S. has to establish through in vestigation that the

reported rape did not occur in order to deem an allegation unfounded

[17,18].

Uncertainty of how strict and to w hat extent the new guidelines are

followed by law enforcement agencies will never be fully dispelled. e

new guidelines, however , can be expected to have led to more valid

gures on the prevalence of false allegations of rape. A study by Spohn

et al. [19] does not seem to reject the validity of this hypothesis.

Spohn et al. [19] studied a random sample of 401 allegations of

sexual assaults at the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) that were

led in 2008, to test whether the guidelines of the FBI and I ACP to

unfound cases are followed by police ocers. e researchers

concluded that in 2.4% of all allegations o f sexual assault that were

classied by LAPD ocers as unfounded evidence existed that a crime

did occur. In 9.9% of unfounded allegations Spohn et al. [19]

concluded that there was evidence that complainants lacked interest to

pursue the case or were motivated by fear or pressure to stop pursuing

the case. us, a total of 12.3% o f all allegations were deemed to be

misclassied by the LAPD. Spohn et al. [19] wrote “One conclusion

that can be drawn from thes e data is that the LAPD is clearing sexual

assault cases as unfounded appropriatel y most, but not all, of the time”

(p: 173).

e unfounded c ategory , however , is a broader category than false

allegations alone, it als o consists of baseless cases. A baseless case is a

case that does not meet the legal criteria for the crime [9]. us, also if

the classication process is awless then some proportion of cases

would still no t be false allegations in the sense that the complainant

deliberately tried to mislead everyone.

In the study by Spohn et al. [19] ve cases, 6.2% of all unfoun ded

cases, that were correctly classied as unfounded by the LAPD w ere

labeled by the r earchers as baseless allegations. If the LAPD, which is

one of the largest police depar tments in the U .S., is representative for

law enforcement agencies in the U.S. then recent gures from the UCR

could help to resolve the heated debate on prevalence of false an d

baseless rape allegations in the U.S.

W e compare the rate of false and baseless rape allegations to fals e

and baseless allegations for any number of other crimes to test the

hypothesis that false and baseless allegations of rape are more

prevalent than false and baseless allegations of crimes in general.

Method

W e received the raw crime statistics of the U.S. from the UCR of the

FBI. at included the master les from 1960 until 2010. e les

contained raw data from every law enforcement ag ency in the U .S.

[20]. W e ext racted the data fro m the les, and imported the data in

SPSS. Our sample consisted of a recent ve-year period, from

2006-2010. W e chose a recent time period to make sure we obtained

gures of a time period when the ne w guidelines ap plied, and were

implemented for some time. A ve year period was chosen to increase

the reliability of the gures.

Procedure

W e divided the number of crimes into dierent categories. e

category of unfounded cases (i.e., false and baseless allegations), of

actual cases (i.e., probable true allegations), and of cases c leared by

arrest. W e chose the most typical crimes for comparison: Rape T otal,

Rape by force, Murder , Man slaughter, Robbery, Assault, Burglary,

e, and Larceny (T able 1). e T otal crime category, however,

includes all types of crimes within this time frame. We also compared

the unfounded category with the actual oences category (T able 2).

Citation: De Zutter A, Horselenberg R, van Koppen PJ (2017) The Prevalence of False Allegations of Rape in the United States from 2006-2010.

J Foren Psy 2: 119. doi: 10.4172/2475-319X.1000119

Page 2 of 5

J Foren Psy , an open access journal

ISSN:2475-319X

V olume 2 • Issue 2 • 1000119