0617 meatfedpftexas

Emails, Joe Schuele, vice president, communications, U.S. Meat Export Federation, June 28, 2017

From: Schuele, Joe

Sent: Wednesday, June 28, 2017 1:44 PM

Subject: FW: Texas reporter, urgently seeking information for a fact check

Gardner,

While we cannot speak for Secretary Perry, he was most likely referring to the restrictions the European Union places on imports of U.S. beef (including from Texas). The most notable of these restrictions is the EU’s ban on the use of growth hormones, which are widely used in U.S. beef production, making this the subject of a long-running trade dispute between the U.S. and the EU.

So while the EU doesn’t exactly refuse to buy U.S. beef, only a small percentage of U.S. beef is eligible for export to the EU.

Hope this is helpful,

Joe

Joe Schuele

Vice President, Communications

U.S. Meat Export Federation

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, June 28, 2017 12:46 PM

Subject: RE: Texas reporter, urgently seeking information for a fact check

What’s the best way to get a detailed timeline and explanation of the extent to which beef from different states isn’t imported to France?

3:28 p.m.

To follow up on our phone conversation:

In 2015, the EU imported roughly 18,500 metric tons of U.S. beef, valued at $264 million

Last year EU imports of U.S. beef declined to about 16,000 metric tons, valued at $205 million

This year (through April), imports have rebounded to some degree to 6,900 metric tons (up 46% year-over-year) valued at $85 million (up 36%)

The export requirements for U.S. beef destined for the European Union can be found here:

https://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsis/topics/international-affairs/exporting-products/export-library-requirements-by-country/European-Union

As for the timeline, the EU’s ban on beef produced with growth hormones dates back to 1989 (note that the EU was then referred to as the European Economic Community). The WTO ruled in the United States’ favor in this dispute in 1997. The duty-free quota, which the parties agreed to as an alternative to U.S. retaliatory measures, dates back to 2009.

Thanks,

Joe

Joe Schuele

Vice President, Communications

U.S. Meat Export Federation