rust consulting inc complaints, reviews, scams, lawsuits and frauds reported, 51,104 results
Your Search: rust consulting inc

As the leading consumer advocacy website, our technology is being continually upgraded to handle the volume of searches from consumers, the media, the authorities and millions of others from around the world. While we are always in the process of upgrading, our search results may not return all reports. This is only temporary and intermittent. If you are an attorney helping victims, the media, or law-enforcement, please contact us to have us run a complete database search to help your case or story.

Results

#632466 - Rust Consulting, Inc Scamming Settlement Due Minneapolis, Minnesota ...settlement that I never received from a previous employer. Contacted IRS and reported issue and they told me to contact Rust Consulting Inc who supposedly handled the case.....I was excited since I've been waiting for this settlement for 3 yrs......that I never received from a previous employer. Contacted IRS and reported issue and they told me to contact Rust Consulting Inc who supposedly handled the case.....I was excited since I've been waiting for this settlement for 3 yrs now,......I never received from a previous employer. Contacted IRS and reported issue and they told me to contact Rust Consulting Inc who supposedly handled the case.....I was excited since I've been waiting for this settlement for 3 yrs now, only... Updated at: Aug 24 2010 09:16 AM

#1052875 - Rust Consulting Inc Rust Consulting will not respond Faribault Michigan I was sent a check from Rust Consulting Inc on behalf of Wells Fargo Independent Foreclosure Review. The problem is they sent the check in both my deceased husbands name and mine. I can not cash the check, not even at a Wells Fargo Bank. I...I was sent a check from Rust Consulting Inc on behalf of Wells Fargo Independent Foreclosure Review. The problem is they sent the check in both my deceased husbands name and mine. I can not cash the check, not even at a Wells Fargo Bank. I have...I was sent a check from Rust Consulting Inc on behalf of Wells Fargo Independent Foreclosure Review. The problem is they sent the check in both my deceased husbands name and mine. I can not cash the check, not even at a Wells Fargo Bank. I have contacted... Updated at: May 22 2013 07:18 AM

#1051995 - Payment Agent-Rust Consulting, Inc Rust Consulting, Inc gives Consulting Firm should be forced to close all their offices Faribault Minnesota ...informed me that all the doucmentation that I submitted inlcuding the court documents was we enough to support my refund. Rust Consulting is suppose to send another form that I need to complete and get notarized. I have yet to......me that all the doucmentation that I submitted inlcuding the court documents was we enough to support my refund. Rust Consulting is suppose to send another form that I need to complete and get notarized. I have yet to receive...Today is February 18th and I still have not received my refund. I was able to speak with a representative who informed me that all the doucmentation that I submitted inlcuding the court documents was we enough to support my... Updated at: Feb 19 2014 10:41 AM

#713373 - rust consulting inc. wal mart mdl1735 settlement payments not being paid , Internet this complaint is about rust consulting inc. handling of the walmartmdl1735 settlement payments. i received a book and a claim form in the mail concerning a lawsuit settlement for current and former walmart hourly employees ( which i am ) in 2009 to recover...this complaint is about rust consulting inc. handling of the walmartmdl1735 settlement payments. i received a book and a claim form in the mail concerning a lawsuit settlement for current and former walmart hourly employees ( which i am ) in 2009 to recover money...this complaint is about rust consulting inc. handling of the walmartmdl1735 settlement payments. i received a book and a claim form in the mail concerning a lawsuit settlement for current and former walmart hourly employees ( which i am )... Updated at: Apr 03 2011 03:33 PM

#972305 - Rust Consulting, Inc. I haven't received my lawnmower check yet! minneapolis , Minnesota I haven't received my lawnmower check yet!!I haven't received my lawnmower check yet!!I haven't received my lawnmower check yet!! Updated at: Nov 21 2012 02:57 PM

#287135 - Rust ConsultingRust Consulting, Inc ameriquest settlement delay again Minneapolis Minnesota ...were counting on this for Christmas money. Now the checks have been delayed until the end of December. I believe rust Consulting is dragging this out as long as they possibly can, with their vague responses, and general lack of......been ripped off in the first place! And now we are being ripped off once again, now apparently by the consulting firm hired to pay out the checks. I've been on the internet this morning and I'm heart broken to...I want to know what are the unforseen, unanticipated delays yet once again in dispursing this settlement money? There would be no money or no settlement if we had never been ripped off in the first place! And now we... Updated at: Nov 27 2007 01:03 PM

#715811 - rust consulting inc lawn mower settlement payment are not being paid ( another ripoff by rust consulting inc minneapolis, Minnesota well here we again another ripoff by rust consulting inc of minneapolis and faribault minnesota i filed a couple of claims for the lawnmowerclass .com settlement a nationally advertized lawsuit on tv about false horsepower ratings on lawn mowers well anyway according to lawnmowerclass.com website the people...well here we again another ripoff by rust consulting inc of minneapolis and faribault minnesota i filed a couple of claims for the lawnmowerclass .com settlement a nationally advertized lawsuit on tv about false horsepower ratings on lawn mowers well anyway according to lawnmowerclass.com website the people who...well here we again another ripoff by rust consulting inc of minneapolis and faribault minnesota i filed a couple of claims for the lawnmowerclass .com settlement a nationally advertized lawsuit on tv about false horsepower ratings on lawn mowers well anyway according to lawnmowerclass.com website the people who filed... Updated at: Apr 09 2011 12:18 PM

#1053751 - Rust Consulting, Inc Rust Consulting - LIARS and THIEVES - That company needs to be investigated by the Attorney General's office Faribault Minnesota I had no problem receiving the notices and postcards sent by Rust Consulting.... but when it came time to receive the so-called payment...now all of a sudden ...nothing ! Even the tracking notice they claim they were going to send me ....nothing !....3 times , they claim they sent me......them to earn interest while the money stays in their bank account. Screwed by Wells Fargo and screwed by Rust Consulting !! I will send certified letters to the Attorney General's Office, also the Office of the Comptroller of...I had no problem receiving the notices and postcards sent by Rust Consulting.... but when it came time to receive the so-called payment...now all of a sudden ...nothing ! Even the tracking notice they claim they were going to... Updated at: May 25 2013 06:27 AM

#1066309 - Rust Consulting, Inc. WE HAVE BEEN DEFRAUDED BY THE BANKS AND THE PAYING AGENT RUST CONSULTING, INC. Minneapolis Minnesota I would like to know when the housing rip-off will finally be settled. Rust Consulting, Inc. is the paying agent for the Independent Foreclosure Review and this company continues to screw home owners. I receive a I-9 claiming that the company didn’t have my social security number on record, imagine that! The banks... I would like to know when the housing rip-off will finally be settled. Rust Consulting, Inc. is the paying agent for the Independent Foreclosure Review and this company continues to screw home owners. I receive a I-9 claiming that the... I would like to know when the housing rip-off will finally be settled. Rust Consulting, Inc. is the paying agent for the Independent Foreclosure Review and this company continues to screw home owners. I receive a I-9 claiming that the... Updated at: Jul 11 2013 04:49 PM

#629622 - Rust Consulting, Inc Rust Consulting Stole my Settlement from AOL CL Class Action Lawsuit Minneapolis, Minnesota Rust Consulting stole my settlement form the AOL Class Action lawsuit. They stole the back pay that was granted by the courts. Settlement checks were mailed on July 23, 2010. When my mailbox did not have this check on August...Rust Consulting stole my settlement form the AOL Class Action lawsuit. They stole the back pay that was granted by the courts. Settlement checks were mailed on July 23, 2010. When my mailbox did not have this check on August 3,...Rust Consulting stole my settlement form the AOL Class Action lawsuit. They stole the back pay that was granted by the courts. Settlement checks were mailed on July 23, 2010. When my mailbox did not have this check on August... Updated at: Nov 05 2010 11:37 AM

#1100668 - Rust Consulting, Inc. Rust Consulting failing to pay individuals from the Independent Foreclosure Review Process Faribault Minnesota ...was eligible to receive a payment as a result of an agreement between PNC Bank and the federal banking regulators. Rust Consulting was the paying agent. It is now November 19th, 2013, and Rust Consulting has been unable and unwilling......eligible to receive a payment as a result of an agreement between PNC Bank and the federal banking regulators. Rust Consulting was the paying agent. It is now November 19th, 2013, and Rust Consulting has been unable and unwilling to... I received a postcard in February that I was eligible to receive a payment as a result of an agreement between PNC Bank and the federal banking regulators. Rust Consulting was the paying agent. It is now November 19th, 2013,... Updated at: Nov 19 2013 12:40 PM

#1116284 - Rust Consulting Inc. Citigroup purchased 2013 Independent Foreclosure Review and National Mortgage Settlement Fairbault Minnesota ...Debra A Rousseau.(Correcting me legal name from 2011)On January 7, 2013 I overnight mailed a letter to Independent Review Administrator, Rust Consulting Inc, P O Box 2593, Faribault, MN 55021-9593 referencing claim no and property address asking for an update. ......A Rousseau.(Correcting me legal name from 2011)On January 7, 2013 I overnight mailed a letter to Independent Review Administrator, Rust Consulting Inc, P O Box 2593, Faribault, MN 55021-9593 referencing claim no and property address asking for an update. They...Independent Foreclosure ReviewOn November 25, 2011 I received a Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the OCC have required an Independent Foreclosure Review under Debra Penkala James Penkala.On November 30, 2011 I filed a request for the... Updated at: Jan 17 2014 09:47 AM

#718997 - Rust Consulting Inc. Faribault, MN Class Action Suit vs First Franklin Financial Corporation Faribault, Minnesota ...that the lawsuit became final. We were surprised because we weren't notified that we were in a lawsuit. I called Rust Consulting and the represenative told me well we didn't get anything back from you in the mail I stated......the lawsuit became final. We were surprised because we weren't notified that we were in a lawsuit. I called Rust Consulting and the represenative told me well we didn't get anything back from you in the mail I stated again...We received for the first notification that we were involved in a class action suit against First Franklin Financial Corporation dated April 12, 2011. This post card indicated that the lawsuit became final. We were surprised because we weren't notified... Updated at: Apr 18 2011 11:26 AM

#1051011 - Rust Consulting Inc. Independent Foreclosure Review was and is a SCAM I received a 500 dollar check today Faribault Minnesota Rust Consulting Inc. Independent Foreclosure Review was and is a SCAM I received a 500 dollar check today Faribault MinnesotaRust Consulting Inc. Independent Foreclosure Review was and is a SCAM I received a 500 dollar check today Faribault MinnesotaRust Consulting Inc. Independent Foreclosure Review was and is a SCAM I received a 500 dollar check today Faribault Minnesota Updated at: May 14 2013 09:16 PM

#1058461 - Rust Consulting, Inc. Pay consultants appear to be up to no good Faribault Maine ...that all monies for the Independent Foreclosure Review should be complete by the end of July, but the scammers at Rust Consulting, Inc. want to keep the process going so that they can steal more money from already low income......want to keep the process going so that they can steal more money from already low income individuals. If Rust Consulting could not handle changing an address over the phone, they should not have accepted the job of being the... This Company was hired to get payment out for the Independent Foreclosure Review but they seem to have a problem with you if you call in to change your address with them. They provide their phone number for you to... Updated at: Jun 11 2013 10:41 PM

#1058046 - Rust Consulting Inc. and Federal Banking regulators LIERS, THEIFS, MANIPULATORS, FRAUD,GOVERMENT HOAX, WE NEED CLASS ACTION SUIT Faribault Minnesota This company thinks it's about the law and it has the Federal banking regulators backing them up. So listen to my story. Millions of people lost their homes. It was heart wrenching enough to hear all the horrible stories about...This company thinks it's about the law and it has the Federal banking regulators backing them up. So listen to my story. Millions of people lost their homes. It was heart wrenching enough to hear all the horrible stories about...This company thinks it's about the law and it has the Federal banking regulators backing them up. So listen to my story. Millions of people lost their homes. It was heart wrenching enough to hear all the horrible stories about... Updated at: Jun 10 2013 05:42 PM

#1045349 - Rust Consulting, Inc. RIP OFF! Where's the $840 we were promised?Only got $300! Fairbault, Maine ...it was at least that amount, if not more. Today is April 22, 2013 and we received a check from Rust Consulting for $300. What happened to the other $540?? Lawyer's fees? Really? I also found out upon more research......was at least that amount, if not more. Today is April 22, 2013 and we received a check from Rust Consulting for $300. What happened to the other $540?? Lawyer's fees? Really? I also found out upon more research that...A few weeks ago in March we received a postcard saying we were qualified for a payment under the agreement with the federal banking regulators under the Independent Foreclosure Review by the regulators. Upon more research, I was able to... Updated at: Apr 22 2013 06:42 PM

#1058466 - Rust Consulting Refusal Minneapolis Minnesota ...7 to 10 days. I finally called the OCC who (not know to me) only takes your information and contacts Rust to give them my complaint. I was contacted by Rust Tier 2 who advised that they finally received the... I have been trying since April 25, 2013 to get an address change form. Everytime I call it was something different. The first time was the initial call and the young lady supposedly put my address in the system. I... I have been trying since April 25, 2013 to get an address change form. Everytime I call it was something different. The first time was the initial call and the young lady supposedly put my address in the system. I... Updated at: Jun 12 2013 12:04 AM

#550077 - Rust Consulting, Inc Countrywide settlement riddled with form deadline extensions, evasive, vague and arrogant Faribault, Minnesota ...lost their homes due to Countrywide's criminal lending practices. I am currently outraged by the delay tactics being implemented by Rust Consulting, the firm hired to handle disbursement of the funds. There was an original deadline date to return the......merely for sending the form in. There is no payment date in sight. Brief research I have done on Rust Consulting has brought to light that this is a common tactic used by this company. For months now calling, I...The New Jersey Attorney General's Office negotiated a settlement with Countrywide Mortgage for individuals who lost their homes due to Countrywide's criminal lending practices. I am currently outraged by the delay tactics being implemented by Rust Consulting, the firm hired... Updated at: Jan 20 2010 03:44 PM

#287248 - Rust Consulting Ameriquest Multistate Settlement Rust Consulting Internet Amen and halleluiah! I too have been waiting for my settlement check. First we're told early spring, then we're told mid November, then by the end of November and now today after contacting the administrator I'm told the end of...Amen and halleluiah! I too have been waiting for my settlement check. First we're told early spring, then we're told mid November, then by the end of November and now today after contacting the administrator I'm told the end of...Amen and halleluiah! I too have been waiting for my settlement check. First we're told early spring, then we're told mid November, then by the end of November and now today after contacting the administrator I'm told the end of... Updated at: Nov 27 2007 07:54 PM

#1085802 - Rust Consulting, Inc. paying agent - rust consulting, inc. i've been laied by them on several ocations regarding payment for compensation pursuant to orders issued by Federal Banking Regulators Faribault Minnesota ...code they claimed they sent the letter to and they did not have a record of any letters returned to RUST and addresed to my name. I started going through the insernet looking for similiar cases and I found out that......cashed by them? I have never got the answer to that question. I know that all those numbers that Rust Consulting advertise as far as how much monet they dispersed is a one fat lie. Somebody is doing us consumers...In March of 2013 I received a post card informing me that I am eligible for compensation pursuant to orders issued by Federal Banking Regulators. The postcard informed me that I should expect the compensation chack for the amount of... Updated at: Sep 19 2013 01:04 PM

#288611 - Rust Consulting Restitituion Delayed again Minneapolis Minnesota Thanks to Jason from Rhode Island for the template emails. I used them to contact Rust, my state legislators and also my national legislators. I will be mailing a copy to my state attorney general (they don't accept emails). It is...Thanks to Jason from Rhode Island for the template emails. I used them to contact Rust, my state legislators and also my national legislators. I will be mailing a copy to my state attorney general (they don't accept emails). It is...Thanks to Jason from Rhode Island for the template emails. I used them to contact Rust, my state legislators and also my national legislators. I will be mailing a copy to my state attorney general (they don't accept emails). It is... Updated at: Dec 03 2007 01:53 PM

#1097524 - Rust Consulting This company has no integrity Minnesota I also have been dealing constantly with rust consulting. I continue to get the 4/6 weeks delays., I continue to be lied to. , I did a google search for the CEO,, senior vice president etc. I have been sending them emails. I received a call 5 weeks...I also have been dealing constantly with rust consulting. I continue to get the 4/6 weeks delays., I continue to be lied to. , I did a google search for the CEO,, senior vice president etc. I have been sending them...I also have been dealing constantly with rust consulting. I continue to get the 4/6 weeks delays., I continue to be lied to. , I did a google search for the CEO,, senior vice president etc. I have been sending them... Updated at: Nov 06 2013 07:41 PM

#1309184 - Rust Consulting Administrators Rust Consulting are liars and thieves, faurbault Minnesota Nationwide ...money Feb 2016, they keep posting dates of checks being mailed then change it, just misleading lies for ever, unbelievable, Rust had been lying for over a year about build a website which certificate clearing.com does all coupons for class... Rust Consulting Administrators lying to class members over a year, Judge told them release money Feb 2016, they keep posting dates of checks being mailed then change it, just misleading lies for ever, unbelievable, Rust had been lying for over a... Rust Consulting Administrators lying to class members over a year, Judge told them release money Feb 2016, they keep posting dates of checks being mailed then change it, just misleading lies for ever, unbelievable, Rust had been lying for over... Updated at: Jun 21 2016 02:59 PM