Amid nationwide outcry, McQueen lifts controversial suspension on student gun protester
CLOSE Alex Trujillo, Wooster’s student body vice president, talks about why National Walkout Day matters and why people should listen.

School backs away from punishment after legal threats from ACLU

Suspended McQueen student Noah Christiansen pictured March 19, 2018 in the Reno offices of ACLU of Nevada. (Photo: James DeHaven)

The Washoe County School District on Friday lifted a controversial suspension imposed on a McQueen High School student who used profanity while taking part in widespread student walkouts seeking action on gun control.

The student, Noah Christiansen, was handed a two-day suspension last week, hours after a staffer for U.S. Rep. Mark Amodei, R-Nev., complained to the school about salty language Christiansen used in a call to his office during the student-led protests.

Attorneys with the American Civil Liberties Union of Nevada threatened a lawsuit and called on the school to overturn the suspension. They also asked Amodei to apologize and withdraw his office’s complaint.

Nine days later, amid nationwide media coverage, the district announced it would comply with the ACLU’s request to wipe the punishment off the 17-year-old’s record, issuing a statement that cited potential legal costs among the reasons to abandon Christiansen’s punishment.

“The Washoe County School District respects the First Amendment rights of students and encourages students to exercise those First Amendment rights and to engage in the political process,” said Traci Davis, the district's superintendent. “However, as educators we also serve a critical educational purpose to prepare our students for citizenship in our democratic system, which includes educating our youth on manners of civility, proper decorum when expressing opinions, and to treat all persons with respect.

“I support our teachers and administrators who work tirelessly to instill these essential values in our students.”

In a Friday evening statement, ACLU Nevada Legal Director Amy Rose said, in part:

"This is a major win for the First Amendment. Noah will move forward with a clean disciplinary record. Students, like everyone else, have a right to criticize government officials. Now students will know they have a right to speak passionately about their political beliefs, free from retaliation."

Neil Rombardo, the district’s top attorney, defended McQueen administrator’s actions in a formal response to the ACLU attached to Friday’s statement, though he too conceded that arguing the matter in court was not the best use of taxpayer dollars.

Christiansen, reached for a Monday interview, said he called Amodei’s office and asked that the congressman vote to make bump stocks illegal and raise the minimum age to buy a gun from 18 years to 21 years.

He admitted telling a staffer something to the effect of “congress people who are not acting on gun control reforms need to get off their f---ing asses and do something.”

The high school junior and aspiring attorney said that didn’t warrant a suspension.

“I’m smart enough to use better words than the f-word,” Christiansen said. “At the same time, even if I do want to use those words, it’s my right to do so.”

The ACLU agreed.

“The retaliation by Congressman Amodei’s office is a betrayal of the First Amendment and of the representative process,” Tod Story, ACLU of Nevada’s executive director, said in a statement. “Nothing this constituent did was illegal, and we hope Congressman Amodei would be as interested in the opinions of students as anyone who seeks to ‘petition the government.’”

The statement goes on to call Christiansen a model student and a major player on his school’s debate team. Christiansen said he was recently elected class secretary, but was not able to serve in that role due to his suspension.

Amy Rose, ACLU of Nevada’s legal director, said Christiansen was unaware of any other student who had been punished so harshly for using profanity.

Rose, writing in a Monday letter to Superintendent Davis, suggested Christiansen’s suspension may have had something to do with his past public remarks on President Donald Trump — comments he said school administrators cited as evidence of his “prior bad behavior.”

“(McQueen) punished Noah for exercising his First Amendment right to engage in political speech,” Rose added. “As explained below, the discipline imposed is unconstitutional and must be overturned immediately.”

Reached late Monday, Amodei said he had no plans to apologize for disciplinary action taken by school administrators.

He said staffer Arturo Garzon had a right to report the call to McQueen, thought he too "kind of wondered" what went into the school's decision to take disciplinary action against Christiansen.

"I'm not going to apologize to (Christiansen) because he offended somebody he didn't even know," Amodei said. "The ACLU can do whatever it thinks is right."

Read or Share this story: https://www.rgj.com/story/news/politics/2018/03/23/amid-nationwide-outcry-mcqueen-lifts-controversial-suspension-student-gun-protester/455112002/