SALGA
Office Hours Mon-Fri: 08:00-16:30 | Call Center +27 12 369 8000











SALGA National Executive Committee appoints Cllr Thembisile Nkadimeng as new SALGA President Posted: 14 June 2019 Following the 2019 Provincial and National elections, the South African Local Government Association (SALGA) President Parks Tau was appointed as a Deputy Minister for Cooperative Governance resulting in a vacancy of the SALGA President...... Read More

Local Government celebrates the role played by the Youth Posted: 07 June 2019 The twenty-five (25) years of democracy and freedom presents South Africa’s youth an opportunity to reflect also look back to the 43 years since that fateful June 16 of 1976. We see it befitting as local government to say THANK YOU for the fearlessness and courage of the Youth of 1976. That year, amongst others, highlighted a turning point in our history..... Read More

Plight of Internal Auditors Posted: 06 June 2019 Internal auditors, by virtue of their mandate, may inevitably unearth wrongdoing in their organisations. This would ordinarily be all in a day’s job. With a lack of understanding of the mandate of internal audit and how far their powers go, there is often a misperception that internal auditors could singlehandedly have stopped the scourge of corruption.... Read More

SALGA calls for Political Parties to remove election posters in respect of Outdoor Advertising By-Laws Posted: 28 May 2019 With South Africa’s 2019 National and Provincial elections behind us, SALGA is calling for all Political Parties who contested the elections to remove all election posters in accordance with the Municipal Outdoor Advertising By-Laws governing the erection of election posters in municipal infrastructure.... Read More

Celebrating Africa Day: A Healthy Lifestyle Prolongs Life Posted: 24 May 2019 This year’s theme: “Healthy Lifestyle Prolongs Life” has been selected to emphasize the significant relationship between unhealthy lifestyle and premature mortality. The theme is in line with Aspiration 1 of the Agenda 2063 which is “A prosperous Africa, based on inclusive growth and sustainable development”.... Read More

SALGA congratulates former Chairperson, Amos Masondo on his appointment as the Chairperson of National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Posted: 23 May 2019 SALGA congratulates its former national chairperson, Honourable Amos Masondo on his appointment as the Chairperson of the National Council of Province (NCOP). Former Premier of Northern Cape, Sylvia Lucas has been confirmed... Read More