Ending long-term drinking water advisories
Everyone in Canada should have access to safe, clean drinking water. The Government of Canada is working with First Nations communities to:

Two drinking water advisories at Ojibway Nation of Saugeen, in Ontario, became long-term on April 26 and 27 after being in place for more than 12 months. ISC is working with the community to restore safe drinking water at both sites, the Saugeen School and Saugeen Health Clinic.

A drinking water advisory at Standing Buffalo, in Saskatchewan, became long-term on May 9 after being in place for more than 12 months. Operation and maintenance repairs to the existing treatment system have been completed and options to address capacity issues or reduce demand are being explored. ISC continues to work with the community to complete a long-term recapitalization and capacity expansion of the water treatment plant. These longer-term upgrades are projected to be complete by December 2020.

Pinaymootang First Nation, in Manitoba, lifted a long-term drinking water advisory from the Pinaymootang Arena Semi-Public Water System and the water was safe to drink as of April 17, 2019, following upgrades to the water treatment system. The advisory had been in effect since August 17, 2015.

Mishkosiminiziibiing (Big Grassy River), in Ontario, lifted a long-term drinking water advisory from the Big Grassy Public Water System on April 17, 2019, following maintenance and repairs to the water treatment system. ISC invested over $200,000 to support the community's efforts to address the safe drinking water needs of its 277 residents. The advisory had been in effect since March 1, 2017.

This line graph depicts the number of long-term drinking water advisories in effect between November 2015 and May 31, 2019 and projected numbers of long-term drinking water advisories expected to be in effect by the end of June and December of each calendar year from 2018 through 2021. It also depicts the projected number of houses and community buildings affected by long-term advisories.

Ensuring essential infrastructure

The Government of Canada works with First Nations to address health and safety needs, ensure proper facility operation and maintenance, and to prevent short-term advisories from becoming long-term.

Ending a drinking water advisory is often complex, spanning multiple phases. Actions to resolve a water or wastewater issue can include:

feasibility studies

new system design work

interim repairs on existing systems

permanent repairs to existing infrastructure

construction of new infrastructure

improved training and monitoring

Completion of a new water treatment system can take 3 to 4 years on average to complete. See the Life-cycle of a First Nations community infrastructure project.