With goal in sight, caravan members must make tough choices about asylum
Members of the migrant caravan who have entered a version of immigration purgatory in Tijuana repeat the same phrase when talking about what will happen to them next — tenemos que esperar.

The phrase has two possible translations — We have to wait. We have to hope. Both are applicable to the uncertainty facing those who trekked hundreds of miles and are now staring across a border at a goal that has shifted from theory to reality.

More than 4,700 members of the caravan are already in Tijuana, according to city officials, with more on the way from Mexicali and other parts of Mexico. Most who have arrived are camped at a sports complex in Zona Norte, a neighborhood next to the border where the waiting migrants can see through the barrier to the place they’re hoping to end up.

The majority are waiting for the rest of the group to arrive before deciding their next move. If they choose to apply for asylum in the U.S., they will likely have to wait months in the backlog of applicants in Tijuana and then again in the backlog of U.S. immigration court.

How successful they will be depends on what happened to them in their home country before they left and how well they’re able to convey that, first to an asylum officer and then to an immigration judge.

Most haven’t yet learned about the complex system awaiting them on the other side though volunteer attorneys are hosting daily legal briefings in the baseball diamond of the sports complex to educate migrants about the U.S. asylum process.

Last week, a woman in Tijuana described the bleak situation that many would face, the potential for months locked up in detention centers while they fight for the chance to stay. Those places feel like prisons, she said.

Delma, a 34-year-old who only agreed to give her first name, hadn’t yet been to see the attorneys. She, along with her husband and 12-year-old daughter, are among the few from the caravan who have already visited the port of entry to take a number in the official line for asylum requests.

“We’re waiting to see what happens, waiting to see what we can do,” Delma said in Spanish. “Everything is complicated, but we have to be patient.”

Another Honduran woman in the caravan named Suyapa acknowledged that she came for a different reason. Her 21-year-old daughter has cancer, and she can’t find enough work in her country to pay the treatment costs.

“I’m not going to lie — I haven’t been threatened,” Suyapa said. “I’m here to fight for my daughter.”

Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said in San Diego on Tuesday that based on “historic trends, intel and open-source reporting,” officials anticipate that most caravan members will make “frivolous or unsubstantiated claims of asylum.”

Immigration court distinguishes between losing a case because the migrant’s story doesn’t line up with asylum law and making a “frivolous claim,” or purposefully lying in an asylum case. A frivolous claim can get a migrant barred from the U.S. for life.

Gilbert Saucedo, a Los Angeles-based attorney who volunteered with the National Lawyers Guild to give legal orientations at the sports complex, estimated that about 70 percent of those he talked to had stories that should pass credible fear interviews, the first major step towards asylum after migrants make it in the door.

“Some of them were marginal. Some of them were very strong, and there were a few that I just had to tell them your application would probably be rejected, so you may want to reconsider,” Saucedo said.

He worried that those with asylum-worthy stories might not have enough documentary evidence to prove their claims in court. Most don’t know how the system works or know that they need to bring evidence with them, he said. Some who did bring evidence lost it or had it stolen along the way.

China, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras were the top countries for asylum grants in fiscal 2017, according to data from the Executive Office for Immigration Review. The Northern Triangle countries accounted for about 30 percent of those who won their cases.

Delma hoped that her story of extortion and persecution in Honduras would be enough when her turn came.

“People say taking a number means certain deportation, but I’m trusting God, and I got my number,” Delma said. “If I have to go back, honestly, I will be very afraid.”

Winning a case can be difficult for any asylum seeker, especially those who don’t have lawyers. To win, applicants must show how their stories line up with the legal definition for asylum, that they have been persecuted or have a well-founded fear that they will be persecuted because of their race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership in a social group.

They must also show that either their country’s government is persecuting them or that the government is unwilling or unable to protect them. In this part of asylum law, the stories that come out of Central America often fall into a gray area because many are fleeing gangs extorting them or threatening to kill them.

Former Attorney General Jeff Sessions said that “private violence” such as domestic violence or gang violence should not count for asylum and made changes to case law since the last caravan arrived to make it harder for those kinds of claims to win in court.

“It was definitely a directed attack at the Central American population,” said San Diego immigration attorney Tammy Lin.

President Donald Trump also recently tried to block those who cross the border illegally from claiming asylum. His proclamation was quickly challenged in court, and a judge preliminarily blocked its implementation. Under immigration law, a person is allowed to ask for asylum no matter how they entered the U.S.

Lin worried that the Trump administration would implement more changes to the system before migrants from the caravan made it to the front of the line in Tijuana to be processed that could further hinder their cases’ chances of success.

News reports emerged over the weekend that the incoming Mexican government is in talks with U.S. officials to allow asylum seekers to stay in Mexico while they await a decision from U.S. courts. Trump has been pushing to end the current policy of letting applicants to stay in U.S. until their cases are resolved.