Do You Believe Me Now? Why Sexual Assault Allegations Come in Waves
Over the last week, the story behind Harvey Weinstein's long reported history of sexual assault and harassment has unfurled like a soiled red carpet. After the New York Times published an explosive report on the subject, woman after woman has made public, disturbing allegations of sexual harassment and assault by the famous, powerful, and notoriously nasty producer. Each new sickening tale opens the door for more women to share their own. In such cases, people may wonder, Why now? Why, when these stories date back years, did the women not say anything until someone else did? The answer is inherent in the question itself—often it takes one loud voice to make it possible for others to speak up.

If this sounds familiar, it's because it is. In a world full of rampant misogyny , coming forward about having been sexually harassed or assaulted is often a harrowing prospect. Victims face intimidation, having to relive traumatic experiences, the unlikelihood of justice, and ridicule from the public, who may call them liars or gold diggers or worse. The result is that many survivors would rather keep silent.

But when one woman shares her story about an abusive man—especially when that man is in a position of power—it often breaks the dam, allowing others the accused has preyed upon to feel safer coming forward. These women are not riding a wave for 15 minutes of fame; they are emboldened and empowered by the examples of other victims. They see that they are not alone. They hope people will believe them. They are finding strength and safety in numbers.

"When one woman breaks the silence, others are empowered to tell their [stories]," Sonia Ossorio, president of the National Organization for Women–New York , an advocacy organization defending reproductive rights, fighting economic inequality, and aiming to end discrimination and violence against women and girls, tells SELF. "Together those stories paint the full picture and create an environment where victims are more likely to be believed."

Many of the women saying Weinstein assaulted or harassed them were too scared to share their stories publicly—until now.

The New York Times ' October 5 exposé claimed that Weinstein has systematically sexually harassed and assaulted women for decades and paid many of them to keep silent. Since these first allegations broke, numerous other women have come forward saying that Weinstein harassed, assaulted, or raped them—and they had been too scared to say anything until now. Further coverage alleges that Weinstein's behavior was an "open secret" in Hollywood, and that previous stories about Weinstein's behavior may have been buried by powerful celebrities and politicians.

So far, at least 27 women have gone on the record about alleged harassment or assault from Weinstein, and many more have spoken out anonymously. Ashley Judd, who went on record for the Times , claimed that Weinstein invited her to have breakfast with him at a hotel. When she arrived, she said, he called her up to his suite and asked her for a massage, a shoulder rub, and to watch him shower. “I said no, a lot of ways, a lot of times, and he always came back at me with some new ask,” she said. “It was all this bargaining, this coercive bargaining.”

Since that story broke, other big names in Hollywood have revealed their own stories. Earlier this week, both Gwyneth Paltrow and Angelina Jolie shared that they, too, had been harassed by Weinstein. Jolie told the Times in an email , “I had a bad experience with Harvey Weinstein in my youth, and as a result, chose never to work with him again and warn others when they did. This behavior towards women in any field, any country is unacceptable.” Paltrow says Weinstein invited her to a business meeting that turned out to be in his hotel suite, where he tried to massage her and invited her into his bedroom.

Other stories, detailed in the Times and in a separate investigative story in the New Yorker , include harrowing allegations of physical and psychological intimidation, assault, and rape.

People who report being assaulted face intense scrutiny, public disbelief, and attacks on their character. Critics have used the fact that many of Weinstein's accusers say he harassed them years or even decades ago to argue that the assaults did not happen or "weren't that bad." Along with a barrage of your typical Twitter trolls, fashion designer Donna Karan insinuated that women may be "asking for it" based on how they dress. (She has since apologized and claimed her comments were "misinterpreted.") Director Oliver Stone at first casted doubt on Weinstein's accusers, saying he would not "comment on gossip" and that Weinstein "shouldn't be condemned by a vigilante system." As the allegations mounted, he recanted, saying , "I’ve been traveling for the last couple of days and wasn’t aware of all the women who came out to support the original story in the New York Times . After looking at what has been reported in many publications over the last couple of days, I’m appalled and commend the courage of the women who’ve stepped forward to report sexual abuse or rape."

"A major reason why survivors don’t speak up is that they are afraid nothing will be done or they won’t be believed. Too often they’re met with questions that immediately place the doubt on them," Ossorio says. "As a society, we need to stop offering up doubt as the first response and start with believing."

Many of Weinstein's accusers report feeling isolated, scared that no one would believe them, and worried that coming forward would torpedo their careers. For victims afraid to come forward, knowing someone else has broken the silence before you step into such a harsh and unforgiving spotlight is invaluable.

In the last few years alone, we have seen numerous examples of women coming forward en masse against an alleged harasser.

"We can see that there is a shift underway in public attitudes toward sexual assault and sexual harassment," Ossorio says. "We hope this is a turning point and one that sends a message to powerful men that they can no longer get away with sexual harassment." As she notes, the Weinstein allegations are just the latest example of many women sharing their stories after someone has broken the silence.

After comedian Hannibal Burres called Bill Cosby a rapist on stage in October 2014, scores of women came out accusing Cosby of sexual assault, drug-facilitated sexual assault, and rape. While five women had already spoken openly about Cosby allegedly assaulting them, the majority of his accusers came forward between November 2014 and August 2015, sometimes sharing their stories at the same press conferences.

At least 15 women have accused President Donald Trump of sexual assault, reporting incidents between the 1980s and 2013. These accusations were covered extensively in the media in October 2016, after a tape emerged in which Trump claimed you can "grab" women "by the pussy" as long as "you're a star." Trump was elected president of the United States one month later.

It doesn't even have to be against the same man; when Taylor Swift bravely testified against a DJ who groped her in 2013, calls to the Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network's hotline increased by 35 percent in just a few days. Reports of discrimination and sexual harassment in Silicon Valley have been emerging on a semi-regular basis since Ellen Pao filed a gender discrimination suit against her former employer Kleiner Perkins in 2012.

Whenever these kinds of stories come out, people question the women who have made accusations, claiming that they have invented these stories in order to get attention, money, or revenge. It's hard to argue as eerily similar accounts of harassment and assault emerge—and yet it happens anyway.

In a case like Weinstein's, there is clearly comfort in knowing you're not alone.

Regardless of what everyone else says, the women coming forward know for sure that Weinstein's other accusers will believe them—and that can mean everything.

It's completely understandable that these women feared the thought of standing up alone to a seemingly indestructible member of the Hollywood elite. And that it's only now, when so many others are speaking about their experiences, that they feel safe sharing their stories—and daring to hope that justice might be served (or at least future victims spared).

“There are more people willing to come forward now,” Anita Hill, an attorney and civil rights advocate who accused Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment, told Variety in an article about the Weinstein allegations. “There’s obviously strength in numbers.”

If you or someone you know has been sexually assaulted, you can call the National Sexual Assault Hotline at 800-656-HOPE (4673). More resources are available online from the National Sexual Violence Resource Center .

Related:

You may also like: This Former Prison Will Soon Be a Hub for Women's Rights Organizations