When should police be allowed to shoot? Fight returns to California Capitol
SACRAMENTO — A fight over when police officers should be allowed to open fire on suspects has returned to the state Capitol after negotiations between civil liberties advocates and law enforcement groups hit an impasse.

Despite months of discussions led by state Senate President Pro Tem Toni Atkins, D-San Diego, intended to produce compromise legislation, the two sides announced competing bills this week. One, backed by police, emphasizes more training. The other raises the legal standard for deadly use of force, making it easier to prosecute officers.

That measure is nearly identical to a proposal that Atkins shelved at the end of the last legislative session. Assemblywoman Shirley Weber, D-San Diego, and the American Civil Liberties Union had sought to raise the standard, established by a 1989 U.S. Supreme Court decision, that the use of lethal force is justified if an “objectively reasonable” officer in similar circumstances would have acted the same way.

Their bill would have tightened that standard to make the use of lethal force legal only in “necessary” circumstances — when an officer or a bystander is facing an imminent threat of serious injury or death and police have no reasonable alternatives, such as a verbal warning. It was introduced amid public outrage over the death of Stephon Clark, who was unarmed when police fatally shot him in the backyard of his grandmother’s Sacramento home in March.

Law enforcement organizations argued that the change would make it more dangerous for police to do their jobs by causing them to second-guess their actions. They lobbied aggressively to keep the bill from even getting a floor vote.

The new version introduced Wednesday by Weber, AB392, specifies that officers could plead self-defense for killing a civilian, but says courts could also consider whether an officer’s actions contributed to the need to use deadly force.

“California is known to be on the cutting edge of change and that which is good, yet our law enforcement policies are old, outdated and deadly,” Weber said.

She said she ran out of time last year to get her bill through the Legislature, but was returning in a stronger position because of new support from some labor unions. Even without reaching common ground with law enforcement, Weber said, “we realized that we had to move forward.”

After finding themselves on the defensive last session, police groups tried to get ahead of the announcement by unveiling legislation Tuesday that focuses on creating use-of-force protocols for departments across the state.

The bill would direct the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training to develop minimum guidelines for using de-escalation techniques and requiring law enforcement to report excessive force by colleagues.

“The key is focusing on training, so that when an officer is faced with a life-or-death situation, you revert to what you know,” said David Mastagni, an attorney for the Peace Officers’ Research Association of California. “What we’re all looking for, and where there’s common ground, is we all want to make sure there’s fewer deaths.”

Atkins said in a statement that she would continue to engage “to find common ground” between the two measures.

“As part of our discussions, I have asked both sides to acknowledge two key principles,” Atkins said, “that peace officers make incredibly difficult decisions in rapidly evolving situations and deserve our protection” and “that we have a problem with disproportionate police use of force.”

The sticking point will be what kind of accountability officers face. Police killed 172 civilians in California last year, according to state Department of Justice statistics, but few of those cases were prosecuted.

Law enforcement said their bill addresses that concern by giving departments the ability to discipline or fire officers who break their guidelines. That was not enough for supporters of Weber’s bill at a news conference Wednesday.

“Let’s have a fair, objective, unbiased conversation about the disproportionate rates at which people of color are being murdered at their hands. Step up to the plate, law enforcement, and let’s have a dialogue about what’s just and right in our society,” said state Sen. Holly Mitchell, D-Los Angeles.

Cephus “Uncle Bobby X” Johnson said more training means nothing if state law provides no way of holding officers accountable when they disregard that training. Johnson’s nephew Oscar Grant was shot and killed on New Year’s Day 2009 by a BART police officer at Fruitvale Station in Oakland.

“The power of police officers to use deadly force is perhaps the most important, significant responsibility that we give to any public officials,” Johnson said. “The loss of Oscar and the pain we suffered from that loss, I don’t wish that on anyone.”

Alexei Koseff is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: alexei.koseff@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @akoseff