Arrest in attempted Starbucks poisoning









Photo: San Jose Police Department, Courtesy Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Ramineh Behbehanian, 50, was arrested Monday, April 29, 2013 for allegedly trying to sneak bottles of orange juice tainted with rubbing alcohol into a display case at a Starbucks coffee shop in San Jose, police said. less Ramineh Behbehanian, 50, was arrested Monday, April 29, 2013 for allegedly trying to sneak bottles of orange juice tainted with rubbing alcohol into a display case at a Starbucks coffee shop in San Jose, police ... more Photo: San Jose Police Department, Courtesy Image 2 of 3 Starbucks on 6000 block of Snell Ave. in San Jose, CA Starbucks on 6000 block of Snell Ave. in San Jose, CA Photo: Google Maps Image 3 of 3 Ramineh Behbehanian, 50, was arrested at her home. Ramineh Behbehanian, 50, was arrested at her home. Photo: Associated Press Arrest in attempted Starbucks poisoning 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

(04-30) 20:19 PDT SAN JOSE -- A trained chemist put a "lethal quantity" of rubbing alcohol in orange juice bottles that she tried to sneak into a display case at a Starbucks coffee shop in San Jose, police said Tuesday.

Ramineh Behbehanian, 50, was being held without bail at Santa Clara County Jail on suspicion of attempted murder and poisoning.

According to her Linkedin profile, she has a master's degree in physical chemistry and chemical engineering from Lehigh University in Pennsylvania and works at a pharmaceutical subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson.

The profile said Behbehanian had more than 15 years of experience in the pharmaceutical, diagnostic and medical device industries and had expertise in "drug delivery and controlled release technologies," among other things.

Behbehanian walked into the coffee shop on the 6000 block of Snell Avenue about 3:45 p.m. Monday and was seen by a customer swapping two plastic bottles of Evolution Fresh orange juice from the refrigerated display case with two bottles she was carrying in a Starbucks bag, said police Sgt. Jason Dwyer and a company official.

Latest news videos

"Apparently she was trying to appear as a customer," Dwyer said. Carrying a Starbucks bag, he added, "tells me that she had planned this out. A Starbucks bag inside of a Starbucks shop is not going to stand out."

After placing the bottles on the shelf, Behbehanian got into line as if she was going to get coffee, police said. When the "heads-up" customer brought her actions to employees' attention, however, she fled, Dwyer said.

Workers examined the bottles and noticed a "toxic smell to them," Dwyer said.

San Jose firefighters who responded determined the bottles contained a mixture of orange juice and isopropyl alcohol, or rubbing alcohol, police said.

"According to the fire captain on scene, the quantity of rubbing alcohol inside the bottles was a lethal quantity," Dwyer said.

No one drank the juice, authorities said.

Officers tracked down Behbehanian at 8:30 p.m. at her home several miles away on Chambertin Drive in San Jose with the help of a Starbucks employee who had jotted down her license plate number.

Police said they believe Behbehanian acted alone but that her motive was unclear. Investigators do not believe she tried to plant poisoned products in other coffee shops, Dwyer said.

The store, located across the street from Santa Teresa High School, closed for the day and destroyed all the juices on the shelf "out of an abundance of caution," said Starbucks spokesman Zack Hutson. Other Starbucks shops in San Jose were told to check their bottles for signs of tampering, he said.

Hutson said the company was "immensely grateful to the vigilant customer who did the right thing."

Behbehanian has no criminal history, Dwyer said. She lives alone and keeps to herself, said a neighbor who not want her name used because she feared retribution.