040207 aastycstory

Austin American-Statesman (Texas)

April 2, 2007 Monday

Correction Appended

Final Edition

Laws complicate pursuit of youth agency charges

BYLINE: Laylan Copelin AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2224 words

Despite being touted as the state's top lawyer, Attorney General Greg Abbott must negotiate a patchwork of overlapping jurisdictions with local prosecutors before he can investigate and prosecute crimes.

In local criminal cases involving fraud in insurance, Medicaid or elections, the attorney general can usually find a way to involve himself, one way or another. His staff, using a provision in the penal code dealing with computer crimes, can even initiate investigations into the solicitation of sex from minors on the Internet.

However, charges of sexual molestation and a cover-up at a state facility, the kind of lurid allegations that have rocked the Texas Youth Commission, are off-limits until a local prosecutor requests assistance in writing.

For 11 months after learning that a Texas Ranger had filed his case about the abuse charges with a West Texas prosecutor, Abbott's staffers waited for that prosecutor, Ward County District Attorney Randall Reynolds, to write for help. They waited despite an e-mail from the Ranger saying Reynolds was a "very weak prosecutor" who might not prosecute his year-old investigation before the deadline for prosecution expired. They waited despite phone calls months later from a lawmaker and the governor's office inquiring whether Reynolds ever requested assistance. Abbott and the agency's senior staffers didn't learn of the problems at the Texas Youth Commission until two months ago.

Eric Nichols, deputy attorney general for criminal justice, said the state office followed the letter of the law. In hindsight, the Legislature is considering changing that law, although prosecutors, elected locally, are warning against a statewide prosecutor eroding the state's traditional reliance on locally based prosecutions.

With a few exceptions, state law says the attorney general can help prosecute a criminal case only if the local prosecutor requests help.

It's that law that confused and angered some members of the House Corrections Committee who questioned Nichols last week about whether Abbott's office should have done more: Even if he couldn't initiate prosecution, couldn't he have picked up the phone and called Reynolds, or even the governor, the state's chief executive officer?

"Did you read the Ranger's report? If you had read it, wouldn't you have called the district attorney?" asked Rep. Jim McReynolds, D-Lufkin. "Does the attorney general respond to everything like that?"

After the fact

In an interview after the hearing, Nichols defended the attorney general's actions between the Ranger's initial plea for help in February 2006 and the first request for assistance from the Ward district attorney 11 months later.

"It's an issue of jurisdiction," Nichols said. "It was clear by that (Ranger) communication that the local prosecutor had exclusive jurisdiction over that matter."

The Ranger's e-mail indicates the case had already been filed with the Ward County district attorney.

"In short, I had to file it with the local DA that I didn't want to in the beginning," the Ranger's e-mail to the attorney general said. "He hasn't done anything with it and I am losing hope that he will. . . . I would like you to view this report and tell me what you think."

In addition to statements by youths who said they were molested, the Ranger's report included statements from employees who said commission leaders had done nothing about their complaints of suspicious behavior.

Nichols said the attorney general's hands were tied.

"For the attorney general, at that point, to interfere with the criminal justice process in Ward County, would - by all accounts - be improper," Nichols said.

Besides, Nichols said, the assistant attorneys general who knew about the case - and only a couple did during those 11 months - assumed the local prosecutor was doing his job.

Nichols said there were no red flags raised by the Ranger's e-mail or by calls from lawmakers and the governor's office eight and 10 months later, wondering whether the local prosecutor had finally sought help.

"Do you automatically draw the conclusion that nothing is going to happen?" Nichols asked.

Not every committee member was satisfied.

"If you don't have legal authority, you don't just let it lay," said Rep. Jim Dunnam, D-Waco, who is a lawyer.

As soon as the Ward County district attorney wrote asking for assistance, Nichols said, "I jumped right on it."

Rob Kepple with the Texas District and County Attorneys Association says he agreed - up to a point.

"No one appreciated that the case was going to fall through the cracks," Kepple said of the state's lawyers. "If they had thought for a moment the Ranger didn't get help, they'd have made those calls" to the prosecutor or other officials.

But Kepple said there is nothing in law to prevent the attorney general from calling the local prosecutor and offering his assistance, a point Nichols seemed to confirm under questioning by the House Corrections Committee.

Tracing a prosecutor

It might not have mattered whether someone in the attorney general's office called Reynolds to offer help.

According to testimony by the investigating Ranger, Sgt. Brian Burzynski, to state lawmakers, Burzynski said Reynolds continually assured him that he would prosecute the case. With nothing happening, Burzynski said he gave Reynolds the attorney general's instruction on how to request help. He also said he talked to a neighboring district attorney and the county attorney for Ward County about taking over the case.

Reynolds wouldn't surrender jurisdiction but, according to Burzynski, he didn't move toward prosecution.

Reynolds has said little in his defense except to blame politics or a "breakdown in communications." He is the district attorney for three remote, sparsely populated counties - Reeves, Ward and Loving - and maintains a private law practice.

The Associated Press quoted two sheriffs in Reynolds' jurisdiction, Reeves County Sheriff Arnulfo Gomez and Ward County Sheriff Mikel Strickland, complaining about Reynolds' lack of attention to their cases.

Reynolds, who denied the AP report, did not return a call Thursday seeking comment.

Last week, some of the House Corrections Committee members remained perplexed that the attorney general didn't react differently.

Nichols said that being the state's top lawyer is sometimes more perception than reality.

Under the constitution, the attorney general is part of the executive, not the judicial, branch of government.

His primary job is representing the state in civil matters.

Past attorneys general, however, busily created the image of being crime fighters on the campaign trail - from Mark White slamming cell doors on TV ads more than 25 years ago to Abbott showing film clips of his employees arresting accused child molesters who were surfing the Internet for victims.

The Legislature has allowed the attorney general some leeway - hiring peace officers and lawyers with backgrounds in criminal prosecution to assist local prosecutors when called upon.

No one has suggested changing the state constitution, which gives the authority to prosecute criminal cases to county and district attorneys, a nod to past Texans' distrust of centralized government.

But the Legislature is considering changing the state law on how and when an attorney general can get involved in a local criminal matter, a prospect that has some prosecutors on the defensive.

State law allows prosecutors to request assistance from the attorney general but is silent about the attorney general offering assistance.

Nichols suggested allowing the state's top lawyer to make the offer - without waiting for a written request from a local prosecutor.

"It would not intrude upon local prosecutors," he said. "It would provide a system of checks and balances."

Kepple doesn't see that as necessary.

"Whether we need a law to say the attorney general can pick up the phone and call," Kepple said, "my members are not impressed with that. I think people can make a courtesy phone call now."

What to change

The Senate is taking a slightly different approach, passing a bill that would give the attorney general, with the consent of the local district attorney, concurrent jurisdiction to prosecute when someone in a state agency misuses state resources or is suspected of abusing someone in custody.

Kepple said the attorney general cannot be the long-term answer because there are 400,000 criminal cases filed in Texas annually.

Expanding the attorney general's authority, he said, is a "knee-jerk reaction" because "people in Austin want someone to blame."

The answer, Kepple said, is making the 155 district felony prosecutors more accountable to Austin.

He said prosecutors are working with Rep. Jerry Madden, chairman of the House Corrections Committee, on creating another Office of Special Prosecution. That office, which was created to respond to allegations of abuse in the adult prisons, is overseen by locally elected prosecutors who have prisons in their counties.

Kepple is suggesting something similar for youth commission facilities.

The problem, he said, is that those special offices, created to respond to a crisis, don't anticipate the next crisis - for example, allegations of abuse in other state-run facilities or hospitals.

lcopelin@statesman.com

(BOX)

Attorney general's authority

The state constitution gives locally elected prosecutors the authority to prosecute criminal matters.

The Government Code, however, says: 'A prosecuting attorney may request the assistance of the attorney general in the prosecution of all manner of criminal cases or in performing any duty imposed by law on the prosecuting attorney. In requesting such assistance, a prosecuting attorney may appoint any assistant attorney general as an assistant prosecuting attorney.'

EXCEPTIONS:

Election, Labor, and Health and Safety codes: Attorney general may prosecute a crime defined under the first two codes and the unwarranted commitment of a person to a mental health facility under the third.

Insurance fraud: Attorney general may offer assistance to a local prosecutor.

Medicaid fraud, theft, tampering with a government document: Attorney general has concurrent jurisdiction with the local prosecutor, but the local prosecutor must give his consent.

Penal code: Attorney general may offer assistance to local prosecutors in computer or telecommunication crimes and money laundering.

Source: Office of the attorney general

(BOX)

The path to prosecution of the Texas Youth Commission allegations

Feb. 23, 2005: Texas Ranger Brian Burzynski receives a report that an administrator at the West Texas State School, a Texas Youth Commission facility near Pecos, was sexually abusing youths in custody. He begins an investigation that later expands to include a second administrator.

March 9, 2005: Youth Commission informs staff members of several lawmakers and Gov. Rick Perry of the investigation.

March 15, 2005: Dwight Harris, the commission's executive director, tells the Senate Criminal Justice Committee that there is an investigation into sexual contact between staff and youth at the West Texas State School.

April 15, 2005: Ranger e-mails report on investigation to Ward County District Attorney Randall Reynolds and later to the commission, which had checked similar complaints and found nothing.

July 28, 2005: U.S. attorney's office declines to accept the case because it could pursue only misdemeanor charges. Federal lawyers suggest state laws are tougher in cases without bodily injury.

January 2006: Burzynski testifies that Reynolds had promised to present the case to a January grand jury but never did.

Feb. 21, 2006: Burzynski e-mails state Assistant Attorney General Will Tatum, whom he knows from another case, and sends his investigative report on allegations that state employees are molesting children in custody. Burzynski seeks help from the attorney general's in getting the case prosecuted.

Feb. 23, 2006: After checking with his supervisor, Tatum responds that the attorney general cannot get involved unless the Ward County district attorney seeks help in writing. He sends the Ranger the name and address of his supervisor, Adrien McFarland, for the Ranger to give to Reynolds.

Oct. 30, 2006: Rep. Jerry McFadden, the chairman of House Corrections Committee, calls the office of attorney general to see whether Reynolds ever asked the attorney general for help. McFarland responds that Reynolds hasn't sought help.

Dec. 15, 2006: Alfonso Royal, a budget and policy analyst with Gov. Rick Perry, makes a similar inquiry and gets the same response.

Jan. 17: McFarland informs Eric Nichols, deputy attorney general for criminal justice, that Reynolds has requested help prosecuting the case.

Jan. 18: Nichols orders that the attorney general's criminal justice division confirm that it will assist Reynolds.

Jan. 22: Attorney General Greg Abbott first learns of West Texas State School investigation at a meeting of senior staff.

Feb. 13: Burzynski and Reynolds meet attorney general's staff in Austin about the case.

Feb. 18: First news reports about the long-stalled investigation. Gov. Rick Perry says that's when he first learned of the problem.

March 6: Law enforcement officers are dispatched to the agency's 22 facilities to look at records and interview employees and students.

March 9: Abbott announces that a grand jury will begin hearing the case March 19 in Pecos.

CORRECTION-DATE: April 3, 2007

CORRECTION: * A timeline with a Page One story Monday about the Texas Youth Commission and the attorney general's office gave an incorrect name for Rep. Jerry Madden, R-Richardson, chairman of the House Corrections Committee. Madden called the attorney general's office in October to check on the status of an investigation of alleged sex abuse at a Youth Commission facility.