0815 hudpftexas

Emails, Cameron French, press secretary, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, July 29-30, 2015

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 02:05 PM

To: French, Cameron R

Cc: Saacks, Bradley (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Seeking factual backup of claim by Secretary Castro

Good afternoon.

Secretary Castro said this week that less than half of the poorest American households have a home internet subscription. We saw the statement in his speech Monday, posted here.

Can you provide the factual basis for this claim? We are trying to check it.

I am copying in our reporter, Bradley Saacks, who is researching this issue.

We’d like this information today.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: French, Cameron R

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 2:10 PM

Subject: Re: Seeking factual backup of claim by Secretary Castro

Hello - the stat you are researching is from a White House fact sheet: https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/07/15/fact-sheet-connecthome-coming-together-ensure-digital-opportunity-all

...

I've pasted the relevant section of the fact sheet below:

Despite this progress, a new analysis released <http://go.wh.gov/es37iR> today by the President’s Council of Economic Advisers (CEA) illustrates that some Americans are still unable to benefit from high-speed broadband, especially America’s lower-income children <http://go.wh.gov/3JAcDE> . In fact, while nearly two-thirds of households in the lowest-income quintile own a computer, less than half have a home internet subscription. While many middle-class U.S. students go home to Internet access, allowing them to do research, write papers, and communicate digitally with their teachers and other students, too many lower-income children go unplugged every afternoon when school ends. This “homework gap” runs the risk of widening the achievement gap, denying hard-working students the benefit of a technology-enriched education.

Cameron French

U.S Department of Housing and Urban Development

From: Saacks, Bradley

From: Saacks, Bradley (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, July 30, 2015 3:57 PM

To: French, Cameron R

Subject: RE: Seeking factual backup of claim by Secretary Castro

I was exploring the CEA’s analysis and was wondering where it was listed that less than half of the poorest Americans do not have internet access; there are references that seemed to confirm the Secretary’s statement using the Census’s PUMA’s data but they seem very colloquial, and I want to simplify as much as possible for readers.

Any clarification or simplification would be extremely helpful!

From: French, Cameron R

Sent: Thursday, July 30, 2015 4:01:01 PM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada)

To: Saacks, Bradley (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Seeking factual backup of claim by Secretary Castro

The fact below is derived from a tabulation CEA did on the 2013 American Community Survey (ACS). They used ACS data at the household level to calculate the share of households in each quintile of the household income distribution with home internet subscriptions. For the lowest quintile of the distribution, less than 50 percent of households have such a subscription. They then used 2013 data because it is the most recent available version of the ACS, which in 2013 included a set of items on internet use at the household level.

Hope this is helpful.

Cameron