0415 hooveralexanderpftexas

Emails, Hoover Alexander, Austin, April 20-21, 2015

On Mon, Apr 20, 2015 at 5:10 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Hello; thanks for the call-back.

I’ve been checking a claim by Austin City Council Member Pio Renteria that 15 years ago, you couldn’t get a pizza delivered in the neighborhood bounded by I-35, the lake, Pleasant Valley Road and East Seventh Street. Any insights on this? Research guidance?

Thanks.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: On Behalf Of Hoover Alexander

Sent: Monday, April 20, 2015 7:03 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Re: Reporter working on a fact check

Hey Gardner,

Sadly, that probably is correct. I can tell you personally, I moved into my house on Comal in 1991, near 12th St, just a few blocks from Disch Falk Field. And yes, No pizza delivery for my neighborhood for sure until '00 - '05. I would call in to one of the ones near MLK & Guadalupe, and drive 5 min to pick up. Growing up, It was understood that there was no delivery east of IH 35.

…

Hoover

On Tue, Apr 21, 2015 at 9:49 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Tell more?

Where did you grow up? If you don’t mind, how old are you now?

Our focus for this fact check has been on the neighborhoods bounded by I-35, East Seventh, Pleasant Valley Road and the river. Do you have personal experience or other insight on whether you couldn’t get a pizza delivered in that area about 15 years ago?

Thanks!

g.

10:33 a.m.

I am a native Austinite, grew up in East Austin, 60 yrs old. My elementary school was Our Lady of Guadalupe next to State Cemetery. 1st through 8th grade actually, and then Martin Jr. High for 9th grade. I grew up in neighborhoods near E.12th, but my extended neighborhood went to the river, into the Mexican American area. My personal experience about no deliveries was beyond the specific E. 7th St line you're asking about, but the collective black & brown neighbors east of IH 35, from the river to Manor Rd, knew we were in the "no delivery zone" that stemmed from the belief that East Austin was unsafe & crime ridden, and there was a fear of drivers getting robbed. Rightly or wrongly, the perception became the reality of no deliveries. My personal experience was no deliveries between 12th St. & MLK, east of the Interstate, and that does dovetail into the same 15 yrs ago timeline.

Hope this helps.

Hoover