0617 tasbpftexas

Email, Dominic Giarratani, assistant director, Governmental Relations, Texas Association of School Boards, June 15, 2017

4:45 p.m.

I think the LBB pointed you in the right direction. But it is just one view. They use the GR numbers to determine state funds. General Revenue is often a fair to look at it because of its discretionary use nature.

However, a more expansive view of state funds might be all funds that are not federal funds.

After all what is dedicated can be undedicated and turned into GR. In fact, most sessions have a fund dedication/undedication bill for just such purpose. Additionally, the “other funds” category are funds created by the legislature and then in many cases its uses are fixed in the constitution, but not in all cases as the rainy day fund is considered an “other fund” and they could use that for whatever they wanted.. Again it’s a little mushy about what sort of discretionary uses can be done with these funds but if you take the state highway fund and its past uses, the legislature has found a way to appropriate that to DPS and even the criminal justice system. The two largest sources of other funds are the property tax relief fund, and appropriated receipts which I understand to be largely but not entirely “recapture”. The budget contains significant amounts ($8.5 billion biennially) from both sources and a smidgeon from the rainy day fund when looking at pub ed.. If those are taken into account.

From page 3, ALL Funds budget is $216,757.9 minus federal funds budget (page 7) of $71,858.8, gives you a state funds budget of $144,899.1

From page 3, All funds budget for education is $80,433.0, minus federal fund budget (page 7) of $10,767.2 gives you a state funds budget of $69,665.8

That indicates to me that state sources of funds are 69,665.8/144,899.1 = 48.1 percent of the state funds budget.

Looking at GR only is a reasonable way to view it, but a more expansive view of what was possible including using rainy day funds or doing things that would reduce recapture, I think is “more true” about legislative effort.

Please feel free to share my thoughts with others to fact check my thinking.

Sincerely,

Dominic Giarratani

Assistant Director

Governmental Relations

Texas Association of School Boards