0815 bredpftexas

Emails, Candice Bredbenner, associate professor of history, University of North Carolina, Wilmington, Aug. 31-Sept. 2, 2015

2:06 p.m.

As it turns out I can answer the narrow question about transfer of citizenship through an American mother pretty quickly. Unfortunately, Cruz was wrong. It was not until 1934 that American women living abroad and married to non-citizens (Cruz’s situation) could transfer their citizenship to their children born outside the jurisdiction of the US. The relevant statute granting women (and their children) this right was the Act of May 24, 1934, 48 Stat. 797. Even then, that law required that the child born abroad live in the US before his/her 18th birthday to be able to claim US citizenship.

Although not directly relevant to Cruz’s comment, you might be interested to know that unmarried fathers still face discrimination in this regard. See a fairly recent US Supreme Court case, Flores-Villar v. US (2010).

Hope this helps. Candice Bredbenner

9:03 a.m.

Sept. 1, 2015

My book, A Nationality of Her Own. Women, Marriage, and the Law of Citizenship can give you more historical context for the policies. But, here’s what I hope is a useful summary:

Early nationality laws did not explicitly deny or grant women power to transfer their citizenship to their children (Act of January 29, 1795, Act of April 14, 1802). However, the Naturalization Act of 1855 eliminated this ambiguity by specifying that only fathers had that right (Act of Feb. 10, 1855). In general, the government became increasingly concerned about having to protect citizens living abroad who had never lived in the US, so that was one of the factors driving this policy development. Also, although coverture doctrine was beginning to erode, the law gave American men almost exclusive control over the citizenship of their minor children and wives. The same 1855 law, for example, declared that noncitizen women who married American men automatically became U. S. citizens. This policy remained in place until 1922. I should also note here that in 1907, American women who married aliens lost their U. S. citizenship. Again, that policy was retracted for some women in 1922. Women’s rights groups organized to fight for independent citizenship for women and were also behind the campaign to give citizen women the power to transfer their citizenship to their children (just sanguinis). As I mentioned early, they were able to accomplish that goal by 1934. But, even then, the government remained wary of allowing people to retain their U. S. citizenship if they did not reside in the US. So, restrictions continue on the ability of naturalized citizens and children born abroad to keep their citizenship if they did not live in, or return to, the U. S. for some specified period of time. So, for example, in the case of the 1934 law that I mentioned earlier, the rule was that a child born abroad to a citizen mother or father would be recognized at birth as a U. S. citizen. BUT, “the rights of citizenship shall not descend to any such child unless the citizen father or citizen mother…has resided in the United States previous to the birth of such child.” And if one of the parents was not a U. S. citizen, then “the right of citizenship shall not descend unless the child comes to the United States and resides therein for at least five years continuously immediately previous to his eighteenth birthday, and unless, within six months after the child’s twenty-first birthday, he or she shall take an oath of allegiance to the United States of America as prescribed by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.”

That rule was amended by the National Law of 1940, which required that children born abroad “in order to retain such citizenship…must reside in the United States or its outlying possessions for a period or periods totaling five years between the ages of thirteen and twenty-one years….” The current policy is explained here: http://www.uscis.gov/us-citizenship/citizenship-through-parents.

This is probably more information than you really need or want, but the point I wanted to illustrate here is that the policies on granting citizenship at birth to children born abroad to a married citizen mother have undergone considerable change over time. So, Cruz’s assumption that, since the country’s founding, the federal government has recognized a mother’s right to transfer her U. S. citizenship to a child cannot be supported by the evidence.

Best, Candice

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, September 01, 2015 5:11 PM

To: Bredbenner, Candice

It’s quite a topic, turns out.

This afternoon, I had the pleasure of finding your book , “A Nationality of Her Own…,” and it had a passage on p. 84 about Congress in 1920 and an unsuccessful proposal by Kansas Rep. Daniel R. Anthony giving American mothers the ability to transfer citizenship to their children born abroad. One way of reading this section is that it implies there was nothing in law up to then awarding citizenship to a minor born abroad to an American-citizen mother. Is that a solid reading on my part or am I misreading?

In this section, you wrote, “A family’s shared nationality, like its common surname, was more a tribute to paternal authority than to family unity, and patriarchal notions about familial headship deterred the adoption of this reform (referring to Anthony’s proposal?) in the United States.”

g.

7:07 a.m.

Sept. 2, 2015

Yes, this stuff quickly gets pretty complicated. So, to be fair to Ted Cruz, even the person with some modest interest in this subject could be easily confused. Regarding your reading of the efforts in the interwar period to give married women the ability to transfer their citizenship to their children born abroad—I would not say that that there was “nothing in the law up to then….” because the pre-1855 policy (as we discussed earlier) was ambiguous. After 1855, though, I think it is safe to say that the interpretation of the law was that women did not have that right. And then between 1907 and 1922 the question would not even come up in US agency circles because an American woman who married someone with a different nationality lost her US citizenship. As for my observation about the Anthony and similar later proposals, I would base that conclusion in part on the federal government’s resistance even after the passage of the Cable Act in 1922 to easing the entry into the US of the alien husbands of American women—as had been done for the foreign wives of American men. The other factor at play there was the government’s general inclination to limit the number of men of prime working age coming into the US. They were seen as greater threats to US laborers’ employment than immigrant women. But that is another story…….

Candice