0914 wdavispftexas
SCRIPT FACTS

VO: West Texas. 2005. SUPER: West Texas. 2005 An Investigation By The Texas Rangers Alleged, Between 2003 & 2005, Two Administrators Abused Youths At The West Texas State School. In March 2007, The Houston Chronicle reported, "the Texas Ranger who pursued the case despite a lack of support from local, state and federal authorities, Sgt. Brian Burzynski, will tell jurors what he believed happened inside the tall metal fence of the 52-acre West Texas State School between 2003 and 2005. In his investigative report, Burzynski said TYC staffers, incarcerated youth and log books indicated the two administrators summoned youthful offenders from classrooms and dormitory beds to their offices where they abused them. Burzynski noted in his 2005 report, that one youth reported being abused by one of the men 'so many times' that he 'lost count.'" [The Houston Chronicle, 3/21/07]

VO:Young boys at a state run school are sexually abused. SUPER:"sexually abusing six youths" Houston Chronicle, 4/11/07 Staffers At West Texas State School Were Arrested For "Sexually Abusing Six Youths..." In April 2007, The Houston Chronicle reported on abuse at the West Texas State School. "The suspects, Ray Brookins and John Paul Hernandez, both 41, were indicted on charges of sexually abusing six youths, ages 16-19, who were incarcerated at the West Texas State School in Pyote in 2004 and 2005." [The Houston Chronicle, 4/11/07] 2010: Former Assistant Superintendent At The West Texas State School Was Sentenced To 10 Years In Prison For Sexually Abusing Inmate At The State Facility. In April 2010, The Associated Press reported, "Ray Edward Brookins, a former assistant superintendent at the Texas Youth Commission's West Texas State School, was convicted Thursday of sexually abusing a then-18-year-old inmate in 2004. He was convicted of two counts each of improper sexual activity with a person in custody and having an improper relationship between an educator and student." He was sentenced to 10 years in prison. [AP, 4/24/10] AP: "In All, Authorities Believe At Least 13 Boys Were Sexually Abused." In April 2010, The Associated Press reported, "A former Texas youth prison administrator was found guilty Thursday of sexually abusing a teenage inmate more than five years ago in a case that ignited a statewide scandal over the treatment of young offenders. Ray Edward Brookins was convicted of two counts each of having an improper sexual activity with a person in custody and having an improper relationship between an educator and student...In all, authorities believe at least 13 boys were sexually abused." [AP, 4/23/10]

VO: When a local investigation lags, a Texas Ranger notifies Attorney General Greg Abbot asking him to investigate. February 2006: Texas Ranger Emailed Attorney General's Office With A Detailed Report About Sexual Abuse At State Youth Facility. The Houston Chronicle reported that a "sexual abuse investigation at the West Texas State School that languished from March 2005 until January 2007, despite reports to staff in both the governor's office and the attorney general's office... And an e-mail message indicates that in February 2006, a lawyer with the attorney general's office received a detailed report from the [Texas] Rangers about the West Texas [State School] case but rebuffed the investigating officer's plea for help until the local prosecutor requested assistance." [The Houston Chronicle, 3/30/07] In Email To The OAG Asking For Help, Texas Ranger Said That The Local Prosecutor Was "Very Weak" & Might Not Prosecute The Case Before The Deadline Expired. In April 2007, the Austin American-Statesman reported, regarding the stalled prosecution of administrators accused of molesting inmates at a Texas Youth Commission facility, that a Texas Ranger emailed the Attorney General's office asking for help, saying that that the Ward County District Attorney Randall Reynolds, was a "very weak prosecutor" who might not prosecute the year old-old investigation before the statute of limitations expired. [Austin American-Statesman, 4/02/07]

VO: Abbott does nothing. Eleven months go by... SUPER: E-mail shows Texas AG's office had graphic report on youth prison abuse, but didn't pursue it -Associated Press, 3/10/07; Texas Juvenile Justice Department The Associated Press: "E-mail shows Texas AG's office had graphic report on youth prison abuse, but didn't pursue it"[Headline, AP, 3/10/07] February 21, 2006: Texas Ranger Emailed Attorney General's Office Seeking Help In The Prosecution Of Sexual Abuse At The West Texas State School. According to the Austin American-Statesman, on February 21, 2006, "[Texas Ranger Sgt. Brian] Burzynski e-mails state Assistant Attorney General Will Tatum, whom he knows from another case, and sends his investigative report on allegations that state employees [at the West Texas State School] are molesting children in custody. Burzynski seeks help from the attorney general's in getting the case prosecuted." [Austin American-Statesman, 4/02/07] January 18, 2007: Greg Abbott's Office Gets Involved In The Prosecution Of Staff Members At The West Texas State School. According to the Austin American-Statesman, on January 18, 2007, "[deputy attorney general for criminal justice, Eric] Nichols orders that the attorney general's criminal justice division confirm that it will assist [Ward County District Attorney Randall] Reynolds," regarding the prosecution of staff members at the West Texas State School. [Austin American-Statesman, 4/02/07]

VO: ...sixteen more incidents of abuse and neglect take place. SUPER: E-mail shows Texas AG's office had graphic report on youth prison abuse, but didn't pursue -Associated Press, 3/10/07; Texas Juvenile Justice Department Feb. 21, 2006 - Jan. 18, 2007: There Were 16 Confirmed Incidents Of Abuse, Neglect Or Violations At The West Texas State School. According to records from the Texas Juvenile Justice Department, between February 21, 2006 and January 18, 2007, there were 16 confirmed incidents of abuse or neglect at the West Texas State School - two cases of assault; one incident of excessive force; one incident of staff sexual contact; one inappropriate relationship; five incidents of youth harm to self/other; one incident of contraband; four incidents of unprofessional conduct; one incident of unnecessary use of force. [Records from the Texas Juvenile Justice Department] Feb. 21, 2006 - Jan. 18, 2007: There Were 61 Allegations Of Abuse, Neglect Or Violations At The West Texas State School. According to records from the Texas Juvenile Justice Department, between February 21, 2006 and January 18, 2007, there were 61 allegations of abuse or neglect reported at the West Texas State School - twelve allegations of assault; thirteen allegations of excessive force; five allegations of staff sexual contact; four allegations of an inappropriate relationships; one allegation of endangerment; nineteen allegations of youth harm to self/other; one allegation of contraband; five allegations of unprofessional conduct; one allegation of unnecessary use of force. [Records from the Texas Juvenile Justice Department]

VO: But Abbott didn't pursue the case. SUPER: E-mail shows Texas AG's office had graphic report on youth prison abuse, but didn't pursue it -Associated Press, 3/10/07; Texas Juvenile Justice Department Republican State Senator Criticized Abbott's Office For Not Getting Involved Sooner In Case About Sexual Abuse At State Facility. In March 2007, The Associated Press reported on Abbott's office not taking action in the case about sexual abuse at the West Texas State School despite having a report for nearly a year detailing the abuse, "At a Thursday legislative hearing, Republican state Sen. Chris Harris of Arlington criticized Abbott's office for not getting involved sooner." [AP, 3/10/07] House Corrections Committee Member: "If You Don't Have Legal Authority, You Don't Just Let It Lay." In April 2007, the Austin American-Statesman reported, responding to the Attorney General's office claim that they waited until the local prosecutor requested assistance to get involved in the stalled prosecution of administrators at a Texas Youth Commission facility accused of molesting inmates because they did not have jurisdiction before then, House Corrections Committee member Rep Jim Dunnam (D-Waco) said, "If you don't have legal authority, you don't just let it lay." [Austin American-Statesman, 4/02/07]