0416 hershpftexas

Email (excerpted), Matthew Hersh, lecturer, Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas, April 13, 2016

11 a.m.

First of all, I have to just mention that there is a problem here when this many sexual assaults are occurring. And I strongly disagree with the premise of choosing between safety procedures. It is like choosing between locking the doors or locking the windows to your house to prevent a burglary. You should lock them both and here in Austin, we should do everything we can to decrease sexual assaults.

In terms of Councilmember Troxclair’s statement, that is one of the worst misrepresentation of statistics I have ever seen.

First of all, in comparing the number of assaults in TNCs to taxis, Councilmember Troxclair cites data including all of 2014 even though TNCs only started operating halfway through 2014 (from “Uber says drunk-driving crashes down in Austin since advent of ride-sharing services” Politfact).

She also claims that there are 15,000 TNC drivers but many TNC drivers only work as a TNC driver for a very short period of time. There has never been a point where there were 15,000 people working as TNC drivers at the same time.

My 7-year-old son plays flag football. The statement that there are 15,000 TNC drivers would be comparable to my saying my son scored a touchdown against 15 people on defense based on the fact that 15 people had at some point played defense even though only 5 were playing when he scored. (Though I have no doubt he would however be able to score a touchdown against 15 people.)

Another serious issue in the statement is the fact that unlike taxi drivers who work much closer to full time (40 hours a week), TNC drivers only work as drivers part time. So looking at the number of assaults over the number of drivers to compare the probability of an assault is completely flawed.

Going back to a football example, suppose we have two teams. On team A, they have one quarterback who plays the whole game and throws one interception a game on average. On team B, they have four quarterbacks who each play for one quarter and they throw as a whole 3 interceptions per game on average. Based on Councilmember Troxclair’s reasoning, there is a higher probability of getting an interception from team A (1/1) than team B (3/4). However, it is much more likely team B will throw an interception. Team A throws an interception at an average rate of 1 for every 48 minutes and team B throws interceptions at an average rate of 3 for every 48 minutes.

In order to really compare the probability, what one needs to know is when someone steps into a taxi or TNC, what is the probability of an assault. That probability is far more complicated than simply the number of assaults divided by the number of drivers. What needs to be looked at is the number of assaults divided by total hours driven. Or the number of assaults divided by trips.

The TNCs have not shared this data so a thorough analysis cannot be provided and there really is no justification for Councilmember Troxclair’s statement. However, I have been able to find some estimated data that a basic comparison can be conducted on. This data was put together by Julio Gonzalez Altamirano and can be found on his blog keepaustinwonky.com. ...

I want to stress, that although these numbers seem small, about 90% of assaults go unreported. That would not change the comparison but I want to stress that this should in no way be used to indicate there is not a problem. 20 assaults in a year in TNCs is a problem just as 5 assaults in a year in taxis is a problem. Also, these are not actual data provided by TNC companies. They have not shared their data with the city. But it is clear that the statement provided by Councilmember Troxclair not only has no basis but is simply not true.

Matt