0217 jvaupftexas

Emails, Jessica M. Vaughan, director of policy studies, Center for Immigration Studies, Feb. 8-9, 2017

12:42 p.m.

Feb. 8, 2017

The sanctuary policy adopted by Travis County is clearly in violation of 8 USC 1373. It could also lead to a violation of 8 USC 1324, the anti-harboring statute.

More specifically, paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the Travis County policy restrict local officers from communicating and exchanging information with ICE and the Border Patrol, which is prohibited in 8 USC 1373. Moreover, paragraph 2 requires Travis County officers to release criminal aliens who are subject to ICE detainers in most cases – this is knowingly disregarding a notice about a deportable criminal alien, releasing the alien, and enabling the alien to evade enforcement. There is a reasonable argument to be made that such conduct is harboring criminal aliens, which is a crime.

I am not familiar with the sheriff’s oath or all of Travis County laws and ordinances, but most state and local law enforcement agencies have a policy or general directive to assist all fellow law enforcement agencies in the legitimate performance of their duties. If such a directive exists in Travis County or the state of Texas, then Sheriff Hernandez could be violating that. In addition, if the Sheriff is required to comply with all laws, then she clearly is not with this sanctuary policy.

I would recommend contacting the Texas Sheriffs Association. I believe Sheriff Louderback of Jackson County is the government relations person.

Hope that’s helpful, Jessica

Jessica M. Vaughan

Director of Policy Studies

Center for Immigration Studies

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, February 8, 2017 2:06 PM

To: Jessica Vaughan

Subject: Following up

Thanks for this.

Abbott’s tweet did not mention 1324.

Otherwise, it looks to me like Sec. 1373, which was noted in his tweet, is limited to information sent and received about the immigration status of any individual.

Paragraphs 3-5 in the sheriff’s policy bar local officers from conducting or initiating immigration status investigations or providing release date and personal address information to ICE (paragraph 3); communicating to ICE an inmate’s release date, incarceration status or court dates absent a warrant or court order or using agency personnel to enforce immigration laws (paragraph 4); or allowing ICE personnel to conduct immigration status investigations at the jail (paragraph 5) with the stipulation that nothing prevents the agency from deciding to cooperate with ICE, case by case at the sheriff’s determination, on matters of national security.

It looks to me right now like the paragraphs in the department policy don’t conflict with the language in the federal law, which is limited to barring any restriction on officials sending and receiving information about an individual’s immigration status.

What am I missing?

g.

8:36 p.m.

It’s not just sending and receiving. You need to read paragraph (b) of 1373:

(b)Additional authority of government entitiesNotwithstanding any other provision of Federal, State, or local law, no person or agency may prohibit, or in any way restrict, a Federal, State, or local government entity from doing any of the following with respect to information regarding the immigration status, lawful or unlawful, of any individual:

(1)

Sending such information to, or requesting or receiving such information from, the Immigration and Naturalization Service.

(2)

Maintaining such information.

(3)

Exchanging such information with any other Federal, State, or local government entity.

The usual way to conduct or initiate an immigration status investigation is to send a query to ICE and receiving a response, which is covered by section (1) above. The Travis County policy says they can’t do that. It says they can’t provide an inmate’s release date to ICE. That’s exchanging information, covered in paragraph (3) above. They can’t send ICE an inmate’s incarceration status or court dates. That is also an exchange of information that 1373 says must be allowed. Blocking ICE from the jail to interview inmates is blocking the exchange of information with ICE, I would argue. If only the Sheriff is allowed to decide when the agency will cooperate with ICE, on a case by case basis on matters of national security, then that is preventing all of the above kinds of communication between officers and ICE and the Border Patrol on a routine. In addition, as I recall, the policy also prevented them from calling the Border Patrol for translation assistance. That could be viewed as preventing the exchange of information, and thus a violation of 1373.

This one isn’t even close; it’s clearly a sanctuary policy that violates 1373. The sheriff clearly does not allow officers to communicate with ICE about the immigration status of inmates. The County policy paragraph (4) says they cannot spend any time or resources communicating with ICE. That is clearly prohibiting and restricting them. Jv

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, February 9, 2017 11:22 AM

To: Jessica Vaughan

Subject: Received; fresh queries below

Will review this closely. ...

Up front, it looks like the focus of the law is on sending or receiving information on “immigration status.” I don’t see language speaking to release dates or incarceration status. Agree?

4:49 p.m.

Feb. 9, 2017

Let me share with you what the Dept. of Justice found last year, when it examined several sanctuary policies in the context of 1373. Here is the report

[https://www.oig.justice.gov/reports/2016/1607.pdf] and here are some relevant excerpts:

“According to the legislative history contained in the House of Representatives Report, Section 1373 was intended "to give State and local officials the authority to communicate with the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) regarding the presence, whereabouts, and activities of illegal aliens. This section is designed to prevent any State or local law, ordinance, executive order, policy, constitutional provision, or decision of any Federal or State court that prohibits or in any way restricts any communication between State and local officials and the INS."4 …

9. A reasonable reading of Section 1373, based on its "in any way restrict" language, would be that it applies not only to the situation where a local law or policy specifically prohibits or restricts an employee from providing citizenship or immigration status information to ICE, but also where the actions of local officials result in prohibitions or restrictions on employees providing such information to ICE. …

In Orleans Parish, Louisiana, Orleans Parish Sheriffs Office (OPSO) policy on "ICE Procedures" states that, "OPSO officials shall not initiate any immigration status investigation into individuals in their custody or affirmatively provide information on an inmate's release date or address to ICE." While the latter limitation applies by its terms to information related to release date or address, taken in conjunction with the prior ban on initiating immigration status investigations, the policy raises a similar concern as to the limits it places on the authority of OPSO officials to share information on that topic with ICE. …

Although the Cook County, Orleans Parish, Philadelphia, and New York City local policies and ordinances purport to be focused on civil immigration detainer request~, and none explicitly restricts the sharing of immigration status with ICE, based on our discussions with ICE officials about the impact these laws and policies were having on their ability to interact with local officials, as well as the information we have reviewed to date, we believe these policies and others like them may be causing local officials to believe and apply the policies in a manner that prohibits or restricts cooperation with ICE in all respects. 11 That, of course, would be inconsistent with and prohibited by Section 1373.

So the DOJ has found that your reading is too narrow, and that 1373 does not apply simply to specific requests or communication about “immigration status,” but on communication and information-sharing with federal immigration authorities.

The issue is not whether LEAs have an obligation to honor a detainer (altho 8 CFR 287.7(d) says that they “shall”). The issue is whether they are violating an individual’s civil rights if they do. In several of the cases referenced by the news story, the issue was that ICE had not provided a statement of probable cause on the detainer. That was resolved in 2012 when ICE revised its detainer form to provide the probable cause (even though the law does not stipulate probable cause as the standard for immigration arrests). In addition, it is now ICE practice to issue a warrant of arrest if the local LEA requests it. However, 90% of the sheriffs in the country do not require a warrant, and consider the detainer to be sufficient to hold an individual for ICE, just as they would for any other law enforcement agency.

At any rate, these court decisions do not apply in Texas.

I also suggest that you take a look at Attorney General Paxton’s statement, which I just saw today, which addresses many of these issues. It’s attached.

Sorry for the delay in getting back, just lots of emails today. Best, Jessica

Jessica M. Vaughan

Director of Policy Studies

Center for Immigration Studies