1016 gallegopftexas

Emails, Lyndsey Rodriguez, communications director, Pete Gallego U.S. House campaign, Oct. 12, 2016

2:05 p.m.

Pete was not, is not and never has been a lobbyist. One of the ads aired by the NRCC implied that Pete was a lobbyist in Washington D.C., which is an easily demonstrable lie.

Pete was a temporary and in-house employee of the City of Austin for approximately a six-month period of time. Pursuant to state law (TEX. GOVT. CODE ยง305.026), a municipality such as the City of Austin is prohibited from using any public funds to compensate an individual for lobbying unless the person is a registered lobbyist.

The City of Austin does in fact contract with paid lobbyists. Pete was not a contract employee. To the contrary, Pete was an at-will employee of the city. Had the City of Austin hired Pete as a lobbyist, it would have violated state law.

The Texas House of Representatives, dominated and led by Republicans, did not consider Pete to be a lobbyist. Pursuant to both House rules and state law (TEX. GOVT. CODE ยง305.023), no lobbyist is allowed on the floor of the House while the House is in session. If any unauthorized individual, such as a lobbyist, accesses or attempts to access the House floor while the House is in session, the House Sergeant-at-Arms escorts that individual out of the chamber immediately.

The evidence that the Texas House did not consider Pete to be a lobbyist is contained in numerous official photographs taken by the House photographer of Pete visiting with his friends and former colleagues on the House floor. Had he been considered a lobbyist, this would not have occurred and Pete would have been immediately escorted from the floor.

During his temporary employment with the City of Austin, Pete reported directly to the city attorney and provided the city attorney with opinions on legislative language and process. Pete also reviewed legislation, during and after session, to determine its impact on the city. Which portion of the city budget Pete's salary was allotted to is an accounting issue that is irrelevant to his work and outside of Pete's control.

The evidence shows clearly that neither the Texas Ethics Commission, the Texas House of Representatives nor the City of Austin considered Pete to be a lobbyist. The charge that Pete is a lobbyist was made for purely partisan purposes by a desperate political action committee. The Texas Ethics's Commission can confirm that Pete Gallego was not, is not and has never been a registered lobbyist.

Thank you,

--

Lyndsey Rodriguez

Communications Director

Pete Gallego for Congress

Wed, Oct 12, 2016 at 3:57 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Got it.

Did Pete Gallego either testify or register a position on behalf of the city in the 2015 session?

G.

4:06 p.m.

He did not.

Thank you, Gardner.

--

Lyndsey Rodriguez

Communications Director

Pete Gallego for Congress