0215 uscensusbureaupftexas

Emails (excerpted) including 2013 population estimates for the states, Robert Bernstein, public affairs specialist, and Jesse Willhide, section chief, Employment Statistics Branch, Economy-Wide Statistics Division, U.S Census Bureau, Feb. 18, 2015

8:34 a.m.

You could determine state workers per capita by using the link below and dividing that number by the 2013 state pop. estimate in the attached table. Hope this helps. If you have additional questions, please contact me.

​​

Robert Bernstein

Public Information Office

U.S. Census Bureau

From: GOVS Employ (CENSUS/GOVS)

Sent: Wednesday, February 18, 2015 9:07 AM

To: Robert B Bernstein (CENSUS/PIO FED)

Subject: Re: Fresh inquiry for a fact check

​Robert,

Below is a link to the state government employment table for the 2013 Annual Survey of Public Employment & Payroll. I'd suggest using the Full-Time Equivalent total column for each geography.

http://factfinder.census.gov/bkmk/table/1.0/en/GEP/2013/EMP009

The reporter can use these data in conjunction with the population estimates to derive per capita figures.

Thanks,

Survey of Public Employment & Payroll

U.S. Census Bureau

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com>

Sent: Wednesday, February 18, 2015 11:39 AM

To: GOVS Employ (CENSUS/GOVS); Robert B Bernstein (CENSUS/PIO FED)

Subject: RE: Fresh inquiry for a fact check

Given that we’re checking a claim that refers to “full-time employees,” would it be better to use Column 1, or is that going to skew?

What we’re trying to verify: "Texas has more full-time state employees per capita than California and Illinois."

g.

10:46 a.m.

...I overlooked that your primary purpose was to compare full-time only.

However, you could perhaps explain the results with the caveat that the significant number of part-time employees at the higher education level were excluded from these calculations.

Hard to say whether it would impact one state more than another; most states rely heavily on part-time workforce for their higher education systems.

Survey of Public Employment & Payroll

U.S. Census Bureau