Participants Biographies

(Speakers = *)

Fiona B. Adamson is a Senior Lecturer (Associate Professor) in International Relations at SOAS, University of London. Her research in international relations, migration and diaspora politics, transnationalism and international security has appeared in International Security, European Journal of International Relations, International Studies Review, Political Science Quarterly and Cambridge Review of International Affairs, as well as in numerous edited volumes. She co-edits the book series Security and Governance (Routledge) and is currently the principal investigator for the ESRC-funded two-year project “Diaspora Mobilisation and International Security.” Dr. Adamson has held visiting fellowships at Harvard University, Stanford University, and Humboldt University, Berlin, and has previously taught at University College London (UCL) and Stanford University. She was the founder and chair (2000-2007) of the Immigration Research Group (IRG) of the Council for European Studies (CES); is co-founder and co-convener of the London Migration Research Group (LMRG); and co-founder and co-convener of the European Consortium for Political Research (ECPR) Standing Group on Security Issues. Dr. Adamson holds a PhD in Political Science from Columbia University in New York

Azad Ali is married with 3 children and lives in East London; he has been a community activist for over 20 years. He is a presenter on Muslim Community Radio's flagship show Easy Talk. Aziz is the former chair of the Muslim Safety Forum and currently leads on the Counter Terrorism work-team for the Forum, working with the Home Office, ACPO and Security Services. Azad is currently the President of the Civil Service Islamic Society and a Board Member of the London CrimeStoppers. He is also a Trustee of the East London Mosque & London Muslim Centre. He chairs the Muslim Council of Britain's Membership Committee and is a member of its Central Working Committee. He is also the Vice-Chair of Canon Barnet School Board of Governors and Chair of the Saturday Islamic School Board of Governors. He sits on the Strategic Stop & Search Committee and Police Use of Firearms Group with the Met. Azad is also a member of the IPCC’s Community Advisory Group and the Home Office's Trust and Confidence Community Panel.

Ihsan Alkhatib is a practicing attorney in the Detroit area who has been involved with the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee (ADC) and civil rights issues for a number of years. Alkhatib earned his J.D. from the University Of Toledo School of Law in 1999, and soon after began practicing law in Dearborn, Michigan.



While Alkhatib has been a member of ADC since 1994, the 9/11 attacks and their aftermath increased his involvement. He volunteered his time in representing a number of Arab immigrants in interaction with law enforcement and speaking with national and international media about Arab- American issues. Alkhatib served as President for the Detroit Chapter Board of Directors of ADC-MI for a number of years, and currently serves on the ADC-MI Advisory Board.



Alkhatib was one of the early members of BRIDGES, believing in its mission and goals. He states that believing in the importance of engagement and constructive dialogue with the federal government is the key to creating and maintaining a solid foundation of understanding. In attempts to promote working relationships, Alkhatib has participated in a number of outreach programs for the U.S. State Department. He maintains a blog on Arab American issues and Arab politics: http://ihsanalkhatib.blogspot.com.

Alkhatib is married to Maysoon Suleiman-Khatib and has four children: Nazmieh, Ali, Omar and Mohamed.

Siddik Bakir currently works as Political Assistant of Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne MEP in the European Parliament and the House of Lords. Additionally, he works with Baroness Nicholson’s AMAR International Charitable Foundation in London; a humanitarian NGO specialized in the field of primary health, universal education projects and capacity building in Iraq, Lebanon and other conflict-zones.

Siddik graduated from the Ruhr University Bochum in Germany with degrees in Political Science and Oriental Studies/Islamic Science. He was awarded with a scholarship from the prestigious German National Academic Foundation - Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes. In 2005 he was a Humanity in Action (HIA) scholar, exploring human rights and minority issues in Berlin, Amsterdam, Copenhagen, Washington, DC and New York. In 2006 and 2007 he conducted interviews with academic experts, national authorities, and major representatives of Muslim organizations, community leaders and youth researching the impact of Germany’s Anti-Terrorism legislation on Muslims and researching the reasons leading to the radicalization of Muslims in Germany. His results were published in the Humanity In Action Report 2005, and Taz – die Tageszeitung, a national daily newspaper in Germany.

In 2006, he was Lantos/HIA Congressional Fellow working for Tom Lantos and his senior foreign policy adviser on U.S. Foreign Policy and Middle Eastern Issues in the Committee on International Relations of the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, DC. In 2007, he interned with the German MEP, Cem Özdemir, in the European Parliament assisting the Parliamentarian on issues related to international affairs, Turkey’s accession process to the EU, Islam in Europe, immigration policy as well as minority rights in Germany and Europe.

Siddik was also named as one of the “100 Muslim Leaders of Tomorrow 2006” by the World Economic Forum and the American Society of Muslim Advancement in Copenhagen in 2006. He is fluent in German, English, Kurdish, Turkish, Arabic and French.

Dr Muhammad Abdul Bari, MBE, FRSA has been the Secretary General of the Muslim Council of Britain (MCB) since June 2006. He is an educationalist with a PhD and PGCE from King's College London and a Management degree from the Open University. He has worked as an Air Force Officer, Researcher in Physics, Science Teacher and SEN specialist in London. He is a trustee of an international Muslim Charity (Muslim Aid), a patron of the National Youth Agency and Ramphal Centre and a non-executive board member of the London Organising Committee of the Olympic Games and Paralympic Games (LOCOG) Ltd. He has authored several books on family and parenting and issues of youth and identity.

Ali Bas has undergraduate and postgraduate degrees from the Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, and has also studied at Bilborough College (Nottingham/UK). He is a trained teacher and has worked at Gisbert-von-Romberg Berufskolleg (College), Dortmund. He has conducted research on teacher training in German multicultural society. Since 2008 he has been employed as a Lecturer at the Department of Education at Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, where his main focus is on the identities of young Muslims in German society

Since 2002 he has been a member of Bündins 90/Die Grünen (German Green Party), and a Green member of the Committee of Education and Culture in the Ahlen City Council.

He became a Spokesman of the local branch of Bündnis 90/ Die Grünen in Warendorf/NRW in 2005, and in 2007 co-founded and became spokesman of the working group “Green Muslims NRW” (the first Muslim network in a German party) in the regional branch of the German Green Party in North-Rhine-Westphalia



Commissaire de police, Eric Battesti has been Special Adviser at the General

Directorate of Internal Security Police in Paris. Since 2007 he has been the Home Affairs Attaché at the French Embassy in the United Kingdom.

Christophe Bertossi is a Senior Research Fellow and Head of the "Migrations, Identities, Citizenship" Programme at Ifri (French Institute of International Relations). He gained his PhD in Political Sciences at the Institut d'Etudes Politiques in Aix-en-Provence (2000). Now an Associate Fellow, he was a Marie Curie Research Fellow at the Centre for Research in Ethnic Relations, University of Warwick (UK). He is also associated with the Centre for Comparative Immigration Studies, University of California in San-Diego (US) and the American University in Paris. He is lecturing political science at Sciences Po (Paris). His publication include: Les frontières de la citoyenneté en Europe: nationalité, résidence, appartenance, Paris, L'Harmattan, 2001; European Anti-Discrimination and the Politics of Citizenship: France and Britain, Basingstoke/New York, Palgrave, 2007; (with Catherine Withold de Wenden), Les couleurs du drapeau: les militaires français issus de l'immigration, Paris, Robert Laffont, 2007.

Mark Bodenstein has been Research Fellow at the German Federal Office for Migration and Refugees in Nuremberg since 2007. His research focuses on Muslim self-organisation and the institutionalisation of Muslim representation. From 2004 to 2006 he educated teachers for Islamic religious education at the universities of Erfurt and Osnabruck, actually substituting the newly established chair for Islamic religious pedagogy at the University of Münster.

Amel Boubekeur is a Research Fellow and the leader of the Islam and Europe programme at the Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS) in Brussels. She is completing her PhD at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales and the Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris on the Contemporary Transformations of Islamic Militancy. Active in various international projects and research activities dealing with Muslim communities in Europe, Islamist movements, terrorism and radicalisation processes, European foreign policy and the Arab world, Islam and gender development. She is the author of Le voile de la Mariée. Jeunes musulmanes, voile et projet matrimonial, L'Harmattan, Paris, 2004, European Islam : the challenges for public policy and society, (with Michael Emerson),

CEPS, Brussels, 2007 and Whatever Happened to the Islamist ? Salafis, Heavy Metal Muslims and the Lure of Consumerist Islam (with Olivier Roy), Hurst/Columbia, September 2008.

John Bowen is the Dunbar-Van Cleve Professor in Arts & Sciences at Washington University in St. Louis. He studies problems of pluralism, law, and religion, and in particular contemporary efforts to rethink Islamic norms and law in Asia, Europe, and North America His most recent book on Asia is Islam, Law and Equality in Indonesia: An Anthropology of Public Reasoning (Cambridge, 2003), and his Why the French Don’t Like Headscarves (Princeton, 2007) concerns current debates in France on Islam and laïcité. Forthcoming are Can Islam be French? (Princeton) and The New Anthropology of Islam (Cambridge).

Louise Cainkar is a sociologist who teaches in the Department of Social and Cultural Sciences at Marquette University. Her forthcoming book (Russell Sage Foundation) is Homeland Insecurity: Arab/Muslim American Experiences after 9/11, based on three years of ethnographic research and in-depth interviews with Arab Muslims in metropolitan Chicago. Her recent publications have appeared in City and Society, The Journal of American Ethnic History, Ameraisa Journal, Journal of Sociological Practice, Contexts, Anthropology and Education Quarterly, and the Bulletin of the Royal Institute for Interfaith Studies.

In 2003, Louise Cainkar was recognized as a Carnegie Corporation Scholar for her work on Islamic revival among Arab Americans. Louise Cainkar has also conducted research-based, public sociology, including authoring an immigrant integration policy for the State of Illinois in partnership with the office of Governor Rod Blagojevich, the Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights, and national and local immigrant leaders, as well as a study of barriers and resources affecting domestic violence intervention in Arab/Muslim families, in partnership with Chicago’s Arab American Action Network.

Julien Cantegreil teaches the philosophy of law and international and French public law at the Ecole Normale Supérieure (ATER), Sorbonne (Lecturer) and the Sciences Po (Ass. Prof.). He is also the Programme Director of En Temps Réel, a Paris based think tank; a Young Leader 2008 of the French American Foundation; Member of the Board of France-Fulbright; and, formerly, a member of the Cabinet of the Minister of Economics, Finance and Industry (France). He is an Agrégé in philosophy, holds degrees from the Ecole Normale Supérieure (Paris) and in law from Paris I (Panthéon-Sorbonne) and the Yale Law School. His publications address philosophy and law, particularly regarding terrorism and investment law. These include Terrorisme et libertés (Paris: En Temps Réel, 2005); (ed) Sur les cas extrêmes (Paris: Presses de l'Ecole normale supérieure, 2006), "De logica van grondwettelijke na 11 september," in Veiligheid en Vrijheid (Dutch Ministry of Justice, Dutch Minister of Interior, 2008); "The Glamis Case under NAFTA: Human Rights in the BIT generation," in P-M Dupuy, Fr. Francioni & E-U Petersmann (Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press) (forthcoming 2009).

Mark Carroll is currently developing a new charity to build civic society capacity to tackle extremism. He is on a career break from the UK Civil Service and is being hosted by the Foundation for Community Involvement, a not-for-profit organisation.

Mark was from 2002 until November 2007, the Director in HM Government responsible the government’s strategies for tackling extremism, building community cohesion and integration, and for increasing race equality. He led a staff team of 110 staff with a direct budget of £65m. Key achievements during this time include: leading, since the 2005 London bombings, the government’s work with Muslim communities to tackle extremism; publication in April 2007 of the cross-government strategy to prevent violent extremism as part of the overall counter-terrorism strategy; providing the secretariat for the Commission on Integration and Cohesion and delivering the government’s response in October 07; development and implementation of the first cross-government strategy on race and cohesion in 2004, which has significantly improved education and employment outcomes for black and minority groups. Mark’s Directorate also led the recent cross-government work to nationally commemorate the 200th Anniversary of the Abolition of the Slave trade and in 2005 organised the national commemorations to mark 60th Anniversary of the Holocaust. Both of these commemorations were led by HM the Queen and televised by the BBC.

From October 2005 to September 2006 Mark was also a member of the main Home Office Group Management Board and the Acting Director General for Communities which in addition to the responsibilities outlined above, also included the Governments responsibilities for: the third sector; volunteering; new charity legislation; increasing community participation and empowerment. Total staffing resource for the Group was 190 staff and a budget of £180m.

Before joining the Civil Service, Mark worked in consultancy with private and public sector clients primarily on issues of leadership, equality and diversity and organisational culture. He was part of the small team of consultants that pioneered equality training for the judiciary, as well as at Board level for a number of government departments. Prior to this he developed a small charity with 2 members of staff to one that employed 25 staff, with 60 volunteers and a very strong regional presence. The charity was a pioneer in developing community responses to the emerging problems of gangs, drugs and violence particularly amongst Black inner city communities.

Mark began his career as a Probation Officer and then as a Social Worker undertaking child abuse investigations. He obtained his first degree from Leicester Polytechnic and a MA in Social Science and Social Work from the University of Nottingham.

Dominic Casciani covers home affairs for BBC News and is part of a team of reporters focusing on the major counter-terrorism prosecutions and policy. His wider specialist background is in Muslims in Europe, minority communities in the UK, identity politics, belonging and extremism. He has also worked in Northern Ireland.

Jocelyne Cesari, is an Associate at the Centre for Middle Eastern Studies and teaches at the Harvard Divinity School. Dr. Cesari is a political scientist, specializing in the Middle East and Islamic studies. Before coming to Harvard, she served as an Associate Research Scholar and Visiting Professor at Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs. At Harvard, she is Director of the interfaculty Islam in the West Program (see http://cmes.hmdc.harvard.edu/research/iw). This research program produced a major publication, the Encyclopedia of Islam in the United States, which was published by Greenwood Press in September of 2007.

Dr. Cesari received her Ph.D. in political science from the University of Aix-en-Provence in France and has served as a Senior Research Fellow and Associate Professor at the French National Centre for Scientific Research at the Sorbonne, Paris, since the fall of 1992. Her areas of expertise include Islam and globalization, Muslim minorities in Europe and America, and Islam and politics in North Africa. Over the course of her career, Dr. Cesari has published thirteen books and more than fifty articles in European and American journals. Her most recent books are When Islam and Democracy Meet: Muslims in Europe and in the United States (Palgrave 2006) and European Muslims and the Secular State (Ashgate 2005). She has also received grants to write the reports “Islam and Fundamental Rights” and “The Religious Consequences of September 11, 2001, on Muslims in Europe” for the European Commission (see www.euro-islam.info).

David Cole is a professor of constitutional law and criminal justice at Georgetown University Law School. After graduating from Yale Law School he served as a clerk to Judge Arlin M. Adams of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. Later he became a staff attorney for the Centre for Constitutional Rights where he litigated a number of major First Amendment cases, among them United States v. Eichman (1990), which established that the First Amendment protects flag burning. He continues to litigate First Amendment and other constitutional issues as a volunteer staff attorney at the Centre. He has published in a variety of areas, including civil rights, criminal justice, constitutional law and law and literature. He is the legal affairs correspondent for The Nation, a commentator on National Public Radio: All Things Considered, and the author of several award-winning books, including Less Safe, Less Free: Why America Is Losing the War on Terror (with Jules Lobel): Enemy Aliens: Double Standards and Constitutional Freedoms in the War on Terrorism; Terrorism and the Constitution: Sacrificing Civil Liberties for National Security (with James X. Dempsey); and No Equal Justice: Race and Class in the American Criminal Justice System. Professor Cole has received numerous awards for his civil rights and civil liberties work.

Sarah Connolly is head of the Counter-Terrorism Research Group in the Foreign & Commonwealth Office. Since joining the FCO as an international terrorism analyst in 2004, she has worked on a series of projects, including detailing al-Qaeda’s post-2001 structure, outlining the threat to Europe from returning jihadis, and comparative work on counter-terrorism legislation. Her speciality is counter-radicalisation. She also has an academic background in human rights strategies and counter-terrorism.

Josh DeWind has directed the Migration Program of the Social Science Research Council since 1994. He received his Ph.D. from the Department of Anthropology of Columbia University in 1977 and from 1989 to 2002 was a Professor of Anthropology at Hunter College, City University of New York, where he initiated the college's Program on Human Rights and directed its Latin American and Caribbean Studies Program. He has published numerous books, reports, and articles related to migration including The Handbook of International Migration: The American Experience, edited with Charles Hirschman and Philip Kasinitz (Russell Sage Foundation, 1999); Aiding Migration: The Impact of International Development Assistance on Haiti, with David Kinley (Westview Press, 1988); and Peasants Become Miners: The Evolution of Industrial Mining Systems in Peru, 1904-1972 (Garland Press, 1988). He was a founding member of the Center for Immigrants Rights, National Coalition for Haitian Rights, and National Immigration Forum.

Abdullah Faliq is Head of Research at The Cordoba Foundation, a think-tank based on the Cordobian experience of promoting dialogue between cultures and civilizations. He edits the Foundation's journal, Arches Quarterly which explores issues in dialogue and civlilisations.

Abdullah is also the Director of Training at the Centre for the Study of Terrorism and Assistant Editor of the Centre's monthly journal, Islamism Digest. A trustee of London's oldest mosque (established in 1910) The East London Mosque & London Muslim Centre, and head of Media and Research at the Islamic Forum of Europe, he provided the launching pad for the Grand Mufti of Bosnia Dr Mustafa Ceric's Declarations of European Muslims.

Abdullah studied Arabic Language at the British Institute in Egypt as well as University of Jordan and Zarqa Private University. With an MA in Middle East Politics from Durham University, he is currently completing a doctorate on the politicisation of British Muslims and the influence of Arab political Islam at the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London.

A founding committee member of the National Interim Committee of Muslim Organisations (NICMU) – a precursor of the Muslim Council of Britain, Abdullah is former president of Britain's oldest youth Islamic movement – Young Muslim Organisation UK; founding member of the European Muslim Network headed by Prof. Tariq Ramadan; part of the co-ordination team of the Global Civilisations Study Centre; Media and Research secretary of the pan-European Islamic Forum of Europe; and founding director of the Muslim Community Radio (MCR).

Baroness Kishwer Falkner is a Liberal Democrat Peer in the House of Lords. She is Spokesman for the Ministry of Justice. The first Muslim peer for the Lib Dems, she takes an active interest in foreign affairs and civil liberties, community relations and integration. In 2006, she was a Fellow at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, teaching a seminar on US foreign policy and democracy for the Muslim World. She speaks extensively on public policy issues relating to Muslims in the West, multiculturalism and integration

Elena Fiddian is a Research Fellow in Diaspora Mobilisation and International Security at SOAS (University of London), and is currently completing her doctorate at the University of Oxford on the protracted Sahrawi refugee situation. Her doctorate is based on fieldwork conducted in the Sahrawi refugee camps (Algeria), Cuba, South Africa, Spain and Syria. Her broader research focuses on refugees and asylum-seekers in the Middle East and North Africa.

Safiya Ghori is currently MPAC's Government Relations Director in the Washington DC office, meeting regularly with the Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security, and the FBI in order to develop and implement policy recommendations that provide guidance to both the government and the Muslim American community on civil rights, voting rights, and counterterrorism issues.

Under Safiya’s guidance, the MPAC DC office recently launched “Activate 08: MPAC’s Policy Guide to the 2008 Elections” which serves as a reference to the American Muslim community on issues ranging from national security to healthcare. In 2007 Safiya organized the first MPAC Young Leaders Summit, which brought young Muslim American leaders to Washington, DC to engage and meet with senior government officials from the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Justice, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, experts from think tanks, and members of Congress and committee staff.

Safiya earned a joint JD and MA in May 2006 from the University of Arkansas. Her most recent article, "Mutah Marriages in the American Legal System" in the Journal of Islamic Law and Culture looks into applying the religious law of Muslim minority communities throughout the United States. Safiya’s most recent op-ed piece about Islamophobia in America was published in the San Diego Tribune in December 2006. Safiya has appeared on BBC, Bridges News, The Voice of America GEO TV, and has also been featured in Congressional Quarterly and the Washington Post. She has also authored legal and policy memoranda, briefing papers and press releases on counterterrorism strategy, radicalization, immigration reform, human rights issues and U.S. domestic and foreign policy. Safiya is fluent in Hindi and Urdu.

Prof. Andrew Grossman is the Royal G. Hall Professor of the Social Sciences and Chair of the Political Science Department at Albion College in Michigan. He published Neither Dead Nor Red: Civil Defense and American Political Development During the Early Cold War with Routledge Press in 2001. In addition to publishing on issues of national security policy and homeland security, he is a participant in the Social Science Research Council’s program, “Reframing the Challenge of Migration and Security.”

Currently, Grossman is completing his second book Born to Fail: The DHS and the Fate of Homeland Security in the United States. Born to Fail analyzes the institutional roots of the Department of Homeland Security and the problem of balancing anti-terrorism, civil liberties, and civilian defense in the post-September 11, 2001 period. This project examines two primary issues: war and state-building as it relates to the post-9/11 period. Given that the DHS hopes to selectively institutionalize some programs that are used in both Great Britain and Israel as tools for internal security, the book employs a comparative analysis of these types of civilian defense policies and critically examines whether they are even possible in a robust federal republic such as the US. As the title of suggests, he believes that the answer is “no”.

Imad Hamad is the Regional Director and Senior National Advisor for Public Affairs of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee (ADC), the premier civil rights organization in the nation on behalf of Arab Americans. He is a long time community advocate, who has fought for the cause of civil rights and justice.

Mr. Hamad came to the United States as a student in 1980. He served the Arab American community in Michigan as a bilingual counselor, social worker and job developer until 1997, when he assumed his position as the Regional Director of ADC. Throughout the years, he has earned his community’s respect and has become one of its rising leaders

In appreciation for his contribution to the cause of civil rights in America he has received numerous local, state, and national awards. Similarly, Mr. Hamad’s commitment to civil rights and cultural understanding reaches far beyond his work at the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee to include numerous appointed positions in other organizations, both private and governmental.

Dr. Kamal El-Helbawy was born in the Governorate of Menoufia, Egypt in 1939 and joined the Muslim Brotherhood at the age of twelve. He served as the official spokesman of the Muslim Brotherhood in the West from 1995-1997.

Following graduation from Cairo University, Helbawy worked in the field of manpower planning and training with Central Training Organization in Egypt (1960-1970). Dr. Helbawy studied Business administration; interpretation, political science and specialized in strategic studies.

While lecturing at Sokoto University he participated in founding the first branch of Muslim Educational Trust in Sokoto in 1971 in Nigeria. Dr. Helbawy traveled to Saudi Arabia in the early 1970s where he was among the founders of the World Assembly of Muslim Youth (WAMY) and became their first executive director until 1982. He served as an advisor to the Arab Bureau of Education for Gulf States (ABEGS) from 1982 - 1987. From 1988 to 1994 Dr. Helbawy was in charge of Muslim Brotherhood affairs and activities in Afghanistan. During the same period he was based as an advisor at the Institute of Policy Studies in Islamabad - Pakistan. He served as the editor in chief of Arabic weekly - Qadaya Dowaliya (International Issues) published in Pakistan from 1988-1994.

After settling in the United Kingdom in 1994, Dr. Helbawy helped create the Muslim Council of Britain (MCB) and the Muslim Association of Britain (MAB) and he became its first founding president. He continues to be among the MCB’s Board of Counselors. He is currently the chairman of the Centre for the Study of Terrorism (CFSOT) and an advisor to the Global Civilizations Study Centre (GCSC). He is also a founding member of the recently launched 2008 Islamic Unity Forum (IUF) which seeks to unite Muslims from both Sunni and Shi’a communities.

Dr. Helbawy has travelled extensively and lectured in many countries. He has written and translated more than twenty books and many articles especially on Afghanistan; Islamic Movement and the Muslim world affairs.

Aziz Huq directs the liberty and national security project at the Brennan Center for Justice at NYU School of Law, where he conducts litigation and does works on civil liberties in the counter-terrorism context. He is also an adjunct professor at NYU School of Law and a 2006 Carnegie Scholars Fellow.

Before joining the Brennan Center, he clerked for Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg of the Supreme Court of the United States, and for Judge Robert D. Sack of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. In 2001, he graduated summa cum laude from Columbia Law School. His scholarship has appeared in the Columbia Law Review, the Yearbook of Islamic and

Middle Eastern Law, the World Policy Journal and Constellations. He has essays in the Encyclopedia of Islam in America (Palgrave) and One of the Boys: Women and Torture (Seal Press). He writes for Democracy Journal, the Nation, Legal Times, American Prospect, Findlaw, the New York Law Journal, and Himal Southasian. His book Unchecked and Unbalanced: Presidential Power in a Time of Terror (co-authored with Fritz Schwarz) was published in March 2007 by the New Press.

Mr. Huq also consults as a senior analyst with the International Crisis Group on issues of constitutional and judicial reform in South Asia.

Prof. Barbara John is currently Coordinator for Language Training for Migrants at the Ministry for Education Berlin, and Prof. of Ethnology at Humboldt-University Berlin. Prof. John was the Berlin Senate Commissioner of Integration and Foreigners’ Affairs in from 1981 to 2003, and holds degrees in Teaching, Political Sciences and Pedagogy after studies in London and Berlin. Her areas of expertise are political sciences, epistemology and the theory and economics of education.

Before becoming Senate Commissioner she taught “German as a second language” at the Free University Berlin. Prof. John has published extensively on pedagogy and on migration issues. She lectures on integration and migration topics at national and international conferences, and holds membership in relevant boards and commissions.

Humera Khan is a freelance consultant and researcher with a background in Equal Opportunities. She is a founder member of An-Nisa Society, an organisation managed by women working for the welfare of Muslim families. Through the organisation she has been involved in setting up many projects such as Islamic counselling, the Supplementary Muslim School (co-ordinator), written a series of books on sexual health from an Islamic perspective called Cycle of Life, set up and ran a Girls & Young Women’s Drama group and provides support and counselling on a broad range of issues. In 2006 she concluded an 18 month project on Muslim fatherhood with a national conference in November 2007 entitled “Searching for Dad: Exploring Muslim fatherhood”. This project included producing a Practitioners Guide for working with Muslim fathers, a research based study speaking to Muslim fathers and a Prayer and Praise booklet for Muslim dads. Currently Humera is working on a three-tiered project entitled “British Muslim or Wot?” working with Muslim boys and young men aged between 13 and 19 years of age.

In December 2007 Robert retired from the Metropolitan Police Service after 31 years service, 28 years of which were spent in operational counter-terrorism and counter-violent extremism. In January 2002, together with a police colleague he set up the Muslim Contact Unit (MCU), with the purpose of establishing partnerships with Muslim community groups both equipped and located to help tackle the spread of al-Qaeda propaganda and recruitment in London.

In October 2005 he embarked on a parallel academic project, researching key aspects of MCU partnership experience, for a PhD in the Department of Politics, University of Exeter (due for completion in 2008). He is also a member of two related research projects, led by Dr. Jonathan Githens-Mazer (Exeter) and Dr. Basia Spalek (Birmingham) respectively.

Abdul Malik Mujahid from Chicago, USA, is an imam, an award winning author and producer. He is the founding president of the Sound Vision foundation and executive producer of daily RadioIslam.com (WCEV 1450 AM Chicago). He serves as the Chairman of the Council of Islamic Organizations of Greater Chicago. Br. Mujahid also serves as the Vice Chair of the Council for a Parliament of World Religion; and at the board of the Midwest Coalition for Human Rights. In January 2008 he was elected as a member of the Credential Committee of the 2008 Democratic National Convention. As the national coordinator of Bosnia Task Force, USA, in 1990s he successfully led efforts in collaboration of National Organization of Women (NOW) to declare rape as a war crime.

Maleiha Malik is a Lecturer in Law at the School of Law, King's College, University of London and co-author of Discrimination Law: Theory and Context (Sweet and Maxwell, 2008). Maleiha is currently editing a special issue of the journal Patterns of Prejudice, entitled 'Anti-Muslim Prejudice in the Past and Present.' She is also currently undertaking research on Muslim women.

Maleiha has an undergraduate degree (LLB) from the University of London and a postgraduate degree (B.C.L) from the University of Oxford. Before joining King's College as a Lecturer she practiced as a barrister and she is a member of Grays Inn.

Prof. Peter Mandaville is the Director of the Center for Global Studies at George Mason University in Washington DC where he is also Associate Professor of Government & Islamic Studies. He previously taught at the University of Kent at Canterbury in the UK. He holds degrees from the University of St. Andrews and the University of Kent, and has also studied at the American University in Cairo. Visiting affiliations have included American University, and the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington DC. He is most recently the author of Global Political Islam (London: Routledge, 2007). Other books include Transnational Muslim Politics: Reimagining the Umma (London: Routledge, 2001; paperback 2003), and several co-edited volumes and anthologies such as Globalizing Religions (London: Sage, forthcoming 2008), The Zen of International Relations (London: Palgrave 2001) and Meaning and International Relations (London: Routledge, 2003). He has authored numerous book chapters and journal articles, contributed to publications such as the International Herald Tribune and The New Republic, and consulted extensively for media, government and non-profit agencies. Much of his recent work has focused on the comparative study of transnational religious authority and social movements in the Muslim world, global development, and cosmopolitanism. His research has been supported by the Pew Charitable Trusts and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.

Dr. Aminah B. McCloud is professor of Islamic Studies in the Department of Religious Studies at DePaul University and the Director of the Islamic World Studies Program. She is the author of African American Islam, Questions of Faith, and Transnational Muslims in American Society. She is currently working on Silks: The Textures of American Muslim Women’s Lives and Defining Islam: The Status of African American Islam in the 21st Century, and author of dozens of articles on topics ranging from Islamic Law to Muslim women. Also, she is a Fulbright Scholar, consultant on Muslim affairs for the courts, and current editor-in-chief of The Journal of Islamic Law and Culture. She is the founder of the Islam in America Conference at DePaul University the “Islam in America Archival Project.” As of January, 2005 she has run the only undergraduate baccalaureate Islamic World Studies program. She is a board member of Radio Islam, the Institute for Social and Policy Understanding, Feminist Sexual Ethics Project (Brandeis U), and works as an educator for the Middle East Policy Council on understanding Islam and Arabic cultures. She has received grants for her work from the Ford Foundation, Illinois Humanities Council, Graham Architectural Foundation and the Lilly Foundation. Dr. McCloud has also worked on a number of television projects on Muslims and is currently working on task forces for the East West Institute and Chicago Council on Foreign Affairs relating to Islam and Muslims

Brian M. Moskowitz became the first permanent Special Agent in Charge (SAC) of the ICE Office of Investigations in Detroit, Michigan in January 2004. He previously served as the Associate SAC of the ICE Office of Investigations in Chicago, Illinois, and was based at U.S. Customs Service Headquarters in Washington, DC. Mr. Moskowitz spent eight years in Tucson, Arizona where he worked as a special agent, supervisory special agent, and was the Deputy Director of the Arizona HIDTA (High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area) Intelligence Center. Mr. Moskowitz began his Customs career at the World Trade Center in New York in 1988 after serving several years as a special agent with the Criminal Investigation Division of the Internal Revenue Service in Manhattan.

In 1999, Mr. Moskowitz was elected and served as Vice President and Legislative Director for the 20,000 member Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association. He represented the federal law enforcement community at the White House and on Capitol Hill and was responsible for helping pass legislation including the Federal Law Enforcement Officers Good Samaritan Act. In June 2000, Mr. Moskowitz lead a successful effort to thwart the FAA from banning the majority of federal, state, and local law enforcement officers from flying armed aboard commercial aircraft. This effort resulted in many of the regulations now in effect. In 1999, also Mr. Moskowitz received a Certificate of Special Congressional Recognition for his efforts in promoting the federal law enforcement profession. He is a graduate of NYU (BS Accounting), and attended the Executive Leadership Institute at Columbia University's Graduate School of Business

Mehmood Naqshbandi has worked as a consultant with the IT company Logica for over twenty years. He specialises in IT solutions for investigation, intelligence and the criminal justice system. He provides Technical Authority services to the Police, Home Office, Ministry of Justice, the Crown Prosecution Service, the Serious Fraud Office and other government agencies.

Mehmood converted to Islam in 1982 and is active in the Muslim community in Britain. He has observed at close hand the growth of Muslim militancy over two decades and uses his knowledge and insights to advise government departments and the police on topical issues. In 2006 he wrote a book, Islam and Muslims in Britain - a Guide for non-Muslims, to meet the needs of City of London Police, which is now used by half the UK's police forces, OSCE, the Scottish Executive and others. A report he wrote for the Home Office following the July 2005 bombings, "Problems and Practical Solutions to Tackle Extremism", was published by the Defence Academy of the UK in 2006. He runs the website www.MuslimsInBritain.org where this material can be found. Currently Mehmood is writing a paper describing how Muslim neophytes, especially converts, feature prominently in many terrorism cases and how neophytes are marginalised within the Muslim community; he argues that the latter situation directly influences the former.

Matthew J. Nelson is a Lecturer (Assistant Professor) at the Dept. of Politics and International Studies, SOAS. He is a political scientist focusing on the politics of SouthAsia, and has spent several years conducting archival, ethnographic, and survey based field research in Pakistan. He has also completed a number of consulting assignments for The Asia Foundation, the Asian Development Bank, the British Department for International Development (DFID), and the European Commission.

His first book concerns the relationship between Islam, Islamic law, and democratic politics in the Muslim-majority districts of western Punjab (In the Shadow of Shari'ah: Islam, Islamic Law, and Democracy in Pakistan, Columbia University Press, forthcoming 2009). His current work is focused on the politics of religious education and the question of sectarianism (“Dealing with Difference: Religious Education and the Challenge of Democracy in Pakistan” Modern Asian Studies, forthcoming 2008; “Religious Education in Non-Religious Schools: A Comparative Study of Pakistan and Bangladesh,”

Commonwealth and Comparative Politics, 2008, 46:3; “Muslims, Markets, and the

Meaning of “A Good Education” in Pakistan,” Asian Survey, 2006, 46:5;

“Madrasas and the Modern State: Religious Education and the Question of

Extremism in Pakistan,” RUSI Newsbrief, 2006, 26:7.

Eda Pepi is Migration Program Assistant at the Social Science Research Council.

Tara Lai Quinlan is the Director Research for Professor Deborah Ramirez’s Partnering for Prevention (PfP) initiative at Northeastern University. Most recently, Tara and Professor Ramirez travelled to London and Leeds in May 2006 where they conducted field research on law enforcement-community partnerships with the British Muslim community. Tara co-wrote the forthcoming article, “The Greater London Experience: Essential Lessons Learned In Law Enforcement-Community Partnerships and Terrorism Prevention.” Tara and Prof. Ramirez have worked together since 2001 on racial profiling and community policing issues, co-authoring the article, “Defining Racial Profiling in a Post September 11th World”, 40 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1195 (Summer 2003).

Tara is currently an Associate at Outten & Golden LLP, where she represents employees in all areas of employment law, including discrimination, retaliation, sexual harassment and wage and hour violations. Tara is a former Law Clerk in the Staff Attorneys’ Office of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Tara received her J.D. from Northeastern University School of Law, and her B.A. from the University of California, Berkeley.

Tara is also the former Test Coordinator for the non-profit Sentinel Fair Housing in Oakland, California, where she coordinated fair housing testing, investigated housing discrimination complaints, trained fair housing testers, and conducted training seminars on fair housing law.

Francesco is a Research Fellow in Diaspora Mobilisation and International Security at SOAS (University of London). He is currently completing a joint PhD Sciences Po and Northwestern University, and the focus of his research is the role of the Croatian diaspora during the war in former Yugoslavia.

Deborah Ramirez is Professor of Law at Northeastern University Law School, as well as the founder of the Partnering for Prevention and Community Safety Initiative. Before joining the Northeastern faculty in 1989, Professor Ramirez was an associate with the Boston law firm of Hale and Dorr and an assistant U.S. attorney in Boston, where she was assigned to the Organized Crime Drug Task Force Unit. In that position, she was in charge of numerous investigations, trials and appeals. Professor Ramirez teaches Criminal Justice, Advanced Criminal Procedure, Evidence, Professional Responsibility, and a seminar, “Balancing Liberty and Security in a Post-September 11th World.”

Most recently, Prof. Ramirez has authored a Promising Practices Guide on how to develop partnerships between law enforcement and the American Muslin, Arab, and Sikh communities. Her belief is that we will only truly be safe from terrorist attacks when law enforcement adopts a strategy focused on building trust and strengthening relationships with the American Muslim, Arab and Sikh communities. In 2004, she was selected as a Soros Senior Fellow by the Open Society Institute. She is an elected director of the Harvard Alumni Association Board and a member of the Board of Advisors for Harvard Law School’s Civil Rights/Civil Liberties Law Review.

Steffi Redmann has been with the German Federal Office for Migration and Refugees since 2006. She deals mainly with religious aspects of social integration and the German Islam Conference. Currently, she is also preparing her PhD thesis on the Human Rights Debate in the Arab-Islamic World. From 2003 to 2006 she was an active member of an interdisciplinary post graduate programme on anthropological developments in Christianity and Islam. She holds a Masters degree in Middle Eastern Studies (Islamic Studies, Political Science, and Economics) from the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg

Ahmed Rehab is CAIR-Chicago's Executive Director and CAIR's National Strategic Communications Director. Rehab is a regular contributor to the Chicago Tribune and Chicago Public Radio. He has been interviewed over 200 times by newspapers, radio, and TV venues, both national and international. Rehab lectures at various University campuses in Chicago and around the nation. Prior to joining CAIR in August of 2004, Rehab was a freelance speaker, writer, and activist in the fields of interfaith collaboration, education, and community outreach. Between 1999 and 2002, Rehab served as a consultant for Arthur Andersen LLP - a global consulting firm. Rehab serves as a board member of the Illinois Coalition of Immigrant and Refugee Rights (ICIRR). He is a board member and secretary of the Egyptian American Society, a member of the Chicago Council on Global Affairs' (CCGA) Muslim task force, an Eisenhower fellow of the American Assembly, and alumnus of the FBI Citizen's Academy. A software engineer by trade, Ahmed is also co-founder & president of Ibex Computers based in Des Plaines, IL.

Mathieu Rigouste studies the technical legitimization of domination and the institutional construction of “otherness” in postcolonial France. His published articles feature the construction of the postcolonial migrant image by the media. His thesis, which traces the genealogy of images of “the enemy from within” in the French military institution from colonial wars to the contemporary security order, is the subject of his forthcoming book, L'ennemi intérieur, des guerres coloniales au nouvel ordre sécuritaire to be released in September 2008 (La Découverte, Paris).

Michael E. Rolince is a recognized expert in counterterrorism and counterintelligence investigations and operations with international stature. He currently holds the position of Senior Associate at Booz Allen Hamilton, having retired as the Special Agent in Charge (SES IV) of the FBI’s Washington Field Office (WFO) Counterterrorism Division. Mr. Rolince possesses a current Top Secret/SCI security clearance with CI polygraph. His experiences are complemented by seven years of senior executive level efforts in managing, facilitating and directing complex intelligence, counterintelligence and counterterrorism programs of international scope. In his capacity as Acting Assistant Director, Washington Field Office, he effected sweeping changes to financial, personnel and technical resources to address evolving criminal, intelligence and terrorist threats. Mr. Rolince developed and implemented national-level policies on domestic intelligence activities as Acting Assistant Director in the FBI Office of Intelligence, and cultivated partnerships with the public sector. He has extensive operational experience as demonstrated by a successful record in targeting terrorist groups, crafting responses to major terrorist incidents, and formulating coherent strategies while serving as Chief, International Terrorism Operations Section, FBIHQ. Mr. Rolince has received in excess of twenty awards and letters of commendation, including the Director’s Award for Excellence and the Presidential Rank Award, in recognition of his efforts to mitigate significant risks to the United States.

George Selim serves as a Policy Adviser in the Office for Civil Rights & Civil Liberties at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS). His primary duties involve advising Department leadership on policy issues at the intersection of civil rights and homeland security. This is achieved by (1) working with other Federal agencies to develop and strengthen the U.S. Government’s civic engagement, public outreach and public diplomacy initiatives; (2) regularly engaging with the American Arab, Muslim, Sikh, and South Asian communities; and (3) helping law enforcement officials better engage with ethnic and religious minorities nationally.

Prior to joining DHS, Mr. Selim had been serving under a White House appointment to the U.S. Department of Justice. Mr. Selim served as Special Assistant to the Director of the Community Relations Service (CRS), an agency created out of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Mr. Selim also spent several years working as a community organizer for Dr. James Zogby at the Arab American Institute.

Mr. Selim is a recipient of the 2006 Department of Justice “Meritorious Service Award,” the 2006 Arab American Institute “Public Service Award,” and the 2005 recipient of the Lebanese American Chamber of Commerce “Chairman’s Award.” Mr. Selim holds a B.A. in Sociology and is an M.A. candidate at Georgetown University.

Tabish Shah is currently working as a Research Assistant on Dr. Fiona Adamson's project Diaspora Mobilisation and International Security at SOAS (University of London). She recently completed an MA in Political Science at University College London (UCL).

Alessandro Silj is the Secretary General of the Italian Social Science Council (CSS) and Director of Ethnobarometer (European research network on inter-ethnic relations and migration flows in Europe). His past positions include those of Assistant to the Secretary General, Euratom, Brussels (1960-65), Research Fellow, Center for International Affairs, Harvard University (1966-67), Deputy Director, European Community Office, Washington DC (1968-69) and Program Officer, European Affairs, the Ford Foundation, New York (1970-73).

His main publications include: Europe’s Political Puzzle, CIA, Harvard, 1968; Malpaese (a history of violence and corruption in Italian politics, 1945-94), Donzelli, Roma, 1994,

also published in Germany, Suhrkamp, 1997, and Romania, Nemira, 1999; L’alleato scomodo (case studies of US-Italian relations in the Mediterranean), Corbaccio, 1998;

Migration and Criminality: the Case of Albanians in Italy, co-author, Ethnobarometer, 1998; Crisis in Macedonia, co-author and editor, Ethnobarometer, 2002; Mai più senza fucile, Vallecchi , 1977 (published also in the US, Karz, 1979), biographies of militants of the Red Brigades and other Italian armed revolutionary groups; BR-Stato, Vallecchi, 1979, a study on the press coverage of the kidnap and assassination of Aldo Moro; and East of Dallas, British Film Institute, London,1988, a comparative analysis of narrative structures of European and American television series.

He is also the author of books and essays on European affairs, as well as two novels and several short stories. He has contributed articles to La Stampa, Le Monde, La Repubblica,, Corriere della Sera, The Irish Times, Interplay, l’Espresso, Tempo Presente, The International Spectator, among others.

Dr. Silvestri is Lecturer in Islam in Europe, Religion in Global Politics, International Relations at the School of Social Sciences, City University. She is also a Research Associate at the University of Cambridge. Dr Silvestri’s research interests are located across international politics and sociology, with a focus on Muslim identity politics and public policies that affect Muslims in Europe; she is also interested in immigrants’ integration in Europe, the impact of Islamist movements and ideologies on International Relations, and evolving state relations with faith communities.

Dr. Johannes Urban represents the Intercultural Dialogue Unit within the Policy Planning Department of Germany’s Federal Ministry of the Interior. The unit assists the Federal Minister of the Interior, Dr. Wolfgang Schäuble, in his efforts to engage with Muslim community leaders in the German Islam Conference (DIK). Founded by Dr. Schäuble in 2006, the Islam Conference is the principal process for dialogue and partnership between the German State and the Muslim communities in Germany. It involves representatives from all levels of government as well as Muslims from various denominations, convictions and walks of life. The goal of the Islam Conference is to better integrate Muslims into German society and to improve the relations between Muslims and the German state. Prior to joining the ministry in 2006, Dr. Urban served as a Research Fellow with the Technical University of Chemnitz where he holds an Adjunct Faculty position, teaching in the fields of public policy and political communication.

Niraj Warikoo is a staff writer for the Detroit Free Press (daily newspaper with Sunday circulation of 640,000), where he currently writes about religion and immigration. Warikoo has written about Arab-American and Muslim issues for ten years. Before the Sept. 11 attacks, he wrote about the challenges facing Arab-American and Muslim communities from profiling and the use of secret evidence. In the aftermath of the attacks, he wrote about a range of problems they faced, from hate crimes to job discrimination to terrorism investigations. In one case, his newspaper filed suit on his behalf against the U.S. Dept. of Justice after he and other reporters were denied access to a federal immigration hearing in the case of a Muslim leader suspected of terrorist support. In 2003, Warikoo wrote about how the Pentagon was working closely with Iraqi-Americans to help overthrow Saddam Hussein's regime and build a new government. In 2005, he visited Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington D.C. to write about the struggles of U.S. soldiers severely injured in Iraq. A year later he traveled to Lebanon to report on the aftermath of the war between Hizbollah and Israel. Before the conflict started, he had written a special report that showed a spike in Hizbollah prosecutions in the U.S. by federal prosecutors. He also reports about the daily lives of Muslims in America, writing stories about the increasing use of hijab and athletes who fast during Ramadan.

Warikoo graduated from Columbia University with a bachelor's degree in political science and a master's in journalism. He was one of ten journalists selected to be a 9-11 Security and Liberty fellow at the University of Southern California, where he studied national security and civil rights. He has received the Golden Pen award from the Islamic Center of America, one of the USA’s biggest mosques, for his coverage of Muslim issues.

David Williams joined Communities and Local Government in November 2007 as the new Director for Cohesion. He now heads up CLG’s teams leading on cohesion and faith issues, preventing extremism, race equality and diversity, gypsies and travellers and the Citizenship Survey. David moved to the Department from a year-long secondment to the Local Government Association as programme director for safer communities and cohesion. There he led policy development and lobbying work with the Home Office, Ministry of Justice and CLG itself on issues such as crime and disorder, community cohesion, and fire and rescue. David's background before joining the LGA is as a senior civil servant at the Ministry of Defence. Recent roles include running the Department's CSR07 team; long-term planning and resource allocation work; equipment acquisition (in support of operations); and a spell working for Geoff Hoon MP in the Defence Secretary’s private office.

David lives with his wife, Antonia, and two children, Daisy and Jay, at the seaside in East Sussex.

Dr. Tanja Wunderlich is Program Officer based in the German Marshall Fund's Berlin office where she heads the Immigration and Integration Program. She is responsible for the Key Institutions Immigration and Integration Program, the Transatlantic Forum for Migration and Integration (TFMI), and Transatlantic Trends on Immigration, a representative public opinion survey. She was one of the coordinators and organizers of the Bellagio Dialogue on Migration, a month-long project in cooperation with the Rockefeller Foundation. Prior to her position in Berlin, she worked at the European Forum for Migration Studies (EFMS) in Bamberg, where she was responsible for research projects, funding management and international cooperation. Dr. Wunderlich holds a Ph.D. in political science from Otto-Friedrich-University in Bamberg and has published extensively in academic journals and books.