Nedbank Cup Last 32 Report: Black Leopards v Orlando Pirates 26
Nedbank Cup Last 32

Result: Black Leopards 1-1 Orlando Pirates (Leopards won 5-4 on penalties)

Date: 26 January 2019

Venue: Thohoyandou Stadium

Another big side dropped out of the Nedbank Cup, as Orlando Pirates were sent packing after losing to Black Leopards on penalties at the Thohoyandou Stadium.

Milutin Sredojevic made four changes from their 1-1 draw with Black Leopards on Tuesday, as Musa Nyatama, Xolani Mlambo, Asavela Mbekile and Innocent Maela came back to the starting XI after missing the last match.

After a lively opening, Mwape Musonda almost opened the scoring for Kerr’s charges in the 13th minute with a strike from the centre of the box that sailed slightly over the bar.

Justin Shonga eventually broke the deadlock for Pirates in the 32nd minute with a well placed direct free-kick on the edge of the box that sailed into the far corner.

Leopards weren't behind for too long as Musonda equalised six minutes before the break with a first-time strike that goalkeeper Jackson Mabokgwane was unable to keep out despite getting a hand to the ball.

Both sides went back and fourth in the remaining stages of the first half, but they were unable to add to the tally.

After a quiet start to the second half stanza, Vincent Pule almost restored the lead for Pirates in the 61st minute with a well weighted side-footed shot from just outside the box that missed slightly wide.

Kerr was forced to make a substitution 11 minutes before time as Mahangwahaya got injured and was replaced by Joseph Mhlongo, before Karabo Tshepe came on for Lesedi Kapinga in a direct switch upfront moments later.

Shonga had a chance to seal the game for Pirates three minutes before time after going through on the right side of the box , but his shot at the near post hit the side-netting, sending the game the into extra-time.

In the sixth minute of the first stanza of extra time, striker Thamsanqa Gabuza came on for defender Paseka Mako as the visitors looked to go all out for a winning goal.

Leopards had the momentum in the closing stages of the first half of extra time, but the combination of poor finishing and the brilliance of goalkeeper Jackson Mabokgwane denied them the lead.

Lidoda Duvha were reduced to ten men with three minutes remaining on the clock as Lehlohonolo Masalesa picked up his second yellow card for a lunge on Mlambo and was sent off.

There was little time left for both to find the winner and they went to penalty shoot-outs, where Leopards held their nerve triumph 5-4 in sudden death to progress to the last 16 of the competition.

Here's how they lined up:

Leopards: Ndlovu, Mudau, Zulu, Munganga, Masia, Masalesa, Bereng, Kapinga, Musonda, Mahangwahaya, Hlongwane.

Subs: Muleka, Ndou, Ndlovu, Nene, Tshepe, Mokoena, Mhlongo.

Pirates: Mabokgwane, Jele, Ndengane, Mbekile, Maela, Mlambo, Nyatama, Mako, Pule, Lorch, Shonga,

Subs: Sandilands, Munetsi, Maphangule, Motshwari, Mntambo, Mahchi, Gabuza.