Bill updating Oregon advance directives heads to governor's desk
Buy Photo The statue atop the Oregon Capitol Building (Photo: GORDON FRIEDMAN / Statesman Journal)Buy Photo

A bill that would make changes to Oregon's advance directive for end-of-life situations passed the Senate on a party-line vote Tuesday.

House Bill 4135 now heads to Gov. Kate Brown.

Lawmakers on both sides agreed the current form is in dire need of improvement. It was created in 1993 and has remained unchanged.

Sen. Elizabeth Steiner Hayward, D-Portland, said she has worked with hundreds of people on advance directives, and right now the wording is "almost impossible" to understand.

The confusing nature of the document makes a difficult conversation about end-of-life situations even more challenging.

"This form that we have now, it's written in lawyer and doctor. It's not written in English," she said.

An advance directive is a legal tool that allows a person to designate a representative to make health care decisions on their behalf in the event they are incapacitated. There is some specific guidance in the document, including whether they wish to receive life support or a feeding tube.

The changes to the form would be aimed at simplifying the language and reducing the sometimes burdensome witness requirement.

The bill would also create a committee to review that document every four years. The governor would appoint individuals to the committee representing health care providers, hospitals, hospice, disabled individuals and long-term care facilities, along with a few lawyers.

This bill is a redrafted version of a Senate bill that passed out of its originating chamber last year but did not reach the floor of the House for a vote. A work group has been reviewing this legislation since after the 2015 session.

It passed the House two weeks ago, 35-25.

Senate Republicans didn't think the bill was quite ready.

Sen. Dennis Linthicum, R-Klamath Falls, pointed to a handful of cases where he saw unclear language and phrasing issues.

One, in particular, is that the committee this bill would create is named the "Advance Directive Adoption Committee" and when it comes to the form itself, the action the committee would undertake is "adopt" instead of, as he would prefer, "propose."

Linthicum said this wording gives the committee too much power and provides the legislature too little oversight.

The bill itself says any changes to the advance directive form would need to be ratified by the legislature.

Linthicum proposed the committee include four additional members who would be appointed by the legislature, granting the Senate and House some additional oversight.

Other sections of the bill also lacked precision, Linthicum said. In short, the bill needed more work.

"In general, I'm not asking that we blow the bank on this," he said. "I'm simply saying the short session did not give us enough time to work these details out."

Contact the reporter at cradnovich@statesmanjournal.com or 503-399-6864 , or follow him on Twitter at @CDRadnovich

More: Oregon vows to reduce number of children housed in hotels by 2020

More: State representative's 2009 comment questioned women in leadership

More: Dallas man had blood-alcohol seven times legal limit in crash that killed Silverton teen

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/2ovsSmP