Judith Collins defends linking to fake news article on France consent laws
Senior National MP Judith Collins is standing by a tweet linking to an article that made false claims about France's age of consent laws.

The YourNewsWire.Com article was headlined "France Passes Law Saying Children Can Consent To Sex With Adults". In fact, France has just passed a law that made it far easier to charge adults who had sex with children under 15 with rape. It has strengthened its consent laws, not weakened them.

Yet Collins asked Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern to "denounce this legislation of child sexual abuse".

The article said France was the latest nation to "give into pressure from an international network of liberal activists determined to normalise paedophilia and decriminalise sex with children" by "abandonment" of its age of consent laws.

France had already made sex with any children younger than 15 an offence, but it did not automatically classify all such sex as rape - neither does New Zealand.

Another article on YourNewsWire, which is widely cited as a fake news site.

The new law makes it far easier for prosecutors to do so by introducing a new offence of "abuse of vulnerability". Critics have argued that the new law does not go far enough, but not that the law goes backward.

The website the article came from has been described as a "fake news" outlet by multiple sources including fact-checking site Snopes and The Times. It includes bizarre, false articles claiming pop singer Katy Perry has endorsed cannibalism.

Collins responded to those on Twitter who asked why she was tweeting out fake news by tweeting to reputable news sources covering the same topic, but in a deeply different way.

She told Stuff she didn't necessarily "agree" with every article she tweeted but wanted to draw attention to the issue.

"I'm just concerned about the story about France itself," Collins said.

She said France had a chance to strengthen its laws and had not and she hoped Ardern would bring this up with French President Emmanuel Macron

"It doesn't go far enough, that's my issue," Collins said.

"I was shocked to learn there is no age of consent in France....This is a civilised country, they should know better."

"I often retweet articles of interest. I don't have to agree with everything in those articles, otherwise I would never tweet anything except my own stuff."

"I don't censor people. I don't say you shouldn't listen to people you don't disagree with. I say don't shoot the messenger - and the message to me is not about allegations of liberal conspiracy, it's that child sex abuse is wrong, it's disgraceful, and in some countries it is easier than others."

Collins said she didn't buy into "conspiracies" about liberals pushing paedophilia worldwide, despite sharing the article which suggested liberals were doing just that in its first paragraph.

The baseless conspiracy theory that LGBT activists are also pushing for wider acceptable of paedophilia by adding "P" to LGBT" has gained much traction in the United States in recent months.

Collins did say anyone who had been police minister - as she has - would know there was an international network of paedophiles sharing abusive images of children.

Asked whether she thought these people had exercised any influence on the French law passing, Collins said: "I hope not."

Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern declined to comment at length on the French situation when asked, saying she would have to know more about the legal situation in the country before commenting.

She also declined to comment on whether or not it was appropriate for an MP to tweet a link to an article from a website known to publish fake news.



National leader Simon Bridges said he wouldn't discipline Collins over the tweet.

"I think in this case Judith Collins feels strongly about the issue - that's legitimate. But it is a wrong source, she acknowledges that, and we should in general try and get them right."