Details in spa sex, human trafficking released; neighbor says case 'like a movie'
Orchids of Asia Day Spa in Jupiter, one of several businesses targeted in a human trafficking and sex investigation that apparently began in Martin County, had online reviews identifying it in slang terms as a provider of sexual services.

Postings from February 2015 to March 2018 on a forum-based website detailed visits involving Asian women supplying sex acts, massages and body rubs for pay. Investigators found evidence of bodily fluids and got video of sex acts inside the Palm Beach County business.

These were among the details in a 16-page affidavit obtained Wednesday supporting the arrests of Hua Zhang, 58, and 39-year-old Lei Wang, in connection with the spa at 103 S. U.S. 1 in Jupiter.

The latest: Illicit sex spa income funds property in Martin County, records show

Previously: Large human trafficking ring busted across Treasure Coast, Palm Beach and Orange counties

Lei Wang (Photo11: CONTRIBUTED PHOTO BY MARTIN COUNTY SHERIFF'S OFFICE)

Far-reaching investigation

Hua Zhang (Photo11: CONTRIBUTED PHOTO BY PALM BEACH COUNTY SHERIFF'S OFFICE)

The affidavit brings into focus what investigators said was going on in at least one of the spas targeted, four of which are in Martin County.

Martin County Sheriff William Snyder on Tuesday discussed a far-reaching investigation involving human trafficking and sex that he said stretches to Orange County, New York and China.

Snyder disclosed the Tuesday arrests of Ruimei Li, of Jupiter, and Lixia Zhu, of Stuart, both 48. They were identified as madams or managers.

More: Third woman charged in connection with human trafficking ring on Treasure Coast, Jupiter

Ruimei Li (Photo11: CONTRIBUTED PHOTO BY MARTIN COUNTY SHERIFF'S OFFICE)

Photo of suspect Lixia Zhu, seen during a media briefing at the Martin County Sheriff's Office in Stuart on Tuesday, Feb. 19, 2019, to discuss an eight-month multi-agency case investigation involving human trafficking and prostitution. (Photo11: CONTRIBUTED PHOTO BY MARTIN COUNTY SHERIFF'S OFFICE)

Records show Zhang, of Winter Garden, and Wang, with an address in Hobe Sound, also were arrested Tuesday.

Meanwhile, officials in Indian River County Tuesday afternoon announced a six-month investigation into “multiple massage parlor locations” there, as well. Sebastian police raided AA Massage, in the 1500 block of U.S. 1. Additional details are expected to be discussed in Vero Beach Thursday.

What we know: Human trafficking in Florida massage parlors

What they found

Records supporting criminal charges at Orchids in Jupiter show an investigation began in October after Martin County sheriff’s detectives reported “they were working several cases of prostitution and possible human trafficking at Asian massage parlors in their county,” records state.

Jupiter police researched corporate records and found Orchids became active in February 2012, with Zhang as the registered agent.

More: 'It just didn't seem like it was an up-and-up situation,' says spa neighbor

Jupiter police researched Orchids online and found reviews indicating paid sex activities were available.

Surveillance in November showed as many as about 20 men a day visited Orchids, staying for 30 to 60 minutes.

CLOSE The Martin County Sheriff's Office hosts a news conference Feb. 19, 2019 detailing a local human trafficking ring that was busted across Treasure Coast, Palm Beach and Orange counties. Hannah Schwab, hannah.schwab@tcpalm.com

During a Nov. 14 state Department of Health inspection, three women, including Wang, were inside. It appeared women were living at the business. Wang identified herself as the manager.

Investigators inspected trash from the business and found evidence of bodily fluids on napkins.

They stopped men leaving Orchids, who said sexual services were rendered upon them.

Covert surveillance inside detailed sex acts on dozens of men.

More: Treasure Coast spas connected to human trafficking arrests opened within past three years

Investigators got a search warrant to install a tracking device on Zhang’s vehicle.

It was tracked from her condo in Jupiter to the business to Wang’s home in Hobe Sound. It also went to Sequoia Apple Day Spa, another targeted business, in Hobe Sound.

Jupiter investigators developed criminal charges for more than 20 men they said gave money to Zhang, Wang or others in exchange for Zhang, Wang or others to perform sex acts.

'Like a movie come to life’

Therapy Spa in Martin County (Photo11: WILL GREENLEE)

One of the businesses targeted in Martin County — Therapy Spa — is between Center for Specialized Dentistry and Sherban Spine Institute in a plaza on the west side of U.S. 1 at Southeast Luckhardt Street in Stuart.

Lettering out front notes services for golf massage, foot massage, body massage and couples massage.

Stephanie Lewandowski, medical assistant at the spine business, said when she got to work on Tuesday, many law enforcement officials were there.

“You hear that this stuff happens, but right next door to where you work?” Lewandowski said.

She said she thought the business kept unusual hours.

“It’s like a movie come to life,” Lewandowski said. “You see it like in a movie or you hear about it, but you never think it’s really going to happen next to where you work.”

More: Human trafficking, prostitution charges dropped for Port St. Lucie man arrested in sting

Cove Spa and Massage, 6136 SE U.S. 1, Stuart (Photo11: ERIC HASERT/TCPALM)

Miles to the south, in the Port Cove Plaza just south of Cove Road, is Cove Day Spa, another targeted business. Other establishments in the plaza include Tropical Smoothie Cafe and Rosalie’s Salon.

Erik Kromann, owner/manager of Rosalie’s, said he had suspicions about activities at the spa from the beginning. He said just one person worked on the interior.

“We never saw the contractor; they had a single guy just working and building out the place,” he said. “I was positive they were sleeping in there.”

He said he thought the spa opened around Thanksgiving, and the clientele was almost all men.

“Anything from a lot of pickup trucks to … some high-end cars that were coming in here, too,” Kromann said. “There were like $90,000 cars that were pulling up.”

Kromann said traffic picked up as the night went on and the windows of the spa were dark.

“It just didn’t seem like it was an up-and-up situation,” Kromann said.

Want more Treasure Coast breaking news coverage? If you're already a subscriber to TCPalm, thank you! If not, please subscribe to keep coverage of Treasure Coast breaking news coming.

More: Massage business shut down after prostitution sting near downtown Stuart

More: Post Parkland shooting: More deputies, more security at Treasure Coast schools

Read or Share this story: https://www.tcpalm.com/story/news/crime/martin-county/2019/02/20/details-florida-sex-spa-human-trafficking-cases-released/2929679002/