Taco Bell Restaurant Franchise FAQs
Do I need previous restaurant or franchising experience to become a Taco Bell franchise owner?

A Taco Bell franchisee must either have restaurant experience or partner with an operator who has restaurant experience.

Is Taco Bell offering single and multi-unit restaurant franchise opportunities?

Taco Bell has a goal of developing 2,000 new Mexican restaurant locations by 2023. Taco Bell’s main focus is to recruit new franchisees that can acquire and develop multiple units over time.

What are the initial franchise fee and royalty fees?

Initial Franchise Fee = $45,000

Monthly Service Fee (Royalties) = 5.5% of Gross Sales

Marketing = 4.25% of Gross Sales (Includes national and local contributions)

What type of training will I receive as a new Taco Bell franchisee?

The above amounts do not include the initial investment required to construct the restaurant, training expenses, grand opening expenses or opening inventory. Please refer to the Taco Bell Franchise Disclosure Document (FDD), Item 7, for more in-depth information on the total investment.

Before you open or acquire your first restaurant franchise, an approved Primary Operator and/or Franchisee will complete approximately eight weeks of restaurant training. The franchisee is responsible for all costs incurred including travel and lodging. An annual Brand Immersion program is also offered to further enhance the franchisee's training.

Does Taco Bell offer financing to open a restaurant franchise?

Taco Bell does not provide financing, however, we do provide a list of banks/financing institutions that have expressed an interest in lending to Taco Bell franchisees. To facilitate financing, Taco Bell is also listed on the SBA Registry.

Will I have a protected territory?

Franchisees do not have territories, however Taco Bell has an Impact Policy that exists to regulate new store development. Stores are only approved if the sales impact on existing Taco Bell restaurants is below established standards. Your Taco Bell representative can explain these standards further.

Will I receive guidance on purchasing restaurant equipment and supplies?

Yes, Restaurant Supply Chain Solutions (RSCS) is located at the Taco Bell Restaurant Support Center. You will work with them on standards and specifications regarding furnishings, equipment and approved suppliers.

How do I get started?

Let us know that you're interested! Click here to fill out the Request Information form, and someone from our franchise team will contact you if you are a fit.

Request More Info