Cuomo supports free SUNY tuition for NY Gold Star children
Gov. Andrew Cuomo says he will support a bill blocked by fellow Democrats that would provide free SUNY tuition to children of any military member from New York killed in the line of duty.

Cuomo said during a visit to Buffalo that it’s possible the bill could reach his desk this year, even though Assembly Democrats on the Higher Education Committee voted Tuesday to hold the legislation.

The 15-11 committee vote effectively ended the bill’s chances of making it to a floor vote this session.

“We have a moral obligation, a social obligation to help those families who lost their provider, their loved one, in service to this nation,” Cuomo told WGRZ-TV in Buffalo. “So, I would support providing free college tuition to SUNY schools for the children of people who were lost in service to the military.”

Some Assembly Democrats objected to the bill coming up for a committee vote a week after the Legislature passed a $175 billion budget. The budget included $27 million to provide new college tuition aid to undocumented immigrants.

Cuomo suggested Wednesday that lawmakers could still find a way to pass the shelved bill this year outside of the budget process.

“It requires a legal change, but I would support that legal change, and we have many more weeks of legislative action,” Cuomo said. “The legislature’s not going anywhere, so I would support it.”

NY Assembly blocks free college tuition for more Gold Star families Lawmakers block bill to provide SUNY tuition to families of any NY military member killed in line of duty.

The legislation would automatically grant free SUNY or CUNY tuition, room and board to any child, spouse of financial dependent of New York service members killed in the line of duty, known as Gold Star family members.

The bill would expand the existing MERIT scholarship program that’s available only to families of New York military members killed in combat zones. That program provides tuition assistance up to $24,250 per student each academic year.

The bill blocked Tuesday by Assembly Democrats would make aid available to families of military members killed or disabled anywhere in the line of duty, including training accidents in the U.S. and abroad. The bill would provide free tuition, room and board at any SUNY or CUNY school.

Contact Mark Weiner: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751