TEDxUniversityofWürzburg
Aya Jaff Writer & Coder It was no hard decision to invite Aya Jaff to contribute to TEDxUniWuerzburg - she has a remarkable background as entrepreneur, innovator, speaker, was dubbed "Mrs.Code" by ZEIT and featured in countless magazines and newspapers. In her talk she will share the secret of her success, how she conquers fears and self-doubt in order to change the world - or just to become the person she wants to be.

Jannik Kaiser Soziology Jannik, 28, is a passionate community builder and social entrepreneur. He is Co-Founder of Unity Effect, a for-purpose organization focusing on empowering young changemakers. Jannik is also co-developing „The Tannenbusch House“, a hub for skill-sharing and sustainable action in Bonn. His previous work experience was mainly in academia and the NGO sector, where he was responsible for teaching, project management and organizational development for more than 5 years.

Karl Kratz Owner of Karl Kratz online marketing The finest Online-Marketing since 1996

Mirjam Heine Medical Student One to two percent of the main male population is considered as pedophiles. This means worldwide more than 57 million people. Therefore, pedophilia is not an irrelevant phenomenon we can ignore. It is unrelated to class status and educational level. The medical student Mirjam Heine explains how an appropriate approach to the unchangeable sexual orientation pedophilia might look like. She is mainly guided by the works of Prof Dr. Dr. Beier, the head of the institute for sexology and sexual medicine at the University Hospital Berlin and the prevention network “Kein Täter Werden” (meaning “don’t offend”). Hence, she also believes that no one is responsible for their sexual orientation, for their feelings, but that everyone is responsible for acting upon this sexual orientation. She also inquires how all of us can gain if we distinguish clearly between our feelings and our actions. Since pedophiles can’t change their sexual desires, they must learn to control them to not act upon them.

Prof. Dr. Marc Erich Latoschik Professor arc studied mathematics and computer sciences at the University of Paderborn, the New York Institute of Technology and the Bielefeld University. After several accompanying years in the computer business, he received his PhD in 2001 in the area of multimodal–gesture and speech–interaction for Virtual Reality. He headed the AI & VR Lab at the Bielefeld University until 2007, became professor for media informatics at the University of Applied Sciences (HTW) in Berlin, and founded the Intelligent Graphics Group at Bayreuth University in 2009. Marc holds the chair for human-computer interaction at Würzburg University since 2011. His work is interdisciplinary oriented towards human-computer interaction interconnecting real-time 3D graphics and simulation, virtual and augmented environments, Artificial Intelligence, and cognitive sciences. arc studied mathematics and computer sciences at the University of Paderborn, the New York Institute of Technology and the Bielefeld University. After several accompanying years in the computer business, he received his PhD in 2001 in the area of multimodal–gesture and speech–interaction for Virtual Reality. He headed the AI & VR Lab at the Bielefeld University until 2007, became professor for media informatics at the University of Applied Sciences (HTW) in Berlin, and founded the Intelligent Graphics Group at Bayreuth University in 2009. Marc holds the chair for human-computer interaction at Würzburg University since 2011. His work is interdisciplinary oriented towards human-computer interaction interconnecting real-time 3D graphics and simulation, virtual and augmented environments, Artificial Intelligence, and cognitive sciences.