Feds announce indictment in massive bribery scheme related to Russian uranium company (UPDATED)
Correction: An earlier version of this story incorrectly stated that the indictment was related to the sale of Uranium One. That information was not correct. This story has been updated to remove all references to the Uranium One controversy. We regret the error.

———

The Department of Justice announced Friday the indictment of a Maryland man for his alleged role in a massive bribery scheme involving "an official at a subsidiary of Russia's State Atomic Energy Corporation."

What are the details?

The DOJ announced an 11-count indictment against Mark Lambert, a "co-president of a Maryland-based transportation company that provides services for the transportation of nuclear materials to customers in the United States and abroad."

According to the DOJ, Lambert allegedly payed bribes to Vadim Mikerin, a Russian official who worked JSC Techsnabexport (TENEX), in order to win "highly sensitive nuclear fuel transportation contracts." TENEX is a subsidiary of the Russian State Atomic Energy Corporation.

From the indictment:



[B]eginning at least as early as 2009 and continuing until October 2014, Lambert conspired with others at "Transportation Corporation A" to make corrupt and fraudulent bribery and kickback payments to offshore bank accounts associated with shell companies, at the direction of, and for the benefit of, a Russian official, Vadim Mikerin, in order to secure improper business advantages and obtain and retain business with TENEX.



In order to effectuate and conceal the corrupt and fraudulent bribe payments, Lambert and others allegedly caused fake invoices to be prepared, purportedly from TENEX to Transportation Corporation A, that described services that were never provided, and then Lambert and others caused Transportation Corporation A to wire the corrupt payments for those purported services to shell companies in Latvia, Cyprus and Switzerland.



Lambert was charged with seven counts of violating the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, two counts of wire fraud, one count of international promotion money laundering, and one count of conspiracy to violate the FCPA and to commit wire fraud.

Lambert's former co-president Daren Condrey pled guilty in 2015 to conspiracy to violate the FCPA and to commit wire fraud. Similarly, Mikerin served four years in prison for facilitating the payment of bribes from U.S. firms to win business with TENEX. He was deported from the U.S. last May.