'I'm drawn to a racially pure white society'
Here's a good joke, I tell the leader of the Young British National Party. It was told by the black comedian Lenny Henry at the West Bromwich Plaza in the 70s. It goes like this. "Enoch Powell wants to give us £1,000 to go home. Suits me. It only costs me 50p to get to Dudley." It sums up what I feel about the BNP's policy of repatriation and racial purity. The racists lost - black people are here to stay. Funny joke, isn't it?

Mark Collett doesn't smile. "Just because a dog is brought up in a stable doesn't make him a horse," he says. "If I was born in Afghanistan, that wouldn't make me an Afghan." So how long will it take for blacks born in Britain to become British in your view? "Never. All I ask of them is that when in Rome, they behave like Romans. They have to behave while they're here. Most people who are born here but are not white do not have an affiliation to this country. They run off to support Pakistan in the cricket and they don't get upset about people dying in the twin towers. That's unacceptable."

I'm pretty sure Lenny Henry doesn't support Pakistan, I say, and the safe money says he was upset by September 11. But in any event, how does he feel about Lenny Henry having a white wife? "It's not ideal. But then I don't think I'd have sex with Dawn French." Somehow I don't think she'd have sex with you either. Why are mixed relationships a problem to you? "I'm drawn to a racially pure white society." Why? "Because I'm proud of being British and English." Me too - at least sometimes - but I'm proud to live in a country where the captain of the English cricket team, Nasser Hussain, was born in India because it gives me hope for a racially integrated Britain. Does it have the same effect on you? "No. I can't cheer for an Indian even if he is captain of England."

But if this leading BNP organiser can't pass Norman Tebbit's cricket test, why should he condemn Britons of Pakistani heritage for supporting the Pakistan cricket team?

Let's try another sport. Imagine Beckham's foot fracture doesn't heal and Sol Campbell is made captain of the England football team for the World Cup. Would you cheer if this black man lifted the World Cup? "No. It's not ideal." Yes it is ideal, I counter: Campbell represents the great English virtues of the stiff upper lip, steadfastness under pressure, and having a black captain would do more for soothing race relations than anything you'll ever do. What's more, he's gorgeous - isn't he?

"That's the sort of rubbish I would expect from the Guardian." But you've lost, haven't you? Black people are so integrated into British society that your dream of a pure white Britain is never going to be realised. "No. Black people don't want to integrate. But you're right in one way: government figures say that by 2060 whites are going to be outnumbered by blacks. I'm not prepared to let that happen."

We're sitting in the Leeds University student's union canteen - Collett, me and his friend Andreas from Hamburg, the kind of endearing life form that can describe himself as a "German nationalist" without irony. It's great here, I say surveying the students taking lunch - people of different races and colours all mixed up together. You must hate it? "There are a lot of foreign students. I don't mind them because I've spoken to them and they say they don't want to live here. They want to go back home."

Collett is a 21-year-old business economics student poised to take his finals. He wrote an essay at 8am, has two classes this afternoon and then plans to take Pro-Plus so he can stay up all night to finish his dissertation on the economic collapse of the Soviet Union.

Then it's back to canvassing. Collett is standing in Leeds' Haresfield ward in tomorrow's local elections. He expects to poll 10% and come third, at least. Like many of the wards the BNP is targeting in the north of England, Haresfield is a deprived, ethnically divided area where racial tension has been stoked by Collett and his associates. None the less, he tries to portray the BNP as respectable. "We're not Nazi fetishists like the NF were. They were clowns. We're serious."

What makes an articulate student embrace racist, extreme rightwing policies? Does it help with pulling the girls or something? "I get my fair share," says Collett. "That blonde behind you is a possible." He says he was brought up in a "very, very working-class family" in Leicester, that his father managed to pull himself up by his bootstraps and set up a successful window company. Yes, yes, but why the BNP? "When I came to Leeds University I joined the Free Speech society to fight against political correctness. Then a BNP speaker got expelled, which I thought was absurd. He invited me to a BNP meeting in Burnley and I felt right at home. They were my kind of people - families, not loony Nazis of media hysteria."

But what is it that made you a racist - something about Leicester with its large ethnic-minority population perhaps? "I went back there recently and it was worse than Leeds - blacks everywhere, sari shops, jewellers, Indian restaurants. I hated that." Funny, I say: I was brought up in Dudley and Birmingham and I loved all that - Indian sweets, beautiful Asian women, wonderful clothes from another culture, the sense that a decaying white culture might be enriched by immigration, curries. "Ah yes, but we invented curries," snaps Collett childishly. "They didn't exist till we got out there." Whence this desire to appropriate or exterminate a culture rather than enjoy it? Is all racism that infantile?

He fixes me. "You'd fit right in the BNP. Short hair, neat clothes, wedding ring." Is this a recruitment pitch? I should have told him about my years proselytising in favour of black music when I was jazz critic of the Morning Star, then extolled my love of gay Jews such as Wittgenstein and Proust, and made a lurid pass at him.

What do your parents think of you? "They're proud of me. I'm the youth leader of the fourth-largest political party. We have had long conversations and they agree with a lot of what I stand for." Your siblings? "I've got a 17-year-old sister. She's with me." What about your tutors? "Some of them are a bit concerned about me."

As I walk back to Leeds railway station I see some graffiti. "What's the point?" it says, and that smug apathy, of the same stamp that made the French stay at home rather than vote for Jospin, chills me. Collett, to his credit, has helped me to answer it. "You say we've lost," he says. "We haven't. We're sweeping across Europe. Le Pen, Haider, Norway, Holland. It could be here next."