0714 cruzpftexas

Emails, Catherine Frazier, press secretary, U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, July 1-2, 2014

12:05 p.m.

Only a few of many examples below. Please note that the President says these policies, specifically DACA, is not amnesty and it is only temporary — but there is nothing on paper that ends this policy. It is indefinite until someone else comes in and decides to finally enforce the law. And he may say it's not amnesty, but we argue it is – his policies make it clear that people who have come here illegally are allowed to stay with no threat of deportation.

Here is a statement from me. Please include its entirety in your writeup: "There is no greater advocate for legal immigration than Sen. Cruz, whose own father immigrated – legally – from Cuba. We are a nation of immigrants, a heritage that should be celebrated. But we must also be a nation of laws. President Obama has made numerous efforts to bypass Congress and ignore the law by taking executive action that allows those who have come here illegally to stay here indefinitely, with no consequences. Announcing such policies sends a message to the world that we don't enforce our own laws, and that those who make it across the border will be allowed to stay, which is de facto amnesty. We need to reform our immigration system – and we must do so by securing the border and revamping our legal immigration system while respecting the rule of law.

June 15, 2012

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/16/us/transcript-of-obamas-speech-on-immigration-policy.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0

This morning, Secretary Napolitano announced new actions my administration will take to mend our nation’s immigration policy, to make it more fair, more efficient and more just, specifically for certain young people sometimes called DREAMers.

Now, these are young people who study in our schools, they play in our neighborhoods, they’re friends with our kids, they pledge allegiance to our flag. They are Americans in their heart, in their minds, in every single way but one: on paper. They were brought to this country by their parents, sometimes even as infants, and often have no idea that they’re undocumented until they apply for a job or a driver’s license or a college scholarship.

Put yourself in their shoes. Imagine you’ve done everything right your entire life, studied hard, worked hard, maybe even graduated at the top of your class, only to suddenly face the threat of deportation to a country that you know nothing about, with a language that you may not even speak.

That’s what gave rise to the Dream Act. It says that if your parents brought you here as a child, you’ve been here for five years and you’re willing to go to college or serve in our military, you can one day earn your citizenship. And I’ve said time and time and time again to Congress that — send me the Dream Act, put it on my desk, and I will sign it right away.

Now, both parties wrote this legislation, and year and a half ago, Democrats passed the Dream Act in the House, but Republicans walked away from it. It got 55 votes in the Senate, but Republicans blocked it. The bill hasn’t really changed; the need hasn’t changed. It’s still the right thing to do. The only thing that has changed, apparently, was the politics.

Now, as I said in my speech on the economy yesterday, it makes no sense to expel talented young people who, for all intents and purposes, are Americans. They’ve been raised as Americans, understand themselves to be part of this country. To expel these young people who want to staff our labs or start new businesses or defend our country simply because of the actions of their parents or because of the inactions of politicians — in the absence of any immigration action from Congress to fix our broken immigration system, what we’ve tried to do is focus our immigration enforcement resources in the right places. So we prioritize border security, putting more boots on the southern border than at any time in our history.

Today there are fewer illegal crossings than at any time in the past 40 years. We focus and use discretion about whom to prosecute, focusing on criminals who endanger our communities rather than students who are earning their education. And today deportation of criminals is up 80 percent. We’ve improved on that discretion carefully and thoughtfully.

Well, today we’re improving it again. Effective immediately, the Department of Homeland Security is taking steps to lift the shadow of deportation from these young people. Over the next few months, eligible individuals who do not present a risk to national security or public safety will be able to request temporary relief from deportation proceedings and apply for work authorization.

Now, let’s be clear. This is not amnesty. This is not immunity. This is not a path to citizenship. It’s not a permanent fix. This is a temporary, stopgap measure that lets us focus our resources wisely while giving a degree of relief and hope to talented, driven, patriotic young people. It is the — it is the right thing to do.

January 29, 2013

http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/01/29/remarks-president-comprehensive-immigration-reform

And third, we took up the cause of the DREAMers, the young people who were brought to this country as children, young people who have grown up here, built their lives here, have futures here. We said that if you’re able to meet some basic criteria like pursuing an education, then we’ll consider offering you the chance to come out of the shadows so that you can live here and work here legally, so that you can finally have the dignity of knowing you belong.

But because this change isn’t permanent, we need Congress to act -- and not just on the DREAM Act. We need Congress to act on a comprehensive approach that finally deals with the 11 million undocumented immigrants who are in the country right now. That's what we need.

From: <Selby>, Gardner Selby <wgselby@statesman.com>

Date: Wednesday, July 2, 2014 1:22 PM

To: Catherine Frazier

Subject: Policy institute expert

Sharing here:

Today, we interviewed Marc Rosenblum of the Washington-based Migration Policy Institute, who told us a longstanding U.S. policy signed into law by George W. Bush has contributed to unaccompanied children fleeing the violence-afflicted countries of Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras for this country.

He said the Trafficking Victims Reauthorization Act, signed into law in 2008, affirmed existing government policy requiring officials to enable unaccompanied children entering from countries other than Canada and Mexico to stay here long enough to seek asylum. Notably, Rosenblum advised, the law requires such children to be placed in the least restrictive setting, which typically ends up being a family member already here.

“It’s not that kids are responding to misinformation” about Obama’s actions, Rosenblum said. “They’re responding to accurate information about what’s happening to people who have come.”

Let me know if you have anything fresh to provide?

g.

5:13 p.m.

July 2, 2014

Yes – the William Wilberforce Act. This does not change the fact that the policies promoted by the president are encouraging these children to come here, nor solely explain the spike in UAC crossings the last few years under the Obama Administration.

Here is another report citing officials within CBP and ICE saying that the lack of deterrence has impacted the rate of children crossing the border alone. It was prepared by UTEP at the request of DHS: http://ncbsi.utep.edu/documents/UAC%20Project%20Site%20Visits/UTEP%20NCBSI%20Final%20Report%20March%2020%202014.pdf

EXCERPT:

Both Border Patrol and ICE ERO officers agreed that the lack of deterrence for crossing the US Mexican border has impacted the rate at which they apprehend UACs. Officers are certain that UACs are aware of the relative lack of consequences they will receive when apprehended at the U.S. border. UTEP was informed that smugglers of family members of UACs understand that once a UAC is apprehended for illegal entry into the United States, the individual will be reunited with a U.S. based family member pending the disposition of the immigration hearing

From: <Selby>, Gardner Selby <wgselby@statesman.com>

Date: Wednesday, July 2, 2014 11:47 AM

To: Catherine Frazier

Subject: RE: Following up, fresh fact check

Let me know if you have more than the 2012 executive action.

5:28 p.m.

July 2, 2014

June 17, 2011 John Morton ICE prosecutorial discretion memo, establishing the current policy of to focus most interior enforcement resources on criminal aliens.