Let them eat air...
Breatharians claim to live on cosmic light alone, but their leaders have been dogged by rumours of furtive snacking. Oliver Burkeman finds out how long we can really go without food and water

As off-the-wall millennial fads go, breatharianism doesn't so much take the biscuit as put it firmly back in the packet and chuck the whole lot in the dustbin along with the rest of the larder's contents. Followers of Jasmuheen, the 43-year-old Brisbane-based ex-businesswoman who spearheads the movement, claim to subsist on air and light alone.

Using meditation and visualisation techniques they have, they say, "reprogrammed" their bodies to require no food or drink. Breatharians call it "pranic nourishment", and argue that they have discovered not just a source of enhanced energy, better health and a more fulfilling sex life, but a viable solution to world hunger. Conventional nutritionists call it madness.

So far, so eyeball-rollingly new age. But this improbable tale of fresh-air freakery was cast in a more sombre light last week by the sad story of Verity Linn, 49, whose body was found near a tent overlooking the remote Cam Loch near Elphin, Sutherland, in the Scottish Highlands. Police believe she died from hypothermia and dehydration several days before she was discovered. A copy of Jasmuheen's best-selling breatharian primer Living on Light was among her possessions, and her diary suggests she had embarked upon the 21-day initiation programme recommended in the book - beginning with a week of complete abstention from food and drink.

If that is what happened, she will not have been breatharianism's first casualty. Last summer Lani Morris, a 33-year-old Australian, died in a Brisbane hospital after following the regime. It has also been linked to the death in 1997 of Munich kindergarten teacher Timo Degen, who was 31.

The body, unsurprisingly, does not take kindly to such deprivations. Experts differ as to the absolute maximum length of time that human life can continue without water, but the broad consensus rests at somewhere between seven and 10 days - though severe dehydration and confusion (due to the build-up of sodium and potassium in the brain) would set in sooner. In the desert, of course, lack of water can kill in a matter of hours.

"It depends on the climate, and how much exercise you're taking, but if you're lying in bed you would probably be just about all right for a week," says Dr Charles Clarke, who specialises in high-altitude survival medicine and has accompanied the climber Chris Bonington on expeditions to Mount Everest. "But towards the end of the first week, you'd become pretty gravely ill. Your blood would become thicker, your kidneys can't cope; multiple organ failure follows, you get hypothermic and eventually you die."

Two decades of research have established that the body replenishes half of its water every 10-12 days, according to Benjamin Caballero, president of the Society for International Nutrition Research and a professor at Johns Hopkins university in Baltimore. "Somebody who is not consuming any water at all would therefore lose half their body water after about 10 days," he says. "That's probably lethal: after all, even a 10 to 15% loss of body water can cause severe dehydration in children, and 20% can lead to a coma."

But scratch the surface of the breatharians' boldly implausible claims and a very different story emerges. Rather crucially, far from living on "prana" alone, the movement's leading lights eat and drink.

Jasmuheen freely admits to drinking orange juice regularly and occasionally nibbling chocolate biscuits for a "taste sensation". In the past she has described her diet as including tea with honey and soya milk, chocolate, crisps, soup and the odd piece of fruit. Thoeretically, a diet consisting of those foods in small amounts could represent a calorific intake to which the body could adjust without significant weight loss.

More intriguing is the litany of rumours and anomalies that have dogged the movement since its earliest days. In 1983 Wiley Brooks, founder of the Breatharian Institute of America, caused horror and mass resignations within his organisation and hilarity outside it when he was reported to have been spotted - depending on whom you believe - either ordering a chicken pie in a hotel restaurant or buying Twinkies from a 7-11 store. Brooks, now in his 60s, has consistently denied the allegations, and attributes them to the resentment of a woman he'd just finished dating.

Reporters visiting Jasmuheen's Brisbane home have been bewildered to find her fridge well-stocked with vegetarian food which, she says, belongs to her partner Jeff Ferguson, a convicted fraudster. And a British journalist accompanying Jasmuheen to her check-in desk at Heathrow last December was astonished when the BA clerk asked her to confirm that she'd ordered an in-flight vegetarian meal. "No, no," she replied. "Well, yes, OK, I did. But I won't be eating it."

At the end of last year, on a speaking tour of Britain, Jasmuheen repeatedly offered to put an end to the speculation with a scientifically monitored "Breatharian Retreat".

It never happened. A terse email from a staff member at Jasmuheen's Cosmic Internet Academy stated yesterday that "the Breatharian Retreat was cancelled", adding that Jasmuheen would be unavailable for comment until later this week.

There's no evidence of malicious intent on the part of Brooks or Jasmuheen. Instead, eating disorders specialists believe, some breatharians may themselves be suffering from a dietary delusion common among obese people trying to lose weight.

"Breatharianism is a fraud, but breatharians may be deluded," says Dee Dawson, medical director of Rhodes Farm Clinic in north London, which treats young children with eating disorders. "Every obese person who comes into my surgery says, 'Doctor, I can't understand why I'm not losing weight - I haven't eaten all week.' Then I say 'What did you have for breakfast?' 'Oh, just three pieces of toast.' 'And lunch?' 'Just one sausage and few chips...' Add it all up and they've eaten 2,000 calories that day."

Dawson argues the movement's self-publicising antics are damaging the efforts of those working to treat dietary problems. "They're nutters," she says. "This silly woman going around saying such stupid things is not helping those children."

Hard-to-stomach diets

Raw-foodism

A vegan diet, but it can include dairy products and even raw meat. Raw-foodists say enzymes used by the body to digest cooked food divert energy from the body's natural cleansing and healing processes

Living-foodism

A diet high in raw fermented foods, raw, blended foods, and sprouts. Often practised as a variation on sproutarianism.

Instinctive eating

"Instinctos", guided by their senses, eat single food types (seafood, raw meat) in sequence in accordance with "messages" from their bodies.

Fruitarianism

This calls for a diet of around three-quarters raw fruit, though vegetables are also permissible.

Sproutarianism

Self-explanatory - and not a joke. Sproutarians usually supplement a diet of sprouts with other raw vegetables.

Related story:

22 September: Dead woman 'tried to live on air'