1014 texaseducationagencypftexas

Emails, Lauren Callahan, information specialist, Texas Education Agency, including response from Laura Moriaty, staff attorney, TEA, Oct. 23-24, 2014

From: Callahan, Lauren

Sent: Thursday, October 23, 2014 5:04 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: FW: Seeking agency analysis for a fact check

Gardner,

Our legal team got back to us, and I’m forwarding their explanation to you. Let us know if you have any further questions.

Lauren

From: Moriaty, Laura

Sent: Thursday, October 23, 2014 4:59 PM

Subject: RE: Seeking agency analysis for a fact check

Put another way, before this measure passed into law, could districts terminate a teacher convicted of a felony? What barriers existed?

Chapter 21 of the Texas Education Code states that a school district can terminate a teacher for good cause (the definition of “good cause” differs slightly by the type of teacher contract involved, but conviction of a felony is likely good cause for termination of any type of teacher contract). The school district has to give proper notice, and teacher can request a hearing and then appeal the case to the Commissioner. That statutory process existed both before and after the passage of HB 1610.

For teachers convicted of a felony, HB 1610 removed the teacher’s right to notice, a hearing, and appeal to the Commissioner under Chapter 21 of the Texas Education Code, basically making it quicker, easier and cheaper for school districts to terminate teachers convicted of felonies. The HRO analysis on the bill presents the proponents and opponents positions pretty well: (please note the HRO report is on the version of the bill that went to the House floor but the relevant provisions is substantially similar to the version that passed--http://www.hro.house.state.tx.us/pdf/ba82r/hb1610.pdf#navpanes=0)

“SUPPORTERS SAY:

CSHB 1610 would permit a school district or charter school to avoid the expensive termination process for teachers involved in certain felony offenses, which can take between 90 and 120 days. Current law permits

immediate termination only of a teacher convicted of a violent crime or a crime against a minor and leaves out crimes that destroy public trust, such as theft, burglary, and embezzlement. It is critical that a district or charter school have the ability to terminate immediately individuals convicted of other felonies in order to protect the integrity of the school district. Teachers still would have the full protection of due process of the law. For the school district to be able to terminate a teacher under the bill, the teacher would have been through the entire legal process and have been convicted of the crime or received deferred adjudication. At that point, the school district would not change the legal findings of the judicial system, but would be able to remove quickly teachers who had broken the trust of the public.

OPPONENTS SAY:

This bill would revoke a teaching certificate for any felony, which could punish some teachers needlessly for mistakes made in their younger years. The current system works and should be maintained. The bill would take away a teacher’s right to due process by prohibiting an appeal. If a school district or charter school was wrong to terminate a teacher, the teacher would have no recourse to challenge the decision.”

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Thursday, October 23, 2014 5:26 PM

To: Callahan, Lauren

Cc: Ratcliffe, Debbie

Subject: RE: Seeking agency analysis for a fact check

Thanks.

Chapter 21 said all that’s in the first graf below before HB 1610 happened, yes?

8:31 a.m.

Oct. 24, 2014

Yes, that section of Chapter 21 was enacted in 1995.