Mums share the unintentionally rude drawings their kids accidentally made very X-rated
THESE are the hilarious drawings which show how innocent children's minds can accidentally come up with some very rude artwork.

These children's creations left viewers in stitches after mums took to social media to share the unintentionally X-rated drawings.

The Unmumsy Mum 9 This hilarious drawing sent Facebook viewers into a frenzy

One mum shared this hilarious Father's Day drawing of a "superhero daddy" with an unconventional power.

The well-endowed dad is wearing a long blue cape, which accidentally came out looking more than a bit phallic.

Mum Kirsty Heron posted the silly snap to Facebook with the caption: "Thought you'd like to see my 6-year-old daughter's drawing of her superhero dad for Father's Day."

Related Stories mum knows best Worried about your cooking? This self-confessed ‘crap housewife’ will make you feel a lot better Would you do this? Parents row online after a child is spotted sleeping alone in a car... but not everyone agrees it's wrong Wit a girl 'I'd like to go to heaven but you can't smoke weed there': Mum shares hilarious comments her child, 7, makes Disney do well Man shows up every other dad in the world by making his child an awesome costume for her Disney World trip Best kept secret A dead cat and a paternity test: Kids share the surprising things they found in their parents' bedroom

One joker commented: "I think we all know what his superpower is," followed by a winking emoji.

Another added: "Lucky mummy," with another winky face.

Another funny drawing features a rocket which looks a bit rude, prompting delight amongst viewers.

One person joked: "Poor rocket needs to get its haemorrhoids checked", while another added:

"Is that blood from it being chopped off?"

The Unmumsy Mum 9 This "rocket" raised eyebrows online

Meanwhile, one child made a dinosaur look very x-rated, having drawn a green, phallic creature instead of a more typical breed of the long-extinct lizards.

And one child's artistic impression sea lion turned out to look very rude indeed, causing a stir thanks to it's unusually shaped tail.

The Unmumsy Mum 9 T-Sex... this unlikely dinosaur looks a bit X-rated

The Unmumsy Mum 9 This sea lion's tail makes it look a bit suspect

Another drawing features a man posing with an eyebrow-raising addition drawn on between his legs, whilst this next unintentionally rude drawing also caused a substantial stir.

Apparently the circular person in this picture had a belly button added on below his torso, although it looks like something very different thanks to its unfortunate placement.

The Unmumsy Mum 9 This drawing features a blatant - and very rude - addition between his legs

The Unmumsy Mum 9 This man boasts a bizarrely-placed belly button

Likewise, one kid's superhero painting was made very x-rated thanks to the dubious placement of this man's outstretched arm.

"You are my superhero," the charming card reads, although the unfortunate limb makes it seem ruder than it was certainly intended.

The Unmumsy Mum 9 Out on a limb... this outstretched arm is a dodgy addition

Another card features a fisherman who made a splash thanks to the placement of his droopy rod - which looks to be part of his anatomy rather than anything else.

And one of the funniest illustrations features this LEGO figure - who appears to have a technicolor appendage between his legs.

The Unmumsy Mum 9 This droopy rod make a fisherman seem very rude