This ancient shark is said to be the world’s oldest living vertebrate at 512 years old…meaning it was born before SHAKESPEARE
A SHARK believed to be the oldest living vertebrate has been discovered — and it could be older than Shakespeare.

The massive Greenland shark was found in the North Atlantic ocean by scientists who estimated it is up to 512 years old.

INSTAGRAM/@JUNIEL85 A Greenland shark is caught by fishermen. One of a group of 28 analysed by scientists is believed to be up to 512 years old (file picture)

They used its size to suggest its year of birth is as early as 1505 - when future King Henry VIII ended his engagement to Catherine of Aragon.

Greenland sharks, which only grow 1cm a year, have been known to live for hundreds of years.

Experts used its length - a staggering 18ft - and radiocarbon dating to determine its age as between 272 and 512 years old, according to a study in journal Science.

It was the oldest of a group of 28 Greenland sharks analysed for the study.

INSTAGRAM/@JUNIEL85 Greenland sharks are known for their longevity, living for hundreds of years (file picture)

INSTAGRAM/@JUNIEL85 An 18ft Greenland shark was estimated to be as old as 512 (file picture)

MOST READ IN NEWS YOU SHOP, THEY DROP Hermes workers caught hurling your Christmas packages around car park GETTING HOT AND STICKY Brazil's babes prepare for 30C Christmas with DUCT TAPE bikinis HO HO NO Drunk partygoers collapse in the street and cops attacked on Mad Friday 'I STILL HOPE' Maddie McCann's mum reveals she still buys missing daughter presents ALDI HORROR Man charged with murdering Aldi worker 'is her mum’s ex-partner' NO PLAYBOYS Hugh Hefner will orders heirs to stay sober if they want cut of £40m fortune

Ancient beasts: Some of the world's longest-living creatures Aldabra giant tortoise - Species has been known to live to up to 255 years old, making it the oldest terrestrial animal in the world

Glass sponges (pictured) - Found in the East China Sea and Southern Ocean, examples have been found that are over 10,000 years old

Great Basin bristlecone pine - One tree is the oldest in North America at 5,067 years old

Endolith - A microspopic organism that lives inside rock. One was found on the ocean floor in 2013 generation time of 10,000 years

Hydra - an ocean species that does not age, making it technically immortal

Creme Puff - The oldest known domestic cat, who died in Austin Texas in 2005 aged 38 years and three days

Jeanne Calment - French great grandmother who died at 122 years and 164 days in 1997. She outlived both her daughter and grandson by several decades.

The shark would have been alive during major world events like the founding of the United States, the Napoleonic wars and the sinking of the Titanic.

Greenland sharks mostly eat fish but they have never been observed hunting. They have been found to have remains of reindeer and even horses in their stomachs.

Their flesh is considered a delicacy in Iceland, but it is also toxic if not treated.

A separate study of its bones and tissues by the Arctic University of Norway may also provide clues about the effects of climate change and pollution over a long time span.

Already the researchers have mapped out all the 16ft shark’s mitochondrial DNA – genetic material held in tiny battery-like bodies in cells that supply energy.

Great white shark headbutts diver in scary shark attack encounter

Now they are working on DNA from the cell nucleus, which contains the bulk of the animal’s genes.

The “long life” genes could shed light on why most vertebrates have such a limited life span, and what determines life expectancy in different species, including humans.

Professor Kim Praebel, who is leading the hunt, said the sharks were “living time capsules” that could help shed light on human impact on the oceans.

Many were so old they pre-dated the industrial revolution and the introduction of large-scale commercial fishing.

“The longest living vertebrate species on the planet has formed several populations in the Atlantic Ocean,” said Prof Praebel, who was speaking at the University of Exeter at a symposium organised by the Fisheries Society of the British Isles.

“This is important to know, so we can develop appropriate conservation actions for this important species.”

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.