United Airlines
Current Location within United.com Skip Navigation Links Home

Travel information

Inflight services

Basic Economy You are here. Basic Economy Created for our customers who may be more price-sensitive, our lower-priced Basic Economy fares provide most of the same inflight services and amenities that are available with standard United Economy® fares — such as food and beverages, United Wi-Fi℠ and inflight entertainment — but with some important restrictions that you'll want to be sure to review carefully before booking: Complimentary seat selection and upgrades are not available When you choose a Basic Economy ticket, your complimentary seat will be automatically assigned prior to boarding, and you won't be able to change your seat once it's been assigned. Advance seat assignments may be available for purchase during booking and up until check-in opens. You will not be eligible to purchase Economy Plus® seating or receive Economy Plus subscription benefits. MileagePlus members, including Premier® members, cannot use complimentary, earned or mileage upgrades. Group and family seating is not available Please note that customers traveling in a group, including families, will not be able to sit together unless advance seat assignments are purchased and seats are available. Full-sized carry-on bags are not permitted on select routes On trans-Atlantic flights, your carry-on baggage allowance is the same as for standard Economy tickets. For all other Basic Economy tickets, you're not allowed a full-sized carry-on bag unless you're a MileagePlus Premier member or companion traveling on the same reservation, the primary cardmember of a qualifying MileagePlus credit card or a Star Alliance™ Gold member. Everyone else who brings a full-sized carry-on bag to the gate will be required to check their bag and pay the applicable checked bag fee plus a $25 gate handling charge. One personal item is allowed You are allowed one small personal item that fits under the seat in front of you, such as a shoulder bag, purse, laptop bag or other item that is 9 inches x 10 inches x 17 inches (22 cm x 25 cm x 43 cm) or less. Mobility aids, assistive devices, medical devices including breast pumps, and compact folding strollers are also permitted. With Basic Economy, you'll only be able to check in for your flight through united.com or the United app if you indicate that you're checking a bag. To check your bag, you'll go to a check-in counter or designated kiosk in the airport lobby. If you begin check-in and do not indicate that you're checking a bag, you'll need to finish checking in for your flight at the airport. Flight changes and refunds are not allowed Ticket changes are not allowed with Basic Economy, including advance and same-day changes. Refunds are not allowed except as stated in the Ticket changes are not allowed with Basic Economy, including advance and same-day changes. Refunds are not allowed except as stated in the United 24-hour flexible booking policy Certain MileagePlus and Premier member benefits are not available If you're a MileagePlus member, you will still earn award miles based on the fare and your MileagePlus status, as well as full Premier qualifying dollars, lifetime miles and toward the four-segment minimum. However, MileagePlus members will earn 50% Premier qualifying miles and 0.5 Premier qualifying segments, and they won't receive some benefits. If you're a MileagePlus member, you will still earn award miles based on the fare and your MileagePlus status, as well as full Premier qualifying dollars, lifetime miles and toward the four-segment minimum. However, MileagePlus members will earn 50% Premier qualifying miles and 0.5 Premier qualifying segments, and they won't receive some benefits. See more details below Last boarding group With Basic Economy, you'll also be in the last boarding group unless you're a MileagePlus Premier member or companion traveling on the same reservation, the primary cardmember of a qualifying MileagePlus credit card or a Star Alliance Gold member.

Checked baggage policies For Basic Economy fares on trans-Atlantic flights, you’ll be required to pay for your first checked bag. All other Basic Economy fares have the same checked baggage policies as standard Economy tickets. You can still check your bags and pay the applicable service charge in the airport lobby when you're picking up your boarding pass. MileagePlus and Premier member details MileagePlus members, including Premier members, will earn: Award miles based on the fare and MileagePlus status

Full Premier qualifying dollars (PQD)

50% Premier qualifying miles (PQM)

0.5 Premier qualifying segments (PQS)

Lifetime miles

Toward the four-segment minimum MileagePlus members, including Premier members, will not receive: Complimentary Economy Plus seating

Paid upgrades

Mileage upgrades

Complimentary Premier Upgrades

Regional Premier Upgrades

Global Premier Upgrades United Travel Options While Economy Plus is not available with Basic Economy fares, you can still personalize your trip with most other United Travel Options products. Enjoy added convenience when you purchase Baggage Delivery and access to United ClubSM locations — and you have the option of protecting your booking with FareLockSM or trip insurance. If you have an eligible itinerary, you can also buy more miles with the Award Accelerator® program. View frequently asked questions about Basic Economy Terms and conditions Basic Economy tickets are nonrefundable and non-changeable except as allowed by our 24-hour flexible booking policy — and they cannot be combined with any other fare type. They have no value if canceled or unused.

Seat selection: Seats are automatically assigned prior to boarding and can't be changed. Customers traveling together, including families, will not be able to sit together. Advance seat assignments may be available for purchase during booking and up until check-in opens.

Seats are automatically assigned prior to boarding and can't be changed. Customers traveling together, including families, will not be able to sit together. Advance seat assignments may be available for purchase during booking and up until check-in opens. Carry-on bags: On trans-Atlantic flights, your carry-on baggage allowance is the same as for standard Economy tickets. For all other Basic Economy tickets, you're allowed one small personal item that fits under the seat in front of you, such as a shoulder bag, purse, laptop bag or other small item that is 9 inches x 10 inches x 17 inches (22 cm x 25 cm x 43 cm) or less. Mobility aids and other assistive devices are also permitted. View our baggage policies. You're not allowed a full-sized carry-on bag unless you're a MileagePlus Premier member or companion traveling on the same reservation, primary cardmember of a qualifying MileagePlus credit card or Star Alliance Gold member. Everyone else who brings a full-sized carry-on bag to the gate will be required to check their bag and pay the applicable checked bag fee plus a $25 gate handling charge.

On trans-Atlantic flights, your carry-on baggage allowance is the same as for standard Economy tickets. For all other Basic Economy tickets, you're allowed one small personal item that fits under the seat in front of you, such as a shoulder bag, purse, laptop bag or other small item that is 9 inches x 10 inches x 17 inches (22 cm x 25 cm x 43 cm) or less. Mobility aids and other assistive devices are also permitted. View our baggage policies. You're not allowed a full-sized carry-on bag unless you're a MileagePlus Premier member or companion traveling on the same reservation, primary cardmember of a qualifying MileagePlus credit card or Star Alliance Gold member. Changing a flight: Ticket changes are not allowed. This includes advance changes and same-day changes, even for Premier members.

Ticket changes are not allowed. This includes advance changes and same-day changes, even for Premier members. Premier qualifying credits: MileagePlus members will earn 50% Premier qualifying miles and 0.5 Premier qualifying segments. They will still earn full Premier qualifying dollars, award miles based on the fare and their MileagePlus status, lifetime miles and toward the four-segment minimum.

MileagePlus members will earn 50% Premier qualifying miles and 0.5 Premier qualifying segments. They will still earn full Premier qualifying dollars, award miles based on the fare and their MileagePlus status, lifetime miles and toward the four-segment minimum. Economy Plus and upgrades: Travelers with Basic Economy fares are not eligible to purchase Economy Plus seating or premium cabin upgrades, use their Economy Plus subscription benefits or purchase United Travel Options packages.

Travelers with Basic Economy fares are not eligible to purchase Economy Plus seating or premium cabin upgrades, use their Economy Plus subscription benefits or purchase United Travel Options packages. MileagePlus and Premier member seating benefits: Travelers with Basic Economy fares who are MileagePlus members, including Premier members, will not be eligible to use paid upgrades, mileage upgrades, Complimentary Premier Upgrades, Regional Premier Upgrades, Global Premier Upgrades or any other upgrade types. Complimentary Economy Plus seating will not be available for MileagePlus Premier members.

Travelers with Basic Economy fares who are MileagePlus members, including Premier members, will not be eligible to use paid upgrades, mileage upgrades, Complimentary Premier Upgrades, Regional Premier Upgrades, Global Premier Upgrades or any other upgrade types. Complimentary Economy Plus seating will not be available for MileagePlus Premier members. Boarding groups: Travelers with Basic Economy fares will be assigned to the last boarding group, with the exception of MileagePlus Premier members and their companions on the same reservation, primary cardmembers of a qualifying MileagePlus credit card and Star Alliance Gold members. Passengers requiring special assistance will be able to pre-board the aircraft.

Travelers with Basic Economy fares will be assigned to the last boarding group, with the exception of MileagePlus Premier members and their companions on the same reservation, primary cardmembers of a qualifying MileagePlus credit card and Star Alliance Gold members. Passengers requiring special assistance will be able to pre-board the aircraft. If you are planning to check bags: Please review our baggage policies to determine if any service charges apply.

Please review our baggage policies to determine if any service charges apply. Your travel is subject to United's Contract of Carriage.

Advertisements