United Nations Population Fund
Technical notes and sources

- Data not available.

aThe MMR has been rounded according to the following scheme:<100, rounded to the nearest 1; 100-999, rounded to nearest 1; and >1,000, rounded to nearest 10.

bIncludes surveys conducted between 2006-2014 only. Live births for 2010-2015 is used as this is the mid-year of the included surveys.

cExcludes Saudi Arabia.

dExcludes Cook Islands, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Tokelau and Tuvalu due to data availability.

eExcludes Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Montserrat, Netherlands Antilles, Saint Kitts and Nevis, and Turks and Caicos

1Includes Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands and Norfolk Island.

2 Includes Nagorno-Karabakh.

3 For statistical purposes, the data for China do not include Hong Kong and Macao, Special Administrative Regions (SAR) of China, and Taiwan Province of China.

4As of 1 July 1997, Hong Kong became a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China.

5As of 20 December 1999, Macao became a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China.

6Includes Northern-Cyprus.

7Includes Åland Islands.

8Includes Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

9Includes Saint-Barthélemy and Saint-Martin (French part).

10 Includes Sabah and Sarawak.

11 Includes Agalega, Rodrigues and Saint Brandon.

12 Includes Transnistria.

13Includes Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands.

14Includes East Jerusalem.

15Includes Kosovo.

16Includes Canary Islands, Ceuta and Melilla.

17Includes Zanzibar.

DEFINITIONS OF THE INDICATORS

Total population: Estimated size of national populations at mid-year.

Average annual rate of population change: Average exponential rate of growth of the population over a given period, based on a medium variant projection.

Population aged 10-24, percent: Proportion of the population between age 10 and age 24.

Population aged 0-14, percent: Proportion of the population between age 0 and age 14.

Population aged 15-64, percent: Proportion of the population between age 15 and age 64.

Population aged 65 and older, percent: Proportion of the population aged 65 and older.

Dependency ratio: Ratio of dependents (people younger than 15 or older than 64) to the working-age population (those ages 15-64). Data are shown as the proportion of dependents per 100 working-age population.

Maternal mortality ratio: Number of deaths of women from pregnancy-related causes per 100,000 live births during the same time period.

Births attended by skilled health personnel: Percentage of births attended by skilled heath personnel (doctor, nurse or midwife).

Adolescent birth rate: Number of births per 1,000 adolescent girls aged 15-19.

Contraceptive prevalence rate: Percentage of married or in-union women aged 15 to 49 who are currently using any method of contraception.

Contraceptive prevalence rate, modern method: Percentage of married or in-union women aged 15 to 49 who are currently using any modern method of contraception.

Unmet need for family planning: Percentage of married or in-union women aged 15 to 49 who want to stop or delay childbearing but are not using a method of contraception.

Proportion of demand satisfied: Percentage of total demand for family planning among married or in-union women aged 15 to 49 that is satisfied.

Adjusted primary school net enrolment ratio: Percentage of children of the official primary age group who are enrolled in primary or secondary education.

Gender parity index, primary education: Ratio of female to male values of adjusted primary school net enrolment ratio.

Secondary school net enrolment ratio: Percentage of children of the official secondary age group who are enrolled in secondary education.

Gender parity index, secondary education: Ratio of female to male values of secondary school net enrolment ratio.

Life expectancy at birth: Number of years newborn children would live if subject to the mortality risks prevailing for the cross section of population at the time of their birth.

Total fertility rate: Number of children who would be born per woman if she lived to the end of her childbearing years and bore children at each age in accordance with prevailing age-specific fertility rates.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Total population: United Nations Population Division. Regional aggregates calculated by UNFPA based on data from United Nations Population Division.

Average annual rate of population change: United Nations Population Division. Regional aggregates calculated by UNFPA based on data from United Nations Population Division.

Population aged 10-24, percent: UNFPA calculation based on data from United Nations Population Division.

Population aged 0-14, percent: UNFPA calculation based on data from United Nations Population Division.

Population aged 15-64, percent: UNFPA calculation based on data from United Nations Population Division.

Population aged 65 and older, percent: UNFPA calculation based on data from United Nations Population Division.

Dependency ratio: United Nations Population Division. Regional aggregates calculated by UNFPA based on data from United Nations Population Division.

Maternal mortality ratio: United Nations Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, The World Bank and the United Nations Population Division).

Births attended by skilled health personnel: United Nations Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Millennium Development Goals Indicators. Regional aggregates calculated by UNFPA based on data from United Nations Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Millennium Development Goals Indicators.

Adolescent birth rate: United Nations Population Division and United Nations Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Millennium Development Goals Indicators. UNFPA regional aggregates calculated by UNFPA based on data from United Nations Population Division.

Contraceptive prevalence rate: United Nations Population Division.

Contraceptive prevalence rate, modern method: United Nations Population Division.

Unmet need for family planning: United Nations Population Division.

Proportion of demand satisfied: United Nations Population Division.

Adjusted primary school net enrolment ratio: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS).

Gender parity index, primary education: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS).

Secondary school net enrolment ratio: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS).

Gender parity index, secondary education: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS).

Life expectancy at birth: United Nations Population Division. Regional aggregates calculated by UNFPA based on data from United Nations Population Division.

Total fertility rate: United Nations Population Division. Regional aggregates calculated by UNFPA based on data from United Nations Population Division.

The designations employed and the presentation of material on the map do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNFPA concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The dotted line represents approximately the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir agreed upon by India and Pakistan. The final status of Jammu and Kashmir has not yet been agreed upon by the parties.