Meet Hashtag, a newborn baby girl
NYP2001102102 - 21 OCTOBER 2001 - NEW YORK, NEW YORK, USA: David Bowie during rehearsals at New York City Madison Square Garden for the VH1 October 20, 2001 Concert for New York City to benefit the victims of the World Trade Center disaster. rlw/ep/Scott Gries UPI. | License Photo

Jenna Elfman and Bodhi Elfman attend the 2010 People's Choice Awards in Los Angeles on January 6, 2010. UPI/Jim Ruymen | License Photo

Director Spike Lee and his wife Tonya Lewis Lee attend the after party for Lee's documentary 'Bad 25' at Storys Building during the Toronto International Film Festival in Toronto, Canada on September 15, 2012. The film chronicles the making of Michael Jackson's seminal album 'Bad'. UPI/Christine Chew | License Photo

Peter Cook arrives for court in his divorce trail against Christie Brinkley in Central Islip New York on July 7, 2008. (UPI Photo/John Angelillo) | License Photo

Christie Brinkley arrives for court with Robert S. Cohen for her divorce trail against Peter Cook in Central Islip New York on July 7, 2008. (UPI Photo/John Angelillo) | License Photo

Director Robert Rodriguez arrives at the premiere of his new motion picture crime thriller "Machete", at the Orpheum Theatre in the downtown section of Los Angeles on August 25, 2010. UPI/Jim Ruymen | License Photo

Jonathan Davis of Korn, performs in concert during the Projekt Revolution 2004 Tour, at the Sound Advice Amphitheatre , in West Palm Beach, Florida, on August 17, 2004. (UPI Photo/Michael Bush) | License Photo

Jason Lee and Beth Riesgraf arrive for the 58th annual Primetime Emmy Awards at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles, California on August 27, 2006. (UPI Photo/Jim Ruymen) | License Photo

Penn Jillette with Penn & Teller performs at the Seminole Hard Rock Hotel and Casino in Hollywood, Florida on February 4, 2011. UPI/Michael Bush | License Photo

Erykah Badu performs in concert at the American Airlines Arena in Miami on April 8, 2010. UPI/Michael Bush | License Photo

Actor Nicolas Cage and wife Alice attend the World Premiere of his new film "Ghost Rider"on February 15, 2007 at New York's Loew theatre. (UPI Photo/Ezio Petersen) | License Photo

Jermaine Jackson (L) and Katherine Jackson (R) leave the courthouse following Dr. Conrad Murray's sentencing in Los Angeles on November 29, 2011. Murray was sentenced to four years for manslaughter in the death of Michael Jackson. UPI/Phil McCarten | License Photo

Sean Penn, best actor winner for his role in the film 'Milk,' and his wife, actress Robin Wright Penn, arrive at the 81st Academy Awards in Hollywood on February 22, 2009. (UPI Photo/Phil McCarten) | License Photo

Dweezil Zappa performs a song with his late father Frank Zappa on a video screen during a concert at the Grand Rex theater in Paris on October 5, 2007. Zappa organized his "Zappa Plays Zappa" tour with the goal of bringing the music of his father Frank Zappa to a younger audience. (UPI Photo/David Silpa) | License Photo

Ashlee Simpson and Pete Wentz watch Roger Federer of Switzerland play Jurgen Melzer of Austria on day 8 at the U.S. Open Tennis Championships in Arthur Ashe Stadium in New York City on September 6, 2010. UPI/John Angelillo | License Photo

Jay-Z and Beyonce watch the Brooklyn Nets play the Toronto Raptors in the first regular season game ever for the Nets at the Barclays Center in New York City on November 3, 2012. UPI/John Angelillo | License Photo

The Edge of U2 performs during the first concert of their 360 Degree North American Tour at Soldier Field in Chicago on September 12, 2009. UPI/Brian Kersey | License Photo

Actress Rachel Griffiths and husband Andrew Taylor attend the G'Day USA Australia Week 2009 Black Tie Gala in Los Angeles on January 18, 2009. (UPI Photo/ Phil McCarten) | License Photo

There are probably weirder names out there, but this one is at least in contention.

Little Hashtag Jameson (yes, that's actually her name) came into the world around 10 p.m. on Saturday, weighing eight pounds.

One of her parents, name currently unknown, posted a picture of the newborn on Facebook, with the caption "Hashtag Jameson was born at 10 oclock last night. She weys 8pounds and i luv her so much!!!!!!"

RELATED Preview new posthumus Jimi Hendrix release

Top 20 weirdest celebrity baby names:

1. Audio Science (Parents Shannyn Sossamon and Dallas Clayton)

2. Banjo (Parents Rachel Griffiths and Andrew Taylor)

3. Blue Angel (Parents The Edge and Aislinn O'Sullivan

4. Blue Ivy (Parents Beyonce Knowles and Jay Z)

4. Bronx Mowgli (Parents Ashlee Simpson and Pete Wentz)

RELATED Gazans name babies after Iranian rocket

5. Diva Muffin (Parents Frank and Gail Zappa, whose other kids are Dweezil, Ahmet and Moon Unit)

6. Heavenly Hiraani Tiger Lily (Parents Michael Hutchence and Paula Yates)

7. Hopper (Parents Sean Penn and Robin Wright)

RELATED Doctor dad delivers own son in car

8. Jazz Domino (Parents Joe Strummer and Gabrielle Salter)

9. Jermajesty (Parents Jermaine Jackson and Alejandra Genevieve Oaziaza)

10. Kal-el (Parents Nicholas Cage and Alice Kim)

RELATED British parents have 16th child

11. Mars Merkaba (Parents Erykah Badu and Jay Electronica)

12. Moxie CrimeFighter (Parents Penn and Emily Jillette)

13. Pilot Inspektor (Parents Jason Lee and Beth Riesgraf)

14. Pirate (Parents Jonathan and Deven Davis)

15. Rocket (Parents Robert Rodriguez and Elizabeth Avellan, whose other kids are Racer, Rebel, Rogue and Rhiannon)

16.Sailor Lee (Parents Christie Brinkley and Peter Cook)

17. Satchel (Parents Spike Lee and Tonya Lewis Lee)

18. Story Elias (Parents Jenna and Bodhi Elfman)

19. Tabooger (Parents Dan Cortese and Dee Dee Hemby)

20. Zowie (Parents David and Angela Bowie... so yes, that's Zowie Bowie)