Plotkin's Vaccines - 9780323357616
From the development of each vaccine to its use in reducing disease, Plotkin's Vaccines, 7th Edition, provides the expert information you need to provide optimal care to your patients. This award-winning text offers a complete understanding of each disease, as well as the latest knowledge of both existing vaccines and those currently in research and development. Described by Bill Gates as "an indispensable guide to the enhancement of the well-being of our world," Plotkin's Vaccines is a must-have reference for current, authoritative information in this fast-moving field.

Covers the new oral cholera and zoster vaccines , as well as newly licensed meningococcal group B vaccines and a newly licensed dengue vaccine.

, as well as newly licensed meningococcal group B vaccines and a newly licensed dengue vaccine. Brings you up to date on successful human trials of Ebola vaccines, an enterovirus 71 vaccine licensed in China, and new recommendations and changes to polio vaccines.

Features a new chapter on maternal immunization.

on maternal immunization. Expert Consult™ eBook version included with purchase. This enhanced eBook experience allows you to search all of the text, figures, and references from the book on a variety of devices.

Includes complete information for each disease , including clinical characteristics, microbiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment, epidemiology, and public health and regulatory issues - plus complete information for each vaccine , including its stability, immunogenicity, efficacy, duration of immunity, adverse events, indications, contraindications, precautions, administration with other vaccines, and disease-control strategies.

, including clinical characteristics, microbiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment, epidemiology, and public health and regulatory issues - , including its stability, immunogenicity, efficacy, duration of immunity, adverse events, indications, contraindications, precautions, administration with other vaccines, and disease-control strategies. Analyzes the cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness of different vaccine options.

of different vaccine options. Helps you clearly visualize concepts and objective data through an abundance of tables and figures.

By, MD, Emeritus Professor of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Emeritus Professor, Wistar Institute, Former Chief, Division of Infectious Diseases, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA; Former Medical and Scientific Director, Pastuer Merieux Connaught (now Sanofi Pasteur), Marnes-la-Coquette, France;, MD, DSc (HON), Professor of Medicine and Pediatrics, and Global Health, Emory University; Associate Director, Emory Vaccine Center, Atlanta GA; Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA; Former Director, National Immunization Program, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta GA ;, MD, Chief, Division of Infectious Diseases, Director, Vaccine Education Center, The Childrne's Hospital of Philadelphia; Professor of Pediatrics, Maurice R. Hilleman Professor of Vaccinology, Perelman School of Medicine, The University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA. and, MD, Sarah H. Sell and Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in PEdiatrics, Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Vanderbilt University, Nashville TN