When will the Senate start holding congressional sexual harassers accountable?
Congress is in the spotlight for its sexual harassment cases and missed its chance to hold its perpetrators accountable. Will it take its next chance?

The U.S. Capitol dome at sunrise after an early morning House vote to halt the government shutdown Feb. 9, 2018. (Photo: Shawn Thew, EPA-EFE)

After a tsunami of sexual harassment allegations struck Congress in 2017 and the House passed reform legislation on Feb. 6, 2018, the Senate has not yet acted, while the list of scandals continues to grow.

On April 2, 2018, Rep. Elizabeth Esty, D-Conn., announced that she would not seek reelection amid reports of a sexual harassment scandal in her office. Esty kept her chief of staff on the job three months after she learned that he had threatened the life of a former female colleague.

Four days later, on April 6, 2018, Rep. Blake Farenthold, R-Texas, said he would resign over the $84,000 he used to settle a 2014 sexual harassment claim. While Rep. Farenthold promised to pay back the taxpayer money he used, he did not do so before his resignation.

More: Jolie, Paltrow and Harvey Weinstein: Shock, regrets and nothing changes

More: I interviewed an executive in his underwear to get the job done

These two episodes were just the latest in a series of Congressional misconduct cases that first began to come to light in October 2017. Congress was put into the spotlight amid sexual misconduct scandals that plagued the nation. Several lawmakers and staffers spoke up and shared their stories, which exposed a culture of suppression and secrecy. The use of taxpayer dollars to settle or cover up unscrupulous acts exemplified Congress’s well-known lack of transparency and accountability.

Since the Congressional Accountability Act of 1995 (CAA) became law and established a Treasury Department fund to settle workplace harassment and discrimination claims, more than $17 million has been used to pay for 264 congressional office settlements. Between 2008 and 2012, the Treasury paid roughly $174,000 for 15 sexual misconduct settlements in the House.

The CAA also created the Office of Compliance (OOC), which requires misconduct victims to undergo a combined 60 days of counseling and mediation. If the case is not settled in mediation, the victims must undergo a month-long “cooling off period” before pushing the complaint further. Through the entire process, the victims are under strict confidentiality guidelines.

Fundamentally, the Congressional Accountability Act does not hold Members of Congress accountable for their actions, forces victims to endure a secret and arduous claim and settlement process, and provides zero fiscal restraint on using tax dollars to settle disputes.

More: Charlie Rose, sexual harassment and the female newsroom managers who looked away

POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media

To address these concerns, the House passed H.R. 4924, the CAA Reform Act, by voice vote on Feb. 6, 2018. This legislation would eliminate counseling and mediation requirements to expedite an unnecessarily lengthy procedural process and require all members, both current and past, to reimburse the Treasury for any money used to settle workplace misconduct or discrimination complaints.

While the bipartisan effort in the House should be applauded, the Senate has failed to do its part. When the Senate had the opportunity to attach reforms to the gargantuan, 2,232-page omnibus Appropriations package, the legislation was left out. The Senate instead opted to pass the $1.3 trillion spending bill less than 24 hours after the bill’s text was released.

Rep. Mark Amodei, R-Nev., blasted the Senate’s inaction, saying, “It is not my issue or crusade but holy mackerel; you have north of 400 votes (and) it was bipartisan, from North, East, South and West. Then it doesn't make it in the [Omnibus bill]? No wonder people hate this process.”

On March 22, 2018, all 22 female senators sent a letter to Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., and Minority Leader Chuck Schemer, D-N.Y., expressing their disappointment that reform legislation had not been brought to the Senate floor and urging a vote.

The 1995 Congressional Accountability Act is outdated and inadequate. The CAA Reform Act would provide workplace misconduct reforms to create a more transparent process for victims, hold members accountable, and save taxpayer dollars. The 115th Congress has faced, and will continue to face, many tough decisions and partisan debates, but sexual harassment and discrimination reform for Capitol Hill should not be one of them.

Leslie Paige is the vice president for policy and communications of Citizens Against Government Waste.

You can read diverse opinions from our Board of Contributors and other writers on the Opinion front page, on Twitter @usatodayopinion and in our daily Opinion newsletter. To respond to a column, submit a comment to letters@usatoday.com.

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2qWxi6G