The six Trump properties President Trump has visited almost every weekend in six months

CLOSE Donald Trump was already a controversial figure on Twitter, but that didn't end after he became president. Here's a look at some of his most controversial tweets since his inauguration. USA TODAY

If you have to stay somewhere, you may as well stay at a place you own, right?

That more or less seems to be the attitude of President Trump, who has rarely missed a weekend with at least a stop by a Trump property since he started visiting Mar-a-Lago down in Florida on his third weekend in office.

The only exceptions: The two weekends surrounding his first foreign trip in office and the one time he went to presidential retreat Camp David. Even when he returned to Washington from the G-20 summit in Hamburg, Germany, he had time to head to one of his golf clubs.

These Trump trips may be costly (while exact numbers are scarce, the Mar-a-Lago trips alone have cost taxpayers millions of dollars), but that doesn't keep the president from going.

Trump, as a private citizen, slammed President Obama for playing golf – and insisted on the campaign trail that he “would rarely leave the White House because there’s so much work to be done.” However, of the 26 weekends he's been in office – including his inaugural weekend – he's only spent five weekends exclusively in Washington without a trip to his nearby golf club.

More on six months of the Trump presidency:

As we mark six months of the Trump presidency, here are the six Trump properties he's visited on weekends.

1. Mar-a-Lago (7 weekends)

Right before he took office, Donald Trump dubbed his Palm Beach club his "winter White House" in a tweet on Jan. 18 — and it has lived up to that nickname. He's used his club to host both Japan's Shinzo Abe and China's Xi Jinping there, in February and April respectively.

He spent seven weekends at the estate before it closed for the season in May. While here, Trump signed off on a strike on an airbase in Syria, creating a makeshift "situation room" and prompting concerns about whether the club was secure enough to discuss such sensitive material.

Expect his visits to begin again after the club opens on Nov. 1.

2. Trump International Golf Club in West Palm Beach (7 weekends, concurrently with Mar-a-lago)

If he was at Mar-a-Lago, he swung by his golf club that is a little less than 6 miles away.

3. Trump National Golf Club in Jupiter, Fla. (1 weekend)

He visited his club in Jupiter, about 18 miles away from Mar-a-Lago, and brought Japan's Shinzo Abe along.

4. Trump International Washington (3 weekends for dinner)

When he's stays put in Washington, D.C., for the weekend, you might spot him at the Trump International Washington, his hotel that opened last year just blocks away from the White House. His frequent dinner companions: Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner, among others.

The hotel itself has been at the center of controversy. When Trump took office, the General Services Administration had to determine whether the president was in violation of a clause that prohibits elected officials from being "admitted to any share or part" of the lease of the federal building that would become the hotel.

GSA has since concluded that the Trump family is in full compliance of it lease... but that hasn't prevented protests at the hotel.

5. Trump National Golf Club in Sterling, Va. (9 weekends)

If he's in D.C., he's also likely to head into northern Virginia for a round of golf – and a meeting or two. While he's often hitting the links, he's also been known to take care of some business at the club. Back in March, he met with some cabinet members at the club, including Veterans Affairs Secretary David Shulkin, Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.

6. Trump National Golf Club in Bedminster, N.J. (4 weekends)

With Mar-a-Lago closed for the season, the president typically heads north to Bedminster, N.J., when he needs to get away from Washington. His latest trip included the U.S. Women's Open, since it was hosted at his golf course.

Read more:

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2uJxsmk