President Trump's July Fourth: Golf, picnic, and tweeting
President Donald Trump holds newspapers as he returns to the White House in Washington from Trump National Golf Club in Washington last month. (Photo: YURI GRIPAS, AFP/Getty Images)

WASHINGTON – Amid political tests and tensions, President Donald Trump spent Wednesday's July Fourth holiday golfing, tweeting and hosting a White House picnic for military families.

The presidential motorcade arrived at the Trump National Golf Club in suburban Virginia in the late morning, and returned four hours later on a 94-degree day.

As he departed the White House in the morning, Trump took to Twitter.

In addition to a general salutation – "Happy Fourth of July....Our Country is doing GREAT!" – Trump also tweeted out a video in which he salutes the authors of the Declaration of Independence and the American soldiers who won the revolutionary war against Great Britain.

Happy Fourth of July....Our Country is doing GREAT! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) July 4, 2018

Trump also saluted current members of the U.S. armed forces – "truly special people" – saying "we are in awe of their courage, and we are eternally in their debt."

Trump took a low-key holiday while preparing for high stakes events in the coming days.

The president is deciding whom to nominate to replace retiring Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy, a decision he said he will announce Monday; the next day, Trump is scheduled to leave for Europe on a trip that includes a NATO summit and a meeting with Russia President Vladimir Putin.

More: 'Our most fundamental values are under attack': Democrats issue bleak July Fourth statement

More: Supreme Court nominee short list features candidates President Trump likes for different reasons

More: Donald Trump tells NATO allies to pay more for defense, raising tensions ahead of summit

Some of Trump's critics, meanwhile, marked the Fourth of July by protesting administration policies ranging from immigration to the imminent Supreme Court selection.

"Everywhere we look, our most fundamental values are under attack," said Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez in his Independence Day statement.

"Thousands of children have been separated from their parents at our southern border," Perez said. "At our highest court, workers' rights are being taken away, voting rights are under assault, Muslim Americans are being discriminated against for their faith, and women's right to choose is under threat like never before."

The president and first lady Melania Trump will host a July Fourth picnic for military families at the White House later Wednesday.

The Trumps and their guests will watch fireworks from the South Lawn.

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2zgQljk