Why Robert Griffin III turned his ‘Know Jesus Know Peace’ t-shirt inside out
Redskins quarterback Robert Griffin III dislocated his ankle on Sunday afternoon. Because of that painful and very serious injury, Griffin wound up watching the second half of his team’s victory over the Jaguars from the training room, wearing athletic pants and a T-shirt.

As usual, Griffin had brought an outfit of dress clothes to the stadium to wear to his postgame news conference. But because he had just spent a few hours getting his ankle put back together and getting treatment on that injury, the quarterback never put on his outfit of dress clothes. Instead, he used his crutches to hobble into the media room while still wearing that T-shirt.

Of course, the T-shirt in question happened to have a message: Know Jesus Know Peace/No Jesus No Peace. The shirt comes from Christian clothier Not of This World — the company’s logo, with a halo and a cross, is seen right after the final E — and it obviously reflects Griffin’s strongly held Christian viewpoints.

Griffin, though, has been twice fined by the NFL for wearing non-approved logos or clothing on game days. He was fined $10,000 for wearing an Adidas shirt to his news conference after he was hurt against the Ravens in 2012, and he was fined another $10,000 by the NFL for wearing an Adidas logo on the field before a 2013 preseason game. So before he addressed reporters on Sunday — in his uncharacteristically informal attire — Griffin turned the Know Jesus Know Peace T-shirt inside out.

No big deal. Except some readers asked me about this, and I tweeted out a before-and-after image. Around the same time, another media outlet mistakenly suggested that Tony McGee — the NFL’s uniform inspector in Washington — had prompted Griffin to make this move. Comcast SportsNet also wrote about the issue.

And the story took off. I got hundreds of tweets on the matter from outraged Christians who were disappointed by Griffin and/or furious with the NFL and McGee. McGee received substantial criticism, as well as pressure from sponsors of his television show. And the headlines were … well, you can probably guess.

The Week: “RGIII forbidden from wearing his Jesus shirt to press conference”

Christian Today: “Washington quarterback Robert Griffin III made to turn ‘Know Jesus Know Peace’ T-shirt inside out?”

The Washington Free Beacon: “RGIII Forced by NFL to Turn Shirt With Christian Message Inside Out”

Mad World News: “NFL Says NO to Jesus and Threatens Six-Figure Fine on Redskins Star Player”

Say what now? Fox Business also picked up on the story.

NFL rules, as it turns out, are incredibly explicit about postgame apparel. During postgame interviews, players are prohibited “from wearing, displaying, or orally promoting equipment, apparel or other items that carry commercial names or logos of companies, unless such commercial identification has been approved in advance by the League office.” Players are also “prohibited from wearing, displaying, or otherwise conveying personal messages either in writing or illustration, unless such message has been approved in advance by the League office.” That T-shirt — and virtually any popular commercial T-shirt — would clearly violate these rules.

So to recap, because of circumstances, Griffin was wearing a T-shirt he would not ordinarily be wearing while meeting the press. To save himself from a probable fine for going against the league’s explicit postgame apparel rules, Griffin turned the T-shirt inside out. There was no campaign against God, not from Tony McGee, the NFL, Redskins PR, nor anyone else.

(First blogged by CSN Washington)