Anthony Bourdain calls Hillary Clinton’s Weinstein response ‘shameful’
Anthony Bourdain. (Andy Kropa/Invision/AP)

Celebrity chef and television host Anthony Bourdain late Wednesday blasted Hillary Clinton’s response to the scandal engulfing her longtime donor, producer Harvey Weinstein, who has been accused of sexually assaulting and harassing dozens of women.

Clinton earlier in the day had sat for an interview with CNN’s Fareed Zakaria as part of her book-promotion tour — and talk of course turned to Weinstein. The former Democratic presidential candidate declared herself “appalled” by the allegations against him. “It was something that was just intolerable in every way,” she said. “And, you know, like so many people who’ve come forward and spoken out, this was a different side of a person who I and many others had known in the past.”

But her condemnation of Weinstein, who hosted fundraisers for Clinton and for President Barack Obama in addition to giving to many Democratic pols, wasn’t enough for some viewers. Bourdain — whose girlfriend, Asia Argento, accused Weinstein of sexually assaulting her — tweeted a series of criticisms.

And I have to say, Hillary's interview with Fareed Zakaria was shameful in its deflection and its disingenuousness. — Anthony Bourdain (@Bourdain) October 11, 2017

Others had called out Clinton for being slow to condemn Weinstein. After the New York Times dropped its blockbuster story, several Democrats were quick to announce they would donate Weinstein’s money to charity, but it took Clinton days to publicly comment.

But Bourdain went further and seemed to insinuate that Clinton should have been aware of Weinstein’s behavior, which has been called in several reports this week “an open secret.” In the CNN interview, Clinton said she “certainly didn’t” know of it.

know what Hillary Clinton is NOT? She's not stupid. Or unsophisticated about the world. The Weinstein stories had been out there for years — Anthony Bourdain (@Bourdain) October 11, 2017

As his comments stirred controversy, he sought to clarify:

Hillary is CLEARLY not responsible for anything Weinstein Thats screamingly obvious. Her response to questions though has been uninspiring — Anthony Bourdain (@Bourdain) October 12, 2017

I can assure you that the victims of Mr. Weinstein's three decades of predatory behavior are disappointed too. I'm sitting next to one. — Anthony Bourdain (@Bourdain) October 12, 2017

And he joked about provoking the ire of Clinton backers: