For the Obamas, upholding MLK’s legacy includes championing spinach
President Obama and first lady Michelle Obama participate in a Martin Luther King Day service project at Leckie Elementary School in Washington, D.C., on Jan. 18. (Yuri Gripas/Reuters)

For most Americans, celebrating the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.'s legacy includes pressing for expanded civil rights or working on behalf of the poor. For President Obama, it also includes championing the virtues of a much-maligned and marginalized segment of U.S. society: the humble spinach.

The president and first lady took part Monday in a community service project at Leckie Elementary School in Washington, D.C., where a high proportion of students come from military families. The Obamas, joined by several AmeriCorps program volunteers and young men and women who are part of the White House's mentoring program, helped to assemble a garden bed, plant vegetable seeds and pack bags with books for those in need at the school as part of the MLK National Day of Service. Corporation for National and Community Service CEO Wendy Spencer, whose agency administers AmeriCorps and leads the service day honoring King's work, also participated

The Obamas dressed casually for the event, which highlighted the first lady's Let's Move! initiative, with the president wearing a blue checked shirt and Michelle Obama sporting an olive sweater.

"Spinach is outstanding," Obama remarked during the planting portion of the event. "That's how you stay healthy.".

The Obamas handed out the bags — which included a copy of Dr. Seuss's recently-reissued book, "Oh the Things You Can Do that are Good for You!" — to children in the school's gym, who were visibly excited to see them.

[Obama expounds on Dr. Seuss, feminism and his grandmother]

The president, who knows some of Dr. Seuss's literature by heart, is an an unabashed fan of the late children's book author. During a visit to a Head Start center in Lawrence, Kan., a year ago, he happened upon children who were reading the Dr. Seuss book “The Sneetches,” a parable warning about the perils of discrimination.

“Are these the Sneetches? The star-belly Sneetches? The Sneetches with no stars on ‘thars’? That is one of my favorite stories,” Obama told them. “In fact, most of the things I deal with as president would be solved if everybody read about the Sneetches. Because there are some people who think they’re special because they’ve got stars, and some who feel bad because they don’t.”

Several members of Obama's Cabinet and senior administration officials also volunteered Monday to commemorate King's legacy. Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew joined City Year AmeriCorps members in Long Island City, N.Y., at an event that included painting murals, collecting and sorting food and clothing items and building bookshelves for a local school. Interior Secretary Sally Jewell, meanwhile, joined AmeriCorps members at the Student Conservation Association’s annual King Day cleanup of D.C.'s Anacostia Park.