0315 bblackpftexas

Emails, Bryan Black, director of communications, Texas Department of Agriculture, March 11-12, 2015

4:55 p.m.

March 11, 2015

During the recent discussion at the water symposium, Commissioner Miller was referring to farmers who are utilizing irrigation systems to produce their crops.

A PowerPoint report recently put together by the Texas Water Development Board points out “Ag producers achieve up to 98 percent irrigation efficiency.” That PowerPoint is attached.

…

The bottom line is that Texas farmers and ranchers have been working hard and utilizing technology to ensure they conserve water. It will take a major commitment by all Texans — whether they are located in rural, suburban and urban communities — to conserve water and ensure we have this precious natural resource in the future.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Thursday, March 12, 2015 3:32 PM

To: Bryan Black

Subject: Following up on 98 percent

To recap, here is what Commissioner Miller said in that interview: Texas agriculture is “at 98 percent efficiency” in water use and “just about maxed out as to what we can do on the conservation end of it.”

In contrast, the TWDB’s message is that drip irrigation, which isn’t widespread, can achieve that level of efficiency. A board expert told us today agriculture is not maxed out in water conservation, noting the state water plan calls for agriculture to improve in this regard.

I plan to keep at this. I also would be happy to hear more about Miller’s analysis.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

4:43 p.m.

March 12, 2015

As we previously discussed, Commissioner Miller was referring to farmers who are utilizing irrigation systems to produce their crops. The Texas Water Development Board report that was provided to the Commissioner points out “Ag producers achieve up to 98 percent irrigation efficiency.”

In addition to that document, a 2012 report from the Texas Water Resources Institute finds, “Irrigation efficiency has gone from 60 percent to 88–95 percent in much of the state, today allowing Texas to get much more value and agricultural output from its water.” Dr. Kevin Wagner, who is with the Texas Water Resources Institute, put this report together back in 2012 and according to him, the most up-to-date number on irrigation efficiency is now around 98 percent.

Below are links directly to the sources of this information.

http://twri.tamu.edu/publications/conservation-matters/2012/november/trends-of-irrigation/

http://twri.tamu.edu/docs/education/2012/em115.pdf

Thanks.

Bryan Black

Director of Communications

Texas Department of Agriculture