1015 dillontxpoverty

Emails (excerpted), Daniel Dillon, senior research associate, Child and Family Research Partnership, the University of Texas, Oct. 2, 6 and 8, 2015

4:35 p.m.

Here is a spreadsheet showing the poverty rates for TX and the U.S. from 1959 to 2014. I could only find consecutive annual comparisons from 1980 to 2014, which I have also graphed so that you can see how the gap changes over time. You can see the poverty rate gap grows through the 1980s up until about 1988, at which point it peaks at a difference of 5 percentage points. Then it begins to narrow. Throughout much of the 1990s and 2000s, the poverty rate gap dances around, expanding and contracting every few years until about 2010, at which point it begins to close. In 2014, Texas had a poverty rate 1.6 percentage points above the national rate. That’s the closest we have been to the national rate since 1984, when the gap was 1.3 percentage points.

The early years were difficult to track down and I could only find comparisons each decade—1959, 1969, and 1979—which correspond with the decennial census years 1960, 1970, and 1980. I have highlighted these in red since they come from a different data table. Still, Texas shows a higher rate of poverty during this period as well. Though I could not assemble poverty rates for the years in between each decennial census prior to 1980, the available data from 1959, 1969, and 1979 seem to suggest that Texas had a higher rate of poverty than the U.S. throughout this period—essentially since the U.S. began collecting poverty statistics. Of course, it’s impossible to say for certain without annual numbers, but the data at hand would imply that the statement is most likely true.

A note about the data. All numbers come from the Census, with the majority coming from the “U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplements.” They are pieced together from various historical tables and current population reports though, so it’s a bit of a Frankenstein table.

Please let me know if you have any questions.

Daniel

DANIEL DILLON, Senior Research Associate

Child and Family Research Partnership

The University of Texas at Austin

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, October 02, 2015 4:42 PM

To: Dillon, Daniel R

Subject: RE: Inquiry for a poverty rate fact check

...What would you recommend we consider/read to explain why Texas has consistently had a higher poverty rate and to explain why the difference narrowed in the period you describe below?

g.

5:53 p.m.

Oct. 6, 2015

I've tried to address your questions separately. Hope this helps.

Why TX has a higher rate of poverty

There are a number of reasons why Texas has a higher poverty rate than the U.S. Part of it is the demographic makeup of the state. We know that race/ethnicity and nativity are strongly associated with poverty status, and Texas is unique among the states on both counts. Not only do we have a larger foreign-born population than most states, but we are also one of the few minority-majority states where Non-Hispanic whites make up a minority of the population. In comparison to their numbers, minority groups in Texas tend to be overrepresented among the poor. Education level is also strongly linked to poverty status, and Texas is the near the bottom when it comes to the percentage of the adult population with a high school degree. Finally, Texas has a higher percentage of children than most states and child poverty has been on the rise. Today, a quarter of Texas children live below the poverty line. All of these trends contribute to the higher rate of poverty in Texas.

As troubling as it is, the high rate of poverty in Texas is not out of step with the region. Poverty rates are generally higher across the south. Within states, though, there is significant variation. In Texas, poverty tends to be concentrated in the valley and in several smaller pockets throughout the state.

Why the poverty rate gap is closing/Why poverty has been declining in TX in recent years

Poverty tends to rise and fall in response to broader economic conditions. Generally speaking, the official poverty measure does not capture the effect of government programs; it is a measure of people’s income before taxes and without the effect of any non-cash benefits like Medicaid, SNAP, or housing assistance. For this reason, it typically responds to general movement in the economy rather than to specific policies (A separate measure, the SPM, is designed to capture the effect of government programs). Given this general relationship between the poverty rate and the economy, you might expect poverty to be low in Texas. After all, we hear a lot about the Texas economic miracle. The state has had an explosion of job growth over the last few years, driven primarily by the energy boom in oil and natural gas. Though these trends have propelled the state’s economy forward, they have had little effect on the financial circumstances of low-income individuals and their families. Conceptually, it’s possible that growth in the oil and gas industry may have some tangential influence on the poverty rate through second order effects, like growth in local businesses surrounding the oil fields, for example. But the numbers don’t really bear this out. Oil and gas production in the state has climbed dramatically since 2010, but the drop in the poverty rate has been modest and is in keeping with the downward trend seen nationally.

Perhaps a better explanation for the declining poverty rate is the state’s population growth. Texas is growing at a faster rate than other parts of the country. This is due to both new births and in-migration from other areas. As long as the mix of people moving to Texas are more likely to be above the poverty line than below it, this will drive the poverty rate down. Similarly, if births to non-poor families outpace those to poor families, this will also drive the rate down. This is essentially what has been happening; as the state’s non-poor population grows more quickly than its poor population...

Thanks,

Daniel

DANIEL DILLON, Senior Research Associate

Child and Family Research Partnership

10:43 a.m.

Oct. 8, 2015

Since 1980, the (Texas) poverty rate has generally bounced around between 15 and 17 percent with a few exceptions. The fact that is it so consistent means that the rate of growth in the general population is basically on par with the rate of growth in the poor population. Sometimes they don’t change at the same rate though, like after the recession, where the number of poor shot up but population growth was stable. This caused the poverty rate to increase. So the poverty rate is reflecting the interplay between total population change and poor population change, the latter of which is generally more affected by fluctuations in the economy.