0914 zppftexas

Emails, Zac Petkanas, communications director, Wendy Davis campaign, Sept. 25, 2014

On Thu, Sep 25, 2014 at 1:34 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Sen. Davis said Tuesday in North Texas (not sure where): “Greg Abbott and his surrogates have referred to women who have been the victims of rape or incest as though somehow what they are confronting is a minor issue.”

She was referring to Matt Mackowiak, who doesn’t work for Abbott, and his comments in the episode of “Lone Star Politics” that aired Sunday. My transcription of what was said is pasted below. At this time, it looks to me like Mackowiak conceded immediately rape and incest are not minor acts

Is this the basis of her claim that Abbott and his surrogates characterized rape and incest as minor issues?

Anything else factual for us to consider in judging if Mackowiak was an Abbott surrogage and if he called rape and incest minor?

Thanks.

PASTE below

On the program, Gromer Jeffers, a Dallas Morning News reporter, asked Mackowiak if abortion remains a tough issue for Davis in conservative-leaning Texas.

Mackowiak: “It is, right. Wendy Davis didn’t use the word ‘abortion’ in her announcement speech when she announced for that office and that’s for that reason.

“Look, Wendy Davis filibustered a bill that would have outlawed, that did outlaw, late-term abortion after five months. Texas is a pro-life state.

“We can get into minor issues that are 1 percent or 2 percent of the problem. But ultimately, Texas is a strongly pro-life state. Abbott would love to fight this campaign on that issue alone from here on out, but Wendy knows that that’s not strategically wise.”

Matt Angle: “That’s the first time I’ve heard rape or incest called a minor issue.”

Mackowiak: “It’s minor in terms of the percentage of the cases, that’s all I’m saying.”

Angle: “A victim of rape or incest is not a minor problem.”

Mackowiak: “Ok. All right. Great. Right.”

The station’s host then said: “This is just like being in the spin room right after the debate.” He then shifted to another topic.

End of paste

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

1:42 p.m.

Matt Mackowiak was doing post-debate spin defending Greg Abbott's belief that rape and incest should be illegal for victims of those crimes on television. That's the definition of what a surrogate does.

Zac Petkanas

Communications Director

Wendy R. Davis for Governor

On Thu, Sep 25, 2014 at 1:47 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Is Mackowiak paid by the Abbott campaign? Are you saying any Republican who speaks kindly of Abbott is an Abbott surrogate?

Separately: What other surrogates was Davis referring to?

g.

2:01 p.m.

I'm only aware of the surrogate Mackowiak

On Thu, Sep 25, 2014 at 2:16 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

You didn’t respond to my other queries. This seems to be the key portion of the exchange showing Mackowiak did not say what Davis is saying he did say:

Angle: “A victim of rape and incest is not a minor problem.”

Mackowiak (nodding his head): “Ok. All right. Great. Right.”

2:22 p.m.

I think his original statement is the key portion of the exchange:

Direct quote: "We can get into minor issues that are one percent or two percent the problem."

Only after he was called out by Angle did he start spinning what he said.

On Thu, Sep 25, 2014 at 2:43 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

I am neither an ‘Abbott strategist’ nor an ‘Abbott surrogate’ and have never claimed to be, so the Davis campaign’s repeated claims of this are false. To the extent that the Davis campaign has intentionally mislead voters about what I said and offended people, I regret that. I do not believe rape or incest is a minor issue and never said that. For any victim of rape or incest, that brutal crime is a major and life-changing issue and the crime deserves to be prosecuted to the full extent of the law. Rather, I said that rape and incest are a small percentage of abortions. The Davis campaign has intentionally mischaracterized what I said in a desperate attempt to raise money, while selfishly trivializing domestic violence and sexual assault victims by using them to score cheap political points. The Davis campaign has now relentlessly targeted a private citizen for two full days, with thousands of emails, social media postings, online graphics, a speech, a press release and even a press conference demeaning me, based on several blatant falsehoods. It's time for this campaign for Governor to return to a discussion about the future of our great state."

3:28 p.m.

Background on Greg Abbott's Support for Making Abortion Illegal For Rape and Incest

In October 2013, The Associated Press reported that Abbott said he opposed abortion in all circumstances, even in the cases of rape and incest. [AP, 10/06/13]

In July 2013, "Asked if he opposes abortion in cases of rape or incest, Abbott started, "Well, again....." and Cecilia said, "We just don't discriminate against a child because of their beginnings." Abbott concurred: "We shouldn't discriminate against a child." [Houston Chronicle, 7/14/13]

Dating back to 2002, Texas Weekly reported that Abbott has said, "Regarding instances of rape and incest, which constitute less than 1 percent of all abortions and are admittedly very difficult situations, I further believe life must be preserved." [Texas Weekly, 7/01/02]