0715 pewpftexas

Emails, Stefan S. Cornibert, communications associate – Religion and Global Attitudes, Pew Research Center, July 10, 2015

9:54 a.m.

Thanks for reaching out to Pew Research Center. I work with Katherine Ritchey in our communications division and I’ve been checking into the question you sent us. The Dallas Morning News article you noted to us does summarize our 2013 report accurately. However, we would like to note two points for you.

The statement about there being no sharia courts in the U.S. comes from this report:

http://www.pewforum.org/2013/04/08/applying-gods-law-religious-courts-and-mediation-in-the-us/

Part of the report’s summary, which you can find at the link above, reads:

“Sharia sometimes plays an important role in helping Muslims resolve disputes, particularly domestic ones. Indeed, the most common disputes involving sharia, at least in the United States, probably concern issues surrounding the dissolution of a marriage, such as asset allocation or child custody, says Lee Ann Bambach, an attorney who is completing a Ph.D. in religious studies at Emory University in Atlanta. Inheritance and contract dispute cases also occasionally come up, she says.

In many Muslim countries, marital and other disputes often come before sharia courts, where a judge sometimes renders a decision after hearing only from the two parties involved, without other evidence or witnesses. In the United States, there are no sharia courts operating at this time, Bambach and other experts say. However, a number of Muslim imams offer voluntary dispute-resolution services to American Muslims based on principles of Islamic religious law.”(My underline added.)

First off, we feel it’s worth noting that this piece of information came to us from some of the experts who contributed to the report, as noted above. It may be good to include that information in future reporting. The report, however, does say what the article cites.

Second, we would simply note that the report mentioned in the article is from 2013, two years ago, and we haven’t looked into this issue since then.

I do hope this answers your questions.

Regards,

Stefan S. Cornibert

Stefan S. Cornibert

Communications Associate – Religion and Global Attitudes