041715 ckingpftexas

Email, Christopher King, senior research scientist and director, Ray Marshall Center for the Study of Human Resources, University of Texas, April 17, 2015

2:16 p.m.

First, the data at hand are national, not for Texas, so I'll present these and the basic "narrative".

Looking at the data and research on the subject, labor economists would explain higher unemployment among blacks/African Americans by pointing out that they tend to have lower levels of education and be employed in lower-paying occupations and industries than whites. Evidence for this, for example, can be seen in BLS data (2011) that shows that black men are much more likely to work in Production, Transportation and Material Moving as well as Service occupations, and less likely to work in Professional and Managerial jobs than whites; the picture is similar for black women who are more likely to work in Service and in Production jobs than whites (nice charts here http://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2012/ted_20121026.htm). Similar national stats by occupation as well as industry, both based on 2012 Census Bureau data, can be found at Black Demographics (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/03/29/black-unemployment-nancy-ditomaso_n_2974805.html), which shows that blacks are much more likely (almost 30%) to work in Educational Services, and Health Care and Social Assistance, as well as in Transportation, Warehousing and Utilities (7.1%) and in Public Administration (7.2%) compared to the the entire market (so the difference from whites would be even larger than reported here). They are more heavily represented in some of these fields, especially Public Administration, because of the passage and enforcement federal and then state laws banning discrimination on the basis of race made them favored sectors to work in.

Another key factor is educational attainment. The rate of unemployment is inversely related to educational attainment: higher education, lower unemployment. Blacks tend to have lower educational attainment than whites. The share of blacks with more than a high school education..

Labor market research since the 1930s has shown that the most effective means of finding a job is to rely on networks of family and friends. This is a mechanism that works well for employers in that it offsets their lack of good information about potential job candidates. This is still the case today, with an added assist from the use of technology and social media (e.g., LinkedIn). But social networks are often reinforcing and fail to cross race and ethnic lines. (For more on this, see: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/03/29/black-unemployment-nancy-ditomaso_n_2974805.html)

All that said, racial discrimination is an undeniable fact in labor markets throughout the nation, including Texas, though it's unclear how large the effect on actual unemployment rates might be. There are volumes of court cases demonstrating discrimination in the workplace and in labor markets. In fact, recent studies show that black males with a college education earn less than white male high school dropouts. It's hard to argue that this differential isn't explained in large part by the presence of discrimination. From the same source as above, comes this statement: "Indeed, a 2003 study by Devah Pager, now a Princeton University sociologist, found that white men with criminal records were more likely to get callbacks for job interviews than black men with the same qualifications and no criminal history."