0816 hollopftexas

Emails, Karla Holloway, James B. Duke professor of English, professor of law, Duke University, Aug. 26, 2016

From: "Karla Holloway, Ph.D."

Date: Friday, August 26, 2016 at 10:30 AM

To: "Barrish, Phillip J"

Subject: Re: Topic and title for Texas talk

Dear Phil,

With deep regret I have to rescind my acceptance of your very kind invitation. Actually, it was your ask for the title and the reminder of the lecture’s focus that made me face the matter full on. I believe guns, and especially the vulnerabilities exposed in conceal carry cultures contribute mightily to our nation’s public health crisis. And with the conceal carry now in full effect there, and after discussion with my family, I just cannot come. It’s not only that I would feel personally unsafe—which is absolutely a factor in my decision, but as important is that my ethical position on this matter is decidedly fierce regarding the danger of open or conceal carry statutes and the public health necessity of gun control measures alongside our second amendment rights.

Please understand that I’ve thought deeply about ways to carry through with my promise and still be faithful to my ethical position. But I cannot make my family feel safe about my personal vulnerability and I cannot expiate the necessity in our family to stand firmly opposed to patterns and practices that encourage violence. So I cannot come.

I know there are campus protests, and I support and encourage those protests and stand with those who have made clarion calls regarding the potential harms in the law passed by Texas legislators and signed by your governor. It is especially grievous that treasured spaces of our academy, where the integrity of academic discourse is protected and encouraged, are made vulnerable to violence by this legislation.

I sincerely apologize to my colleagues and audiences, and to you for the ways in which my decision will require additional tasks and rearrangements of your calendar. You are absolutely free to publish all or part or a summary of this letter if it will be helpful in any way. I am still so appreciative of your invitation, and want to express my thanks to all for considering me as a visitor.

Sincerely,

Karla Holloway

James B. Duke Professor of English

Professor of Law

Duke University

(Responding to PolitiFact Texas)

2:39 p.m.

From Subject Received Message

Karla Holloway, Ph.D. Re: Texas reporter, urgent inquiry for a fact check

Dear Gardner Selby,

Here’s the invitation I received and had accepted.

Karla Holloway

Karla FC Holloway

James B. Duke Professor of English

Professor of Law

Duke University

On Mar 24, 2016, at 2:08 PM, Barrish, Phillip J wrote:

Dear Professor Holloway,

I am writing to see if it might be possible to persuade you to visit UT-Austin for a lecture next year in conjunction with what will be a year-long symposium sponsored by the English department on the theme of Health, Medicine, and the Humanities. The symposium, co-organized by myself and my colleague Brian Bremen, will occur under the aegis of the Texas Institute for Literary and Textual Studies (often shortened to TILTS), which chooses a different topic every year. The current year’s topic is the Environmental Humanities. If you are curious, you can read more about the 2015-16 TILTS, as well as prior TILTS years, here. We chose Health, Medicine, and the Humanities as the TILTS topic for 2016-17 to coincide with a very exciting development on campus, which is the planned opening of the UT-Austin Dell Medical School. It will be the the first new university-based medical school to open anywhere in the U.S. In the past forty years.

Several of us here are familiar with your work on bio-culture, bioethics, and medicine, and we believe that a visit from you would be met with great interest by faculty and students not only from English and the new Dell Medical community, but also from the growing cohort of people around campus and throughout the city who are interested in in intersections between medicine and the humanities—as well as, depending on the topic of your talk, the Law School. We also make an effort with all TILTS events to attract people from the broader Austin community.

We would be able to offer you a stipend of $1,500 in addition to travel expenses. In addition to the lecture itself, we hope that you might be available for a dinner with a small group of selected faculty and students. Please do let me know if such a visit might interest you. If so, we can begin to discuss more concrete detail, especially possible dates.

Thank you for your consideration, and best regards,

Phil

Phillip Barrish

Tony Hilfer Professor of American and British Literature

Director, Lower-Division Literature Program

Department of English / The University of Texas at Austin