0318 txdpspftexas

Email, Tom Vinger, press secretary, Texas Department of Public Safety, March 13, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, March 09, 2018 5:31 PM

To: 'Vinger, Tom'

Subject: Query for a fact-check

Tom:

Good afternoon. I am working afresh on fact-checking a claim that looks to me like what we covered in this 2014 fact-check. It’s due early next week.

I write this time seeking a Department of Public Safety update on the figures in play at that time. Is it still accurate, too, to say that the 642,000 count refers to career arrests—not convictions—for some 203,000 immigrants jailed by Texas counties over a recent 69-month period? If not, what would be the accurate way to describe the 642,000 figure? I noticed too that the DPS web page we reviewed then is no longer at the provided link; new link?

In a recent episode of his Fox News program, Sean Hannity said 642,000 crimes had lately been committed by illegal immigrants in Texas.

In the segment, Hannity presented what he described as a video excerpt of a Texas law enforcement presentation on crimes committed by “criminal immigrants” that Hannity had heard during a visit to the state. In the excerpt, Steve McCraw, who directs the Texas Department of Public Safety, is heard saying that more than 200,000 criminal immigrants are responsible for about 642,000 criminal offenses. Closing the excerpt, Gov. Perry says: “That’s the cost of not securing the border.”

Next, Hannity said to broadcaster Jorge Ramos: “Are you literally saying to me that they’re lying? Because they’re not.” Ramos replied that Hannity “has to put those numbers in perspective.”

Hannity subsequently said: “You’re not answering my question; 642,000 crimes committed against Texans alone in a seven-year period.”

We are fact-checking if 642,000 crimes were committed by criminal immigrants against Texans in a recent seven-year period, as Hannity said.

To rehash, we know from our previous look at Rick Perry’s homicides’ claim that the 642,000 figure ties to career criminal charges accumulated by about 203,000 immigrants held in Texas county jails over a recent 69-month period.

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

5 p.m.

This is the link you are probably referring to. It is updated periodically. The data is explained in the verbiage.

http://www.dps.texas.gov/administration/crime_records/pages/txCriminalAlienStatistics.htm

Tom Vinger

Press Secretary

Texas Department of Public Safety