0118 lcallpftexas

Emails, Lauren Callahan, media relations and social media manager, Texas Education Agency, Jan. 11-12, 2018

1:45 p.m.

Jan. 11, 2018

Answers in red below.

I left you a voicemail regarding the areas outlined in TEC 21 in which a certified educator is not required to hold a baccalaureate degree. You will see the links below, as well as our data that address your questions.

As always, please let me know if you need anything else.

Lauren Callahan

Media Relations and Social Media Manager

Texas Education Agency

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, January 11, 2018 10:50 AM

To: Callahan, Lauren

Subject: Queries for a fact-check

Lauren:

As mentioned, we’re trying to fact-check this claim: “Fifty percent of our new teachers don’t have college degrees.”

As you pointed out, a bachelor’s degree is required for a public school teacher to be certified. Correct?

A bachelor’s degree is required for all teacher certifications except for Health Science Technology and Trade and Industrial education. https://tea.texas.gov/Texas_Educators/Certification/Initial_Certification/Becoming_a_Classroom_Teacher_in_Texas/

Texas Education Code Section 12.129 requires almost all teachers in open-enrollment charter schools to hold a baccalaureate degree. http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/Docs/ED/htm/ED.12.htm#12.129

Per my voicemail, the Texas Education Code outlines a couple of instances in which a baccalaureate degree is not needed for certification. You’ll find the language for Health Science Technology in TEC 21.044 (e) and Trade and Industrial Workforce Training in TEC 21.0442. The corresponding rule language is found in 19 TAC 233.14.

Of over 25,000 newly certified Texas teachers in 2015-16, a maximum of 1.5 percent could’ve been certified without a baccalaureate degree. It’s likely the number would’ve been less.

Number of newly certified individuals in Health Science Technology or Trade and Industrial not going through a university-based program in Texas (374 are certified through alternative certification programs (ACPs) and the remaining 8 are certified through the out-of-state credentials review process) - 382

Total newly certified individuals in 2015-16 – 25,451

382/25,451 is about 1.5%

What data does the agency have that would speak to the degrees held by new teachers of late?

It’s possible the person who made this claim was attempting to refer to new teachers who did not major in what they’re teaching. We got into a similar claim in 2013, here. I checked further a moment ago and came across this web page. What data is available from the agency or fro other sources about new Texas teachers along those lines?

The state doesn’t track the undergraduate majors of teachers.

Before being admitted into an educator preparation program, Texas Education Code Section 21.0441 requires an individual seeking certification to teach math or science at or above 7th grade to have a minimum of 15 semester credit hours in the subject-specific content area in which the person is seeking certification or to pass a content test in that area. Other subjects and grade levels require a minimum of 12 hours or test passage before admission. http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/Docs/ED/htm/ED.21.htm#21.0441

3:01 p.m.

Jan. 12, 2018

Answers below are in red, and we have two attachments for you as well.

Again, please let me know if you have additional questions.

Thanks,

Lauren

From: Selby, Gardner

Sent: Friday, January 12, 2018 9:58 AM

To: Callahan, Lauren

Subject: Following up

Lauren:

As mentioned on the phone, here is what an advocacy group says: “A majority of incoming teacher no longer graduate from college with education degrees.” Clay Robison of the Texas State Teachers Association told me today that according to SBEC, in 2015-16, 38 percent of newly certified Texas teachers were certified after earning education bachelor’s degrees; 5 percent after earning post-bachelor degrees; and 57 percent through alternative certification, almost entirely by earning bachelor degrees in subjects not education.

Texas law requires an individual seeking certification for a certificate that requires a bachelor’s degree to have a bachelor’s degree received with an academic major or interdisciplinary academic major, including reading, other than education. As such, any individuals seeking certification aren’t earning a bachelor’s degree in education regardless of their preparation route. - http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/Docs/ED/htm/ED.21.htm#21.050

There are multiple routes to become a certified teacher in Texas:

1) Completion of a traditional undergraduate educator preparation program at a college or university

2) Completion of an alternative certification preparation program (after earning a degree or meeting appropriate requirements for Health Science Technology or Trade and Industrial Education).

3) Completing a post-baccalaureate program at a college or university

4) Completing Texas requirements as a teacher who received certification from another state

Are these figures accurate?

2015-2016 New Teacher Certificates by Preparation Route

Alternative Certification Preparation Program: 50%

Undergraduate Preparation Program: 34%

Out-of-State: 13%

Post-Baccalaureate Preparation Program: 4%

If you remove newly certified in Texas out-of-state teachers from the denominator (see attached spreadsheet), you get:

Alternative Certification Program: 57.3%

University Undergraduate Preparation Program: 38.4%

Post-Baccalaureate Preparation Program: 4.3%

What is the latest available full-year data along these lines?

2016-2017 New Teacher Certificates by Preparation Route

Alternative Certification Preparation Program: 52%

Undergraduate Preparation Program: 33%

Out-of-State: 12%

Post-Baccalaureate Preparation Program: 3%

If you remove newly certified in Texas out-of-state teachers from the denominator (see attached spreadsheet), you get:

Alternative Certification Program: 59%

University Undergraduate Preparation Program: 37%

Post-Baccalaureate Preparation Program: 4%

Anything else to consider in this vein?

I’ve attached a chart comparing the requirements for different routes to certification.

There are 135 entities that offer 260 educator preparation programs, and many universities offer alternative certification programs.