121117 glopftexas

Emails, Brittany Eck, press secretary, Texas Land Commissioner George P. Bush, Dec. 11, 15 and 19, 2017

2:56 p.m.

Thank you for the opportunity to respond. The statements you sent are a gross oversimplification of complex FEMA direct housing programs, lack key facts and demonstrate a lack of understanding of the response efforts.



First, let me clarify a few things. The programs the GLO is administering is the short-term direct housing programs FEMA is offering in the State of Texas following Hurricane Harvey. This is the first time FEMA is offering this package of programs to a state to help individuals get on the path to recovery from a natural disaster and neither the GLO nor the any state agency has been involved in these programs in previous events. The Governor tapped the GLO to help FEMA implement these programs three weeks after the storm, in part due to the enormity of the affected area. In all cases, the applicant must be approved for eligibility by FEMA and, if interested, agree to the terms of FEMA’s regulations. The GLO is processing eligible applicants for short-term housing programs as FEMA is making their information available to the agency.



All individuals displaced by the storm were offered the Transitional Sheltering Assistance (TSA) program, which provides hotel stays to survivors who need shelter while looking for longer-term housing. The TSA program is administered directly by FEMA and has been extended by through Jan. 16, 2018. This program is currently housing 15,027 individuals in 1,334 hotels. FEMA sent a strike team to the coast within the last week to interview those living in tents to assess their situation and determine why they were not participating in TSA and if they would like to access that service at this time. If you would like to talk about this program, please contact FEMA.



The direct housing effort has housed 678 families to date in temporary units, with 79 units ready for occupancy and 65 units in the process of electric hookup – the final stages prior to move in. Additionally, 1,671 work orders have been issued, which means the unit is being dispatched to the affected individuals.



None of the programs provided by FEMA are designed to be a permanent home replacement or complete repair program. The programs are deigned to be short-term (up to 18 months) stopgap solutions while individuals work on long-term solutions. The Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funds provided by HUD are intended to provide long-term funding for unmet needs in communities following a disaster.



The Direct Assistance for Limited Home Repair, or DAHLR, limited permanent repairs to homes with significant damage. FEMA determines the eligibility for DALHR on a case by case basis where there is limited alternative housing available or it is not cost-effective to use. DAHLR has been utilized by FEMA twice, but this is the first time in Texas. To qualify, generally the home must be owned by the applicant, have sustained at least $17,000 in FEMA estimated damage, could not have had insurance, and cannot be located in a floodway. Initially through this program, the home would need to be able to be partially repaired by the lesser of $60,000 or 50% of the fair to market value of the home prior to the hurricane. However, the GLO reported to FEMA that this resulted in several homes not being eligible, so FEMA changed the standard to allow up to 50% of the replacement value of the home. This has enabled a significantly more homes to qualify. The program requires construction grade materials and the contractors must be selected through a required procurement process.



An inspection by a licensed contractor is required to determine if the eligible applicant meets the standards mandated by FEMA. The GLO has contacted 664 households who have initially qualified for the program and conducted 182 DALHR inspections with an additional 195 scheduled. Currently. To date, two homes have had the work completed with an additional 67 homes qualified and 13 work orders issued.



The Partial Repair and Essential Power for Sheltering (PREPS) program is for less damaged homes and provides up to $20,000 to allow homeowners to shelter in their homes. It is designed to supplement emergency sheltering by providing up to $20,000 in limited repairs and power restoration in disaster-damaged single-family owner-occupied residences. PREPS is being offered by FEMA separately from the other programs as it is a public assistance program instead of the individual assistance program and therefore requires a 10% match from the local government. The limited nature of the assistance provided through PREPS is demonstrated in this news report - http://www.brproud.com/news/local-news/governor-steps-in-after-facebook-video-about-shelter-at-home-video/550918674.



I hope this clarifies these issues for you.



Sincerely, Brittany



--

Brittany Eck, Press Secretary

Commissioner George P. Bush, Texas General Land Office

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, December 14, 2017 5:53 PM

To: Brittany Eck

Subject: Sharing an update

Thanks.

I just fielded a returned phone call from the Nueces County judge, Loyd Neal. I am summarizing his comments here in case GLO sees factual errors or wishes to comment.

Neal sounded upset at GLO’s management, in particular at no advance funding being available to COGs that were assigned by GLO to screen applicants for housing including trailers and manufactured homes. As the lack of response stands, he said, he thinks some 400 to 600 county families won’t get help until well after Christmas.

It’s a disgrace, he said, and the greatest bureaucratic buck-passing he’s seen in his career. He said he’s never before been as frustrated with every level of government above him.

He told me his commissioners court voted Wednesday to invite all relevant officials—U.S. Senate down--to a public meeting about the situation Dec. 19 in Corpus Christi.

g.

9:53 a.m.

Dec. 15, 2017

Gardner, according to FEMA there are 52 households needing direct housing in Nueces County.

During IGSA discussions, the GLO guaranteed each of the CoGs at least $200,000 for administrative costs, even if the estimated number of direct housing need was below that number. The expenditures for these programs are reimbursement based and FEMA estimates administrative costs based on the numbers of households in each area needing direct housing.

The Coastal Bend Councils of Government (representing Aransas, Bee, Brooks, Duval, Jim Wells, Kenedy, Kleberg, Live Oak, Nueces, Refugio, and San Patricio) chose not to administer the program, so the GLO has set up and is administering the program directly. FEMA in coordination with the GLO have been setting up and administering these programs while the COGs have been negotiating the intergovernmental service agreements. Additionally, the GLO hired a dedicated staff member in Corpus Christi to work on the recovery.

Commissioner Bush and his team have been to Nueces and the surrounding counties numerous times since the storm struck. We have staff deploying all over the region working with local officials and FEMA to help affected by Hurricane Harvey. Feel free to see for yourself - https://twitter.com/txglo/media.

Sincerely, Brittany

--

Brittany Eck, Press Secretary

Commissioner George P. Bush, Texas General Land Office

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Monday, December 18, 2017 4:48 PM

To: Brittany Eck

Subject: Another county judge's response by phone

We also heard back from Mark Henry, the Galveston County judge.

Henry said today that flooding due to Harvey had damaged 22,000 to 24,000 homes in the county hit by water from an inch to eight feet in depth.

Henry, who described himself as a longtime personal friend to Patterson, also said his office was still fielding daily calls from residents awaiting help. Calling delayed repairs “very frustrating,” Henry said: “As far as the why” repairs have been delayed, “I don’t know and I don’t care. I want it to get done.”

Any other relevant information?

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

11:23 a.m.

Dec. 19, 2017

I spoke with our FEMA counterparts to get you the latest information. Please keep in mind hurricane recovery is a fluid process and numbers are constantly changing.

In Galveston County, there were 19,919 applications who qualified for assistance. $98.6 million was provided to Galveston County residents in individual assistance grants. 167 residents were provided the max grant of $33,300. We have housed 56 applicant households and 446 are in the process of receiving a direct housing solution. I attached the most recent infographic for Galveston County.

Survivors making repairs to homes or looking for rental resources should follow up with their insurance companies for claims assistance, the SBA for loan application status, and/or the FEMA Helpline to update their case if their information has changed, to recertify for additional rental assistance, appeal their determination, or follow up if in the Transitional Sheltering Assistance (TSA) program.

Thank you so much.

Sincerely, Brittany

--

Brittany Eck, Press Secretary

Commissioner George P. Bush, Texas General Land Office