1117 bostaphpftexas

Emails, Lisa Growette Bostaph, Ph.D., associate professor, Department of Criminal Justice, Boise State University, Nov. 20 and 27, 2017

1:36 p.m.

I write as we try to assess the accuracy of a legislator’s claim that “perpetrators of domestic violence accounted for 54% of mass shootings between 2009 and 2016.” State Rep. Eddie Rodriguez attributed this conclusion to an April report issued by an advocacy group, Everytown for Gun Safety.

Here is that report—which says that in 85 of the 156 tallied mass shootings, the perpetrator “shot a current or former intimate partner or family member.”

An appendix to the report summarizes each of the tallied shootings; from that, we spotted 13 tallied shootings, 8 percent of the 156, that occurred after a domestic dispute or involved a shooter previously charged with or linked to domestic violence, based on Everytown’s summaries. My own breakdown, drawing from the summaries, indicates six variations in those charges or links – including charges that led to convictions; charges expunged; charges dismissed; and charges pending.

What’s the best way to get the best data on domestic violence preceding mass shootings?

Any recommended resources or other experts?

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information.

Thanks for taking a look, time permitting,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

Sent: Monday, November 20, 2017 4:28 PM



…



I count 90 of the 156 shootings that involve either the shooting as an act of domestic and/or family violence, a prior history of domestic/family violence and/or violence against women.



The disagreement surrounding these statistics arise out of varying definitions of "domestic violence", "involvement", and "prior history". Researchers use intimate partner violence as the term for violence against a current or former partner or with whom you share a child in common (aka, you have had an intimate relationship with). We use family violence to denote violence against family members with whom you are not in an intimate (i.e., sexual) relationship with, although this can be confusing if the perpetrator was sexually abusing child or other family members. However, most state laws do not differentiate between domestic and family violence, in the sense that "domestic violence" under statute involves both those in current or former intimate partner relationships and people who have, currently or in the past, resided together (e.g., family members) or with whom you have a blood relationship.



I'm not sure it is important to distinguish between shootings that involve intimate partners and family members nor am I convinced that it is important to distinguish between the shooting as an act of domestic or family violence and a prior history of doing so. If you look at the 90 incidents of mass shootings that involve either a current or former intimate partner, a family member of a current or former intimate partner, or a family member of the perpetrator, you see that, even in just the cases of the current or former intimate partner, many others who are not the "object of anger" are killed. These are mass shootings because the violence does not just end with the "object of anger". This is why it is inaccurate to say that domestic violence is only fear-provoking or dangerous to the primary victim.



Also, parsing out whether or not a protection order was granted or a criminal charge resulted in a conviction is ignoring everything that we know about domestic violence: that victims are often manipulated and controlled by fear to rescind requests for protection and criminal charges; that victims are often silent about the domestic violence out of fear of involving others who may later be threatened or hurt; fear of angering the perpetrator and risking further violence for "bringing others into our business"; fear that the perpetrator may lose their job and the victim cannot provide for their children on their own; fear that, by leaving their abuser, they could be risking their abuser having custody or unsupervised visitation with their children who are often witnesses to the violence and/or abused themselves. This means that, if the domestic violence victim is also a victim in the mass shooting, we may never know if there was a history of domestic violence. But, does that really matter, when the end result of that relationship was the ultimate act of domestic and/or family violence?



If we are going to talk about this, we need to do so in a way that is informed by what we know about this issue as whole.



Take care,

Dr. Bostaph







--

Lisa Growette Bostaph, Ph.D.

Graduate Program Coordinator

Associate Professor

Department of Criminal Justice

Boise State University

On Nov 20, 2017, at 4:32 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:



Thanks. Did you get all this from the report’s appendix alone?



I ask because James Alan Fox tells us by email that he reviewed a spreadsheet from Everytown perhaps containing more data. He summarized part of what he found here.



Given the legislator’s claim that we’re checking, I am interested in whether there’s more on-point research available. To what degree has it been analyzed or confirmed that a domestic violence charge or conviction precedes someone committing a mass shooting?



Appreciated,



g.



6:47 p.m.

I used the appendix alone & it appears in this news article that Dr. Fox did as well.



My read of the data is the same as his is. The difference is that I think it’s a moot point to make the differentiation between the mass shooting as the act of domestic/family violence or prior acts of domestic violence. It doesn’t negate the fact that, when domestic/family violence turns deadly, it often results in more than just the primary victim losing their life. That alone should be enough for us to do better at identifying, holding accountable, assessing dangerousness & potential lethality, and treating domestic violence perpetrators and providing appropriate support and services to victims. All of that requires a concerted effort to educate people & professionals about all of those facets of domestic violence.



What these various people are discussing is the difference between two things overlapping (what we call correlation) and prediction (or what we would also call causation at times). Dr. Fox is correct: domestic violence and mass shootings appear to overlap in many cases, but we do not have the data to show that domestic violence predicts mass shootings. In fact, the majority of domestic violence, thankfully and due to many factors, does not result in mass shootings or homicide. Homicide, even in domestic violence, is a relatively rare event given the millions of incidents of domestic violence that occur in this country.



There are tools out there to assist in determining levels of potential dangerousness for reassault or lethality in domestic violence cases. Prior incidents of domestic violence has been identified as being related to increasing dangerousness of someone committing another act of domestic violence, but not a mass shooting per se. And, in science, especially when it comes to human behavior, it is difficult to “confirm” without any doubt any relationship. Yet, calculate how many other people outside of the primary victim were killed in those mass shootings that were acts of domestic or family violence. When do we stop saying that the only person in potential danger in domestic violence is the primary victim?



So, to answer your question, no, data does not exist that confirms that prior domestic violence, alone, predicts a mass shooting. Dr. Fox is correct, but I would suggest that prediction is only part of the story.



I’ll be happy to send you that appendix with my quick notations on it.

11:46 a.m.

Nov. 27, 2017

...here it is. It was just a quick sweep of the cases with no more information than what was listed.