0917 gwilpftexas

Emails, Gail Wilensky, economist and policy analyst, Project HOPE, Sept. 29 and Oct. 2, 2017

Sent: Friday, September 29, 2017 2:32 PM

I agree with analysis done to include all states and not just the states that use healthcare.gov. The increase is 94% not 105%.

I also agree with his statements that states that already had “guaranteed issue” (meaning everyone is charged the same irrespective of expected use or health status and may or may not allow for variations for age groups) and which also required broad coverage had smaller increases than states which had not had adopted such policies. Of course, these were the most expensive states for health insurance in the country before the ACA and it’s not a surprise that the rules of the ACA regarding expansive benefits and guaranteed issue didn’t affect them much.

I do not buy into his analysis that includes New York. He backs into that estimate based on newspaper reports and not on any real data. I don’t find the results credible and it is not an acceptable way to make an estimate. If you can’t get the numbers you need, then you need to just say that..This is hokey at its best.

Hope this helps…

Gail

Doesn’t change the basic conclusion of “mostly true” for Cornyn.

2:39 p.m.

From: Wilensky, Gail

Sent: Friday, September 29, 2017 2:39 PM

He mentions but only really in passing that only ½ of the people in the individual insurance market are in the exchanges getting subsidies. The other half are equally affected by the premium increases. They just get to do it without any subsidies. It’s one of the reasons for continuing dissatisfaction with the ACA—that an the mandate which both R’s and D’s hate on principle even though something that arm twists people into buying insurance is critical if you want to protect coverage for pre-existing conditions and other predictable causes of high health care spending.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Monday, October 02, 2017 3:21 PM

Thanks.

But I didn’t realize the other day, there’s a chart at the very bottom here--http://acasignups.net/17/08/22/aspes-105-increase-report-even-more-misleading-i-thoughtand-raises-another-important-point —indicating the increase across the 50 states was 84 percent. That seem to hold up? Does it change your thinking at all below?

G.

From: Wilensky, Gail

Sent: Monday, October 02, 2017 5:21 PM

The New York numbers are still not real and the California ones are unverifiable. Since this is someone who has a “grudge” rather than being an objective researcher, I am uncomfortable with his data manipulations.

On Oct 2, 2017, at 6:44 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Sharing below. Callaghan is a Texas A&M professor.

From: Callaghan, Timothy H.

Sent: Monday, October 02, 2017 4:51 PM

First, I should say that although Gaba is a data activist, he is quite rigorous with his methods and usually has as good or better data than what is publicly available most places. Since some of Gaba’s data comes from his own sources, as noted with Covered California in his post, I can’t speak to the data’s validity, that said, I speak to the broader points in the post below. I hope this helps.

Best,

Tim Callaghan

In general, it does appear that the data supports Gaba’s claims. Whereas the HHS report is based on 39 states using the federal platform, Gaba includes states with their own marketplaces and demonstrates that the rate drops. This is because, as Gaba notes, many of these states excluded from the federal report had guaranteed issue laws on the books prior to the ACA and thus had higher costs baked into their 2013 premiums. With higher initial costs, the difference from 2013-2017 is much smaller. Overall, this suggests that the true rate increase is smaller across the 50 states than suggested in the HHS report. Even with Gaba’s point however, an 84 or 105% rise is quite large and the root cause of it can be traced back to what I mentioned in my previous email.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Monday, October 2, 2017 3:25 PM

Thank you for your reply the other day.

Can you possibly take a hard look at the final chart on this data activist’s web page suggesting an 84 percent difference in premiums—in contrast to 105 percent? Does the research behind the figure stand up? Why or why not?

I appreciate.

G.

WILENSKY

5:58 p.m.

I agree with this general conclusion. My comments have to do with his use of California data, which is not available and therefore cannot be checked and to a lack of New York data. The HHS data only included 39 states and therefore is incomplete--which the report states quite clearly.

I also agree with the comment that 84% or 105% is quite large.