0917 jblankpftexas

Emails, Josh Blank, research director, the Texas Lyceum, Sept. 12, 2017

11:14 a.m.

Re: the Lyceum, among the 37% of respondents who couldn't offer an opinion in the Cruz-O'Rourke match-up, 36% identified as moderates, 33% identified as conservatives, and 19% identified as liberals.

"More than an accurate depiction of a race that is over a year away, the trial ballot measures a mixture of the baseline support for both candidates, and even more so, the salience of each in the electorate. And given that Senator Cruz is significantly more well-known than Representative O'Rourke, the trial ballot at this early stage is ultimately measuring attitudes towards Ted Cruz more than what actions Texas voters might take on Election Day."

Cruz Fav-Unfav from UT/TT Polling: https://texaspolitics.utexas.edu/set/ted-cruz-favorability-june-2017

O'Rourke Fav-Unfav from UT/TT Polling: https://texaspolitics.utexas.edu/set/beto-orourke-favorability-june-2017

Let me know if I can be of any more assistance.

Best,

Josh

On Tue, Sep 12, 2017 at 11:26 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Mike Baselice writes below, responding to us. Solid critique?

Sent: Tuesday, September 12, 2017 11:15 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Fresh inquiry for a fact-check

Gardner: We are not engaged in the race.

The reason why the Lyceum Poll has the US Senate race as even is because the demographics are not in line with the actual Texas electorate.

Our surveys have shown an 8-10 point Republican advantage over Democrats in terms of partisan vote behavior. I don’t recall waking up and the calendar flipping to 2037? This is still 2017 where Texas is more 8-10 points more GOP then it is Democratic. You can look at the down ballot races where the vast majority of the candidates are unknown to the voters, and yet we see that Republicans defeated Democrats statewide by an average of 15 points in 2016.

Our voter surveys typically show 50% of the electorate as conservative, 30% as moderate/unsure and 20% as liberal.

MICHAEL BASELICE

Baselice & Associates, Inc.

12:08 p.m.

Well, in a sense, no.

Because he is loosely citing polls of registered voters, and more often than not, likely voters taken on or around Election Day.

The Lyceum poll is of adult Texans, a more demographically heterogeneous group than the registered voter pool, and more so still than the actual election day voting pool. So this is a more diverse sample than most of the polling that professional political pollsters regularly survey in Texas - which is one of the biggest advantages of the Texas Lyceum Poll. We only filter the results down to those who say that they are registered to vote, but as the election gets closer, there will be additional filters that will make the measurement of the electorate more conservative, and more in-line with the ultimate outcome (either items in the poll meant to assess vote history and engagement, or creating a sampling frame from the voter file that requires past participation) in addition to more people paying attention and the structural advantages of the Republican Party manifesting themselves further due to campaigning.

So, yes, it's not in line with what the actual TX electorate is going to look like in November 2018, it's an assessment of where voters stand in April 2017, and the Texas Lyceum Poll isn't making any guesses about what the electorate is going to look like in November 2018 based on data collected in April of 2017 – that's the job of consultants, not those trying to accurately measure public opinion in the here and now.

On Tue, Sep 12, 2017 at 3:25 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

You wrote below that among the 37 percent of respondents who did not choose between Cruz and O’Rourke, 36 percent identified as moderates, 33 percent identified as conservatives, and 19 percent identified as liberals—correct?

Are you saying that’s a sign, perhaps, that typically Republican-inclined voters weren’t ready to commit afresh to Cruz in the wake of the Texan’s losing run for president?

3:27 p.m.

I wouldn't go that far. I'm simply saying that a larger share of voters who admitted to not yet having a preference identify as conservative as opposed to liberal. When they choose to tune into the race, they are going to be predisposed towards supporting Cruz over O'Rourke.