0318 cicillinepftexas

Emails, Richard Luchette, communications director, U.S. Rep. David Cicilline, March 8-9, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, March 08, 2018 5:37 PM

To: Luchette, Richard

Good afternoon from Texas where I’m researching the accuracy of a claim by Sen. Ted Cruz that Democratic Rep. Beto O’Rourke “wants to take our guns.”

Cruz points out that O’Rourke co-sponsored the proposed assault-weapons ban. Is there an unpacking of that legislation that makes clear any provisions possibly leading to guns getting taken away?

We count on attributable on-the-record information for our stories. I am hoping to complete this research today.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Luchette, Richard

Sent: Thursday, March 08, 2018 4:51 PM

Hey, I assume you have the bill text already? Do you just need a fact sheet? The answer is that no one’s guns are taken away under the bill, but I’m happy to get that to you in whatever format is best.

On Mar 8, 2018, at 6:38 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Here is what I typed up based on reading the proposal. Does the section about buy-backs intimate some acquisition of guns by government?

PASTE:

The measure would bar the import, manufacture, sale or possession of any semiautomatic assault weapon or “large capacity ammunition feeding device.” It also says that the new bar shall not apply to any semiautomatic assault weapon or device lawfully held before or on the date the act passes into law. The bulk of the proposal lists guns not subject to the proposed ban including handguns, rifles and shotguns. The measure otherwise authorizes federal funds to be spent on government “buy-back” programs for semiautomatic assault weapons and ammunition feeding devices.

6:04 p.m.

Thanks. It doesn’t intimate that. If a gun owner wants to keep their gun, they can. If they want to sell it, they can. Totally up to them.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Friday, March 09, 2018 11:10 AM

What does the buy-backs section mean? Why is it in the measure?

Also, we fielded this follow-up comment from Catherine Frazier, a spokeswoman for the Cruz campaign: “The bill Congressman O’Rourke has cosponsored would ban hundreds of thousands of firearms commonly used by law abiding Texans all over the state for competition, hunting and self-defense. The people of Texas deserve an explanation from him as to how his support for criminalizing the future sale, transfer and possession of such firearms, does not amount to coming after their guns.”

For our story, your own (or the congressman’s) thoughts/analysis? Other research recommendations?

1:07 p.m.

March 9, 2018

The buybacks section is there to provide another option for law-abiding gun owners who want to sell a gun they already own. Shorter version – convenience for the gun owner.

The Cruz ad says, “He wants to take our guns.” His spokesperson doesn’t give any justification for that claim in the quote below. Seems like Lyin’ Ted is at it again…

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, March 09, 2018 2:26 PM

I just fielded a follow-up reply from Catherine Frazier stating that 205 guns that would be banned by the measure are commonly used for self-defense.

Comment/guidance/other resources?

Frazier wrote:

“I know it's convenient for the left to call semi-automatic weapons ‘assault weapons’ and appreciate your efforts to carry that water for them, but the measure - filed again last week - targets 205 firearms commonly used by law abiding citizens for self-defense, recreation, and competition. I've included the latest bill and the description given by the cosponsors.

https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/5087/cosponsors?r=1

“The law would make it ‘unlawful for a person to import, sell, manufacture, transfer, or possess, in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce, a semiautomatic assault weapon.’ Note that the ban wouldn't apply to any weapon that was ‘lawfully possessed’ when the ban goes into effect.

"The Assault Weapons Ban of 2018 will prohibit the sale, transfer, production, and importation of: semi-automatic rifles and pistols with a military-style feature that can accept a detachable magazine; semi-automatic rifles with a fixed magazine that can hold more than 10 rounds; semi-automatic shotguns with a military-style feature; any ammunition feeding device that can hold more than 10 rounds; and 205 specifically-named and listed firearms." (You can see the list of the 205 specifically-named firearms starting on page 4 of the” legislation, she wrote.)

2:15 p.m.

Ok. They’re either lying or they don’t know what they’re talking about. The term ‘assault rifle’ comes from the Sturmgewehr 44 (which translates to ‘assault rifle 44’), a weapon the Germans developed for World War II. At the conclusion of the war, the Sturmgewehr became the inspiration for other assault rifles, including the AK-47 and the M16. I just think it’s really important to point out that this isn’t a term ‘the left’ invented.

Second, the bill clearly states we’re talking about semi-automatic weapons with at least one military-style feature – it also clearly states what those features are (I can pass them along if you need them). The idea that we’re putting all semi-automatic weapons under the same umbrella is something I first saw on Infowars and I guess the Cruz campaign is running with it now. The fact is it’s a lie to try and scare people.

Lastly, it looks like you already have this in what you sent me, but again anyone who owns an assault weapon when the law goes into effect can keep it. They are lying in the ad.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, March 09, 2018 3:37 PM

Got it, thanks.

What’s incorrect about Frazier’s reference to 205 firearms?

Also, is your title communications director?

G.

2:58 p.m.

Yes on communications director. They’re right that there are 205 firearms that are named and banned under the bill. Again, if you already own one of those models, you can keep it or sell it (provided the purchaser passes a background check). But that’s totally up to the owner.

I’d also point out that there are also 2,258 legitimate hunting and sporting rifles and shotguns that are named by make and model and specifically exempted from the ban. There are a couple other exemptions too – antique weapons, weapons used by the military and law enforcement, weapons owned at the time of the bill’s enactment, and any firearm that is operated by a bolt, pump, lever, or slide action.

Hope this helps.