0718 cepftexas

Emails, Chris Evans, communications director, Beto O’Rourke campaign, July 24-25, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, July 24, 2018 11:19 AM

Subject: Fresh URGENT inquiry for PolitiFact Texas

Good morning. I write as we fact-check a July 17 claim by Sen. Cruz here that Beto O’Rourke is the only Senate candidate to call for the impeachment of President Trump.

Is this an accurate statement? Why or why not?

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories. I hope to complete this story by 10 am Wednesday.

I’d be happy to hear from you or O’Rourke by phone or email.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

2:33 p.m.

The statement you identified is not accurate. Beto has never called for the impeachment of President Trump.

Please let me know how I can be of further help.

Talk soon,

Chris

On Tue, Jul 24, 2018 at 3:14 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Are you saying O’Rourke opposes impeachment?

I’d be happy to visit with him by phone on this for the fact-check.

Without more information, it looks to me like O’Rourke’s backing of impeachment has been established in news stories dating back nearly a year.

Most recently, our search of the Nexis news database shows that a July 2018 Dallas Morning News story quoted O’Rourke saying, in part, that “if I were asked to vote on this I would vote to impeach the president.” The story quotes O’Rourke saying the facts against Trump are already damning.

In August 2017, O’Rourke said he’d vote for impeachment, the Waco Tribune then reported. Two days later, O’Rourke told a Killeen audience he’d vote to support impeachment, according to this Texas Tribune video. “I do not believe he’s fit to lead this country,” O’ Rourke said then. This April, The Hill said in a news story that O’Rourke had said in an interview for KFYO radio that he’d seen sufficient evidence to support impeaching Trump.

Thanks,

g.

5:31 p.m.

In each of the instances you highlighted, there was no call for impeachment. Beto has answered questions about impeachment from reporters and town hall attendees but he has never called for it.

He has not brought it up at town halls or rallies, has not sent fundraising or petition emails on it, has not posted social media advocating for it, and has not used his current position of public trust to do so through floor speeches, letters, or resolutions. In fact, when called to the floor of the House of Representatives to vote on impeachment, Beto voted against it.

Dallas Morning News:

Reporter Todd Gillman of the Dallas Morning News asked if President Trump taking Putin's side over the U.S. and our intelligence community warranted impeachment. Answering his question, Beto said "Standing on stage in another country with the leader of another country who wants to and has sought to undermine this country, and to side with him over the United States — if I were asked to vote on this I would vote to impeach the president." He did not call for the President's impeachment.

Waco Tribune-Herald:

At one of his many public town halls, Beto was asked by a Baylor Law School student whether he would support impeaching the president. Responding to the question, he outlined his concerns with the president's behavior. He did not call for the president to be impeached.

Killeen/Texas Tribune:

Reporter Alana Rocha of the Tribune asked Beto to expand on a question that a town hall attendee asked him in Killeen. Responding to the question, Beto said "I do not believe he is fit to lead this country." He did not call for the president to be impeached.

KFYO in Lubbock:

During an interview, radio host Chad Hasty of KFYO asked Beto, "Have you seen enough yet to where you would vote to impeach the president?" Beto answered the reporter's question saying, "The answer is yes. Because I want to be straight with you. I've seen an attempt, no matter how ham-handed, to collude with a foreign government in our national election. I've seen an effort to obstruct justice in the investigation of what happened in the 2016 election." Beto then says, "Impeachment doesn't make any sense right now, until you have reached the point that the facts are so compelling that a Republican colleague, it may be Jodey Arrington, it may be someone else, is able to come before their constituents and explain how they voted to impeach the president of their own party. We are not there yet. So I'm going to stay focused on the issues that we can make a difference on right now." He did not call for the president to be impeached.

The Circus:

Following a town hall, reporter Steve Schmidt of The Circus asks Beto "would you vote to impeach him right now?" Answering the question, Beto responds "I would." In a follow-up question, Steve asks "As a senator, have you made your mind up about his removal from office?" Beto answers the question saying, "Until I'm in that position and am able to hear the case made by each side, all the facts laid out, I can't give you an answer on that. Nor would you want me to." He did not call for the president to be impeached.

On Wed, Jul 25, 2018 at 9:32 AM, Selby, Gardner wrote:

Do you mean that O’Rourke joined many in voting to table the resolution from Rep. Al Green?

11:32 a.m.

Correct, thank you. He voted to table the resolution and not move forward with impeachment.