0518 prcpftexas

Emails, Laura Dixon, PhD, research dissemination manager, Population Research Center & Texas Policy Evaluation Project, The University of Texas at Austin, May 10-11, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, May 09, 2018 3:46 PM

To: Dixon, Laura J

Subject: Inquiry for a fact-check, PolitiFact Texas

Laura:

Good afternoon. Mindful of your research summarized here, I write afresh because we’re fact-checking this candidate claim aired this month: “After Texas cut” its “two-year family planning budget by $73 million, one in four clinics closed their doors.”

Who on your team would you recommend we consult about the effect of the noted cuts?

As your research summary says, lawmakers later voted to put spend other funds on health care. Did that decision lead to clinics opening? What’s the latest count of clinics?

Other research/resource recommendations for us?

I’d appreciate hearing back soon by phone or email. We count on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Dixon, Laura J

Sent: Thursday, May 10, 2018 9:47 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Dear Mr. Selby,

Here is a response from Dr. Kari White:

"Our AJPH article from 2015 reported that 25% of clinics closed or stopped providing family planning services. So, overall, that statement is accurate.

We have not been collecting data on the number of clinics that have reopened since that article was published. A recent brief by Stacey Pogue at CPPP does mention the number of clinics funded by the state’s Family Planning Program, although it is unclear whether the “Program” refers to any cost reimbursement funding stream for family planning or just that now known as the Family Planning Program.

It is also important to make clear that the number of clinics itself is not reflective of the availability of services. As we noted in our AJPH and our recent Health Services Research article, clinics may have family planning funds but may not be offering women a robust level of services."

LAURA DIXON, PhD, Research Dissemination Manager

The University of Texas at Austin | Population Research Center & Texas Policy Evaluation Project

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, May 11, 2018 1:46 PM

Got it, thanks. It doesn’t seem to have new information. Am I reading that correctly?

G.

2 p.m.

May 11, 2018

Hi, again!

We have not collected new information on the number of open clinics.

Laura Dixon