0318 lielinfpftexas

Emails, Scott O. Lilienfeld, Samuel Candler Dobbs professor of psychology,

Emory University, March 28-29, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Texas reporter, urgently seeking comment or interview for a fact-check

Dr. Lilienfeld:

Good morning. I write you at the recommendation of NIH because we’re reviewing the accuracy of this claim by US Rep. Michael McCaul, R-Texas: “1 in 100 people are sociopaths.”

How would you evaluate this statement?

Is there particular research that gauges the prevalence of sociopaths?

I’d be happy to visit directly by phone or to hear more by email. As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

Thank you,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Lilienfeld, Scott O

Sent: Wednesday, March 28, 2018 11:58 AM

Dear Mr. Selby: So far as I know, this assertion derives from research using the Psychopathy Checklist, a well-validated measure of psychopathic personality (psychopathy), sometimes loosely referred to as sociopathy. This oft-cited figure may be defensible, although it is also oversimplified. Evidence suggests that psychopathy isn’t an either-or phenomenon; instead, it is continuously distributed, much like height and weight. So there is no scientific cut-off for distinguishing psychopaths from nonpsychopaths. As a result, the 1 percent figure isn’t exactly wrong, but it’s somewhat misleading because it implies that 1 in a 100 people are somewhat different in kind – rather than in degree - from the rest of us. Instead, psychopathy blends imperceptibly into normality.

Still, the 1 in a 100 figure does tell us something informative – namely, that a nontrivial proportion of people walking among us are markedly elevated on traits such as superficial charm, social dominance, self-centeredness, dishonesty, manipulativeness, callousness, poor impulse control, and casual sexual relationships. Take care..Scott

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com>

Sent: Wednesday, March 28, 2018 1:04 PM

To: Lilienfeld, Scott O <slilien@emory.edu>

Subject: RE: Texas reporter, urgently seeking comment or interview for a fact-check

Thank you for this.

If you were to rephrase what the congressman said, how would you state it for accuracy’s sake—and why?

I am pasting here more of what he said so you can pick up some context. McCaul was speaking about the man who blew himself up the other day in Austin after placing bombs around the city starting March 2.

McCaul said: “He’s a sociopath. He claims I’ve been a psychopath all my life. You know, 1 in 100 people are sociopaths. They have no remorse or conscience or guilt when they commit acts of murder like in this case. So he had no remorse…”

ALSO: Since my initial query sent to you, an aide to Rep. McCaul has told me that McCaul relied on this for his statistic: Robert D. Hare, “Psychopaths and Their Nature: Implications for the Mental Health and Criminal Justice Systems,” in Psychopathy: Antisocial, Criminal, and Violent Behavior, ed. Theodore Millon, Erik Simonsen, Morten Birket-Smith, and Roger D. Davis (New York, NY: Guilford Press, 1998), 188-212.

Other thoughts or research suggestions?

G.

12:11 p.m.

Yes, I’d heard this about the Austin bomber as well.

Not really much to add…but Bob Hare is the developer of the Psychopathy Checklist-Revised, the measure that I had mentioned. Only other point I’d make is that one core feature of psychopathy is a lack of insight into oneself and one’s pathology. So such self-reports (“I’m a psychopath and have always been”) should be taken with more than a grain of salt unless they are accompanied by extensive corroborating evidence, especially extensive reports from people who’ve known the individual well.

Take care…Scott

Sent: Thursday, March 29, 2018 11:50 AM

Subject: Another front, Texas reporter inquiry

Hello again.

We heard back from Dr. Hare.

Hare told us he doesn’t consider sociopaths to be psychopaths. He pointed us to an interview he gave, posted online, in which the interviewer draws Hare’s agreement that unlike psychopaths, sociopaths (or hardcore criminals) are capable of feeling remorse or guilt. In the same interview, Hare said it’s also a misconception to characterize psychopaths as psychotic or “legally insane.”

Thoughts?

g.

12:30 p.m.

March 29, 2018

We don’t use the term “sociopathy” in our work; it is an informal, colloquial term that has no consistent usage in the literature. Bob is right that some people do define them as individuals who engage in antisocial and criminal behavior who are capable of guilt and loyalty, but others use the term differently. Because the term is not a formal scientific term and is used inconsistently in the literature, we steer clear of it. Bob is of course correct that psychopaths are rarely if ever psychotic (they know the difference between right and wrong but don’t care) and do not qualify for the insanity defense.

See the attached article from our lab for explanations of these other issues.