Congressman Lou Barletta : Press Releases : Barletta Introduces Bill to Save Volunteer Firefighters from Obamacare
- Silence from IRS Prompts Action on Employer Mandate Requirement -

- Fire Stations Could Hit 50 Employee Threshold Several Different Ways -

Rep. Barletta inspects a truck at the Duncannon (PA) Fire Company

WASHINGTON – Congressman Lou Barletta, PA-11, today introduced the Protecting Volunteer Firefighters and Emergency Responders Act to specifically exempt volunteer firefighters and volunteers providing emergency medical services from the Employer Mandate Provision of Obamacare. Barletta has been concerned that since the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) currently views volunteer firefighters as employees, fire companies and municipalities would be forced to provide health insurance or pay a fine, saddling them with unbearable financial burdens and threatening public safety. Barletta sent the IRS a letter in November requesting a clarification, but the correspondence has gone unanswered as of today.

The legislation is supported by the National Volunteer Fire Council and the International Association of Fire Chiefs.

“Without further guidance from the IRS – which could have issued a clarification immediately if it so chose – we have no choice but to pursue a legislative fix to yet another problem with Obamacare,” Barletta said. “Make no mistake, this wrinkle we discovered in Obamacare would not provide health insurance to the uninsured, rather it will close down fire companies and do real damage to public safety.”

Under the Employer Mandate Provision, employers with 50 or more employees must provide health insurance or pay penalties. This could be problematic for fire companies, particularly in Pennsylvania where 97-percent of stations rely exclusively or mostly on volunteers. Fire companies could exceed the 50 employee threshold in several different ways: by themselves based on their size, by being part of a larger combined force under several different chiefs, or by being part of a municipality that has 50 or more public employees in total.

“This is just another example of how Obamacare was not well thought out,” Barletta said. “I would rather tear down the whole thing and start over again with a fresh health care approach, but the president has made it clear that he won’t allow that to happen. So, we’re left to try to pave over the potholes, and this is a big one – possibly affecting fire stations nationwide.”

“It is critically important that fire and EMS agencies not be forced to offer health insurance to volunteer personnel,” said Philip C. Stittleburg, Chairman of the National Volunteer Fire Council. “Agencies don’t have the resources to provide health benefits to their volunteers and individual volunteers have no expectation of receiving such benefits from the agencies they serve. On behalf of the National Volunteer Fire Council I’d like to thank Congressman Barletta and all of the original co-sponsors for introducing this legislation to clarify that volunteers will not be treated as employees under the health care reform law.”

“The IAFC strongly supports Rep. Barletta’s bill to clarify the status of volunteer firefighters under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,” said Chief William Metcalf, President of the International Association of Fire Chiefs. “This is a bipartisan issue which could have serious impacts on staffing at fire departments across the United States. The IAFC looks forward to working with Congress and the Administration to help ensure fire departments of all types are able to continue saving lives and serving their communities.”

Background:

Barletta was first alerted to the issue during a parade in the 11th District by Robert Timko, a volunteer firefighter for the Fairview Township Fire Company, who also serves as Pennsylvania Alternate Director for the National Volunteer Fire Council. Barletta then sent a letter to the IRS seeking the clarification regarding volunteer firefighters and their status under the Employer Mandate Provision contained in Obamacare:

“Forcing volunteer fire companies to comply with the Shared Responsibility Provision will not extend health insurance to the uninsured – rather it will close firehouses and place communities at risk,” Barletta wrote to Acting IRS Commissioner Daniel Werfel. “Furthermore, subjecting volunteer fire companies to the Shared Responsibility Provision may force them to eliminate volunteers in order to avoid classification as a large employer.”

Though the IRS has not responded to Barletta’s inquiry, it has been the general practice of the tax agency to treat all firefighters as employees for federal tax purposes. The agency even specifically addresses that question on its website:

“Generally, tax laws apply to firefighters in the same manner as for other types of workers. It does not matter whether firefighters are termed ‘volunteers’, are considered employees, or are identified by any other name, if the work they do is subject to the will and control of the payer, under the common-law rules, they are employees for Federal tax purposes.”

If the IRS continues to regard the volunteers as employees, then the important question would center on the counting of the hours the firefighters are working. A 30-hour work week would trigger Obamacare’s penalties.

“How exactly would they total up hours on duty for volunteers?” Barletta said. “Does it mean when a volunteer is wearing a beeper or carrying a fire department cell phone? Does it include downtime at the station house? Listening to a scanner? These are all legitimate questions raised since Obamacare has been forced on Americans.”