100 Days
Dear Friends:







Sixty-six out of the first 100 days of this Congress have been spent in recess. That’s shameful. While I'd much rather be in Georgia meeting with folks across the 12th District, we have a lot of work to do in Washington.



While most folks in Congress are digging their heals into the ground in these first 100 days, I’m committed to reaching across the aisle on issues that I know are right for Georgia and the country. I’m working with Republicans and Democrats on legislation to balance the budget, cut wasteful government spending, create good-paying jobs in our district and across the country, and remove burdensome government regulations that are holding back our businesses from succeeding. These aren’t partisan issues, they’re common sense ideas on problems the American people want us to fix.



During those 66 days of recess, I’ve been busy meeting with folks all across the 12th District. I’ve visited with folks and held events in all 19 counties of the 12th Congressional District. From our Congress on the Corner town hall meetings to visiting our rural communities and public safety officials, I’m working hard to make sure that the folks in our district know they have a Congressman fighting for them.



Please take a moment to read some information on the work I’m doing for the folks in Georgia and participate in our poll. If I can ever be of help please don’t hesitate to contact me. We’re now up and running with office hours in all 19 counties of the district. As always, you can stay in touch with us by “Liking” my Facebook page or following me on Twitter at the links on the right.



Today marks the 100th day since the start of the 113th Congress. On January 3rd, a new Congress convened with a mandate from voters all across this country to work together. Unfortunately, very little has changed. Too many in Congress are unwilling to compromise and do what’s necessary to get this country moving.That’s shameful. While I'd much rather be in Georgia meeting with folks across the 12th District, we have a lot of work to do in Washington.While most folks in Congress are digging their heals into the ground in these first 100 days, I’m committed to reaching across the aisle on issues that I know are right for Georgia and the country. I’m working with Republicans and Democrats on legislation to balance the budget, cut wasteful government spending, create good-paying jobs in our district and across the country, and remove burdensome government regulations that are holding back our businesses from succeeding. These aren’t partisan issues, they’re common sense ideas on problems the American people want us to fix.During those 66 days of recess, I’ve been busy meeting with folks all across the 12th District. I’ve visited with folks and held events in all 19 counties of the 12th Congressional District. From our Congress on the Corner town hall meetings to visiting our rural communities and public safety officials, I’m working hard to make sure that the folks in our district know they have a Congressman fighting for them.Please take a moment to read some information on the work I’m doing for the folks in Georgia and. If I can ever be of help please don’t hesitate to contact me. We’re now up and running with office hours in all 19 counties of the district. As always, you can stay in touch with us by “Liking” my Facebook page or following me on Twitter at the links on the right.

Sincerely,



John Barrow

Member of Congress



POLL : What is the single most important issue Congress should address in the next 100 days of the 113th Congress?



Submit your response by clicking here. : What is the single most important issue Congress should address in the next 100 days of the 113th Congress?





12th District Office Hours



As your Congressman, I don’t think you should have to travel a long distance or make a long distance phone call to get help. That's why we regularly hold office hours in all 19 counties of the 12th Congressional District. Folks from my staff are available to offer help with all kinds of problems, whether it's with Social Security, Medicare, or the VA.



Cutting Member Pay



Last month, I introduced legislation to make it easier to cut the pay of members of Congress. This ought to be simple: Under the 27th Amendment of the Constitution, Congressional pay cannot be adjusted during the middle of a Congressional session. This amendment was intended to prevent a pay increase, but folks in Washington are using it as a shield to prevent a pay cut. Folks in Georgia who are being furloughed as a result of sequestration don’t have a Constitutional amendment protecting their pay, so why should members of Congress be treated any different? Check out the information on my bill by



The Keystone XL Pipeline



For years the Keystone XL Pipeline project has been held up due to unnecessary red tape and government bureaucrats. I'm working with a coalition of Republicans and Democrats on legislation to get this project approved. The Keystone XL Pipeline will create thousands of high-paying, high-skilled jobs, and will have an economic impact of over $7 billion. More importantly, it puts America on a long-term path to energy independence. This project is a prime example of how working together can create opportunities and solutions for folks across America. For more information about the Keystone XL Pipeline



Balanced Budget Amendment



My first item of business this year, on the first day of this Congress, was to introduce a Balanced Budget Amendment to the Constitution. Under this amendment, the federal government must pass a balanced budget every year. Forcing the government to spend only what it takes in would stop the out of control spending. This would make the federal government operate just like folks in Georgia – spending only what we need and can afford, and no more. For more information on the Balanced Budget Amendment

As your Congressman, I don’t think you should have to travel a long distance or make a long distance phone call to get help. That's why we regularly hold office hours in all 19 counties of the 12th Congressional District. Folks from my staff are available to offer help with all kinds of problems, whether it's with Social Security, Medicare, or the VA. Click here to find out the office times and locations in your county.Last month, I introduced legislation to make it easier to cut the pay of members of Congress. This ought to be simple: Under the 27th Amendment of the Constitution, Congressional pay cannot be adjusted during the middle of a Congressional session. This amendment was intended to prevent a pay increase, but folks in Washington are using it as a shield to prevent a pay cut. Folks in Georgia who are being furloughed as a result of sequestration don’t have a Constitutional amendment protecting their pay, so why should members of Congress be treated any different? Check out the information on my bill by clicking here For years the Keystone XL Pipeline project has been held up due to unnecessary red tape and government bureaucrats. I'm working with a coalition of Republicans and Democrats on legislation to get this project approved. The Keystone XL Pipeline will create thousands of high-paying, high-skilled jobs, and will have an economic impact of over $7 billion. More importantly, it puts America on a long-term path to energy independence. This project is a prime example of how working together can create opportunities and solutions for folks across America. For more information about the Keystone XL Pipeline click here My first item of business this year, on the first day of this Congress, was to introduce a Balanced Budget Amendment to the Constitution. Under this amendment, the federal government must pass a balanced budget every year. Forcing the government to spend only what it takes in would stop the out of control spending. This would make the federal government operate just like folks in Georgia – spending only what we need and can afford, and no more. For more information on the Balanced Budget Amendment click here

Barrow Bulletin

Get e-mail updates sent directly to your inbox.



Pass it On

Forward this message to a friend.



Stay Connected





Office Hours

Click here for more district office hours.