Trade Adjustment Assistance Community College Career Training (ETA)
Program Summary

The U.S. Department of Labor's Trade Adjustment Assistance Community College and Career Training (TAACCCT) grant program is a major investment to increase the ability of community colleges to address the challenges of today's workforce. Grants are designed to help workers eligible for training under the TAA for Workers program, as well as a broad range of other adults.

Every U.S. state received funding for each of four years through 256 grants totaling $1.9 billion. TAACCCT grants, which continue through September 2018, are impacting 60% of the nation's publicly-funded community colleges and building industry-aligned programs in manufacturing, healthcare, information technology, energy, transportation and other industries.

Through TAACCCT, community colleges have developed or redesigned nearly 2,600 Programs of Study to help adults learn skills that lead to family-supporting jobs. Each college or consortium of colleges developed programs of study aligned with local and regional business needs, which were identified through partnerships formed or strengthened with grant funds. To help adult students obtain industry-recognized credentials more quickly, colleges are using TAACCCT funding to innovate with strategies such as career pathways, credit for prior learning, competency-based models, online training, and strong student support systems. The curriculum and other learning materials developed by TAACCCT grantees are being made widely available to all types of training providers on SkillsCommons.org, as described in a recent ETA Training and Employment Notice.

Through this expansive effort, the Department of Labor is helping to strengthen our nation's institutions of higher education as engines of economic opportunity where adults can succeed in acquiring the skills, degrees, and credentials needed for high-wage, high-skill employment while also meeting the needs of employers in hiring skilled workers. The Department is implementing the TAACCCT program in partnership with the Department of Education.

Fact Sheets

The fact sheets found here begin to illustrate the significant impacts TAACCCT is making on the community college and workforce systems across the country, and will be updated as new information becomes available.

Program Information: Offers an overview and key program information about TAACCCT, such as programs launched, participants enrolled, and credentials earned.

The Broad Reach of TAACCCT Funding: This map illustrates the broad reach of TAACCCT funding across the nation's community colleges. Find total funding for each state, and learn about the types of grants each state received.

A Catalyst for Systems Change: Find an overview of state consortium grants, which represent over half of TAACCCT funding, and the impact they are having at the state level.

Deepening Employer Engagement: This fact sheet provides examples of how TAACCCT grants are deepening employer engagement within industry sectors across the nation.

Community College Presidents' Voices on Impact: Hear directly from six Community College presidents how TAACCCT is impacting their institutions.

Open Educational Resources: A one-page overview of SkillsCommons.org, the online repository that makes the materials produced with TAACCCT funds available to ALL training providers.

Annual Reports