REP. JENKINS: OPIOID CRISIS FUNDING SHOULD BE BASED ON NEED
WASHINGTON – U.S. Representative Evan Jenkins (R-W.Va.) is continuing to push for passage of his legislation to ensure federal opioid epidemic funding goes to the states most affected, like West Virginia.

The federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration announced on Monday that West Virginia will be receiving $330,000 in additional funding, as our state has the highest overdose death rate in the nation.

This supplemental funding was needed because the formula for funding under the 21st Century Cures Act sent large amounts of funding to populous states, while states most impacted saw smaller amounts and had unmet needs.

“I appreciate and welcome this additional funding to help our state combat the drug crisis. Federal agencies must prioritize aid to the states struggling the most, and West Virginia must be at the very top of the list. President Trump unveiled his opioid response plan this week, and it is time for Congress to pass my legislation to make sure that West Virginia and other states hardest hit by the drug crisis get the resources they need to truly make an impact in combating this epidemic. We must to everything possible to help people in need find recovery and stop the flood of opioids and other drugs into our communities,” Rep. Jenkins said.

The 21st Century Cures Act, bipartisan legislation signed into law in 2016, included $1 billion in funding to address the drug crisis. In distributing these funds, the U.S. Health and Human Services Department and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration relied on a funding formula that benefited states with larger populations.

The Federal Opioid Response Fairness Act, introduced by Jenkins and Rep. Annie Kuster (D-N.H.), would make clear that per capita overdose deaths should be a part of the formula used to distribute 21st Century Cures Act funding. The introduction of this bill followed an announcement by the U.S. Health and Human Services Department and SAMHSA that there would be no change in the funding formula for the distribution of opioid State Targeted Response grants.