Charter Schools
The Truth Behind Charter Schools

Background



Florida has over 500 charter schools, with 183,000 students currently enrolled. [1]



Charter schools started off as an innovative idea. They were designed as an entrepreneurial model that emphasized experimentation and innovation. The idea was to see what might be applied to public schools as a whole.



But they’ve become something else entirely. While some charters adhere to the original idea, and have shown some success, many charters have become for-profit drivers for large corporations bent on taking over our public schools.



Our Standards





Charter schools must be based on high academic standards.

Students in charter schools should take the FCAT and other assessment tests.

Charter schools should hire certified teachers.

Charter school employees should be covered by the collective bargaining agreement.

Charter schools should have their charter approved by the local school district.

Charter schools should be required to make information available to the public.

Baseline data that includes demographic and academic information must be gathered to show learning gains and to make valid comparisons to other public schools.

All charter schools must remain public schools by definition.

Until true accountability and academic success is documented, Florida should limit the length of operation and number of charter schools.

Charter schools must remain nonsectarian, nonreligious and not home based.

Legislation must include orderly procedures for school closures to avoid educational harm to students and financial harm to the public.

Charter schools must provide both academic and financial reports to the public.

Charter schools should be funded at levels that reflect their student enrollment.

All school employees should be directly involved in the design, implementation and governance of the curriculum and other offered programs.

Talking points

The Florida Education Association remains committed to supporting charter schools that demonstrate that they can raise student achievement, provide students with safe and productive learning environments and use sound fiscal and management practices.

These charters also must not unfairly discriminate in admissions, hiring, and personnel policies, and offer quality staff development that supports the notion that teachers are professionals who are capable of designing and implementing innovative educational programs that help students reach the goals of the Sunshine State Standards.

The Florida Education Association strongly opposes charter schools that do not hold students to the same standards as other public schools, that selectivity admit students, that do not disclose financial and academic information, and that deny their employees the right to bargain collectively.





















































(2012)