Hot Topic: Mosaic New Wales Sinkhole and Water Loss Incident
Contact

Information

Community members who are interested in testing or bottled water: Mosaic

813-500-6575

Resident inquiries and requests for DEP sampling: DEP Office of Public Services 850-245-2118

Media inquiries: DEP Press Office 850-245-2112

The Florida Department of Environmental Protection’s priority is always the safety of Floridians and our environment, and our staff was on-site to investigate the issues at Mosaic’s New Wales facility less than 24 hours after being notified. Since Mosaic’s initial report of the Water Loss Incident at its Polk County New Wales facility on Aug. 28, 2016, DEP has maintained strict oversight of the recovery process and made frequent site visits to ensure timely and appropriate response continues in order to safeguard public health and natural resources.

Governor Scott directed DEP to expedite our investigation, which began on Aug. 29. While Mosaic has taken responsibility, our job is to ensure 100-percent safe drinking water in Florida and to protect our state’s pristine environment. As directed by the Governor, DEP is expediting all water-quality tests to ensure safe drinking water for residents. Governor Scott also has directed the Department of Health to partner with DEP in our investigation to ensure all drinking water in the area is safe.

DEP’s Ongoing Oversight:

Department staff continues to perform frequent, targeted site visits to monitor progress and provide direction and assistance on response activities.

The department continues to communicate with Mosaic on a daily basis to receive updates on the status of the site and the most recent monitoring results, along with a review of investigative activities in accordance with the requirements of applicable state permits and state orders.

Most recent actions taken by DEP include:

During the week of June 25, 2018: DEP and Mosaic collected monitoring well samples on two days. Results from these samples are forthcoming.

During the week of June 18, 2018: DEP and Mosaic collected monitoring well samples on two days. Results from these samples are forthcoming. Upon completion of remedial work, as required by the corrective action plan under the Consent Order, Mosaic was required to provide DEP with a Remedial Summary Report to ensure all repairs have been effectively completed. That report was submitted this week and DEP is currently reviewing this report.

During the week of June 11, 2018: DEP and Mosaic collected monitoring well samples on two days, and DEP and ECT collected additional private drinking water well samples two days. Results from these samples are forthcoming.

During the week of June 4, 2018: DEP and Mosaic collected monitoring well samples on two days, and DEP and ECT collected samples on three days for the supplemental wells as required by the Consent Order. Results from these samples are forthcoming.

Archived response timelines: