Document Collections: U.S. Department of State
Please Note The collections can be searched by selecting their title and may also be searched by using the Virtual Reading Room Documents Search tool. The documents within each collection are included in the number of total searchable documents.

These documents were released to the public under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), in response to requests for records relating to the development and implementation of the travel restrictions in Executive Orders 13769 and 13780 (“Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United States”) and Presidential Proclamation 9645 ("Enhancing Vetting Capabilities and Processes for Detecting Attempted Entry into the United States by Terrorists or other Public-Safety Threats")

President Clinton had directed the Department of State to identify documents that would shed light on human rights abuses, terrorism, and other acts of political violence prior to, and during, the Pinochet era in Chile. This collection was the culmination of a government-wide effort resulting in the release of over 23,000 documents concerning Chile from 1968-1991 and posted to the Department of State FOIA website. This collection consists of documents produced by the CIA, DOD, NARA, NSC, FBI, DOJ, and the Department of State. Some information has been redacted to protect the privacy of individuals, sensitive law enforcement information, intelligence sources and methods, and other national security interests. WARNING: GRAPHIC MATERIAL INCLUDED.

Press Releases

This is a collection of telephone conversations of Dr. Henry Kissinger during his tenure as Secretary of State under Presidents Nixon and Ford (September 1973 to December 1976). The Department of State obtained the collection of roughly 9550 pages of telephone transcripts from the Library of Congress. Of those received, over 8400 pages of transcripts have been released and are available here on-line. The Nixon-era transcripts conform to the National Archives and Records Administration’s review under the Presidential Recording Materials Preservation Act. The Ford-era transcripts have been reviewed under the Freedom of Information Act. The transcripts are conversations that Dr. Kissinger had with: former President Richard Nixon, leaders in government and business, members of the press, foreign ambassadors, and prominent members of the national and international communities. The transcripts record Dr. Kissinger’s role in the Middle East peace process, shuttle diplomacy after the 1973 Yom Kippur War, the Cyprus crisis of 1974, US-Soviet Union relations, Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) negotiations, and actions in negotiating a Vietnamese peace treaty.





This effort began in August 2000, when Secretary of State Madeline Albright met with the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo and the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo while on a five-day trip to Latin America. Following this meeting, Secretary Albright set in motion an effort to release documents relating to the list of names provided by both the Mothers and the Grandmothers, with the goal of shedding light on what happened to hundreds of missing children captured by the Argentine military. Those documents were released in 2002.



In March 2016, President Obama announced the U.S. government’s intent to release the remaining information in its possession regarding these human rights abuses. This project required all relevant U.S. government departments and agencies to search their files for information pertaining to a 19-page list of terms developed by the National Security Council, working with the Government of Argentina, the State Department’s Office of the Historian, and select experts in the field.



In April 2017, President Trump delivered to President Macri the results of a re-review of 813 documents that had been withheld or redacted in 2002, along with 119 documents selected for inclusion in the Argentina and Latin American Region chapters from the Foreign Relations of the United States volume on South America, 1977–80, available here



This final release marks the conclusion of this project. This collection highlights the lengthy and hard-fought deliberations over U.S. policy toward Argentina and the information available to U.S. officials from 1975 to 1985, providing critical context for this period. It will enhance the collections released in 2002, 2016, and 2017, and demonstrates the commitment of the people of the United States, and of their government, to transparency and human rights. The Argentina Declassification Project represents nearly 20 years of effort by U.S. government departments and agencies to release all information about human rights abuses in Argentina between 1975 and 1983. In 2002, the Department of State released 4,600 records pertaining to this critical time period. Following a request by President Mauricio Macri and human rights groups in Argentina, in 2016 and 2017 the U.S. government released nearly 2,000 additional documents. With this final release, the Department of State adds an additional 2,154 records to the collection which, all told, includes 5,596 records from 16 different agencies. All of the records released from 2016 to 2019, from all government agencies, can be found on the http://www.dni.gov/index.php/about-this-site/foia/read-released-records . All of the records released by the Department of State from 2002 and from 2016 to 2019 can be found here on this site.This effort began in August 2000, when Secretary of State Madeline Albright met with the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo and the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo while on a five-day trip to Latin America. Following this meeting, Secretary Albright set in motion an effort to release documents relating to the list of names provided by both the Mothers and the Grandmothers, with the goal of shedding light on what happened to hundreds of missing children captured by the Argentine military. Those documents were released in 2002.In March 2016, President Obama announced the U.S. government’s intent to release the remaining information in its possession regarding these human rights abuses. This project required all relevant U.S. government departments and agencies to search their files for information pertaining to a 19-page list of terms developed by the National Security Council, working with the Government of Argentina, the State Department’s Office of the Historian, and select experts in the field.In April 2017, President Trump delivered to President Macri the results of a re-review of 813 documents that had been withheld or redacted in 2002, along with 119 documents selected for inclusion in the Argentina and Latin American Region chapters from the Foreign Relations of the United States volume on South America, 1977–80, available here https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1977-80v24 . The U.S. government released a majority of the previously redacted documents in their entirety. It released others with more precise and limited redactions. All are available here This final release marks the conclusion of this project. This collection highlights the lengthy and hard-fought deliberations over U.S. policy toward Argentina and the information available to U.S. officials from 1975 to 1985, providing critical context for this period. It will enhance the collections released in 2002, 2016, and 2017, and demonstrates the commitment of the people of the United States, and of their government, to transparency and human rights.

Press Releases

This collection of over 7,800 documents consists of documents processed under three different El Salvador Human Rights special projects cases. Documents concerning allegations of human rights abuses committed by Salvadoran security forces and FMLN rebels (1979 to 1991) were produced by the Department of State in response to inquiries by the United Nations Truth Commission for El Salvador and the U.S. Congress in 1993 - 1994. Documents concerning the murder of four American Churchwomen (Ita Ford, Maura Clarke, Dorothy Kazel and Jean Donovan) by five Salvadoran National Guardsmen on December 2, 1980 are also included.

In 1995 prompted by strong Congressional, media, and public interest, both President Clinton and the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) requested the Department's records on the deaths of Michael Devine, Efrain Bamaca Velasquez, Jack Shelton, Nicholas Blake and Griffin Davis, the abuse of Sister Diana Ortiz and the reported role of Guatemalan military Colonel Julio Roberto Alpirez in the deaths of Devine and Bamaca. This collection is comprised of over 4,800 documents and covers the Bamaca case and other cases involving human rights abuses against American citizens in Guatemala from 1984 to 1995.