Eight of Linda Sarsour’s Most Controversial Tweets
BY: Follow @realHarisAlic



Women's March co-chair Linda Sarsour has a long history of progressive activism and controversial statements, especially on Twitter, her medium of choice.

Below are eight of her most controversial Tweets throughout the years:

1) In 2011, Sarsour praised the Muslim Brotherhood, calling them the "coolest." Some in the United States have pushed for the group, the goal of which is to institute sharia law, to be designated a terrorist organization.

Yo the Muslim Brotherhood knows how to parrrttaaay! So much for radical islamists taking over! If these r – they r da coolest! #jan25 #Egypt — Linda Sarsour (@lsarsour) February 12, 2011

2) In 2016, Sarsour took a swipe at America's men and women in uniform on Memorial Day, implying many only joined the armed services because they were pressured to do by military recruiters.

In high school, we had so many army recruiters. So many young men & women of color had no way out but to serve in the military. #MemorialDay — Linda Sarsour (@lsarsour) May 30, 2016

3) During the 2016 election cycle, Sarsour accused the candidates vying for the Republican nomination of wanting to "torture women and children."

Your next president wants to torture women and children. SMH. Disgusting. #GOPDebate — Linda Sarsour (@lsarsour) March 4, 2016

4) Republican presidential candidates were not the only ones to draw scorn and derision from Sarsour. The activist also had some choice words for former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

.@HillaryClinton must know that women voters are smarter than she gives us credit. We don't vote based on gender. We vote issues. #DemDebate — Linda Sarsour (@lsarsour) October 14, 2015

5) Sarsour also used the 2016 election to attack America's police officers.

I just want someone to say "police have to stop killing black people" #debatenight #debates2016 — Linda Sarsour (@lsarsour) September 27, 2016

6) Sarsour expressed her opinion in 2015 that groups without power cannot be racist.

There's no such thing as reverse racism. Racism is bigotry + power. The group that doesn't have power can't be racist. — Linda Sarsour (@lsarsour) May 26, 2015

7) Sarsour has said that the Nation of Islam, an organization headed by rabid anti-Semite Louis Farrakhan, is integral to the history of Islam in America.

When we write the history of Islam in America, the Nation of #Islam is an integral part of that history. — Linda Sarsour (@lsarsour) April 28, 2012

8) In 2012, Sarsour shared a video of Remi Kanazi, a Palestinian-American poet, with the caption: "Nothing is creepier than Zionism. Challenge racism, #NormalizeJustice." In the video, Kanazi denounces Israel as an apartheid state and compares it to Iran and North Korea.