MoveOn: 2020 Presidential Candidates Should Not Attend AIPAC Conference

NEW SURVEY: Over 74% of MoveOn Members Believe 2020 Presidential Candidates Should Not Attend AIPAC Conference



AIPAC conference to be headlined by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Vice President Mike Pence, Rep. Nancy Pelosi, Sen. Mitch McConnell, Sen. Chuck Schumer & Rep. Kevin McCarthy



A new survey from MoveOn Political Action asked members if they believe progressive candidates vying for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination should skip this year’s American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) Policy Conference, held Sunday, March 24th to Tuesday, March 26th in Washington, DC. More than 74% of MoveOn members responded agree or strongly agree with the statement that “any progressive vying to be the Democratic nominee for President should skip the AIPAC conference.”

The survey, which entails a single prompt, “Any progressive vying to be the Democratic nominee for president should skip the AIPAC conference,” is prefaced by several facts, including:

AIPAC spent tens millions of dollars in 2015 to defeat the Iran nuclear deal negotiated by President Obama along with our European and international allies––a historic diplomatic agreement that Trump has tried to derail since taking office.





This year’s AIPAC conference is headlined by Benjamin Netanyahu … who has been indicted on bribery and fraud charges, and recently made a deal to bring the “Israeli KKK” … party into the next government.





AIPAC has … been known to peddle anti-Muslim and anti-Arab rhetoric while giving platforms to Islamophobes.





AIPAC has refused to condemn the antisemitism of Republicans, such as Trump’s friend and advisor Steve Bannon. Bannon’s wife reported that he had their kids removed from a school because of “the number of Jews that attend”, and that “he didn’t want the girls going to school with Jews. While many groups condemned Bannon, Politico reported that AIPAC “declined to weigh in.

“This survey is less of a formal vote and more of a gut check on what MoveOn members think,” said Iram Ali, Campaign Director at MoveOn Political Action. “It’s no secret that that AIPAC has worked to hinder diplomatic efforts like the Iran deal, is undermining Palestinian self-determination, and inviting figures actively involved in human rights violations to its stage. We asked our members what they think so that we can make more informed decisions–and over 74% agreed that progressive presidential candidates should skip the AIPAC conference. This should also give a clear insight to 2020 candidates on where their base stands instead of prioritizing lobbying groups and policy people who rarely step outside of D.C.”