Hot dog on a stick Meme Generator The Fastest Meme Generator on the Planet. Easily add text to images or memes.

Create Anonymously If this is checked, your username will not be associated with this image after you create it.

Pro-tip: If you Login or Join Imgflip , your captioned memes will be saved in your account

What is the Meme Generator?

It's a free online image maker that allows you to add custom resizable text to images. It operates in HTML5 canvas, so your images are created instantly on your own device. Most commonly, people use the generator to add text captions to established memes, so technically it's more of a meme "captioner" than a meme maker. However, you can also upload your own images as templates.

How can I customize my meme?

You can move and resize the text boxes by dragging them around. If you're on a mobile device, you may have to first check "enable drag/drop" in the More Options section.

You can customize the font color and outline color just to the right of where you type your text.

You can further customize the font and add additional text boxes in the More Options section. Imgflip supports all web fonts and Windows/Mac fonts including bold and italic, if they are installed on your device. Note that Android and other mobile operating systems may support fewer fonts.

You can rotate your meme, add scumbag hats, deal-with-it sunglasses, speech bubbles, or other custom images, and draw on your meme using the panel just above the meme preview image.

You can create "meme chains" of multiple images stacked vertically by adding new images with the "below current image" setting.

Can I use the generator for more than just memes?

Yes! The Meme Generator is a flexible tool for many purposes. By uploading custom images and using all the customizations, you can design many creative works including posters, banners, advertisements, and other custom graphics.

Why is there an "imgflip.com" watermark on my memes?

The Imgflip watermark helps other people find where the meme was created, so they can make memes too! However, if you'd really like to, you can remove our watermark from all images you create, as well as remove ads and supercharge your image creation abilities, using Imgflip Pro or Imgflip Pro Basic.

Do you have a wacky AI that can write memes for me?

Funny you ask. Why yes, we do. Here you go: imgflip.com/ai-meme (warning, may contain vulgarity)