Staff
Aidan Davis

Senior Policy Analyst

aidan @ itep.org

Aidan Davis began work with ITEP in 2015. Prior to joining the team she worked as a senior analyst with The Pew Charitable Trusts where she focused on state and local budget policy. In that role she led research, authored reports, and provided technical assistance to help states improve their long-term fiscal health. Before joining Pew Aidan focused on the property tax and a range of issues affecting low-income families while working with the District of Columbia’s Office of Revenue Analysis and the George Washington Institute of Public Policy. Aidan has also consulted, providing fiscal and policy analysis, for Vermont’s Joint Fiscal Office and Barrett and Greene, Inc.

Aidan holds a Bachelors Degree from Kent State University and a Masters in Public Policy from George Washington University.

Carl Davis

Research Director

cdavis @ itep.org

Carl Davis joined ITEP as an Analyst in January 2008. He works on a wide range of issues related to both state and federal tax policy including tax incidence analysis, tax expenditure reporting, and gasoline tax policy. Since joining ITEP, Carl has used the Institute’s Microsimulation Tax Model to perform tax incidence and revenue analyses for lawmakers and advocates in over twenty states, and has advised groups on tax policy issues in more than forty states. He is an author of Judging Tax Expenditures (2009), The ITEP Guide to Fair State & Local Taxes (2011), Building a Better Gas Tax (2011), and Who Pays: A Distributional Analysis of the Tax Systems in All 50 States (2009, 2013, and 2015 editions). Carl’s work has appeared in such outlets as The New York Times, USA Today, and National Public Radio, and his writing on tax policy has been printed by The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, The Sacramento Bee, and other major media outlets around the country.

Prior to joining ITEP, Carl worked as part of the State Economic Issues team at AARP. He holds Bachelors Degrees in both Economics and Political Science from Virginia Tech and a Masters in Public Policy from George Washington University.

Alan Essig

Executive Director

alan @ itep.org

Alan Essig joined ITEP as Executive Director in April 2017. Prior to ITEP, he was the executive director of the Georgia Budget and Policy Institute for 11 years. Alan’s previous roles include: senior research associate at the Fiscal Research Center at Georgia State University; deputy policy director for the Georgia Governor’s Office; committee aid to the Georgia Senate and Georgia House of Representatives appropriations committees; assistant commissioner for the Georgia Department of Human Resources, and director of the Georgia Senate Research Office. Alan holds a bachelor’s degree in history from the State University of New York at Buffalo and an MPA from the State University of New York at Albany.

Matthew Gardner

Senior Fellow

mattg @ itep.org

Matthew Gardner is a Senior Fellow at ITEP. He previously served as ITEP’s Executive Director. His work focuses on state and local tax systems and their effect on low- and middle-income taxpayers. Mr. Gardner is an author of Who Pays: A Distributional Analysis of the Tax Systems in All 50 States (2003, 2009, 2013, and 2015 editions)), and has authored a number of comprehensive studies of specific states’ tax systems, including Achieving Adequacy: Tax Options for New York in the Wake of the CFE Case (2005), Tax Options for Arkansas: Funding Education After the Lake View Case (2003), Balancing Act: Tax Reform Options for Illinois (2002), and Choices for Iowa: Building a Better Tax System (1998).

Gardner is also the primary author of The ITEP Guide to Fair State and Local Taxes (2005 and 2011), a primer designed to teach lawmakers and advocates the fundamentals of state and local tax policy. Other studies by Mr. Gardner include Tax Simplification Options for Iowa (2003), A Plan for Progressive Tax Reform in Alabama (2000), Revenue-Raising Options for Louisiana (2000), and An Analysis of a Nevada Business Profits Tax (1999). Mr. Gardner has conducted tax analyses for state and local policymakers and advocates in over 45 states.

Mr. Gardner has degrees from the University of Maryland and the University of Rochester. He resides in Washington, D.C. and originally hails from Raleigh, North Carolina.

Lisa Christensen Gee

Senior Policy Analyst

lisa @ itep.org

Lisa Christensen Gee began work with ITEP in 2016. Prior to joining ITEP, she worked as an analyst with the Fiscal Policy Center at Voices for Illinois Children where she focused on state tax and budget policy issues impacting family economic security, education, human services, and health care. In that role she conducted research, authored reports, and created data and communication tools to advance budget and tax reforms that improve opportunities for low- and middle-income families and put Illinois on a path to a stronger fiscal future.

Previously, Lisa worked on a range of social policy issues, including a fair tax campaign with the Sargent Shriver National Center on Poverty Law, family tax credits with the National Women’s Law Center, and domestic violence legal services with LAF. Lisa has also worked in non-profit administration and as a middle school teacher.

Lisa holds a Bachelors Degree from Brigham Young University and a Masters in Public Policy Studies and Juris Doctor degrees from the University of Chicago.

Dylan Grundman

Senior Policy Analyst

dylan @ itep.org

Dylan Grundman joined ITEP in 2016. Prior to joining ITEP, he worked as a Fiscal Policy Analyst at OpenSky Policy Institute, which provides research, analysis, education, and leadership around budget and tax policy debates in the state of Nebraska. Before OpenSky, he worked as a Research Associate at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities in Washington, DC, focusing on a range of state fiscal policy issues. He holds a BA in Political Science from Arizona State University and an MA in City and Regional Planning from Cornell University. He lives and works in lovely Lincoln, Nebraska.

Harley Heimovitz

Senior Economist

harley @ itep.org

Harley Heimovitz joined ITEP in late 2009 to update and expand ITEP’s modeling capabilities. Previously, he consulted with federal agencies on cost and methodological issues, primarily for federal health care programs, including the National Institutes of Health, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Census Bureau, Housing and Urban Development, Dept. of Veteran Affairs, and Small Business Administration. Harley resides in Maryland and has a PhD (Public Policy) from the University of MD, Baltimore County, MS (Demography) from Florida State University, and BS (Mathematics) from Cleveland State University.

Misha Hill

State Policy Fellow

misha @ itep.org

Misha joined ITEP in 2016 through the State Policy Fellowship Program, a project of the State Priorities Partnership (SPP). Prior to joining ITEP, she earned a Masters in Public Policy at The George Washington University. While earning her graduate degree Misha was an intern with the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities’ Family Income Support team where she focused on TANF policies. She also interned with the Women’s Health Division at the Kaiser Family Foundation through the Peterson Foundation Fiscal Policy Internship. Before finding her way to the policy world, Misha worked in hospital administration and at a New Jersey welfare-to-work program as an Americorps VISTA volunteer. She earned her undergraduate degree in Hispanic Studies at the University of Pennsylvania.

Edward Meyers

Assistant Director

edmeyers @ itep.org

Ed Meyers has been responsible for ITEP’s day-to-day operations since 1987. He is a United States Army veteran and served as an air traffic controller in Viet Nam. Ed and his wife, Carol, reside in Washington, D.C.

Richard Phillips

Senior Policy Analyst

rphillips @ itep.org

Richard joined ITEP as an intern in the summer of 2010 and was promoted to the position of Senior Policy Analyst in 2015. He works on a wide range of federal tax policy issues, with a focus on corporate tax policy and refundable credits. He is a co-author of ITEP’s groundbreaking report “The Sorry State of Corporate Taxes: 2008-2012,” as well as two recent reports on the need to make temporary expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Child Tax Credit permanent.

Prior to joining ITEP, Richard made his way through the progressive policy world as an intern at places like the Center for American Progress, Taxpayers for Common Sense, and Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. He holds Bachelors Degrees in both Political Science and Interdisciplinary Studies (Communications, Law, Economics, and Government) and a Masters Degree in Public Policy (with a focus in Public Financial Management) from American University. Richard hails from Frederick, MD and currently resides in Washington, DC.

Jenice Robinson

Communications Director

jenice @ itep.org

Alla Sapozhnikova

Senior Economist

alla @ itep.org

Since 2005, Alla has been the technical wizard behind the ITEP Microsimulation Tax Model, working to improve the functioning of the model in a variety of ways. From updating the model to include the latest tax data from the American Community Survey, to writing computer code that allows ITEP to evaluate the latest imaginative tax break enacted by lawmakers, Alla’s programming expertise has been vital in allowing ITEP staff to complete accurate and timely analyses.

Meg Wiehe

Deputy Director

meg @ itep.org

Meg joined ITEP as the State Tax Policy Director in May 2010 and is responsible for planning, coordinating and implementing the organization’s state tax policy agenda. Meg works closely with state policymakers, legislative staff and advocacy organizations to promote and protect progressive tax policy.

Prior to joining ITEP, Meg worked at the North Carolina Budget and Tax Center where her research and advocacy was focused on the impact of state fiscal policy on low- and moderate-income North Carolinians. Her work in North Carolina included leading a successful campaign to enact a state refundable Earned Income Tax Credit and coordinating a statewide revenue coalition, Together NC.

Meg holds a BA in Anthropology from the University of Virginia and a Masters in Public Administration from the Maxwell School at Syracuse University. She resides in Durham, NC.

Meg joined ITEP as the State Tax Policy Director in May 2010. As the Director of Programs she is responsible for planning, coordinating and implementing the organization’s federal and state tax policy agenda.

Prior to joining ITEP, Meg worked at the North Carolina Budget and Tax Center where her research and advocacy was focused on the impact of state fiscal policy on low- and moderate-income North Carolinians. Her work in North Carolina included leading a successful campaign to enact a state refundable Earned Income Tax Credit and coordinating a statewide revenue coalition, Together NC.

Meg holds a BA in Anthropology from the University of Virginia and a Masters in Public Administration from the Maxwell School at Syracuse University. She resides in Durham, NC.

Follow Meg on Twitter: @MegWiehe

undefined