Sex with Strangers by Chris Sowa on Apple Podcasts
1 Explicit Episode 1: Sex in Tokyo Chris travels to Tokyo to explore Japanese sex culture. Topics discussed include host and hostess clubs, happening bars, Japanese rope bondage, love hotels, maid cafes, train groping, Western media attention, and much more. Free View in iTunes

2 Explicit Episode 2: Grindr in Wyoming Chris chats with Grindr users in Wyoming, meeting some fascinating characters with surprising backstories. He also picks up quite a bit of new terminology along the way. Topics discussed include hookups, otters, creeps, money offers, religion and more.. Free View in iTunes

3 Explicit Episode 3: Dungeon Fetish Party Chris attends a fetish party at Continuum Dungeon in Chicago where he interviews three professional dominatrixes and an array of attendees ranging from lifestyle kinksters to vanilla onlookers. Guests include Mistress Cleo LaVamp and others... Free View in iTunes

4 Explicit Episode 4: Sex at Mardi Gras Chris travels to New Orleans during Mardi Gras to chat with party people from around the world. He also sits down with some sex workers, including a 62-year-old escort. This episode also features a conversation with sex columnist and author... Free View in iTunes

5 Explicit Episode 5: Adventures in Sex Work This episode draws on conversations recorded in Tokyo, New York, New Orleans, and Chicago. Topics explored include tickle porn, traditional porn, fetish modeling, stripping, prostitution, sugar daddies, and much more. Free View in iTunes

6 Explicit Episode 6: Sex in Boomtown USA Chris travels to Williston, North Dakota to investigate the impact of the oil boom and subsequent migration of thousands of men from around the world to this small community. Free View in iTunes

7 Explicit Episode 7: Sex in Mumbai Chris travels to Mumbai, India where he discusses transgender issues, arranged marriages, fairness creams, and sex work with a delightful array of locals. Free View in iTunes

8 Explicit Episode 8: Sex, Drugs, and Equality at Chicago Pride Chris chats with L's, G's, B's, T's, Q's, I's, A's, and some folks who are too cool for labels at the 2014 Chicago Pride Parade. Free View in iTunes

9 Explicit Episode 9: Financial Domination Chris explores the topic of financial domination, a fascinating virtual form of BDSM. Free View in iTunes

10 Explicit Episode 10: Sex with Strippers Chris talks with 3 Chicago strippers about cocaine, lap dances, bachelor and bachelorette parties, "extras," golden showers, stalkers and much more. Free View in iTunes

11 Explicit Episode 11: Sex with Rent Boys Chris chats with 1 former and 2 current male escorts. The former being podcaster, sex worker advocate, and writer Eric Barry. You can find Eric's show, Full Disclosure, on iTunes, Stitcher Radio and at FDpod.com. Free View in iTunes

12 Explicit Episode 12: Sex with Porn Clerks Chris talks with one former and two current porn clerks about why sex shops continue to thrive in the Internet age. Free View in iTunes

13 Explicit Episode 13: Sex with Mormons Chris travels to Utah to chat with current and former LDS members about the sexual politics of the Mormon Church. Guests include everyone from a Salt Lake City escort to an anti-porn activist at Brigham Young University. Free View in iTunes

14 Explicit Episode 14: Sex Positive Portland Chris travels to Portland where he talks to some key figures in the city’s expansive sex positive community. Topics include polyamory, play parties, furies, Sex Positive World, the PDX Kink Calendar, the Catalyst Art and Cultural Space and more... Free View in iTunes

15 Explicit Episode 15: Sex with Age-Players From adult babies to naughty school girls. Chris explores the world of age-play, a place where consenting adults can be kids again. Free View in iTunes

16 Explicit Episode 16: Professional Phone Sex Chris chats with several phone sex performers and even sits in on a 9-hour no-taboos phone sex shift. Free View in iTunes

17 Explicit Episode 17: Fifty Shades of Evil Chris chats with couples spending Valentine’s Day at the world’s first Hooters and talks with three professional dominatrixes –Svetlannah Doll, Calista Curves, and Domina Vera Lamarr— whom Chris coaxed into seeing Fifty Shades of Grey. Free View in iTunes

18 Explicit Episode 18: Alpacas Gone Wild In this episode we take a detour from human sexuality and dive into the sexual triumphs and tragedies of livestock. Chris visits two farms in Washington state where he encounters horny alpacas, genetically perfect pigs, and some very confused birds. Free View in iTunes

19 Explicit Episode 19: Sex with Fetish Filmmakers Chris chats with a variety of fetish filmmakers. He talks pegging, sploshing, smoking, shoe-play and vore. Free View in iTunes

20 Explicit Episode 20: Sex in Iceland Chris travels to Iceland to chat with locals about the country’s infamous hookup culture, “end demand” prostitution policies, BDSM scene, and much more. This episode also features a couple of brief exchanges with Icelandic rapper Blaz Roc Free View in iTunes

21 Explicit Episode 21: Sex Therapy This episode features interviews with sex therapist Michelle Herzog, Dr. Susan Kaye and author David Ortmann. David co-wrote the book Sexual Outsiders: Understanding BDSM Sexualities and Communities with Richard Sprott. Free View in iTunes

22 Explicit Episode 22: The 2016 AVN Awards and Expo Chris travels to the 2016 AVN Awards and Expo. Porn performers featured in this episode include Ron Jeremy, Farrah Abraham, Nikki Knightly, Kelly Klaymore, MaseratiXXX, Carmen Valentina, Daisy Monroe, Piper Perri, Yasmine de Leon and many more. Free View in iTunes

23 Explicit Episode 23: New York Sex Parties Some of the parties discussed in this episode include Chemistry, Kinky Salon NYC, Myth, Spam, Hacienda, 2 House of Scorpio events: Countdown and Lip Service, Kinky Riot, Wild’s Playground, and Curvy Fling. We will also hear from Jack from Adu Free View in iTunes

24 Explicit Episode 24: New York Continued This episode features conversations that didn’t quite fit into the sex party episode but were simply too good to leave on the cutting room floor. Free View in iTunes

25 Explicit Episode 25: Behind the Scenes at Kink.com with Quinn Quintana Chris explores San Francisco's historic Armory also known as the Porn Palace with kink.com tour guide Quinn Quintana. Quinn is also a comedian and the host of Hot Tub Interviews with Porn Stars. Free View in iTunes

26 Explicit Episode 26: Fighting the Trafficking Narrative from Alaska to Rhode Island Mainstream discussions of the sex industry have mostly revolved around human trafficking. In this episode we explore why that narrative is misleading and harmful. Free View in iTunes

27 Explicit Episode 27: Sex, Food, and Intentional Weight Gain Chris chats with people in the feederism (sometimes also called feedism) fetish community. All 4 featured guests get off on gaining weight as well as encouraging others to pack on pounds. Two of these guests also work as professional fetish models. Free View in iTunes

28 Explicit Episode 28: The War on Porn Chris chats with porn performers about the current state of the porn industry. Guests include Chanel Preston, Mickey Mod, Michael Stabile, Jerry Barnett, British porn sensation Harriet Sugarcookie and her business partner Tommie. Free View in iTunes

29 Explicit Episode 29: Valentine's Day in Amsterdam's Main Red Light District Chris travels to Amsterdam to chat with couples and sex workers spending Valentine's Day in De Wallen, the world's most famous red light district. Chris is joined in this episode by listener Taylor Hernowitz, who helped Chris with some of the i Free View in iTunes

30 Explicit Episode 30: Paying for Sex Chris chats with 6 men who, collectively, have purchased sexual services well over 100 times. Topics discussed include buying and using drugs (mostly cocaine) with sex workers, seeing porn stars, sex tourism, and the sugar lifestyle. Free View in iTunes

31 Explicit Episode 31: Sex and Disability This episode features people with physical disabilities talking about the able-bodied world's tendency to erase their sexuality, using Tindr in a wheelchair, disability-related sexual superpowers, and much more. Free View in iTunes

32 Explicit Episode 32: Lesbian Sex Lesbians, bisexuals, pansexuals, and queer-identified women sound off on everything from scissoring to strap-ons. Free View in iTunes

33 Explicit Episode 33: Sex with Devotees, Wannabes, and Pretenders In this follow-up to episode 31, Chris chats with several people who fetishize disability. Free View in iTunes

34 Explicit Episode 34: Decriminalized Sex Work Down Under Chris travels to New South Wales, Australia where sex work is decriminalized to interview local sex workers about their lives. Free View in iTunes

35 Explicit Episode 35: Back in Alaska for the 15th Annual International Day to End Violence Against Sex Workers Chris returns to Alaska to attend a memorial and vigil observing the 15th Annual International Day to End Violence Against Sex Workers. Free View in iTunes

36 Explicit Episode 36: Exploring Thailand's Sex Industry Chris travels to the Thai cities of Bangkok and Chiang Mai to chat with sex workers and others with insights into Thailand's sex industry, including members of EMPOWER – the country's oldest and largest sex worker organization. Free View in iTunes

37 Explicit Episode 37: Listening to Women Reverend Cindi Knox, porn star Chanel Preston, comedians Liza Treyger and Megan Gailey, writer/activist/Juggalo anthropologist Kitty Stryker, and others share their thoughts on a diverse range of issues including #MeToo and Time's Up. Free View in iTunes

38 Explicit Episode 38: Sex Podcasting with Sex Podcasters Chris chats with Kevin Allison from the Risk! Podcast, Sunny Megatron and Ken Melvoin-Berg from American Sex Podcast, and Cii Marqui, Jaxon, and Juice from Sex with Strangers a Grown Folks Podcast. Free View in iTunes

39 Explicit Episode 39: Sex in Gay Bathhouses Chris chats about gay bathhouses with a handful of people, including the manager of Club Philadelphia and a woman who attended bisexual night at Hawks PDX. Kevin Allison from the Risk! Podcast also returns to share some of his experiences and S Free View in iTunes

40 Explicit Episode 40: Legal and Illegal Sex Work in Nevada Chris travels to Nevada to chat with Alice Little and Jenny Jade from the world famous Moonlite BunnyRanch as well as stripper and cam model extraordinaire Lita Crystal-Skull, independent Las Vegas escort Kate Layne, journalist Lux Alptraum and Free View in iTunes

41 Explicit Episode 41: Sex and the Amish Chris chats with people who have grown up Amish. Guests include Ira Wagler, author of the aptly named Growing up Amish. Misty Griffin also joins the conversation to talk about her memoir Tears of the Silenced. Free View in iTunes

42 Explicit Episode 42: Sex Researchers Chris chats with sex researchers Dr. Justin Lehmiller and Roni Wiener about sexual fantasies, thinking oneself to orgasm, the importance of sex research, and much more. Free View in iTunes