JoAnne Kloppenburg for Wisconsin Supreme Court
Judicial Philosophy

I apply the law fairly, and thoughtfully, and in a principled and disciplined manner to answer the legal questions presented by the parties in a case. I approach each case with an open mind, and my decisions are based on the law and the facts not on ideology or partisan politics. I am faithful to the court’s role as an independent check and balance on the other political branches of government. My duty is to uphold the constitution, a sacred document that represents the will of the people and which contains the fundamental principles that define our democracy, protect individual rights, and promote a more equal society.

The following two decisions illustrate my approach to judicial decision-making: focusing in on the question asked by the parties, hearing their arguments and conducting thorough research on the question presented, applying a disciplined and principled analysis to the question presented, and writing a clear, thoughtful, and fair decision that is readily understandable to judges, lawyers, and the public. Both decisions were published, and neither was taken up by the Wisconsin Supreme Court.

In Riley v. Extendicare, issued on December 27, 2012, I wrote the decision for the court affirming a circuit court decision denying a motion to compel arbitration against a widow who was suing the owner of a nursing home where her husband had died. In other words, we court preserved her right to bring her claims in state court. The nursing home sought to enforce an arbitration agreement that required arbitration using rules set forth by an arbitrator that been barred by a consent judgment with the Minnesota Attorney General from being involved in any consumer arbitration proceeding like this one. We invalidated the arbitration agreement based on Wisconsin statutes and case law, and a comprehensive review of case law around the country.

In State v. Crute, issued on January 29, 2015, I wrote the decision for the court affirming a circuit court decision dismissing a citation for participating in an unpermitted event in the State Capitol rotunda. The constitutional problem with the rule that formed the basis for the citation was that the rule prohibited unpermitted events undertaken by as few as one person. The parties agreed that the rule must have a numerical floor that exempts small groups from the permit requirement, and the State asked the court to read into the rule such a numerical floor. We explained why the State provided no authority for the court to legislate from the bench in that way.

The Role of the Wisconsin Supreme Court

The Wisconsin Supreme Court upholds the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Wisconsin. It does this by acting as a check and balance on the other branches of government. Partisan politics – and the agendas that come with partisan politics – belong in the legislative and executive branches, not in our courts. Justices ensure that the Supreme Court is fulfilling its role by being impartial and fair and by standing up for the constitution and for the people of Wisconsin, not for partisan agendas or special interests.

Supreme Courts – both the United States Supreme Court and the Wisconsin Supreme Court—have the very great power of judicial review: the power to strike down federal, or in the case of the Wisconsin Supreme Court, state laws. Justices, as they should be, are careful in exercising this power; after all, the laws are passed by the people’s elected representatives. It is also important to note that my oath as a Judge and the Supreme Court’s duty are to uphold the Constitution, which also represents the will of the people and which contains the fundamental principles that define our democracy, protect individual rights, and promote a more equal society.

The Supreme Court decides issues of Statewide importance. In doing so, justices must exercise restraint by focusing on the questions asked by the parties in the disputes before the Court, not by going further and intruding into the arenas of the other branches by answering the questions the Justices would like to answer.

The Integrity of the Supreme Court

In our democracy, the legislative branch has the power of the purse, and the executive branch has the power to execute laws. The judiciary takes its power from the trust of the people: the trust that justice is being dispensed equally, that laws are being applied fairly, that everyone gets a fair hearing, and that Judges come to each case with an open mind and decide each case without fear or favor.

That trust is eroded, and the authority of the Court is undermined, to the extent that people perceive that the judicial system has been compromised by the injection of partisan politics and by the influence of huge sums of unregulated special interest money.

I am running for Supreme Court because I believe deeply that we need to maintain the integrity and independence of our Courts. The stakes in this election are high and the choice could not be clearer. Rebecca Bradley is Scott Walker’s choice. Walker appointed her three times to three judgeships, fast-tracking her from the circuit court to the court of appeals to the Supreme Court in three years.

One of Rebecca’s Bradley’s supporters, Rick Esenberg, wrote to the Governor that “Rebecca…can expect to receive the strong support of conservatives. She has paid her dues. That will not be ignored.”

In the primary election, a right-wing group spent more than one million dollars to support Rebecca Bradley. The very conservative Wisconsin Manufacturers and Commerce (WMC) group has pledged to support her as well.

Paying your dues to conservative causes should not be a qualification for service on the Wisconsin Supreme Court.

Rather, the Supreme Court should be a place where everyone gets a fair shake. It should be a place where Justices approach each case with an open mind. It should be a place where the outcome of any case is not a foregone conclusion. It should be a place where justice is done without fear or favor.. And the people of Wisconsin must have confidence that the Court is working for them.

Rebecca Bradley is Walker’s choice. I am running to be the people’s choice. Based on my judicial and legal experience, my many contributions as a volunteer in my community and in the legal profession, and my background before I became a lawyer, the people of Wisconsin can count on me to uphold our constitution, ensure that the Court is an independent check and balance on the other branches of government, and make sure that the Court works for all the people of Wisconsin.