Marquette University Law School
Professor Schneider joined the faculty of Marquette University Law School in 1996. She teaches ADR, Negotiation, Ethics, and International Conflict Resolution. She is also the Director of the nationally-ranked ADR program at Marquette University Law School. Prior to joining Marquette, Professor Schneider was a Visiting Professor of Political Science and International Affairs at the Elliot School of International Affairs at George Washington University, as well as an associate at Arent Fox in Washington, D.C., where she specialized in international corporate transactions. Professor Schneider has served as a lecturer at Stanford Law School and a Teaching Fellow at Harvard Law School.

Professor Schneider is the author or co-author of numerous books and book chapters in the field of dispute resolution including Dispute Resolution: Examples And Explanations (Aspen 2009, 2nd ed. 2011, 3rd ed. 2014) with Michael Moffitt and co-editor of The Negotiator's Fieldbook (ABA 2007) with Christopher Honeyman. Her other textbooks include Negotiation: Processes For Problem-Solving (Aspen 2006, 2nd ed. 2014) and Mediation: Practice, Policy & Ethics (Aspen 2006, 2nd ed. 2013), as well as Dispute Resolution: Beyond The Adversarial Model (Aspen 2005, 2nd ed. 2011), with Carrie Menkel-Meadow, Lela Love & Jean Sternlight. She also is a co-author of two additional books on negotiation with Roger Fisher, Beyond Machiavelli: Tools For Coping With Conflict and Coping With International Conflict. Professor Schneider also wrote Creating The Musee The Politics of Culture in France (Penn State Press, 1998). Professor Schneider has published numerous articles on negotiation, pedagogy, gender and international conflict, including articles in the Harvard Negotiation Law Review, Conflict Resolution Quarterly, and Negotiation Journal. She currently serves as the co-editor of the ABA Dispute Resolution Magazine and on the Board of Advisors for the Saltman Center for Conflict Resolution at UNLV School of Law.

In 2009, Professor Schneider was awarded the Woman of the Year Award given by the Wisconsin Law Journal and the Association for Women Lawyers. In 2000, Professor Schneider was given an Outstanding Achievement Award by the American College of Civil Trial Mediators for her work as the national coordinator for the ABA Law Student Representation in Mediation Competition. She is a founding editor of Indisputably, the blog for ADR law faculty and started the Dispute Resolution Works-in-Progress annual conferences in 2007.

Professor Schneider regularly conducts negotiation and mediation training sessions for law firms, bar associations, court systems, and companies around the country. Recent clients include American Association of Matrimonial Attorneys, Case New Holland, Continental Properties, Federal Circuit Court Mediators, Fiserv, Foley & Lardner, Godfrey & Kahn, Harley-Davidson, Johnson Controls, New Mexico Second Judicial District, Principal Insurance, Quarles & Brady, We Energies, and the United States Customs and Border Patrol among others.

Professor Schneider received her A.B. cum laude from the Woodrow Wilson School of International Affairs and Public Policy at Princeton University and her J.D. cum laude from Harvard Law School. She also received a Diploma from the Academy of European Law in Florence, Italy.