SB-320 Public university student health centers: medication abortion readiness: abortion by medication techniques: College Student Health Center Sexual and Reproductive Health Preparation Fund.
(e) “Public university student health center” means a clinic providing primary health care services to students that is located on the campus of a university within the University of California or California State University systems.

(d) “Medication abortion readiness” includes, but is not limited to, assessment of each individual clinic to determine facility and training needs before beginning to provide abortion by medication techniques, purchasing equipment, making facility improvements, establishing clinical protocols, creating patient educational materials, and training staff. “Medication abortion readiness” does not include the provision of abortion by medication techniques.

(c) “Grantee” means any qualifying student health center at a public college or university.

(a) “Commission” means the Commission on the Status of Women and Girls established by Section 8241 of the Government Code.

99250. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

99251. (a) On and after January 1, 2022, each public university student health center shall offer abortion by medication techniques.

(b) (1) The commission shall administer the College Student Health Center Sexual and Reproductive Health Preparation Fund, which is established by this chapter for the purposes of providing private moneys in the form of grants to on-campus student health centers at public colleges and universities for medication abortion readiness. Notwithstanding any other law, the commission is authorized to receive moneys from nonstate entities, including, but not necessarily limited to, private sector entities and local and federal government agencies, and deposit these moneys in the fund.

(2) Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code, the moneys in the fund are continuously appropriated to the commission for allocation for purposes of this chapter.

(3) The commission shall utilize fund moneys to do all of the following:

(A) Provide a grant of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) to each public university student health center to pay for the cost, both direct and indirect, of medication abortion readiness. Allowable expenses under these grants include, but are not limited to, all of the following:

(i) Purchase of equipment used in the provision of abortion by medication techniques.

(ii) Facility and security upgrades.

(iii) Costs associated with enabling the campus health center to deliver telehealth services.

(iv) Costs associated with training staff in the provision of abortion by medication techniques.

(v) Staff cost reimbursement and clinical revenue offset while staff are in trainings.

(B) Provide a grant of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) to both the University of California and the California State University, to pay for the cost, both direct and indirect, of the following, for each university system:

(i) Providing 24-hour, backup medical support by telephone to patients who have obtained abortion by medication techniques at a public university student health center.

(ii) One-time fees associated with establishing a corporate account to provide telehealth services.

(iii) Billing specialist consultation.

(C) Paying itself for the costs, both direct and indirect, associated with administration of the fund, including the costs of hiring staff, not to exceed two million four hundred thousand dollars ($2,400,000).

(D) Maintaining a system of financial reporting on all aspects of the fund.

(4) Each public university student health center grantee shall, as a condition of receiving a grant award from the fund, participate in an evaluation of its medication abortion readiness and its provision of abortion by medication techniques.

(5) The requirements of this chapter shall be implemented only if, and to the extent that, a total of at least nine million six hundred thousand dollars ($9,600,000) in private funds is made available to the fund in a timely manner on or after January 1, 2019.

(6) Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as requiring a public university to utilize General Fund moneys or student fees for medication abortion readiness before January 1, 2022.

(c) The commission, working with the public university student health centers, shall assist and advise on potential pathways for their student health centers to access public and private payers to provide funding for ongoing costs of providing abortion by medication techniques.

(d) (1) On or before December 31, 2020, and on or before December 31 of each year thereafter until December 31, 2025, the commission shall submit a report to the Legislature, including, but not necessarily limited to, all of the following information for each reporting period, separately for the University of California and the California State University:

(A) The number of student health centers that provide abortion by medication techniques.

(B) The number of abortions by medication techniques performed at student health centers, disaggregated, to the extent possible, by student health center.

(C) The total amount of funds granted by the commission to the university and the university’s student health centers that is expended on medication abortion readiness, and, separately, the total amount of any other funds expended on medication abortion readiness and the source of those funds, disaggregated by function and, to the extent possible, disaggregated by student health center.

(D) The total amount of funds expended on the provision of abortion by medication techniques and the source of those funds, disaggregated by function and, to the extent possible, disaggregated by student health center.

(2) The report required in paragraph (1), and any associated data collection, shall be conducted in accordance with state and federal privacy law, including, but not necessarily limited to, the state Confidentiality of Medical Information Act (Part 2.6 (commencing with Section 56) of Division 1 of the Civil Code), the federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (20 U.S.C. Sec. 1232g), and the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-191).

(3) The requirement for submitting reports under paragraph (1) shall become inoperative on January 1, 2026, pursuant to Section 10231.5 of the Government Code.