CQ Almanac Online Edition
Attempt to Stop Fortas Debate Fails By 14-Vote Margin

In a stinging defeat for President Johnson, the Senate Oct. 1, by a 45–43 roll-call vote, refused to invoke cloture on debate on a motion to take up consideration of the President's nomination of Supreme Court Associate Justice Abe Fortas to be Chief Justice. (See vote 255, p. 54-S.)

The President Oct. 4 withdrew the nomination at Fortas’ request.

A coalition of Republicans and Southern Democrats, called the conservative coalition, formed to defeat the cloture motion. Sen. Carl Hayden (D Ariz.), who was retiring in 1968, cast his first vote for cloture since coming to the Senate in 1927. Breakdown on the vote: R 10–24; D 35–19 (ND 31–4; SD 4–15). Two-thirds (59) of those voting were required to invoke cloture. (For story on 1968 cloture votes, see box, p. 23.)

The loss in the Senate was a major personal setback both for President Johnson and for Fortas, whom Mr. Johnson had named to the Court in 1965.

Three other men nominated for the Chief Justiceship never attained it. The Senate by a 10–14 roll-call vote refused to confirm John Rutledge, the nominee of President Washington, in 1795. President Grant's nominations of George H. Williams in 1873 and of Caleb Cushing in 1874 were withdrawn before the Senate could consider them. No nomination of equal importance had been rejected in modern times. The most nearly comparable incident occurred in 1959, when the Senate by a 46–49 roll-call rejected President Eisenhower's nomination of Lewis L. Strauss as Secretary of Commerce. (For precedents, see p. 533; Congress and the Nation p. 102a.)

Issues. Several issues began to develop soon after President Johnson nominated Fortas on June 26. Chief Justice Earl Warren June 13 had informed the President of his intention to retire, contingent upon the qualification (confirmation) of his successor. Mr. Johnson also nominated Judge Homer Thornberry of the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals to replace Fortas. Thornberry had served in the House (D 1949–63), representing Mr. Johnson's district in Texas; he was elected in 1948 to fill the vacancy created when Mr. Johnson was elected to the Senate. Before going to the Court, Fortas had been a close friend, adviser and counsel to Mr. Johnson.

Freshman Sen. Robert P. Griffin (R Mich.) immediately began a fight against the nomination, a fight he led down to the final vote on cloture. He contended that the nominations were based on “cronyism,” referring to long-standing personal and professional relationship of Mr. Johnson and the nominees. Griffin also argued that there was, legally, no vacancy on the Court. Some observers suggested that Griffin's motives were, at least, mixed, and that he really intended to save the nominations for GOP Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon, if Nixon was elected.

There were other allegations that Warren, whose dislike of Nixon was well known, was trying to assure that his successor would be chosen by a Democratic President. That issue faded, however, and neither Nixon (who was silent on the nominations but did say the Senate should vote on the Fortas nomination) nor Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, the Democratic candidate for President, figured prominently in subsequent events.

More serious issues developed during hearings held by the Senate Judiciary Committee between July 11 and Sept. 16. One was what appeared to be the continued involvement of Fortas in White House affairs, an involvement frankly admitted to but played down by the Justice in his one appearance before the Committee. There were charges that Fortas had assisted in drafting legislation for the Administration.

More damaging, perhaps, was the disclosure that Fortas had received a fee of $15,000 for giving a nineweek seminar on law at American University during the summer of 1968. The money had been raised by his former law partner from among five former business associates, one of whom had a son involved in a federal criminal case.

During hearings and in subsequent floor debate, however, there was a strong flavor of dislike among many conservatives for the Warren Court. The liberal bent of the Court in general, and the participation of Fortas in some of its decisions, in particular, came under attack. Decisions in the area of criminal procedural law and obscenity were singled out for bitter criticism. During the hearings, opponents of the nomination showed films and books involved in Supreme Court obscenity cases to other Senators and to newsmen.

The opposition to the nomination grew as Griffin pressed the attack relentlessly during the summer. He missed no opportunity to turn the evidence against the nominee. Finally, on Sept. 27, he won his biggest victory, when Senate Minority Leader Everett McKinley Dirksen (R Ill.) reversed his position and announced that he was officially “neutral.” Dirksen had been a strong supporter of the nominee, but it was clear that as Griffin's following of Republican Senators grew, Dirksen's control as their leader diminished. On the floor on Oct. 1, Dirksen gave as his reason for voting against cloture the disposition of an Illinois criminal case by the Court.

Debate on the motion of Majority Leader Mike Mansfield (D Mont.) to take up the nomination began on Sept. 25. Republican and Southern Democratic Senators delivered a series of long speeches, often including searing attacks on the Warren Court. But Mansfield made no attempt to keep the Senate in session for long hours during the five-day filibuster. Each day, the Senate set aside time to transact other routine business, and the latest the Senate adjourned during the five days was 5:58 p.m.

Mansfield's cloture motion, eventually signed by 26 Senators, was read to the Senate on Sept. 29, and the vote was set for Oct. 1. After one hour of final debate that day, the roll-call vote was taken.

The next morning, Fortas released his letter to the President requesting that, to avoid further attacks on the Court, the nomination be withdrawn. Terming the action of the Senate “tragic,” the President consented. (See box on next page.)

The Senate's refusal to promote Fortas meant that there was for the time being no vacancy among Associate Justices for Thornberry to fill.

Early GOP Opposition

The Republican attack on the nominations began on June 26, the day the President made the nominations, but it did not at first include Dirksen. Dirksen June 26 called Justice Fortas “a very able lawyer” and Judge Thornberry a “very solid citizen.”

Dirksen's support was thought to enhance considerably the chances of confirmation of the nominations.

Sen. Griffin obtained the backing of 18 colleagues on the day the nominations were made, however.

The full text of the Republicans’ opposition statement, dated June 26, said:

“It is the strongly held view of the undersigned that the next Chief Justice of the United States, and any nominees for vacancies on the Supreme Court should be selected by the newly-elected President of the United States, after the people have expressed themselves in November's elections.

“We will, therefore, because of the above principle, and with absolutely no reflection on any individuals involved, vote against confirming any Supreme Court nominations of the incumbent President.”

The 19 Republican Senators signing the statement were: Allott (Colo.); Baker (Tenn.); Bennett (Utah); Carlson (Kan.); Cotton (N.H.); Curtis (Neb.); Fannin (Ariz.); Fong (Hawaii); Griffin (Mich.); Hansen (Wyo.); Jordan (Idaho); Miller (Iowa); Morton (Ky.); Mundt (S.D.); Murphy (Calif.); Thurmond (S.C.); Tower (Texas); Williams (Del.); and Young (N.D.).

Committee

The Senate Judiciary Committee July 11 opened hearings on the nomination of Justice Abe Fortas as Chief Justice to succeed Chief Justice Earl Warren.

The appearance of Justice Fortas before the Committee on July 16 marked the first time that a nominee to the Chief Justiceship ever had been heard by the Committee and the first time, except for Justices serving on a recess appointment, that a sitting Justice ever had been heard. (See below.)

Committee Chairman James O. Eastland (D Miss.) presided. The leading opponent of the nominations of Justice Fortas, and of Judge Homer Thornberry as an Associate Justice, was Sen. Robert P. Griffin (R Mich.). He continued his charges that the nominations were based on “cronyism” between the nominees and President Johnson, whom he described as a “lame duck” President.

Much of the early questioning of Justice Fortas centered on his role as an admitted participant in conferences at the White House concerning the war in Vietnam and riots in American cities. Justice Fortas gave what he described as a “full disclosure” of his role, saying that it was limited to that of summarizing what experts said at the conferences.

TESTIMONY—July 11—Eastland entered in the record a letter from the American Bar Assn. stating that in its opinion, Justice Fortas was “highly qualified” to become Chief Justice.

Sen. Sam J. Ervin Jr. (D N.C.), a Committee member, asked unanimous consent that the questioning of Justice Fortas be put over until July 16, in order to prepare questions. Eastland said the matter would be taken up by the Committee in closed session. Ervin said he had “misgivings” about the ability of Justice Fortas to “exercise judicial restraint.”

Ervin raised the issue of whether a vacancy existed on the Court, since Chief Justice Warren was still sitting. “I take the position that the President has no power to nominate and the Senate no power to confirm any new Justice unless the Justice has retired before the appointment is made and that he does so by retiring from regular active service,” Ervin said.

Attorney General Ramsey Clark, the first witness, addressed himself to that issue, saying that precedent and custom since “the earliest years of the Union” held that a successor could be nominated, confirmed and appointed while the incumbent remained on active service. Upon appointment of the successor, he said, the incumbent terminated active service.

“Since ratification of the Constitution, Presidents have frequently and as a preferred method in the interest of continuity in government nominated persons to every position so defined in the Constitution while an incumbent served until his successor could relieve him of the duties of office,” Clark said. “The Senate has not questioned its power to confirm.” Clark cited a number of precedents for the practice.

July 12—Griffin said: “Never before has there been such obvious political maneuvering to create a vacancy so that a ‘lame duck’ President can fill it and thereby deny the opportunity to a new President about to be elected by the people…. And never before in history has any President been so bold as to subject himself to the charge of ‘cronyism’ with respect to two such nominations at the same time.”

Griffin also cited press reports that Justice Fortas had continued to “play an active, important role in the Executive decision-making process’ after elevation to the Court. He urged the Committee to examine those reports.

Senate Minority Leader Everett McKinley Dirksen (R Ill.), a Committee member, told Griffin: “You don't go out and look for an enemy to put on the Court…. I find the term ‘lame duck’ as applied to the President of the United States an entirely improper and offensive term.”

Sen. George A. Smathers (D Fla.), a Committee member, told Griffin that the threatened filibuster would prevent the Senate from exercising its duty to consider the qualifications of the nominees.

Pounding the witness table, Griffin said the President did not have the sole power to name new Justices. “He's got only half the power,” Griffin said. “We've got the other half and it's time we asserted ourselves.

Three conservative witnesses testified in opposition to the nomination of Justice Fortas. They were: Kent Courtney, publisher of The Conservative Journal; Marx Lewis, chairman of the Council Against Communist Aggression; and W. B. Hicks Jr., executive secretary of the Liberty Lobby.

Other opposition came from Charles Callas, a former researcher for the Senate Judiciary Internal Security Subcommittee, and Benjamin Ginzburg, a former staff member of the Committee.

Justice Fortas Testifies

July 16—Justice Fortas took the witness stand, thus becoming (1) the first nominee as Chief Justice ever to be heard by the Committee, and (2) the first sitting Justice, except for those holding recess appointment, ever to be heard by the Committee. As was customary with nominees to the Court, Justice Fortas was accompanied by a Senator from his own state, in that case, Sen. Albert Gore (D Tenn.), who presented him to the Committee.

Eastland asked if Justice Fortas, as press reports had indicated, had been involved in a reported effort to obtain for former Presidential Press Secretary Bill D. Moyers the position of Under Secretary of State, and to secure a federal judgeship for David G. Bress, U.S. Attorney for the District of Columbia.

Justice Fortas replied that since he had been on the Court, he had not recommended anyone for any position. He said he had given his opinion about certain persons when asked for it by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation or other Government agencies.

In response to Eastland's question, Justice Fortas said he had not advised the President or helped the President frame measures relating to steel price increases or to transportation strikes. Justice Fortas said he had participated in conferences at the White House, at the request of the President, regarding the war in Vietnam and riots in American cities. He said that he had not drafted the President's message ordering federal troops into Detroit during the 1966 riot in that city, but that he had seen (but not “approved”) a draft of the President's message. (1966 Almanac p. 792)

Asked for clarification by Sen. John L. McClellan (D Ark.), Justice Fortas said:

“Yes sir. Number one, there have been very few subjects. Number two, they have been matters of critical importance. Number three, they have not been matters on which I have or claim any expertise, and the President knows it. Number four, my role has been solely that of one who sits in the meeting while other people express their views. The President always turns to me last, and he then expects me to summarize what has gone on. And that is about the way it is, Senator, and that is the way it works.”

Justice Fortas told the Committee that he had not been involved at the White House with any matter which might eventually come before the Court, and that he was “proud” that at any time he had been of “the slightest service to the President of my country.”

McClellan asked: “To what extent and under what circumstance do you believe that the Court should attempt to bring about social, economic, or political changes?”

Justice Fortas replied: “Zero. Absolutely zero.”

July 17—Justice Fortas described a number of historical instances in which Supreme Court Justices had advised Presidents, beginning with President Washington, who Justice Fortas said asked the advice of Chief Justice John Jay.

Justice Fortas admitted that in 1967 he had telephoned Ralph Lazarus, president of Federated Department Stores, Inc., to complain about the businessman's public criticism of the Vietnam war budget. Justice Fortas said that Lazarus was a friend of his and that the call was made “because of my solicitude for the country as a citizen. I am a Justice of the Supreme Court, but I am still a citizen.”

Ervin continued his lengthy questioning of the Justice about specific Court decisions. Justice Fortas declined to comment on the decisions.

July 18—Sen. Strom Thurmond (R S.C.), a Committee member, questioned Justice Fortas at length about Court decisions, and Justice Fortas repeatedly declined to comment on the decisions. He said that constitutional doctrine of separation of powers and his duty to remain uncommitted on issues that might come before the Court prevented him from answering the Senator's questions.

At one point, Thurmond referred to the Court decision in Mallory v. U.S. (1957), which held that unnecessary delay in arraigning a federal prisoner vitiated his interim confession to police. The case was decided eight years before Justice Fortas joined the Court.

“Why did he go free?” Thurmond asked. “Do you believe in that kind of justice? Mallory, Mallory. I want that word to ring in your ears. He raped a woman and confessed it in court and the Supreme Court turned him loose on a technicality—free to commit other crimes. Can you condone such a decision? I ask you to answer this question.” Justice Fortas declined to answer.

July 19—Thurmond read for nearly two hours from documents which were critical of the Court. Although pressed repeatedly to answer questions about Court decisions, Justice Fortas declined.

Asked if in his telephone call to Lazarus he transmitted President Johnson's ire, Justice Fortas said: “No sir. I assume Lyndon Johnson would transmit his own ire.”

Judge Thornberry Testifies

July 20—In an extraordinary Saturday session, the Committee heard Ervin question Judge Thornberry at length about the judge's court rulings. Judge Thornberry declined to comment on the decisions.

Eastland released a letter from Justice Fortas in which the Justice said that if he became Chief Justice, he would work to institute new procedures to inform the public better about the Court.

Sen. Philip A. Hart (D Mich.), a Committee member, placed in the record a 27-page study on the opinions of Justice Fortas prepared by the Justice Department. The study concluded that Justice Fortas “deserves extremely high marks” for his work.

July 22—The Committee asked the Justice Department to defend its move in preparing the memorandum on Justice Fortas. Ervin said: “The Department of Justice has started propagandizing the Committee.

The questioning of Judge Thornberry continued, and he declined to answer questions on legal decisions.

W.B. Hicks Jr., executive secretary of the Liberty Lobby, testified against the nomination of Justice Fortas, whom Hicks said was “permissive” toward Communists, crime and corruption.

James J. Clancy, representing Citizens for Decent Literature, Inc., testified against the nomination of Justice Fortas, saying that the Justice had voted to overturn obscenity convictions.

July 23—Deputy Attorney General Warren Christopher defended the Justice Department memorandum. He said it was a routine response by the Department to a request from a Senator.

Ervin urged the adoption of a constitutional amendment requiring the President to select Court nominees from a list drawn up by a conference of the chief judges of the states and the chief judges of the Circuit Courts of Appeals.

Senate Suspends Rule

The Senate Aug. 2 suspended Rule 38 (paragraph six) to permit the Fortas and Thornberry nominations to be carried over while the Senate recessed for the Republican and Democratic Presidential Nominating Conventions. The rule provided that whenever the Senate was in recess for more than 30 days, all pending nominations were to be returned to the President.

Majority Leader Mike Mansfield (D Mont.) told the Senate that if the rule were not suspended, he would keep the Senate in session during the Conventions.

Sens. Carl T. Curtis (R Neb.) and John J. Williams (R Del.) said for the record that Republican agreement to suspension of the rule was not an expression of approval of the nominations.

Action Resumed

Lack of a quorum prevented Committee consideration of the nomination during the week of Sept. 4. Only five members of the Committee appeared for a scheduled meeting Sept. 4.

Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield (D Mont.) and Senate Minority Leader Everett McKinley Dirksen (R Ill.) warned President Johnson in a conference on Sept. 6 that opposition to the nomination had “hardened” and that the necessary two-thirds vote of the Senate to cut off filibustering would be difficult to obtain.

In a surprise press conference following this meeting of Johnson with the Senate leaders, the President indicated his displeasure that “a small sectional group” of Senators would so frustrate the wishes of the majority of the Senate and the American people. Johnson responded to the delay with increased pressure upon Committee Chairman James O. Eastland (D Miss.), urging that the Committee move to a vote. (For text, see p. 540.)

Mansfield Sept. 8 indicated that he would consider keeping the Senate in session until Jan. 3, 1969, if necessary, to win confirmation of the nomination. He also said he would act to discharge the Committee if it failed to move to report the nomination.

Sen. Robert P. Griffin (R Mich.) Sept. 9 called for reopening hearings concerning the extent of Fortas’ involvement in the actions of the Johnson Administration. He noted a magazine article by Daniel Yergin which stated that Fortas, with Clark Clifford and Richard Goodwin, had helped draft the 1966 State of the Union message, and also referred to charges by Sen. Gordon Allott (R Colo.) that Fortas had participated in the formulation of the bill (H J Res 1292—PL 90-331) providing Secret Service protection for presidential candidates. This bill was passed by Congress, following the assassination of Sen. Robert F. Kennedy (D N.Y.).

The regular Sept. 10 session of the Senate was called off so that the Committee might have the full day to consider the question of the nomination. The Committee met with 13 of its 16 members present.

After several hours of closed-door argument, a tentative agreement was reached to reopen hearings for a limited period of time. A date for the vote would be set before the hearings began.

Dirksen indicated that the Committee members supporting the nomination felt that reopening the hearings was necessary to “get the nomination off dead center.” He also stated that the limits imposed to the hearings would prevent any further filibustering in Committee.

Although the final vote on this agreement was not taken until the following day, a telegram was sent late in the afternoon of Sept. 10 to Justice Fortas, vacationing in Connecticut. The telegram asked that he appear again before the Committee for “interrogation on certain films and cases involving the issue of obscenity, matters raised by Senators Allott and Griffin and on other matters relative to your confirmation.”

The Senate Judiciary Committee Sept. 11 agreed unanimously to vote at 11 a.m. Sept. 17 on sending the nomination of Justice Abe Fortas as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court to the floor of the Senate.

The Committee planned in the interim before Sept. 17 to conduct hearings investigating further charges concerning Fortas’ involvement in the operations of the Johnson Administration and concerning certain Supreme Court decisions involving the issue of obscenity.

At hearings on the nomination on Sept. 13, the Committee heard from B.J. Tennery, dean of the Law School of American University, Washington, D.C., that Justice Fortas had been paid $15,000 to conduct a series of seminars at the Law School for nine weeks during the summer of 1968. The money for the seminars came from a fund of $30,000 raised by Paul A. Porter of the law firm of Arnold & Porter, the former law firm of Justice Fortas. Porter raised the money from five prominent businessmen, of whom some were former business associates of Justice Fortas.

Sen. Robert P. Griffin (R Mich.), the leading opponent of the nomination, charged Sept. 17 that all five contributors were “former business associates or clients” of Justice Fortas and his former law firm, and noted that Mrs. Fortas still was a member of that firm.

In other developments, Justice Fortas Sept. 13 declined to appear again before the Committee, stating that he considered it his “proper course of action” not to appear. (See box on this page.)

Invoking executive privilege, Defense Secretary Clark Clifford; Under Secretary of the Treasury Joseph W. Barr; and W. DeVier Pierson, associate special counsel to the President, also declined to testify.

Committee Report

The Senate Judiciary Committee Sept. 17 by an 11–6 vote ordered reported the nomination of Justice Abe Fortas for the post of Chief Justice of the United States with the recommendation that the nomination be confirmed.

The Committee voting for and against reporting the nomination favorably was as follows:

Democrats For—Dodd (Conn.); Hart (Mich.); Kennedy (Mass.); Bayh (Ind.); Burdick (N.D.); Tydings (Md.); and Smathers (Fla.). Sen. Edward V. Long (D Mo.) was absent but was permitted to be recorded as in favor of the nomination.

Republicans For—Dirksen (Ill.); Hruska (Neb.); and Scott (Pa.).

Democrats Against—Eastland (Miss.); McClellan (Ark.); and Ervin (N.C.).

Republicans Against—Fong (Hawaii); Thurmond (S.C.); and Baker (Tenn.).

The Committee Sept. 20 filed its report (Exec Rept 8). Four Committee members filed individual views opposing confirmation.

Committee Views. The report said the procedure used by Chief Justice Warren in retiring was “amply supported by precedent” and that a vacancy, for purposes of confirming the nomination, did exist. After examining the role of Justice Fortas in teaching at American University in 1968 and in participating in White House discussions, the report concluded that Justice Fortas was within his rights to do so and that other Justices had done similarly over the years. The report said that Justice Fortas was “extraordinarily well qualified for the post.”

Individual Views. Committee Chairman James O. Eastland (D Miss.), Sam J. Ervin Jr. (D N.C.) and John L. McClellan (D Ark.) contended that: (1) there was no vacancy on the Court; (2) that Justice Fortas had shown poor judgment in continuing to advise the President on legislative and other matters; (3) that he had shown poor judgment in accepting a $15,000 fee for teaching at American University; and (4) that he had been too liberal in his positions on Court decisions on crime, obscenity and other issues. Strom Thurmond (R S.C.) criticized the Justice's positions on Court decisions on criminal procedure, pornography, state-federal relations and subversive activities.

Floor Action

A group of Republicans and Southern Democrats in the Senate Sept. 25 began a filibuster intended to block confirmation of Justice Abe Fortas as Chief Justice of the United States. The effort to block the confirmation by means of a filibuster was without precedent in the history of the Senate.

The filibuster began on a procedural point and followed a surprise move by Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield (D Mont.) to bring up the nomination. The Senate Judiciary Committee Sept. 20 reported the nomination (Exec Rept No. 8) with the recommendation that the nomination be confirmed. Sen. Joseph D. Tydings (D Md.), a Committee member and supporter of Justice Fortas, Sept. 23 filed the report with the Senate.

Mansfield originally had planned to consider the defense appropriations bill (HR 18707) before calling up the nomination. In a sudden change of plans, he called the Senate into executive session Sept. 24 and moved that the Senate proceed to consider the nomination. His request for a roll call on the motion was granted. Mansfield then recessed the Senate.

The motion to consider the nomination was debatable and the filibuster to prevent a roll call on that motion began Sept. 25. Highlights of debate follow.

Wednesday, September 25

Senate met at 10 a.m. and recessed at 5:48 p.m.

Majority Leader Mike Mansfield (D Mont.): “I reiterate we have a constitutional obligation to consent or not to consent to this nomination…. I believe Mr. Justice Fortas today is eminently qualified to remain on the Court in the position of Chief Justice.”

Sam J. Ervin Jr. (D N.C.) raised the question of whether a vacancy existed on the Court since Chief Justice Warren had not retired.

Robert P. Griffin (R Mich.) criticized Justice Fortas for refusing to testify a second time before the Senate Judiciary Committee. “If there is one serious question, it is the nominee's failure to answer questions about the ‘fund’ established to pay him $15,000 for teaching at American University. And that he would not come back and answer questions as to what extent he was involved in extrajudicial activities in the executive branch of the U.S. Government while serving as a Justice of the Supreme Court further aggravates this concern. I would say these are the principal questions which must be resolved if the nominee is to be confirmed as the next Chief Justice of the United States.”

Charles E. Goodell (R N.Y.). “My feeling is that if he accepts fees of this nature, if there could be a conflict of interest, that when a case comes before the Supreme Court would be the time for the Justice to disqualify himself, but not to conjecture or anticipate the most remote possibility that someone might come before the Court who is paying him a fee for lecturing.”

Ernest F. Hollings (D S.C.). The main issue was the philosophy of the nominee. “…Something must be done to curb the self-assumed, arbitrary power of the Court. The Supreme Court is now unabashedly making law—and that is not the function of the Court.”

Henry M. Jackson (D Wash.) delivered a speech on the nuclear test ban treaty.

Gaylord Nelson (D Wis.) delivered a speech on the cost of new automobiles.

Hollings resumed his lengthy attack on the philosophy of the Warren Court, charging the Court and Justice Fortas with “judicial activism.”

Joseph D. Tydings (D Md.) introduced letters from leaders of the American Bar Assn. supporting the nominee.

Hiram L. Fong (R Hawaii) said: “…Particularly at this juncture in the history of our nation, this crucially important lifetime appointment—affecting as it will the lives of millions of our citizens in generations to come—should be left to the new President soon to be elected by the people.”

Philip A. Hart (D Mich.) urged the Senate to proceed to consider the nomination on the merits.

The Senate by voice vote adopted the conference report to the independent offices appropriations bill.

Several Senators spoke on assorted topics.

Thursday, September 26

Senate met at 10 a.m. and recessed at 5:58 p.m.

George Murphy (R Calif.), opposed to cloture, said that between July 10 and Sept. 25 he had received 6,983 letters from constituents supporting his position and 197 letters opposed to his position.

Howard H. Baker Jr. (R Tenn.) said that “the Supreme Court, as one of our basic institutions of government, has fallen to a low estate in public esteem and that it must be reconstructed, that public confidence in the Court must be restored.” He delivered a lengthy speech against the nomination.

Jacob K. Javits (R N.Y.), supporting the nomination, said the debate “looks like the beginning of a filibuster against the confirmation of the Fortas nomination.”

Spessard L. Holland (D Fla.) gave a lengthy speech against the nomination, charging that it was “quite obvious that the ultra-liberal forces of the nation are jubilant over the” nomination of Fortas. He criticized a number of Court rulings in which Fortas had joined, especially Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections (1966), which held that state poll taxes were unconstitutional.

Jack Miller (R Iowa) spoke against the nomination and said that President Johnson might be “very disappointed to find, in the newspapers and elsewhere, the story of the $15,000 American University fee.”

Friday, September 27

Senate met at 10 a.m. and recessed at 5:25 p.m.

Clifford P. Hansen (R Wyo.) gave a lengthy speech against the nomination. “The unswerving personal loyalty of Mr. Fortas to the now President of the United States and to the controversial programs, policies, and philosophies of this Administration, gives focus to this entire debate and gives cause for the rejection of this nomination,” he said. “The stature of the Court has been demeaned already by the monumentally poor judgment displayed by the President of the United States and by Justice Fortas since his ascension to a seat on the Supreme Court.”

Majority Leader Mike Mansfield (D Mont.) asked that his cloture motion be read. He said he was sending telegrams to all Democratic Senators, regardless of their positions, asking them to be in attendance on Tuesday, Oct. 1, for purposes of voting on the cloture motion.

Sam J. Ervin Jr. (D N.C.) gave a lengthy speech against the nomination. He analyzed recent decisions of the Court and said: “The tragic truth is that in recent years the Supreme Court has repeatedly usurped and exercised the power of the Congress and the states to amend the Constitution while professing to interpret it.” He and several other Senators engaged in colloquy about Court decisions on criminal procedural law, obscenity and other subjects.

Monday, September 30

Senate met at 10 a.m. and recessed at 5:08 p.m.

Gordon Allott (R Colo.) gave a lengthy speech against the nomination, raising anew the question of whether a vacancy actually existed on the Court.

Mansfield obtained unanimous consent that at the conclusion of the prayer at 12 noon on Tuesday, Oct. 1, the Senate debate the cloture motion for one hour before voting, with the time divided equally between the majority and the minority.

John Stennis (D Miss.) gave a lengthy speech against the nomination. He said that terms of Supreme Court Justices ought to be limited in years and not be appointments for life, and suggested a constitutional amendment limiting the terms to 10 years.

Paul J. Fannin (R Ariz.) gave a long speech against the nomination. He said he had “no doubt that Mr. Fortas is qualified in a technical sense.” He said the implications of any involvement of Justice Fortas in drafting legislation were “frightening.”

James O. Eastland (D Miss.), chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, gave a lengthy speech against the nomination. He discussed the record on the nomination developed by the Committee, the position of Fortas on a number of Court decisions, and the Justice's book, “Concerning Dissent and Civil Disobedience,” published in 1968.

Strom Thurmond (R S.C.) gave a lengthy speech against the nomination, concentrating on the position of Fortas on the pornography issue. “Justice Fortas has shown, by his record on the Supreme Court, that he is not only content with the Court's trend in these cases, but also that he is willing to take these trends to further extremes,” he said. “By refusing to confirm this nomination we can reassure a concerned America that standards do exist, and that action will be taken to preserve them.”

Albert Gore (D Tenn.) spoke in favor of the nomination, saying that the qualifications of Fortas were “eminent, indeed.”

Claiborne Pell (D R.I.) spoke briefly in favor of the nomination, calling Fortas “uniquely qualified.”

Byrd (W.Va.) spoke against the nomination, saying that the Court had contributed to “the current permissiveness pervading the land.”

Tuesday, October 1

Senate met at 12 noon and recessed at 5:45 p.m.

Philip A. Hart (D Mich.) summarized arguments for consideration of the nomination and for confirmation of the nomination. “Never in our history has a matter of the nomination of a Justice to the Supreme Court been resolved by filibuster,” he said, adding that the Constitution required the Senate either to consent or to withhold its consent to the nomination.

Robert P. Griffin (R Mich.) summarized arguments against considering the nomination and against the nomination itself. “I took my stand, and I have worked so hard to build support for my position, precisely because I am concerned about the Supreme Court as an institution—because I believe the American people should respect the Court and hold it in high esteem,” he said.

Mansfield (D Mont.) urged the Senate to adopt the cloture motion, saying that more than 25 hours of debate had been consumed on the cloture motion and that if it were adopted, 100 hours of debate would remain on the nomination itself.

Minority Leader Everett McKinley Dirksen (R Ill.) explained why he had changed his mind and would not support the cloture motion. He said the Court's decision in Witherspoon v. Illinois (1968) was the reason. In that case, the Court held that jurors in a capital case could not be challenged for cause simply because they opposed capital punishment; the Court thus struck down the so-called “hanging jury.” The result of the case, Dirksen said, was that 24 convicted murderers in Illinois would receive new trials, since they had been convicted by juries from which persons opposed to capital punishment had been excluded. Justice Fortas participated in the Witherspoon case and voted with the majority, Dirksen said, adding that the whole matter deserved “far better scrutiny than I have been able to devote to it.” Therefore, he concluded, he had no choice but to vote against invoking cloture.

At 1 p.m., the Chair ordered a roll-call vote on the motion to invoke cloture. The result, 45 “yeas” to 43 “nays,” was not enough to stop the filibuster, since two-thirds (59) of the Senators present and voting were needed.

Features

Fortas-Johnson Exchange

Following are the texts of a letter from Justice Fortas to the President, made public Oct. 2, asking for the withdrawal of his nomination, and of the President's statement in reply, made on the same day.

Fortas Letter

My Dear Mr. President:

I note the failure of the motion to end the filibuster in the Senate with respect to my nomination as Chief Justice of the United States. The 1968 term of this Court begins, according to law, on Monday, Oct. 7. I will, of course, be participating in its work as Associate Justice.

In view of these circumstances, I ask you to withdraw my nomination as Chief Justice. Continued efforts to secure confirmation of that nomination, even if ultimately successful, would result in a continuation of the attacks upon the Court which have characterized the filibuster—attacks which have been sometimes extreme and entirely unrelated to responsible criticism.

Attacks of this sort would be especially inappropriate and harmful to the Court and the nation if they should continue while the Court is in session, engaged in the adjudication of issues of great importance to the nation as well as the litigants.

I do not want to provide the occasion for a situation of this sort. My action in submitting this request for withdrawal should avert the danger that it will occur: and I hope that my withdrawal will help put in motion a process by which there will be an end to destructive and extreme assaults upon the Court.

I appreciate the confidence in my qualifications which led you to nominate me as Chief Justice. I wish particularly to thank my colleagues at the bar and in the law schools for their support, and to express my appreciation to those members of the United States Senate who have supported me.

I pray that we shall see, in all of our nation, renewed dedication to the principles of fairness and justice and moderation, without which our democracy cannot continue.

It is in this spirit that I respectfully ask that you honor my request for withdrawal of my nomination as Chief Justice of the United States.

Sincerely,

ABE FORTAS

Johnson Statement

With deep regret I have accepted and concur in the request of Mr. Justice Fortas and am withdrawing his nomination as Chief Justice of the United States. I believed when I made this nomination, and I believe now, that he is the best qualified man for this high position. The action of the Senate, a body I revere and to which I devoted a dozen years of my life, is historically and constitutionally tragic.

I urge all involved with and concerned about our Constitution and its form of Government to pledge now that this shall be no precedent, that the Senate hereafter will act by majority will and never fail to address itself to the issues which it has the constitutional duty to answer.

Most Controversy Centers on Judicial Nominations

Since 1959, when the last Presidential nomination failed of Senate confirmation, the only major nominations which generated controversy were judicial.

The 1959 rejection involved President Eisenhower's nomination of Lewis L. Strauss as Secretary of Commerce. The Senate by a 46–49 roll-call vote rejected the nomination after months of acrimonious public charges, hearings and debate. (1959 Almanac p. 665)

Five weeks earlier, the Senate by a 70–17 roll-call vote had confirmed the nomination of Potter Stewart as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. Justice Stewart had been serving on the Court on a recess appointment and had been a federal judge before. His support of the Court's racial desegregation decisions was well known. All Senators voting against his confirmation were Southern Democrats. (1959 Almanac p. 664)

From that time until 1968, four other men were confirmed as Associate Justices. The nominations of three of them—Byron R. White (1962), Arthur J. Goldberg (1962) and Abe Fortas (1965)—were confirmed by voice vote. Only that of Justice Fortas was at all controversial; three Republicans raised objections on the floor that he had “put the United States last” in reportedly asking Washington newspaper editors to delay release of a story that Presidential aide Walter W. Jenkins had been arrested on a morals charge shortly before the 1964 Presidential elections. (1964 Almanac p. 895; 1965 Almanac p. 1430)

The fourth man was Thurgood Marshall. President Kennedy nominated the Negro civil rights lawyer as a judge on the 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals, but the Senate Judiciary Committee held up confirmation for a year. The Senate in 1962 confirmed the nomination by a 54–16 roll-call vote, with all 11 “nays” cast by Southern Democrats. (1962 Almanac p. 927)

In 1965, Judge Marshall was confirmed by voice vote and without noteworthy controversy as Solicitor General, a post considered as an “in-house” Presidential position. In 1967, President Johnson nominated him as Associate Justice, the first Negro named to the Court. After criticism from some Senators for his “activist” views on the role of the judiciary, his nomination was confirmed by a 69–11 roll-call vote, with 10 “nays” cast by Southern Democrats and one by a Northern Democrat, Robert C. Byrd (D W.Va.). (1967 Almanac p. 1164)

Just as the racial issue was involved in the confirmations of Justice Stewart and Judge Marshall, so it was present in the cases of two other nominations to the federal bench. Senate liberals in 1965 opposed the nomination of former Mississippi Gov. James P. Coleman (D) as a judge on the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals for his past segregationist views, but he was confirmed by a 76–8 roll-call vote. In 1966, Constance Baker Motley, the first Negro woman nominated as a federal district judge, was confirmed by voice vote despite the opposition of Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman James O. Eastland (D Miss.), who charged that Mrs. Motley had been linked to the Communist Party 20 years before. (1965 Almanac p. 1431; 1966 Almanac p. 1285)

In 1960, the Senate by a 69–15 roll-call vote confirmed the nomination of James R. Durfee as a judge on the United States Court of Claims despite charges that he had violated the Civil Aeronautics Board code of ethics by accepting invitations from airlines while he was Board chairman and that he lacked judicial experience. In 1965, strong floor opposition developed to the nomination of Francis X. Morrissey, a longtime friend of the Kennedy family, as a federal district judge, on grounds that he was unfit, and the nomination was withdrawn. (1960 Almanac p. 644; 1965 Almanac p. 1432)

Text of Fortas Letter

Following is the text of the letter, dated Sept. 13, from Justice Fortas to Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman James O. Eastland (D Miss.), in which the Justice declined to accept an invitation to testify further on his nomination as Chief Justice:

“My Dear Mr. Chairman:

“I acknowledge receipt of your telegram advising me that a number of members of the Senate Judiciary Committee have expressed the desire that I return for further interrogation, as described in the telegram, relating to the President's nomination of me for the post of Chief Justice of the United States.

“I appeared before your Committee initially, despite the lack of precedent for such appearance, because of my profound respect for the Senate and my view that such appearance might aid the Senate in the performance of its constitutional duty to advise and consent concerning judicial nominations. I hope that during the interrogation of me by members of the Committee, my respect for the Senate as well as my profound and unshakable devotion to the Court and the Constitution was evident. I believe that, now, my proper course of action is respectfully to decline to appear again at the request of some members of the Committee for the further interrogation described in your telegram.

“Sincerely Yours,”

/s/ Abe Fortas