Dr. Mehrzad Boroujerdi
Mehrzad Boroujerdi is Professor of Political Science and O’Hanley Faculty Scholar at Syracuse University’s Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs. During the 2017-18 acaemic year, as a Fellow of the American Council on Education (ACE), he resided at California State University – Northridge (CSUN). He was also a visiting scholar at UCLA’s Center for Near Eastern Studies.

Dr. Boroujerdi is the author of Iranian Intellectuals and the West: The Tormented Triumph of Nativism (Syracuse University Press, 1996), and I Carved, Worshiped and Shattered: Essays on Iranian Politics and Identity [in Persian] (Nashr-e Negah-e Mo`aser, 2010). He is also the co-author of Postrevolutionary Iran: A Political Handbook (Syracuse University Press, 2018), and editor of Mirror for the Muslim Prince: Islam and Theory of Statecraft (Syracuse University Press, 2013). In addition, he has authored more than thirty journal articles and book chapters in English and Persian.

Dr. Boroujerdi has served in the following administrative roles at Syracuse University: Chair of the Political Science Department (2014-17); Provost Fellow for Internationalization (2015-17); Co-chair of the Internationalization Council (2016-17); member of the Academic Strategic Plan Committee and co-chair of its Working Group on Enhancing Internationalization (2014-16); Director of Graduate Studies in the Political Science Department (2001-04); Founding director of the Middle Eastern Studies Program (2003-14); Co-founder of the Project on Religion, Media and International Affairs (2006-09); and founding editor of the Modern Intellectual and Political History of the Middle East book series published by Syracuse University Press (1996-2014).

In addition, Dr. Boroujerdi was the President of the Association for Iranian Studies (2012-2014), the book review editor of the International Journal of Middle East Studies (2000-07), and a former non-resident Scholar at the Middle East Institute in Washington, D.C (2005-16). He is a co-founder of the Iran Data Portal, and sits on the board of directors of the Near East Foundation.

Dr. Boroujerdi has been the recipient of grants and fellowships from American Council on Education, Harvard University, Henry R. Luce Foundation, Carnegie Foundation, Rockefeller Foundation, Social Science Research Council, the Institute of International Education, the U.S. Department of Education, and the United States Institute of Peace, and the Violet Jabara Charitable Trust. Other awards include the Foundation for Iranian Studies Best Doctoral Dissertation (1990), the Maxwell School’s Daniel Patrick Moynihan Award for outstanding teaching, research, and service (1998), and the Institute of International Education’s Scholar Rescue Fund’s Outstanding Service Award (2011).

Dr. Boroujerdi has been interviewed by numerous national and international media outlets such as Associated Press, LA Times, NPR, New York Times, Reuters, Spiegel and Washington Post, and is a regular commentator on the Persian broadcasting of BBC and Radio Farda/Radio Liberty.

To see his Persian language website click here: http://www.mehrzadboroujerdi.com