Reps. McSally and Hurd Call on DHS to Substantiate Funding Request for Border Wall
WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Representatives Martha McSally (AZ-02) and Will Hurd (TX-23), Chair and Vice Chair of the Committee on Homeland Security’s Border and Maritime Security Subcommittee today sent an oversight letter asking for specific details of the Administration’s request for $999 million to plan, design, and construct the first installment of a border wall between the United States and Mexico.

Addressed to Secretary of Homeland Security John Kelly, and Director Office of Management and Budget Mick Mulvaney, the letter lays out a series of detailed questions to DHS in order to provide the lawmakers with further clarity regarding the President’s recent supplemental appropriations request, which was sent to Congress on March 16, 2017.

The two lawmakers, whose districts collectively represent 880 miles— nearly half— of the U.S-Mexico border, seek specific details of the location of the proposed wall, definitions of adequate natural barriers, and a breakdown of the investments in supplemental technology, infrastructure, and alleviating personnel backlogs.

“As Representatives of the communities that make up our southern border, we recognize the need for robust border security and infrastructure to ensure public safety and increase cross border commerce,” the lawmakers write. “However, we also have an obligation to be good stewards of taxpayer dollars and as such have a number of questions.”

“While we have both publicly stated in the past that we believe physical barriers to be one of many tools required to gain operational control of the border,” continued the lawmakers, “we also believe that an expenditure this large, and submitted with limited details, deserves additional scrutiny to ensure funds are being used effectively in pursuit of our shared goal of securing the southwest border.”

The full text of their letter is below. View a PDF of the letter HERE.

March 21, 2017

Dear Secretary Kelly and Director Mulvaney,

As the Chair and Vice Chair of the Committee on Homeland Security’s Border and Maritime Security Subcommittee, and Members of Congress whose districts represent nearly half of the U.S-Mexico border, we write today regarding the President’s recent supplemental appropriations request to Congress.

As Representatives of the communities that make up our southern border, we recognize the need for robust border security and infrastructure to ensure public safety and increase cross border commerce. To that end we are pleased with the request for funding to increase the number of Border Patrol Agents, investments in infrastructure, and supplemental technology. However, we also have an obligation to be good stewards of taxpayer dollars and as such have a number of questions regarding the single largest dollar amount in the request, which is, “$999 million for planning, design, and construction of the first installment of the border wall.”

While we have both publicly stated in the past that we believe physical barriers to be one of many tools required to gain operational control of the border, we also believe that an expenditure this large, and submitted with limited details, deserves additional scrutiny to ensure funds are being used effectively in pursuit of our shared goal of securing the southwest border. As such, we have the following questions and ask for a response to the subcommittee by April 18, 2017.