Judge cuts break to former youth mentor convicted of molesting Mobile alternative school kids
MOBILE, Alabama – A judge today used his authority under voluntary guidelines to sentence a former youth mentor to a shorter-than-normal prison term for taking advantage of two teenage girls at an alternative school.



Because of a prior counterfeiting conviction, Sherman Fitzgerald Tate was facing a 10-year minimum sentence for second-degree sodomy. A system of voluntary guidelines that took effect a few years ago, however, gives judges discretion to ignore the statutory minimum. Mobile County Circuit Judge John Lockett did just that, sentencing Tate to 8½ years, which was the longest sentence under the guidelines.

The state Legislature adopted the guidelines in an attempt to make punishments for similar crimes more uniform throughout the state and to reduce prison overcrowding. Assistant District Attorney Nicki Patterson, however, said she had not seen a judge use the guidelines for child sex offense before.

A jury last month convicted the 36-year-old Eight Mile man of two counts of second-degree sodomy after hearing testimony that he coerced the 15-year-olds to touch him and themselves sexually in the school’s conference room.

At the time, Tate was working for the Mobile Youth Advocate Program, an organization that had a contract with the Mobile County Juvenile Court to work with troubled youths through intensive intervention and mentoring. Testimony indicated that although both girls were in the program, Tate was not assigned to either one.

That program no longer has funding and is seeking new grants, Patterson said.

The prosecutor did not recommend a specific punishment but urged the judge to make it significant because of the defendant’s position of authority over vulnerable children. She compared it a minister who molests youths in his care.

“In any case like this, trust is taken from young girls,” she said. “Here, we had special, added factors.”

Patterson said Tate selected girls he knew would be less likely to speak up or be believed if they did.

“These girls had been in trouble. They had been truant. They had run away,” she said. “He turned a good program into his hunting ground.”

Tate told the judge that he had helped hundreds of kids and worked hard overcome his own checkered past, adding that he helped Mobile officials craft their teen curfew law. He said it “just hurt my heart” to see his efforts unravel.

“Since 2000 to 2010, I cleaned up the reputation I had on the street,” he said. “Ten years is a long time.”

Four others, including the defendant’s wife and pastor, vouched for Tate’s character and said he had been a good role model for children.

Both girls testified during the trial that Tate pulled them out of class in April 2010 and molested them. Surveillance footage from the school confirmed that the trio went inside the conference room, but there were no cameras there to capture what happened behind the closed door.

Tate denied the allegations during his testimony, telling jurors that the session was nothing more than mentoring.

The mother of one of the girls said Tate betrayed the trust he had been given.

“How would you feel if this happened to your child?” she said. “You violated the trust of the juvenile system … for the purpose of satisfying you flesh.”

The girl said she was eager to move on.

“I just want to say I’m glad this is the end. … I’ve closed this chapter of my life,” she said.

The jury acquitted Tate of a second-degree rape charge stemming from allegations that he had sex with one of the girls the previous month, after she had run away from home.