The response to Hurricane Harvey by members of the Clinton Foundation community; Ways to support

How you can help communities affected by the devastating storm

Updated at 4:45 pm ET Friday, September 8, 2017.

[Editor’s Note: In response to Hurricane Harvey’s devastation, and as Hurricane Irma batters other communities and is predicted to hit many more, President Clinton, President Obama, President George W. Bush, President George H.W. Bush, and President Carter have launched the One America Appeal.

The campaign asks fellow citizens to support the staggering recovery needs. All donations to the One America Appeal will be directed to the George H. W. Bush Presidential Library Foundation, which will quickly distribute 100 percent of every dollar to recovery funds that are assisting hurricane victims.

To learn more or make a donation online, visit OneAmericaAppeal.org. And keep reading for other organizations that are working to support hurricane relief in Houston and across the country.]

On Friday, Hurricane Harvey touched down in Texas, registering as the strongest storm to land on U.S. soil in more than a decade. Harvey has returned inland as a tropical storm, setting off devastating amounts of floodwater that have overwhelmed the Houston area and surrounding communities.

Thousands have been forced to flee or take refuge in local shelters, and life-saving rescues are still ongoing throughout the region. Harvey is expected to continue bringing rainfall to the already deluged Southeast Texas area over the next few days, and Louisiana is bracing for more massive downpours as well. The National Weather Service has called the storm’s impact “unprecedented.”

Among the organizations mobilizing to address the needs of Harvey’s victims are members of the Clinton Foundation community. For more information about efforts underway and how you can help, see the following list, and check back for additional details as they’re made available.

SBP

SBP, a national, New Orleans-based nonprofit with a mission to shrink the time between disaster and recovery, is providing free guides to help impacted residents avoid common pitfalls of recovery. SPB encourages anyone impacted by Hurricane Harvey to access its Recovery Resource Page, and the organizations has established a Hurricane Harvey Recovery Fund for those who would like to contribute to their efforts.