Announcing the Democratic Debate Schedule – Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz – Medium
Earlier this year, the Democratic National Committee announced a set of principles that would guide the debate schedule for our 2016 presidential candidates. Today, we’re pleased to announce a schedule that meets those principles, reflects our party’s values, and best positions Democrats to win the White House in 2016.

With six debates scheduled — at a pace of roughly one per month — voters will have ample opportunities to hear our candidates discuss their visions for our country’s future.

October 13, CNN, Nevada

November 14, CBS/KCCI/Des Moines Register, Des Moines, IA

December 19, ABC/WMUR, Manchester, NH

January 17, NBC/Congressional Black Caucus Institute, Charleston, SC

February or March, Univision/Washington Post, Miami, FL

February or March, PBS, Wisconsin

Additional details about debate dates, locations and partnerships will be announced soon.

What?

Our Democratic candidates are committed to fighting for middle-class families and expanding opportunities to pursue the American Dream, while Republicans continue to push for policies that are out of date and out of touch.

This debate schedule will provide multiple opportunities for our candidates to engage in a rigorous discussion, not only with each other, but also to show the American people where Democrats stand. These six debates will highlight the stark differences between Democrats and Republicans, and help ensure that whoever caucus goers and voters choose as the Democratic nominee will become the 45th President of the United States.

Who?

All five of the announced Democratic candidates have been briefed on the debate schedule and agreed to participate in the DNC sanctioned debate process. If any additional Democratic candidates decide to enter the race, they will need to meet the same criteria for participation as the existing candidates: receiving at least 1% in three national polls, conducted by credible news organizations and polling organizations, in the six weeks prior to the debate. We are in the process of working with our media partners on formats that allow a robust discussion of critical issues, with all our candidates having equal opportunities to make their views known.

When?

Beginning with the Nevada debate in October, Democratic candidates will meet onstage to debate each month for six months. We believe that beginning the debates in the fall of 2015 maximizes the impact of these debates with potential caucus goers and primary voters.

Where?

The DNC previously announced that the four early caucus and primary states of Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada and South Carolina would each host a sanctioned debate. For the other two debates, we have chosen Florida and Wisconsin.

Our debate schedule reflects the diversity of the Democratic Party, and in particular, we are proud to announce today the first ever party-sanctioned Univision debate.

Why?

The choice the American people will face in next November’s election couldn’t be more important. Voters across the country are going to decide between two very different plans for our country — an economy built to last that will strengthen and sustain our middle class, or the failed trickle-down economics of the past. These debates will highlight the Democratic Party’s policies, which will continue to strengthen the middle class, and we hope Americans across the political spectrum will tune in.