Stephen Nodine eyes congressional bid from jail
MOBILE, Ala. - Stephen Nodine, a former Mobile County Commissioner now serving a two-year jail term on perjury and harassment charges, announced via email that he is considering a bid for Alabama’s 1st District congressional seat.

Nodine, 50, resigned from the county commission in 2010 following his indictment for murder in the death of Angel Downs, his longtime mistress. He pled guilty to felony perjury in 2012 as part of a deal in which prosecutors dropped the murder charge.

Nodine, a Republican, said he wanted a second chance at public service.

"I know some will be skeptical of my interest in this congressional race after wrongfully being accused of crimes, drug abuse and personal mistakes,” he said. “I have the determination, the experience and fortitude to serve as congressman for the 1st Congressional District.”

Nodine said he is eligible to serve in Congress despite his status as a convicted felon.

The Constitution allows felons to hold office in the House of Representatives – even while incarcerated. The only requirements to serve in Congress are that a representative must be at least 25 years old, must be a U.S. citizen for the last seven years and must be a resident of the state where they are elected.

"I was never given a second chance, I had no record prior to my wrongful prosecution because of my personal failings and all I ask is for a second chance to serve the citizens of South Alabama,” Nodine said.

Nodine acknowledged it would be "difficult" to campaign for Congress while incarcerated, but said he would make use of social media. Nodine participates in a work release program that allows him to work at his lawyer's office in Bay Minette, but must return to the Baldwin County jail after work.

The 1st District seat is being vacated by U.S. Rep. Jo Bonner, R-Mobile, who announced his intention to resign effective Aug. 15 to take a job at the University of Alabama System in Tuscaloosa.

Gov. Robert Bentley said he plans to call a special election once there is a formal vacancy for the seat.

Nodine said his platform would include economic development, highway construction and relief from federal regulation on red snapper fishing. He also said he would be an advocate for prescription drug addiction and for reforming the justice system.

"I have lived through a devastating chapter of my life, seeing first-hand what an out of control justice system can do to an innocent person’s life,” Nodine said. “I made severe and inexcusable personal mistakes in my life but do not feel it is up to rogue prosecutors to prosecute a person’s personal and moral failings.”

Click here for an up-to-the-minute list of who's in - and who's out - of the race for Alabama's 1st Congressional District.