Houston National Cemetery director to transfer after censorship allegations
The director of Houston National Cemetery will transfer to another job within the Department of Veterans Affairs after becoming entangled in a lawsuit over allegations of religious censorship.

Arleen Ocasio has requested and received a transfer to another position in the National Cemeteries Administration in Washington D.C., said VA spokeswoman Jessica Jacobsen.

Ocasio had served as director of the VA cemetery in Houston since last year. Her transfer will be a lateral move to an administrative position at the same pay grade, Jacobsen said.

Local veterans and volunteer groups had accused Ocasio and other VA officials of banning the use of religious speech — including the words Jesus and God — during services at the cemetery.

VA denied the allegations of censorship and stated that invoking the names of God or Jesus is not only allowed, but common at VA cemeteries across the country.

The parties reached agreement in the case through mediation in September, and a federal judge signed off on a settlement the following month.

You can read the text of the agreement here.

Ocasio‘s status was not addressed in the settlement, and VA officials had said her future was an internal matter.

Ocasio’s departure is for the best, said Cheryl Whitfield, founder of Houston National Memorial Ladies, one of the volunteer groups that sued the cemetery.



“I feel we’re going to return a lot of the dignity and honor back to the cemetery, and I’m hoping that with all this, the veterans who lie there will get everything that they deserve,” Whitfield said.

“I’m looking forward to getting this behind us,” she said. “That was a long several months, and to be honest to you, it wore me out. But, you know, the Memorial Ladies and the (Veterans of Foreign Wars), we stood up for what we believe in, and I’ll always be proud of that. We’re not going to be bullied, and if we are, we’re going to make some more noise.”

UPDATE: The acting director of Houston National Cemetery will be Larry Williams, the assistant director of Dallas Fort Worth National Cemetery, VA officials announced Monday.

Williams assumed his duties on Friday, the same day Ocasio departed the position.