Sen. Sherrod Brown stumps for health care reform
Health care forum Health care forum

CLEVELAND HEIGHTS — U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown stumped for national health care reform at a Cleveland Heights church Friday morning, bringing with him local perspective and urgency.

"We together are going to see this Congress pass national health care reform by the end of the year," the Ohio Democrat told a crowd of about 500 community organizers and activists packed into the sanctuary at Forest Hills Presbyterian Church. Many held up an array of signs, such as "Fix it now" and "Caution: Pre-existing condition."

President Barack Obama has called health care reform a top priority, proposing a national system that would include both private and public insurance options for all Americans. Brown said he expects writing on legislation to begin soon.

"It's so very, very important that we move forward," Brown said before the rally began.



More than one out of every four working-age Ohioans, or an estimated 2.9 million, went without health insurance during 2007 and 2008, according to a Families USA release earlier this month. And the majority of those who went without insurance worked either full or part time.

But even as the ranks of uninsured have grown, health care reform has historically been a tough issue for politicians and failed to pass under the Clinton presidency. Brown, who took national office in 1992, said he sees reform actually passing now because insurance companies, businesses and average Americans are all struggling to pay health care bills.



And Brown isn't the only prominent Ohioan who expects health care reform to happen now: Mal Mixon, chief executive of the Elyria-based homecare business Invacare, said he feels a different tenor to the current debate too.

"If I were a betting man, I wouldn't have bet it would have happened under Hillary," Mixon said. "But I would bet now."

Mixon, who participated earlier this month in a White House forum, said it's natural for local leaders to take part in the debate because Cleveland's future depends on medicine.



The Cleveland Clinic's Dr. Delos "Toby" Cosgrove voiced his views on national reform during a CSPAN show on April 9, saying that he needed to know more about the proposed public/private plan before offering support.

Cosgrove, the chief executive and president of the Clinic, also said he wasn't "particularly enthused" about the idea of a single-payer system, which many at Friday's rally advocated.



Competition has been good to America, he said. A single-payer system would be one in which all doctors, hospitals and insurance companies are paid from one administrator, such as the government.



In contrast, U.S. Sen. Brown told the admittedly sympathetic crowd gathered Friday morning that he has always supported a single-payer system but that wasn't likely to happen during this Congress. So, he said, he's campaigning for the next best thing: The mix between private and public health coverage.



"The plan we write will deal with the uninsured and underinsured," Brown said.