Stevens Martin Vaughn & Tadych PLLC
New clients, opposing counsel and many, many others regularly have difficulty with Mike Tadych’s surname. Shortly after meeting “Mr. Taditch” or “Mr. Tascisch,” however, they quickly come to know this multi-talented lawyer as “Mr. TODDY” — or, in view of his personable nature — simply as “Mike.”

A native of Berea, Ohio, Mike’s ease in dealing with people and broad work history enables him to handle a wide array of legal problems. Since beginning law practice in 1997, Mike has worked on matters ranging from multifamily construction project disputes and trademark litigation to the representation of a national day-care operator before its state licensing agency and negotiation of the contract for a national public radio personality. As an example of his versatility Mike, who grew up knowing nothing about farming, used his background in information technology and presentation development to create computerized damages analyses that led to the successful resolution of more than 35 crop insurance lawsuits filed by North Carolina tobacco farmers in the aftermath of Hurricane Fran. This imaginative work has led to Mike’s handling of crop insurance claims for many other farmers.

In addition to his litigation, First Amendment and professional licensing work, Mike enjoys representing the interests of creative individuals including authors, singers, journalists and artists. He has served as general counsel to the Watercolor Society of North Carolina, The Justice Theater Project and is a frequent speaker on areas of interest to creative individuals regarding business structure, intellectual property and transference of ownership.

A graduate of Indiana University, where he earned a degree in telecommunications, Mike has experience in television production, aerial video photography, graphic design, desktop publishing, editing corporate newsletters and public relations. At Case Western University’s law school, Mike served as coordinator of the school’s national moot court team. Mike’s professional activities include being the current chair of the Communications Committee of the North Carolina Bar Association and a six-year stint as the editor of The Wake Bar Flyer, the newsletter of the award-winning Wake County Bar Association. Mike is currently president of The Springdale Recreation Club and has served on the Board of Directors for the Wake County Bar Association and chaired its Communications Committee. Mike is a long standing member and served on the Board of the Downtown Raleigh Rotary Club – North Carolina’s oldest civic club.

Mike and his wife Denise have three children who revel in Wake County’s magnet schools. He plays tennis and longs to return to playing water polo.