Monroe News Star Newspaper Archives, Jun 18, 1973, p. 8
Monroe News Star (Newspaper) - June 18, 1973, Monroe, Louisiana ms SltelHIonrat ikm-Skr HiiM For AnollMr Flight Fmt-A Monday, ine IS, li» U.S.-Russian Talks Hie Russian • American summit this week is a landmark in Big Power diplomacy. American Presidents have met with Soviet leaders before, but seldom under the auspicious circumstances that exist for a meaningful contribution to world peace. Risks are involved, to be sure. They always are when dealing with the Soviets. But a good chance ex> ists for better relations, and better relations with old enemies seem to be the pattern of the post - Cold War era. The main task of the new summit, as seen through the eyes of Georgy Arbatov, a senior Soviet adviser on U. S. affairs, will be to “keep up the momentum” to further the things which were achieved during the first Nixon - Brezhnev summit in Moscow a year ago. There has been some criticism of the timing of the summit. Sen. Henry Jackson, D-Wash., for example, called for a postponement of the talks because of the pressures now being exerted on Nixon by the Watergate scandal. Nixon is viewed as being at a distinct disadvantage. Brezhnev, on the other hand, has stated he does not Intend to intrude himself into the purely domestic squabble. “In fact,” he told newsmen Thursday in an unprecedented three - hour news conference, “the thought has never entered my head as to whether or not President Nixon has lost any influence or has gained any influence as a result of Wagergate.” Nixon and the bushy - browed Soviet leader are expected to concentrate on arms limitations and closer economic ties, military force reductions in central Europe, the European security conference and the Middle East. Brezhnev left no doubt with newsmen that he would urge Nixon to help him promote what he termed a *‘truly large -scale economic relationship** involving huge transfusions of American capital and technology in return for Soviet raw materials. He said he wanted to place Soviet -American trade on a stable, longterm basis. If all the pros and cons were put side by side, all the debits and credits posted in a ledger viz. the bargaining position of Nixon and Brezhnev, we would suppose that now is as good a time as any for the talks. Brezhnev may be in the stronger position by virtue of his consolidation of power in the Kremlin. However, he is beset by internal economic troubles no less than is President Nixon. He desperately needs help. The Soviets cannot supply the food and fiber that they need for their own people and they can’t get it from the satellite countries (Po land, Czechoslovakia, etc). Their supply system is bad and the quality of much of their goods is second rate. Critics in the Congress, particularly Sen. Jackson, do not want the U. S. to enter into trade agreement with the Soviets until the latter change their policy of restricting Jewish emigration. Nixon has worked long hours to bring about a detente with the Soviets and Communist China. He is a seasoned negotiator, as is his national security adviser Henry Kissinger. If they can’t be trusted to fashion better relations with the Communists’ giants without selling out our country, then nobody can. We only hope that security for Brezhnev is at its tightest and that nothing tragic or embarassing happens during his visit. Touchy Flood Issue Should the federal government pick up the tab for flood damage to homes that were deliberately ^ -*** AW •* I W WW W WMk» t That is a question that is getting attention in Congress right now. The Nixon Administration is concerned about the rising cost of U. S. floods. There were 46 last year and 16 already this year. Two major steps have been taken to cut the government’s share of the losses. First, as of April 20, disaster loans to private citizens from the Small Business Administration (SBA) will be granted only at the rate of 5 per cent interest. Previously loans were at one percent interest — and the first $5,000 did not have to }>e paid back. Secondly, the Administration introduced a get - tough bill in the Senate and House to force every community in the country with flood problems to join the federal flood - insurance program. The bill would prohibit VA, FHA, and other government - insured loans to anyone building or remodeling a structure in a flood - prone area, until a community joined the pro- :4. ^ACIAAi« Ali «IVAUltlVAi, it WVUiU piU* hibit federally insured lending agencies, such as banks and savings and loans, from making loans for any project within a known flood zone. To date, a few communities have adopted the flood - plain zoning necessary to qualify their localities for federal insurance. Many of those who have qualified have only jumped in as flood waters actually approached their city limits. Federal officials say the reason for this reluctance is political pressure brought to bear on local governments by construction and suj)^ division interests. The average American thinking about building should check the outer limits of the 100-year base flood to be sure he’s building on dry land. If he insists on building on a flood plain, houses should be elevated above the level of the 100-year base flood. Sea Law Conference At the rate at which sea boundaries are being extended, about all that may be left for the upcoming United Nations Law of the Sea Conference to decide is whether it should ratify a 200 - mile limit. In addition to several Latin countries, a num>ber of the newly formed states of Africa are claiming jurisdiction over extensive sweeps of the neighboring ocean. More than fishing rights are involved in these claims, although that factor has received much of the attention so far. Many countries, including those which have no exploration or research facilities of their own, are becoming increasingly aware of the potential for oil and other mineral exploration ii:«ifshore waters. They more recently have become concerned about controlling possible sources of offshore pollution. But the main purpose of 200 -mile claims is economic. In t h e process of arbitrarily claiming territorial rights extending so far into the ocean, basic sea research — much of which has little to do with the economics of the sea — is being thwarted. It simply is not possible to study the movement of the tides or the effects of relative salinity of sea water on sea life or the ocean’s life cycle from the floor to the surface or a hundred other pursuits science is interested in when intrusion of any kind is prohibited in that part of the ocean which holds many of the answers. The Law of the Sea Conference will be merely another talk session if too many of the delegates already are committed to extensive and exclusive sea rights. **• Evans Dean's Credibility Under Attack By Howland Bvans And Robert Novak WASHINGTON — The unrelenting onslaught by presidential defenders against the credibility of President Nixon’s deposed White House counsel, John W. Dean HI partly rests on shaky factual foundatons about Dean’s activities during those frantic April days when the Watergate scandal broke open. Contrary to published reports, federal prosecutors say Dean never told them in April that he had no evidence linking Mr. Nixon with the Watergate cover-up. Contrary to claims by Nixon defenders, Dean offered to tell all to federal investigators in return for immunity from prosecution before, not after Mr. Nixon decided to fire him. Moreover, Dean’s lawyers claim that the torrent of personal innuendo about Dean amounts to calculated libels intended to demolish him as a witness. At stake is whether Dean is believed or not when he testifies before the Senate Watergate committee this week. Of all former presidential aides involved in the scandal, only Dean threatens to wrap Mr, Nixon in the guilt of Watergate. Therefore, the White House and other Nixon defenders have campaigned furiously, with remarkable success, against Dean’s reputation and credibility. No evidence But this campaign’s shaky factual foundations, while not insuring the truth of Dean’s laiT!-ely undocumented charge, suggest he should not be written off in advance as irresponsible and unreliable. A major contention in the anti - Dean campaign is that he began accusing Mr. Nixon of complicity in the Watergate cov er - up only after being fired by the President. Some Nixon defenders in the press have written that Dean first told pi:osecu-tors during sessions with them in April he had no evidence to link the President with Watergate. In fact, according to highly-placed figures in the Watergate prosecution. Dean did not then tell prosecutors he had no information to incriminate Mr. Nixon but merely that he had no information he was prepared to give them at that time. According to intimates. Dean had not yet decided how much he could say about the President in view of possible demands of executive privilege, the attorney - client relationship and national security. The charge that Dean offered to tell all only after Mr. Nixon discovered his part in the conspiracy comes from former Nixon aide Charles W. Colson, emerging as the President’s leituiiig public defender. Eleven Days Colson told ABC commentator Howard K. Smith June 6 that he and his new law partner, David Shapiro, “presented information for the President” on ^ril 13 recommending Dean be fired. “It’s no small coincidence that the next day,” said Colson, “Mr. Dean. . .went to the U. S. attorney’s office seeking immunity.” In fact, however, Dean’s immunity negotiations with U. S. prosecutors, covering eight separate late - night and weekend sessions, started April 2, eleven days before the Colson-Shapiro recommendation. All the while there have been underground calumnies on Dean’s character peddled around Washington. All, includ ing contradictory rumors that he is homosexual and goes to massage parlors, are without apparent basis in fact. More significantly, Dean’s lawyers also deny a far more widely circulated and far more damaging report. In early May, CBS quoted one of his lawyers as saying Dean was seeking immunity to avoid jail because he feared sexual assault. That report has been widely repeated, in and out of print, to make Dean a figure of ridicule and contempt here. But his lawyers call it absolutely false, telling us they did not deny it originally for fear the denial would only spread the r^ort. The anti - Dean campaign has experienced conspicuous success. Even some leading Democratic Senators now ridicuTle his impact as a witness on grounds his dishonesty is a proven fact. Highly - placed federal prosecutors also say privately that uean s faiimg credibility will play a part in the government’s eventual decision whether to continue denying him immunity and thus pass up his full testimony. Even without a campaign against him, the 34 - year - old Dean would be hard put to make himself believed against the combined denials of Colson, H. R. (Bob) Haldeman, John Ehr-lichman, perhaps John Mitchell, and, of course, the President. Nevertheless, the campaign against Dean based in part on faulty information suggests he is not quite so irrelevant as the President’s defenders publicly claim. If he seems credible before the Ervin committee next week, the nightmare of the Watergate scandal will grow still bleaker. Old Southern Strategy Keeps Rolling On By Kevin Phillips WASHINGTON — If the New Washington liberal crowd could tear themselves away from Watergate ecstasy and the lionizing of Daniel Ellsberg for a little look-see below the Mason-Dlxon line, they might glean a useful political insight, namely that the GOP “Southern Strategy” seems to be rolling along — and rolling up local victories — just as if G. Gordon Liddy had never existed. Here are the principal Southern political events since the Watergate affair began exploding; Item: On June 9, Virginia Republicans picked their 1973 gubernatorial nominee. The man they chose, former (1965-K3) Democratic Governor Mills B. Godwin, is 1) a heavy favorite in November and 2) the likely architect of a 1973 - 74 fu.sion between conservative Democrats and the GOP (which for the first time he described as “our party”). Meanwhile, the state Democratic Party failed The Small Society yco to field a nominee of its own, commending the candidacy of Lt. Gov. Henrj’ Howell (a liberal running as an Independent) and setting up machinery to purge party conservatives. Item: On June 5, the Republicans scored their greatest gains of the century in the Mississippi municipal elections, winning 63 of the 140 council and mayoralty positions on the ballot. Included was a net gain of 12 mayors. State Republican Chairman Clarke Reed says, “These elections show that Watergate is having no effect on the accoi-erating shift to the GOP in Mississippi.” Realignment Item: In mid - May. the prosperous textile city of Greenville, s. C., held elections for four county and city council positions. All four went to the GOP, including two previously Democratic seats. Item: On April 4, the city of Columbus, Ga., elected a Re- rr^NöT BeifiáA l^fVßuaM THe$B \ PAVö- publican mayor by a large 68 per cent majority. From Virginia to Texas, the question is still not whether the GOP will make some gains but how big they will be. As the Watergate ruckus dies down, former Texas Democratic Governor John Connally — turned Republican on May 2 and since named a White House consultant — will be in motion again, leading more converts into the GOP tent. Speaking in Virginia on June 8, Republican National Chairman George Bush, himself a possible 1974 Texas gubema-toiial nominee, said “the current realignment of the GOP will continue long after Watergate is forgotten,” Bush is probably right. Reaction to Watergatism is bound to hurt «he GOP in some of its traditional middle - class and Yankee strongholds, but below the Mason - Dixon Line there’s no evidence of anything more than a slowdown — if even that — in the Republican trend. by Brickman Lynch AAob §y Nkk TMmmmk WMtÍ0HfIÓIÍ'»f^C9iilruy to wtmt s(Mte atgbt tUok, A4an and Ihre did not tryit iMTt June 17, m at the Watergate «nd thuf CTMte lia, a hu> aún fÉlO^ takm np lmnl0dla^ Iqr tbst hired sang from Nixon bfidqiiarterf. Sin, alai, wdtltd befora Watergate, but the wijr thif town it goteg, you wouldn’t beUéve It. Perhapf thoie who ebwnre here aro fo faaclÉated with the Watergate kind ^ gin that Hieir memoriea and imaginattoM fail them. Anyway, the lin of Watergate ii like the body of the cowhand lying in tiie dusty itreet ot a western town, it lies there and ttie crowd hangs back, waiting for the reaction, waiting for the sheriff to go into the saloon and grab the suspect by the shirt, if indeed it is that man who is really guilty. Local Press Runs What is really on the minds of people who ponder such questions here is how involved is President Nixon? As long as that question nags, as long as the televised hearings continue, as long as the local press runs acres on Watergate, well, the other bnsiness of this city and this government is improperly tended. Here comes Leonid Brezhnev, leader of the Soviet Union, the second most powerful nation of the world, the Communist power which wants to enhance its new relationship with the Unit-ed States. But Washington isn’t very interested. It’s not the beastiy hot weather or what seems like a paucity of agenda issues — no, it’s Wateigate. Here is inflation, thinning our prosperity. Infusing us all with anxiety. It’s a big woriy out across the country, but here, well, it’s second - ranked to Watergate. Quiet Fary Here is the energy crisis, befuddling motorists, making some people wonder if World War n rationing is in the offing. It annoys ¿ven in Washington, but Watergate still preoccupies. So Watergate rightly er wrongly, leads to Mr. Nixon. Watergate ciuiad aS the eld feelings about Urn to enipt, and a few new ones as well. And the crowd in the dusty street hangs back, waiting for the •heriff to decide. there are people who would like to run Mr. Hixon out of town, maybe even lynch him. He traumatited them in the M’s and he hurt them by getting dected in IMS and he crushed them witii his 1172 landslide. Their quiet fury is bUnd. They do not see Breshnev or inflation or the fuel crisis, to say nothing of the residue of Vietnam or our dancing dollar. There are the very few in Mr. Nixon’s Administration who talk bitterly of tiie Uberal and press conspiracy against their leader. They claip earlier administrations also sinned but were undiscovered and undisturbed. One White House aide told me the only wrong thing was that the Watergate gang got caught uid tliat he personally admires G. Gordon Liddy for ^‘keeping his mouth shut and his head in the oven.” But the two aforementioned attitudes are in the minority. Even those who moderately dislike Mr. Nixon wish that he would govern. Some want him to hold a wide - open press conference, to fight it out in that con^ntious ring, in hopes , that a knockdown drag - out will purge the press of its stored resentments of foiir years. Such a possibly unseemly event might not even satisfy the haters, for they would still find “T’s uncrossed and a few I’s astray.” In passing, it’s amusing that some of the people here who really hate Mr. Nixon still feel Dr. Henry A. KiHinger is the liberal saint untainted by Watergate. Actually, both Mr. Nixon and Dr. Kissinger in varying degrees are touched by Watergate, but at this point there is no clear -cut evidence that either man has violated his office. Energy Policy ^ Proposed By John Chamberlain Everything connected with energy seems to be going wrong these days. We have gas shortages and voltage cutbacks. A container ship, the Sea Witch, plows into a small oil tanker, the Esso Brussels, in the Narrows leading to New York harbor, killing several crew members in a flaming, oil - filled sea. The Naderites demand instantaneously clean automobile engines, with complete indifference to the difficulties involved in getting both the carbon monoxide and the oxides of nitrogen out of thè exhaust at one and the same time. The anti - pollutionists and the conservationists seem eternally to be working at cross -purposes: the newer automobiles, with better emission control, get only eight or ten miles to a gallon of gas. which means that the Nader “improvements will require an 11 per cent increase in total fuel consumption. The circle thus goes back to the dangers of collision as more tankers move into our ports with more crude oil destined for our overworked refineries. It could all have been avoided. Ten years ago, as I remember, I took a trip through the Appalachian coal country with Joe Moody, who was head of the National Coal Policy Conference. He kept talking about the need for a national energy policy, which would have resulted in some positive thinking about a blend of coal, hydroelectricity, oil, natural gas and atomic power use. True, he put his main accent on coal, which led critics to say he was flacking for his own industry. But Joe Moody’s interests were wider than that: he urged the need of a composite energy policy on both Richard Nixon and John Kennedy in the 1960 election campaign. Nothing came of it. A Safer Proposition Is Possible So now we have the chickens coming home to roost. The ridiculous thing about it is that our politicians have been scared witless by the shortsighted claims of the environmentalists. New Jersey politicos, fearful of The socio - economic currents involved run too deep. The booming Southlands is realigning against a national Democratic Party dominated by minority groups and liberal activists. Northerners tend to be misled by the analyses of affluent Southern liberals, many of them crypto • Manhattanites hostile to the culture of thuir region and consistently unable to understand basic Dixie alienation. The most appalling example is “The Southern Strategy,” a book of political boob-craft published late in 1971 by Atlanta journalist Reg Murphy. Murphy predicted a new bi-ra-cial progressive Democatic coalition tiiat would reject issues like busing and go on to 1972 Presidential victory. Since the Watergate uproar, he has resumed his kindergarten analysis. polluted beaches, are categorically against setting up a deep-water single - point mooring installation off Sandy Hook that could accommodate the new 250,000- or 300.000 - ton tankers. Their fears are misplaced: a single big tanker pumping its cargo into an undersea pipeline for direct transmission to refin-eries in the northern New Jersey and Philadelphia regions would De a mucn saier proposition than four of five 75,000 ton tankers crowding into the Delaware River or New York harbor. The U.S., up to ten yean ago, was the world’s leader in the technological revolution. But today it seems incapable of learning anything new. Meanwhile, the foreigners have taken over, 'The British, the Mediterranean countries, the Nigerians, the South Africians, the Japanese, the South Americans and the Indonesians have no aversion to deep - water loading and unloading of oil. By idiotic contrast there isn’t a single deep-water oil terminal in the whole United States. The State of Maine voted “no” on a proposition to bring big tankers into a deep harbor at Machiasport. The Big Stone Beach deepwater terminal site in Delaware was prohibited by Bllaware’s Coastal Zoning Aci of 1971. But just what Is that the environmentalists fear? Britain’s Milford Haven oil terminal is located in a national park, and the Gulf Oil company’s Bantry Bay facilities in Ireland are set down in a region that remains attractive to tourists. At Rotter-diam, in Holland, recreational beaches have been built with the sand dredged from the deepwater channels required by tankers. Economic and environmental needs can be combined, but Americans, with their com-partmented minds and emotional approach to problems, don’t seem capable of learninjg from the British, the Irish or the Dutch. ®if JBonrof Hrws-Sfar 0. ¿wint, Publlihtr Wilson Ewing, Publisher I93I-1M2 Robert Ewing Jr., Chairman 195MV70 W»l_am H. Bronion, Publlihar 19SM»7a Publlihad every afternoon except Sat-urday and Sunday by News-Star—World Publishlns Corporation, North 4th and Olive Streets, Monroe, La. whose officers and directors are: Vice President and Director, Mildred Hunt Iwiiii, Vice President and Director, IdnwiHi Oraves SrawH, Jr.; Vice President and Director, nefcert Swing Ml. Secretary and Direct. Hendrleki Treasurer, BiNier Bwing Wynne, other directors are, KMnetli C. Sarranger, Robert ■wing Srewn, Tevlmln Hunter Srewn« ¿is P* If*"*' Virginia Clay Hill.. Jehn A. Hendrlch, Harrhan KeMy Wynlie. Second clau postage paid at /Monroe La. Zip Code »1201. Telephone No. 3M-5U1. J(^ S. Campbell General Manager Edmund G. Brown Ass't Gen. ittar. ¿SfK ^ Executive Edlfor IjglllamCj^jH^_city Editor >reu 7^ember o^ the Associated____ AsMclatad Press Is exclusively entitled to the tttt f#r reproduction of all news dispatches credited te It or not oHierwlse .credited and also the local n<ys herein. _ al adw^sln^epnn^ (jnices In Ygrfc, Ntw^Orteana, Chicago, At. Mire« Ntwa^tar K an kn^epen«. ant newspaper, it prints tha newt Im- Srtlally, It supports wtiat It believes to right. It oppoeet whet It betlavM t* be wrong witnowt ragard to P»rtf pgll. «ÇS. i