Kamala D. Harris Takes Oath as California Attorney General
SACRAMENTO – Kamala D. Harris was sworn in as California Attorney General this afternoon in Sacramento, vowing in her remarks to ensure that state law is on the side of the people.

"I am deeply humbled by the trust you have placed in me and I will never forget it is you, the People of California, whom I serve,' Harris said.

The oath was administered by Chief Justice of California Tani Cantil-Sakauye at the California Museum for History, Women and the Arts. The inauguration ceremony included an invocation by Bishop T. Larry Kirkland, Sr. of the African Methodist Episcopal Church and a performance by classical Indian dancer Vidya Sundaram. Sergeant Gerald D'Arcy of the San Francisco Police Department sang the national anthem and the Presentation of Colors was given by the Department of Justice Color Guard and the Sacramento Area Firefighters.

Attorney General Harris stressed in her inaugural address that she will seek innovative new approaches in tackling the state's toughest problems.

"It is often said that a good prosecutor wins convictions. But a great prosecutor has convictions. In the coming four years, and in the continuing work of the Attorney General's Office, we are going to do whatever it takes in the cause of protecting and defending the lives and livelihoods of all Californians, by moving beyond the status quo,' Harris said. 'To do this, we are going to need to get smart on crime – tougher and smarter – about making California the undisputed national leader in innovation in crime fighting.'

As chief law enforcement officer for the state, Harris plans to focus on reducing recidivism and on reforming the state's revolving door prison system. A major priority of her office will be to lead a renewed collaborative effort against transnational gangs and organized crime.

In her role representing the interests of the people of California, Harris is deeply committed to protecting consumers from mortgage fraud and other scams, as well as to preserving the state's natural resources.

Harris is the first woman, and the first African American and the first South Asian American, to hold the office of Attorney General in the history of California.

Attorney General Harris served two terms as District Attorney in San Francisco. First elected in 2003, Harris drew on nearly 20 years of experience as a courtroom prosecutor to fight violent crime. During her tenure, the city increased conviction rates for serious and violent offenses, expanded services to victims of crime and their families, created new prosecution divisions focused on child assault, public integrity and environmental crimes, and launched effective programs to keep parolees from re-offending. To combat one of San Francisco's biggest challenges, gun violence, she created a gun specialist team and implemented tough gun charging policies.

To learn more about Harris, and the work of the Attorney General's office, visit: http://ag.ca.gov/