This toll hike could be just the beginning
In 2001, a guy by the name of Bret Schundler was running for governor. The Republican candidate’s platform called for the immediate removal of the Garden State Parkway tolls.

His Democratic opponent, Jim McGreevey, said he’d get rid of the tolls as well, but it would take seven years.

Schund­ler as much as called him a liar. “If I win, tolls come down; if I lose, we get high-speed E-ZPass,” he said.

McGreevey won and proceeded to prove himself a liar — in what may be record time for even a Jersey pol. The day after he took the oath of office, McGreevey went on 101.5 FM and told a caller that he had no intention of keeping his promise to remove tolls.

Schundler’s prediction about high-speed E-Zpass came true. Soon, it was being installed on the Parkway.

“He was absolutely dishonest during the course of campaign and he knew it,” said Schundler when I phoned him the other day. As for high-speed E-ZPass, the former mayor of Jersey City recalled that “my chief of staff, when I was mayor, always used to call it ‘E-Z toll increase’ instead of E-ZPass.”

Again, an accurate prediction. As of 6:30 this morning, tolls on the Parkway and New Jersey Turnpike went up 50 percent. For the Parkway, that was the second hike since McGreevey promised to eliminate the tolls.

It took a bit longer, but Gov. Chris Christie also broke a key campaign promise. During the 2009 campaign, Christie promised he’d never raise taxes. But this toll hike is a tax hike. Tolls qualify as user fees only if they are used to maintain the road or bridge for which they’re collected. But Christie is raking off $1.25 billion from this toll hike over the next 10 years to throw into the budget to cover transportation expenses unrelated to either toll road. That makes this a tax hike.

If Christie had been honest, he would have simply raised the gas tax. That’s a true user fee, said Schundler, who was Christie’s education commissioner until he was forced out following a tiff unrelated to tolls.

“I’ve always thought having a gas tax where the revenues get shared by the state, counties and municipality fulfills the user-fee concept,” he said. “You basically have the users of the roads pay for the roads in the most efficient way.”

True enough. But the gas tax doesn’t provide big slush funds at independent authorities where pols can stash their pals. Tolls do, and that recent toll hike by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey was a big source of pork for the governors of both states.

Get ready for the next big rip-off. It’s called “cashless tolling.” This is high-speed E-ZPass on steroids. The Port Authority is planning to implement it, as is the authority that runs the Atlantic City Expressway.

Cashless tolling sounds nice in theory. If you don’t have E-ZPass, then your license plate gets recorded and you get a bill in the mail.

But the cost of collecting that toll can easily exceed the toll itself. The government needs a better way to collect the toll. I came across it in a publication called the International Toll Collection and Road Pricing Review:

“Being able to read license plates and track users to their bank accounts or credit cards ensure that all users pay all tolls and congestion-charge pricing instantly.”

Perhaps you don’t want to grant the government access to your charge card and bank account. Perhaps you don’t want the government knowing where you’ve been driving. Forget about that once cashless tolling kicks in.

And notice that bit about congestion pricing. Not only do you get stuck in traffic; you get to pay more for the privilege.

Best of all, at least from a politician’s perspective, cashless tolling makes it simple to collect tolls on any road. A few years ago, I reported that there are already E-ZPass scanners on Route 24 and interstates 287 and 78. At the moment, they’re used only to monitor traffic flow. But flip a switch and you’ve got cashless tolling.

Imagine if Christie could collect a buck or two from every vehicle on the interstates.

His transportation transition team already proposed that.

Christie said he wasn’t going to do it. But then he also said he wasn’t going to raise taxes.

As of this morning, those toll collectors became tax collectors. And they’re just getting started.