LD-1 Disclosure Form
Clerk of the House of Representatives

Legislative Resource Center

135 Cannon Building

Washington, DC 20515

http://lobbyingdisclosure.house.gov Secretary of the Senate

Office of Public Records

232 Hart Building

Washington, DC 20510

http://www.senate.gov/lobby

LOBBYING REGISTRATION

Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 (Section 4)

Check One: New Registrant New Client for Existing Registrant Amendment

1. Effective Date of Registration 11/20/2009 2. House Identification 32802 Senate Identification 39837

REGISTRANT Organization/Lobbying Firm Self Employed Individual

3. Registrant Organization Van Scoyoc Associates

Address 101 Constitution Avenue, NW Address2 ​Suite 600 West

City Washington State DC Zip 20001 Country USA

4. Principal place of business (if different than line 3)

City ​ State ​ Zip ​ Country ​

5. Contact name and telephone number International Number

Contact ​Mr. David W. Jolly Telephone ​2026381950 E-mail ​mailbox@vsadc.com

​Government Relations Consultant

CLIENT A Lobbying Firm is required to file a separate registration for each client. Organizations employing in-house lobbyists should check the box labeled “Self” and proceed to line 10. Self

7. Client name ​The Free Enterprise Nation Address ​1511 N. West Shore Boulevard

City ​Tampa State ​FL Zip ​33607 Country ​USA

City ​ State ​ Zip ​ Country ​

​Advocates of free enterprise, business, labor and employee issues.

LOBBYISTS

10. Name of each individual who has acted or is expected to act as a lobbyist for the client identified on line 7. If any person listed in this section has served as a “covered executive branch official” or “covered legislative branch official” within twenty years of first acting as a lobbyist for the client, state the executive and/or legislative position(s) in which the person served.

Name Covered Official Position (if applicable) First Last Suffix ​David W. ​Jolly ​ ​Associate Staff, House Appropriations Committee ​David W. ​Jolly (COP cont.) ​ ​General Counsel, Congressman C.W. Bill Young ​David W. ​Jolly (COP cont.) ​ ​Legislative Assistant, Congressman C.W. Bill Young ​Laura ​Donahoe ​ ​ ​H. Steawart ​Van Scoyoc ​ ​

LOBBYING ISSUES

11. General lobbying issue areas (Select all applicable codes).

​BUD ​GOV ​HCR ​LBR ​MMM ​RET ​SMB ​TAX ​

12. Specific lobbying issues (current and anticipated)

Legislative issues regarding the following: Health Care reform, Social Security Reform, Paycheck Fairness Act and other labor related issues and initatives; Taxpayer proection, and Small business

AFFILIATED ORGANIZATIONS

13. Is there an entity other than the client that contributes more than $5,000 to the lobbying activities of the registrant in a quarterly period and either participates in and/or in whole or in major part supervises or controls the registrant’s lobbying activities?

No --> Go to line 14. Yes --> Complete the rest of this section for each entity matching the criteria above, then proceed to line 14.

Internet Address: ​

Name Address Principal Place of Business Street City State/Province Zip Code Country ​ ​ City ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ State ​ Country ​ ​ ​ City ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ State ​ Country ​ ​ ​ City ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ State ​ Country ​

FOREIGN ENTITIES

14. Is there any foreign entity

a) holds at least 20% equitable ownership in the client or any organization identified on line 13; or

b) directly or indirectly, in whole or in major part, plans, supervises, controls, directs, finances or subsidizes activities of the client or any organization identified on line 13; or

c) is an affiliate of the client or any organization identified on line 13 and has a direct interest in the outcome of the lobbying activity?

No --> Sign and date the registration. Yes --> Complete the rest of this section for each entity matching the criteria above, then sign the registration.

Address Ownership Name Street Principal place of business Amount of contribution City State/Province Country (city and state or country) for lobbying activities

​ City ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ State ​ Country ​ ​ ​ % ​ City ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ State ​ Country ​ ​ ​ %