The proposed Oregon plastic bag ban: tax or not?
Oregon State Sen. Mark Hass, one of the chief sponsors of the bill that would ban plastic checkout bags, was quick to jump on an industry official who charged at a hearing Tuesday night that it would "impose a multi-million-dollar tax on Oregon taxpayers."

"We have a legal opinion that this is not a tax," Hass shot back, adding that it was simply wrong to refer to Senate Bill 536 that way. "Let's play within the rules, let's stick to the facts," he said.

Mark Daniels, a vice president from Hilex Poly Co., a major plastic bag manufacturer, decided not to challenge Hass. He quickly started referring to the tax as a fee.

But others weren't so quick to bow to Hass' reasoning. Oregon Catalyst accused Hass of censorship and ran a cartoon mocking the idea that the bill is not a tax.

The reason the T-word came up is that the measure would require retailers to charge consumers five cents for each paper checkout bag they want to use. The grocery industry insisted on this provision, saying it did not want grocers to be stuck with the higher cost of using paper bags.

The Legislative Counsel ruled that the bill is not a tax (which requires a three-fifths vote of both houses to pass the Legislature) because the money doesn't go into the public treasury and because consumers receive "an equivalent identifiable benefit in the form of a paper bag in exchange for the fee."

In addition, Hass argued, "You can avoid the fee. Part of the goal is to get people to use reusable bags." Do that, and you don't have to pay five cents for a paper bag.

Jeff Kropf, the Oregon director of Americans for Prosperity, which brought a contingent of conservative activists to the hearing, scoffed at the not-a-tax argument.

"It ultimately costs people more and they have no choice," he said, even if the money goes to the grocers and not to government. "Now in my mind, that qualifies as a tax."

What about the argument that people can bring their own reusable bags and avoid the five-cent fee?

"How much do those bags cost?" Kropf asked rhetorically. And indeed, stores do sell reusable bags, which range in cost from 50 cents at Fred Meyer to several dollars for stylish cloth bags.

They are also often handed out free at various community events, and Kropf acknowledged he had a closet full of cloth tote bags he's gathered at various conferences and seminars.

Still, there are even more wrinkles to this issue. Several commenters on OregonLive.com noted that they use plastic bags to scoop up dog poo, line trash cans and other household uses. Ban the bags and they'd have to buy them at the store.

On the other hand, one commenter wrote about taking reusable bags to the grocery store for years and getting a five-cent discount for each disposable bag the store doesn't have to use. This commenter figures to have long since made back the purchase cost of the reusable bags and to be making money off of them.

Of course, if the bag bill passes, retailers won't be handing out five-cent rebates anymore.