Georgia Power publishes draft RFP for 2014 Advanced Solar Initiative

Comments accepted through Jan. 31, 2014

Dec 26, 2013

ATLANTA, Dec. 26, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Georgia Power announced today that it is soliciting proposals through a combined Requests for Proposals (RFP) process to fulfill nearly 500 megawatts (MW) of utility-scale solar generation. The RFP includes 70 MW to complete the Georgia Power Advanced Solar Initiative (GPASI) portfolio and 425 MW approved as part of the company's 2013 Integrated Resource Plan (IRP). The RFP will be conducted with oversight by the Accion Group, Inc., which is serving as the Independent Evaluator for the process.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20050216/CLW066LOGO )

Details about the solicitation and the in-service dates for the programs are outlined within the draft RFP documents hosted on the Evaluator's website at http://gpasi.accionpower.com. In order to view the documents, and receive communications about the process, interested parties should register on the website. Registration for prior RFPs will not transition for the 2014 process. The website also includes the 2014 RFP schedule and other information available to the public without registration.

The company will accept comments on the draft RFP documents through Jan. 31, 2014 and will host a RFP bidders conference at the company's Atlanta headquarters on Jan. 13, 2014.

In the fall of 2012, Georgia Power proposed, and the Georgia Public Service Commission (PSC) approved, the company's GPASI program. The GPASI was launched with no regulatory requirement and with a market-based design that does not put upward pressure on customer rates. In 2013, as part of the company's IRP, the PSC approved an additional 525 MW of solar energy to be procured with similar requirements to prevent any upward rate pressures.

About Georgia Power

Georgia Power is the largest subsidiary of Southern Company (NYSE: SO), one of the nation's largest generators of electricity. Value, Reliability, Customer Service and Stewardship are the cornerstones of the company's promise to 2.4 million customers in all but four of Georgia's 159 counties. Committed to delivering clean, safe, reliable and affordable energy at rates below the national average, Georgia Power maintains a diverse, innovative generation mix that includes nuclear, 21st century coal and natural gas, as well as renewables such as solar, hydroelectric and wind. Consistently recognized as a leader in customer service, Georgia Power was recently ranked highest in overall business customer satisfaction among large utilities in the South by J.D. Power and Associates. For more information, visit www.GeorgiaPower.com and connect with the company on Facebook (Facebook.com/GeorgiaPower) and Twitter (Twitter.com/GeorgiaPower).

SOURCE Georgia Power