Is Matt Damon taking family to Australia because of Trump?
Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)

Matt Damon is taking his family to Australia — a top Hollywood source told Page Six – in part because the liberal star’s fed up with President Trump. But the star’s rep insists he is not leaving the US permanently.

A top Hollywood source told Page Six: “Matt’s telling friends and colleagues in Hollywood that he’s moving the family to Australia for a year,” because the activist actor disagrees with Trump’s policies.

But a second source close to Damon, 47, told Page Six his plan was to go Down Under for around three months with his family, depending on his filming schedule, but the move would not be permanent.

The Daily Telegraph newspaper in Sydney had reported that Damon was buying a home in Byron Bay near actor Chris Hemsworth. The two recently appeared in “Thor: Ragnarok” together.

But Damon spokeswoman Jennifer Allen told the Associated Press that while Damon had visited Australia a lot recently he had not bought a home there.

Allen, who repeatedly ignored requests for comment from Page Six, told the Associated Press, “He’s not moving out of the U.S.” She did not comment about Damon’s feelings about the president.

Damon has been outspoken against Trump in the past. He told The Hollywood Reporter last September that the president’s response to the white nationalist riots in Charlottesville, Virginia, was “absolutely abhorrent” Damon also supported Trump’s rival Hillary Clinton in the 2016 election.

Plus, Damon, who has four children with wife Luciana Barroso, may also be waiting for the the controversy to die down after he had to publicly apologize for insensitive comments he made about the wave of sexual assault allegations shaking Hollywood. He had said on an ABC movie show that the #MeToo allegations should be judged on a “spectrum of behavior.”

But he then told NBC’s “Today” of the remark, “I really wish I’d listened a lot more before I weighed in on this. Ultimately, what it is for me is that I don’t want to further anybody’s pain with anything that I do or say. And so for that I’m really sorry.”

Damon and best bud Ben Affleck’s production company this week said it would adopt “inclusion riders” in stars’ contracts, after Frances McDormand spurred the trend from the stage at the Oscars.