Convicted but free to roam
Killer released, Georgia hostage not notified

Steven Rogers still has frightening flashbacks of the time Sengratsamy Sixayaketh held him hostage and gunned down his best friend during a robbery in Locust Grove nearly three decades ago.

Some of those painful memories came flooding back this month after Rogers learned the government had released the Laotian native from a detention center in Alabama five years ago after unsuccessfully seeking to deport him.

Rogers learned of his release from The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, not from the federal agency that let him go, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. So did the Henry County DA. And the county sheriff.

The case highlights the disconnect between ICE and some victims and even local law enforcement authorities.

Rogers said he would have asked a court to keep Sixayaketh behind bars had he known he was going to be released. During the robbery, Sixayaketh fatally shot his best friend — Bill Fortner — who is survived by a daughter.

“The government did not tell me nothing,” Rogers, who lives in McDonough, said about Sixayaketh’s release. “It is appalling the government would do that, especially when my life was on the line, somebody did die and he has a little girl up there who will never know her daddy.”

ICE told the AJC it is developing a new notification system for victims and state and local law enforcement authorities. ICE already has onein place for victims and witnesses, but there’s a catch:they must sign up for it.

Unlike some convicts who become fugitives after entering ICE’s supervision, however, federal immigration authorities and state parole officials in North Carolina say Sixayaketh has been routinely checking in with them as required.

Sixayaketh became a parolee when ICE released him in 2010. North Carolina authorities are now supervising him in the Charlotte area through an interstate parole compact with Georgia. As part of his parole, Sixayaketh is required to remain in contact with authorities, work and submit to drug tests. He is banned from possessing weapons. A spokesman for the North Carolina Department of Public Safety said in an email that Sixayaketh is reporting to authorities as required and “is generally compliant with the terms of supervision.”

Sixayaketh was born in Laos and came to the U.S. as a refugee by way of Thailand in 1980, when he was nine or 10 years old, court records show.

In 1988, he and two other men were arrested following a robbery at a farm in Locust Grove. Armed with a pistol and wearing a red bandana over his face, Sixayaketh forced several victims to sit in a small room while he ransacked the house. When one of the victims refused to turn over his wallet, Sixayaketh shot him in the ankle. Fortner used the diversion to grab him from behind. Sixayaketh broke loose and shot Fortner as he attempted to run away. Fortner died on the way to the hospital. Sixayaketh also shot Obie Wilder in the hip as he went for a rifle.

Sixayaketh fled but was arrested several hours later when a store clerk saw him using a pay phone and notified authorities. In a written statement he gave police, Sixayaketh sought forgiveness, saying he was seeking money so he could travel back home to a parent. He listed his home address as Porterville, Calif.

“The young man (grabbed) me by the neck,” wrote Sixayaketh, who was 18 at the time. “Then, suddenly, the gun went off. I don’t know whose gun. I started to run into the woods. I didn’t look back.”

A Henry County jury convicted Sixayaketh of murder, armed robbery and burglary. He avoided the death penalty but was given two consecutive life prison sentences plus 20 years behind bars.

In 2010 – after he had spent about 22 years in prison – Georgia’s state Board of Pardons and Paroles transferred him to ICE, which unsuccessfully sought to deport him. ICE released him from a detention center in Gadsden, Ala., about three months later on an order of supervision. The federal agency’s records say it released him to comply with a 2001 U.S. Supreme Court ruling — called Zadvydas vs. Davis — that generally prohibits ICE from detaining for more than six months people who have been ordered deported.

James Wright, the district attorney in Henry County, said he wasn’t aware Sixayaketh had been released until the AJC contacted him about it this year.

“If he is released, then law enforcement should at least be aware of that so they can — if they need to — keep an eye on him, so to speak, or at least know where he is at and where he is living,” Wright said. “It’s apparent that he is a dangerous person.”

Henry County Sheriff Keith McBrayer also learned of Sixayaketh’s release from the AJC this year.

“It is concerning,” said McBrayer, whose office investigated Sixayaketh’s crimes. “At least the family and the chief law enforcement officer for that county should be notified.”

Meanwhile, Rogers still has haunting memories.

“I’m a big man,” said Rogers, who was a teenager when Sixayaketh held him hostage. “I’m six-five, 400 pounds and wear size 17 shoes, so there isn’t really one man that scares me. But it’s funny. I still have flashbacks of that stuff that happened a long time ago.”