Jeb Bush swipes at Trump, doubles down on ideas of reform
Jeb Bush wants you to think of him as a pragmatist. An educated technocrat with hardened leadership credentials. A reform-minded conservative. An American just like you, with the same societal and familial concerns.

But on Thursday, as the former Florida governor and once-flourishing presidential contender sat down for an interview with the Monitor’s editorial board, it seemed at times that, for now, he is mostly just exasperated.

“People reading your newspaper can give two hoots about who’s winning and who’s losing, what the poll says, who says the most outrageous things,” he said. People have real concerns like joblessness and are looking for solutions, even if the rhetoric makes the headlines.

At one point, Bush said he finds it offensive when people refer to Donald Trump as a conservative.

Bush touted his vision for reform and said his plans are significantly more detailed than those of his rivals.

His proposal to repeal the Affordable Care Act and replace it with a state-driven model, one that eliminates employer mandates and various coverage requirements while allowing businesses to contribute toward an employee’s insurance and offering tax credits for people to find cheap, stripped-down plans that cover only the most serious conditions.

“The focus ought to be on catastrophic coverage,” Bush said. “Provide incentives for people to be more empowered, to have more information, and have it be portable – their insurance – so they can invest in their health care over time.”

It was the type of detail that reporters and voters have come to expect from the one-time front-runner, whose poll numbers have sunk in the face of an anti-establishment wave that continues to sweep through New Hampshire and other early primary states.

Bush, for one, is doubling down on his experience in Florida and his relentless reputation as a policy wonk.

“Policy really matters,” he said, adding that his campaign has unveiled “detailed plans on more subjects than any other campaign.”

“And I’m proud of that,” Bush said. “I want people to know I’m serious about this.”

In substance, Bush is unabashed about his faith in the restorative power of the market. He acknowledges the threat of climate change, but remains unconvinced about just how large it is. Under his leadership, the federal government would invest in long-term research and development, but would otherwise get out of the way. That means removing tax incentives on the gas industry, as well as alternatives like wind and solar.

“Tear down those barriers so that there’s true competition,” Bush said.

He supported the aggressive steps his father and brother took as presidents to reduce the country’s nuclear stockpile, and said he was committed to modernizing the remaining inventory, a promise he said the Obama administration has failed to follow through on. He complimented President Obama for pressing to disarm Iran, but faulted him for ultimately signing a deal that he feels Iran can easily circumvent.

On immigration, Bush wants to improve border control and collaborate more effectively with local law enforcement to crack down on those who enter the country on a visa and then drop off the radar by the time it expires. Bush continues to support a path to citizenship for children of undocumented immigrants, one that includes either the completion a high school degree or enrollment in the military.

Asked about income inequality, Bush said he is not interested in vilifying or inhibiting the wealthy, but instead with ensuring that people from all backgrounds have the tools and access to climb financially. He talked of revolutionizing the education system to get children career-ready by the 12th grade, and of focusing dealing with the “growing obsolescence of men in low-income communities.”

“That’s a huge challenge, but we need to address it,” Bush said. “The programs need to be there to provide incentives for that to happen. Expanding (earned income tax credits) is one example, block grants to the states or creating new programs that are much more technologically advanced and efficient for mobility.”

“And then the middle class,” he said, pausing. And with that he launched into another series of potential reforms.