With primary less than a week away, Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders turn attention to N.H.
Democrat Hillary Clinton eked out a win over rival Sen. Bernie Sanders in the Iowa caucus Monday night, but both candidates made a triumphant return to New Hampshire on Tuesday.

“Last night, we began the political revolution,” Sanders thundered during a town hall in Keene’s Colonial Theatre. “Not just in Iowa, not just in New Hampshire, but all over this country!”

The crowd roared with approval.

While Sanders didn’t win, the Democratic contest was the closest in Hawkeye State history – with Clinton beating Sanders by less than three-tenths of 1 percent – and the Associated Press didn’t call a winner until mid-afternoon Tuesday. Before the results were official, however, Clinton was touting victory.

“I am so thrilled I’m coming to New Hampshire after winning Iowa,” Clinton told a cheering audience in Nashua. “I’ve won there, and I’ve lost there. It’s a lot better to win.”

But many pollsters said they don’t expect such a close race on primary night in New Hampshire next week. Instead, they expect Sanders to win outright.

The website FiveThirtyEight, which has successfully predicted political races, has Sanders with a 96 percent chance of winning the first-in-the-nation primary. If you take endorsements into account, his chances drop slightly to 89 percent.

“Bernie Sanders is definitely dominating in New Hampshire,” said Joe Bafumi, associate professor of government at Dartmouth College. “He’s got a very strong chance to win.”

Weighing a win

Sanders has been consistently trending upward in the Granite State for months, while Clinton’s poll numbers have taken the opposite trajectory. Both campaigns got a jolt when a Jan. 19 WMUR/CNN poll conducted by the University of New Hampshire Survey Center widened the Vermont senator’s lead to 60 percent compared with Clinton’s 33 percent.

But Sanders’s momentum may not be all that important after all.

Something that’s not talked about much is how Clinton will likely take more delegates out of New Hampshire even if Sanders wins because of her dominance among superdelegates.

New Hampshire has a total of 32 delegates on the Democratic side: 24 are up for grabs on primary night, while eight are unpledged superdelegates. Six out of eight of New Hampshire superdelegates have already given their support to Clinton, according to the Associated Press. And nationally, 97 percent of superdelegates polled by the AP in November said they support Clinton.

That means Clinton already has 15 percent of the delegates she needs for the nomination before the first voters go to the primary polls.

“The Democratic Party elite, which includes those superdelegates, they don’t want Sanders,” UNH political science professor Dante Scala said. “They’re not going to give Sanders the benefit of the doubt. They’re not looking for ways to take that hat away from Clinton.”

But Clinton isn’t a shoo-in for the nomination just yet, Scala cautioned.

“Superdelegate pledges are just that – they’re not a binding contract,” he said. “They could change their mind. People thought eight years ago Clinton would have an advantage over Obama with these superdelegates, and it wasn’t.”

A full week still separates Sanders and Clinton from primary night, including a voter forum and one final debate. The two campaigns have built solid infrastructure in the Granite State, and have spent the past several months amassing thousands of volunteers and canvassing far and wide around New Hampshire.

Bafumi said he’s watching to see whether Clinton will now push the argument more heavily that she is more electable than Sanders. Like Scala, he said even if Clinton does lose the primary, it may not damage her much if she wins Nevada, South Carolina and Super Tuesday.

“A win here by Bernie won’t be a surprise,” he said.

Solid support

While Clinton herself was jubilant in Nashua, her fans are perhaps more wary of the close call in Iowa.

“It sure was a hell of a lot closer than any of her supporters wanted, but that’s how it goes in politics,” Jonathan Loeb, 58, said.

But the New Boston resident declared himself a staunch Clinton supporter; his wife has also already cast an absentee ballot for the former secretary of state.

“It seems to me that she’s a very pragmatic person,” he said, citing Clinton’s experience as a senator from New York. “The next president’s biggest challenge is going to be working and getting anything through Congress.”

In Keene, the long line of boisterous Sanders supporters wearing shirts and carrying campaign signs spread around the block by the Colonial Theater.

Working the sandwich grill at downtown cafe Fritz a block away, Hinsdale resident Elizabeth Fecto couldn’t take a break to go see the Vermont senator, but she said she’s still an adamant supporter.

“He sticks to his guns,” said the 22-year-old Fecto, who said growing up so close to the Vermont border, she’s grown to admire Sanders unwavering support for the lower and middle classes. She said she sees a lot of similar support in Keene and the surrounding area of western New Hampshire.

“There’s support for a lot of candidates but I think there’s a lot of support for Bernie because we are a liberal area,” Fecto said, while a fellow Fritz worker laughed, “that’s for sure.”

Fecto said she would support Clinton if it came down to that in a general election, but added she thinks Clinton has changed positions over the years.

“I’m not a fan of her old agenda,” she said. “She bounced back and forth between a couple things.”

Still deciding

Four out of 10 New Hampshire voters are still undecided, according to the most recent UNH Survey Center poll. Among them were Diane Dyron and Cathy Somma.

Both retired teachers from Pelham, the two women supported Hillary Clinton in the 2008 presidential primary. They came to Nashua Community College on Tuesday to see her again, but Dryon said she was feeling “a little guilty.”

“I hate to say this, but I think I’m voting for Bernie,” Dryon, 65, said.

With one week to go until voting in New Hampshire, the two women said they were both still wrestling their choices.

“Do you vote your conscience, or do you vote what you think is politically helpful to get a woman president?” Somma, 65, said.

She hadn’t answered her own question yet. Her friend, however, was closer to a decision.

“I don’t believe he’s pie in the sky,” Dryon said of the Vermont senator. “I believe it’s doable. . . . The things I hear Bernie saying have been in my heart since I graduated college in 1972.”

Also undecided is Kristi St. Laurent, who serves as the chairwoman of the Windham Town Democratic Committee.

She had hoped to be a delegate for former Maryland governor Martin O’Malley at the party’s national convention later this year in Philadelphia. But O’Malley suspended his campaign Monday evening, when he failed to earn even a single percentage point in Iowa.

“Martin O’Malley just couldn’t get a mention,” St. Laurent said. “If there were more debates, he could have gotten his name out there. When people heard his message, they really liked what he had to say. It was just not being able to be heard.”

St. Laurent said she is hoping to attend the scheduled Democratic debate on Thursday night to hear from the two candidates left.

“I guess I’ve got to decide now,” she said.

(The Associated Press contributed to this report. Ella Nilsen can be reached at 369-3322, enilsen@cmonitor.com or on Twitter @ella_nilsen. Megan Doyle can be reached at 369-3321, mdoyle@cmonitor.com or on Twitter @megan_e_doyle.)