Dallas Cowboys: 'I'll never forget this, never as long as I live;' How Witten spearheaded the idea to honor families of fallen officers
This story is about Published Jul. 2016

'I'll never forget this, never as long as I live;' How Witten spearheaded the idea to honor families of fallen officers Share This Story On... Twitter

Facebook

Email



Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas police Chief David Brown (center) walked arm-in-arm with (from left) Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones, strong safety Barry Church (42), cornerback Orlando Scandrick (32), tight end Jason Witten (82) Magnus Ahrens, 8, (son of slain Dallas officer Lorne Ahrens), his aunt Erika Swyryn, and tight end James Hanna (84) before opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) -- MANDATORY CREDIT, NO SALES, MAGS OUT, TV OUT, INTERNET USE BY AP MEMBERS ONLY Tom Fox/Staff Photographer With her son Cameron in her arms, Emily Crawford (center), wife of slain DART officer Brent Thompson, walks arm-in-arm with Dallas Cowboys wide receivers Dez Bryant (88) and Cole Beasley (11) as the team walked onto the field for the opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. Dallas Sgt Tom Sible is pictured on the right and Robert Sam Thompson, Brent's father is pictured second from left, with Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Lucky Whitehead (13). Dallas police Chief David Brown joined Mayor Mike Rawlings in other groups of players as they walked arm-in-arm with Dallas Cowboys players. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) -- MANDATORY CREDIT, NO SALES, MAGS OUT, TV OUT, INTERNET USE BY AP MEMBERS ONLY Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas police Chief David Brown (right) was joined by Mayor Mike Rawlings (second from right) as they addressed the team before the opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. The two joined by family members of the slain police officers walked arm-in-arm with the Cowboys players onto the field. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) -- MANDATORY CREDIT, NO SALES, MAGS OUT, TV OUT, INTERNET USE BY AP MEMBERS ONLY Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings (second from left) walked arm-in-arm with Dallas Cowboys head coach Jason Garrett (left) along with his players onto the field for the opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. Walking(from left) Garrett, Rawlings, Valerie Michelle Zamarripa, mother of slain Dallas offcier Patricio Zamarripa, quarterback Tony Romo (9), Laura Ann Sipolo, Patricio's sister and her husband Jessie Albert Reyes. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings (center) walked arm-in-arm with Dallas Cowboys head coach Jason Garrett (to his right) along with players onto the field for the opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. Walking (from left) is Executive Vice President Stephen Jones, an unknown Dallas police officer, Dallas Cowboys running back Darren McFadden (20), Garrett, Rawlings, Valerie Michelle Zamarripa (mother of slain Dallas officer Patrick Zamarripa), quarterback Tony Romo (9), Laura Ann Sipolo (Zamarripa's sister) and her husband Jessie Albert Reyes. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) -- MANDATORY CREDIT, NO SALES, MAGS OUT, TV OUT, INTERNET USE BY AP MEMBERS ONLY Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo (9) joined the family of slain officer Patrick Zamarripa, Dallas police Chief David Brown and Mayor Mike Rawlings who walked arm-in-arm onto the field for the opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) Tom Fox/Staff Photographer The Dallas Cowboys players are wearing a special Arm-in-Arm decal on their helmets during training camp. The decal represents the moment when Dallas police Chief David Brown joined Mayor Mike Rawlings along with the players and salon officers family members walked arm-in-arm onto the field for the opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo (9, left) listens with owner Jerry Jones (right) to Dallas police Chief David Brown (not pictured) after the families of slain Dallas officers all walked arm-in-arm with Dallas Cowboys players before opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas police Chief David Brown (second from left) walked arm-in-arm with Dallas Cowboys cornerback Orlando Scandrick (32), tight end Jason Witten (82) and Magnus Ahrens (son of slain Dallas Police Sr. Cpl. Lorne Ahrens) before opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas Cowboys Executive Vice President and Chief Brand Officer Charlotte Jones Anderson (right) walks arm-in-arm with (from right), Dallas Cowboys tackle Doug Free (68), Amie Schoenbaechler, sister of slain Dallas police officer Michael Krol, center Travis Frederick (72), Hudson Schoenbaechler, Krol's nephew, guard Zack Martin (70), Brian Schoenbaechler, Krol's brother-in-law, Troy Schoenbaechler, Krol's nephew and tackle Tyron Smith (77). In, another group Dallas police Chief David Brown joined Mayor Mike Rawlings who walked arm-in-arm with Dallas Cowboys players onto the field for the opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) Tom Fox/Staff Photographer The Dallas Cowboys players are wearing a special Arm-in-Arm decal on their helmets during training camp. The decal represents the moment when Dallas police Chief David Brown joined Mayor Mike Rawlings along with the players and salon officers family members walked arm-in-arm onto the field for the opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas police Chief David Brown (right) was joined by Mayor Mike Rawlings (left) as they addressed the team before the opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. The two joined by family members of the slain police officers walked arm-in-arm with the Cowboys players onto the field. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) Tom Fox/Staff Photographer Dallas police Chief David Brown (second from right) walked arm-in-arm onto the field with (from left) Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones, strong safety Barry Church (42), cornerback Orlando Scandrick (32) and tight end Jason Witten (82) before opening day of training camp in Oxnard, California, Saturday, July 30, 2016. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) -- MANDATORY CREDIT, NO SALES, MAGS OUT, TV OUT, INTERNET USE BY AP MEMBERS ONLY

By David Moore , Staff Writer Contact David Moore on Twitter: @DavidMooreDMN

OXNARD, Calif. -- They walked onto the practice field in silence, arms locked in a sign of unity and support. There was Valerie Zamarripa, a mother who lost her son to a senseless ambush earlier this month, accompanied by quarterback Tony Romo and Mayor Mike Rawlings. Police chief David Brown found himself between tight end Jason Witten and cornerback Orlando Scandrick.

Watch: Cowboys joined at training camp by Dallas police chief, mayor, families of officers who lost their lives

A summer of unrest has ignited a conversation about the racial divide in our country, about what has broken down in our communities that leads to this violence. It's an important and complex discussion. Saturday afternoon was about something more basic. It was about the Cowboys, before their first full practice of this training camp, showing compassion for the family members of the five officers who were slain in downtown Dallas earlier this month. "We're just going to stay arm-in-arm the best we can,'' safety Barry Church said. "Out here we're just playing a game. What they have to deal with is real life. "If we can just lift spirits by what we're doing out here and just stay arm-in-arm and support their cause, I'm with that.'' Rawlings thanked the Cowboys for being the latest group to help lift the city up after the tragic events of July 7. "Those families, those young kids, to be arm-in-arm with a quarterback, a coach or a big lineman, they'll remember that for the rest of their lives,'' Rawlings said of the 13 family members who made the trip to Southern California. "You know, there are mythic moments in history, in the histories of cities. We went through a terrible one a few weeks ago. This hopefully is a mythic moment to take us to the next level.

"As I reminded the team today, they'll always be the Cowboys. But this year, play for Dallas like they've never played before." Witten spearheaded what took place. It began when he approached Charlotte Jones Anderson in the aftermath of the tragedy. "We need to do something,'' Witten told the Cowboys executive vice president. "What are we doing? What should we do?'' "I don't know,'' Anderson responded. "What do you think?''

Photos: Cowboys walk on training camp field linking arms with DPD chief, Dallas mayor, families of slain officers

The conversation went from there. Witten was passionate that the club needed to do something for the families. "A lot of people are doing great things and making donations, which is fabulous,'' Anderson said. "We felt like we could give them something that maybe would mean a little more.'' The idea to come out arm-in-arm belonged to Witten. So did the idea to wear a patch on their helmets in this camp that reads Arm in Arm. The Cowboys have asked the NFL if they can wear that patch on their helmets this season. Discussions are ongoing. Witten got emotional as he spoke about the day and the privilege it is to be a part of the Cowboys. "I think that's really a gateway to special, unique experiences and opportunities for all of us as players,'' Witten said. "I think more than anything else, it leads to a responsibility, a responsibility of generations that have come before us and kids that look up to us as role models. And really, a responsibility to our community. "That's what everybody as players in the organization felt, to represent our community, to give back to it. But more than anything, the special thing about our game is that it can bring our community together. It can lift you up when you're down. "The organization just wanted to honor them, show tribute to the families and show support. It's all about uniting together as a community. It's great to do that on Day One of training camp.''

Sean Lee expects to stay at weakside linebacker, says knee is 100 percent: 'It felt great today'

Brown, as he has since the tragedy, spoke about the need for athletes and others to have a voice in the conversation about race, to talk about the tension that too often exists between police departments and minority communities. Brown spoke of how he grew up in a neighborhood where crack cocaine was sold. Determined to become part of the solution, he dropped out of college at the age of 21 to become a police officer. On a practice field in Oxnard 33 years later, as Cowboys players and coaches dropped down to one knee and formed a circle around the Dallas police chief, he delivered that message. "I talked about there being two things you can do,'' Brown said. "You can be part of the problem by being silent or being complicit, or you can be part of the solution by having a voice, by lending your role as a professional athlete to this cause. "I think that people need to hear, from all parts of society, a discussion on race. It's the toughest discussion that we all have, but it's part of the root cause of some of the problems that we see in some of our communities.'' Brown called Saturday afternoon's experience overwhelming. He called the Cowboys' support for law enforcement priceless. "I've got chill bumps,'' Brown said. "I'm a Dallas Cowboys fan. I'm a three-generation Dallasite, so it means a lot. "This is special, and we'll never forget the Cowboys organization for stepping up in our time of grief." Tears ran down Valerie Zamarripa's face as she walked onto the field. Her son, Patrick, was a big fan of the Cowboys and Rangers. How could he not be? "When he was a baby, I dressed him up in Cowboys gear so from the get-go, he was a total Cowboys fan,'' said Zamarripa, who wore a large circle pin with a picture of her son on a shirt that had Witten's name and number on the back.

Jerry Jones presents city of Oxnard with Cowboys jersey: 'Let's wear this to the Super Bowl'

This Topic is Missing Your Voice.