STOP OBAMA'S TOP SECRET TRANS-PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP - Pray For US
Obama Is Not A King! Fax The Senate To Stop Him !

A portion of Obama's top secret Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) "trade" agreement has been leaked online. This secret trade deal, which Obama is negotiating without ANY input from the constitutionally authorized Senate, will allow foreign governments and United Nations one-worlder courts to persecute Obama's political enemies. Worst of all - Obama and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-NV) want to fast-track this deal through the Senate, which means that the Democrats can ram it down our throats with a simple 51-vote majority. Charles Benninghoff, Founder This awful "trade deal" will give away your constitutionally protected rights as an American citizen! Please send FaxGrams to the Senate Foreign Relations Commitee or to every Republican Senator today! Tell them to filibuster Obama's Trans Pacific Partnership! If they fast track the TPP, it will throw more than 200 years of constitutional law out the window. Only the Senate has the authority to negotiate trade deals, NOT Obama on his own and in secret! Under the TPP rules, only three people from each negotiating country are even allowed to SEE what's in this treaty. The chapter of the TPP that was leaked online covers sweeping new powers that cover trademarks, copyrights, patents, pharmaceuticals, paid television and more. This treaty will throw out every law that we have on the books in America and replace them with new "laws" from the TPP which are designed to punish American entrepreneurs and workers. And we've only seen one chapter so far! Click HERE to read the leaked chapter of the TPP. Obama will use this treaty to target his political enemies, just as he recently used the IRS to go after conservatives. The Senate must not relinquish its authority to negotiate trade deals to Obama! Tell them to filibuster this evil one-worlder treaty! If Obama and Harry Reid fast-track the TPP, your constitutional and biblical right to a fair trial will be immediately dissolved. According to WND, a world court will be able to prosecute Americans using "secret evidence" in a secret trial against them in another country! Forget about your constitutional and biblical right to a fair trial, where you get to know who your accusers are and what the evidence is against you (see Deuteronomy 17:6). If the Senate grants fast-track authority to Obama in this trade deal, they will be ceding their authority to him and establishing Obama as a king over all of us, just as the Israelites did when they refused to obey God in 1 Samuel 12. Fax the Senate today and demand that they filibuster Obama's TPP! Don't grant this man the powers of a third world dictator! And please share this campaign with others, using these links: Your contribution is needed to help fund our ministry efforts in defense of America! Please consider a donation to Pray For US today in addition to the cost of sending your faxes. Sincerely,