Salaries
The House adjourned. The next meeting is scheduled for 10:00 a.m. on February 27, 2019.

On motion to adjourn Agreed to by voice vote.

Mr. Schweikert moved that the House do now adjourn.

SPECIAL ORDER SPEECHES - The House has concluded all anticipated legislative business and has proceeded to Special Order speeches.

Migratory Bird Conservation Commission - Pursuant to section 2 of the Migratory Bird Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. 715a), and the order of the House of January 3, 2019, the Speaker appointed the following member of the House to the Migratory Bird Conservation Commission: Mr. Thompson of California.

Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission - Pursuant to section 104(b) of House Resolution 6, 116th Congress, and the order of the House of January 3, 2019, the Speaker appointed the following member of the House to the Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission: Mr. McGovern.

Congressional-Executive Commission on the People's Republic of China - Pursuant to 22 U.S.C. 6913, and the order of the House of January 3, 2019, the Speaker appointed the following member of the House to the Congressional-Executive Commission on the People's Republic of China: Mr. McGovern.

ONE MINUTE SPEECHES - The House proceeded with further one minute speeches.

Motion to reconsider laid on the table Agreed to without objection.

On agreeing to the resolution Agreed to without objection.

Directing the Secretary of the Senate to make a correction in the enrollment of the bill S. 47." Considered by unanimous consent. H. Con. Res. 21 — "."

Mr. Grijalva asked unanimous consent to consider as introduced.

Motion to reconsider laid on the table Agreed to without objection.

On motion to suspend the rules and pass the bill Agreed to by the Yeas and Nays: (2/3 required): 363 - 62 (Roll no. 95)

To provide for the management of the natural resources of the United States, and for other purposes." Considered as unfinished business. S. 47 — "."

Motion to reconsider laid on the table Agreed to without objection.

On passage Passed by the Yeas and Nays: 245 - 182 (Roll no. 94)

Relating to a national emergency declared by the President on February 15, 2019." Considered as unfinished business. H.J. Res. 46 — "."

UNFINISHED BUSINESS - The Chair announced that the unfinished business was on passage of H.J. Res. 46, and on the motion to suspend the rules and pass S. 47, which were debated earlier and on which further proceedings had been postponed.

At the conclusion of debate, the Yeas and Nays were demanded and ordered. Pursuant to the provisions of clause 8, rule XX, the Chair announced that further proceedings on the motion would be postponed.

DEBATE - Pursuant to the order of the House of today, the House proceeded with fifty minutes of debate on S. 47

Considered under suspension of the rules.

ORDER OF BUSINESS - Mr. Grijalva asked unanimous consent that debate under 1(c) of Rule XV on a motion to suspend the rules relating to S. 47 be extended to 50 minutes. Agreed to without objection.

To provide for the management of the natural resources of the United States, and for other purposes." Mr. Grijalva moved to suspend the rules and pass the bill. S. 47 — "."

The Speaker announced that votes on suspensions, if ordered, will be postponed until a time to be announced.

POSTPONED PROCEEDINGS - At the conclusion of debate on H.J. Res. 46 , the Chair put the question on passage of the joint resolution, and announced by voice vote, that the ayes had prevailed. Mr. Graves (MO) demanded the yeas and nays, and the Chair postponed further proceedings until later in the legislative day.