Call for Action: Keep the Housing Recovery on Track Congress will soon return to Washington with unfinished business to complete. One of those items is a housing issue that could affect almost one-quarter of all real estate transactions - the expiration of Mortgage Forgiveness Tax Relief. Without action before the end of the year, millions of families who hold distressed properties could face a hefty tax bill for trying to modify their mortgage or to seek a short sale through their lender. Even those facing foreclosure will find themselves forced to pay a “foreclosure tax” if Congress doesn’t act.



This is because the amount of debt forgiven by the lender would be considered “phantom income” to the borrower even though they never receive any payment from the lender. No taxpayer should be forced to pay tax on money they’ve already lost with cash they never received.



Please Take Action and tell Congress to extend Mortgage Forgiveness Tax Relief. We need no new obstacles that might throw the housing recovery off track.



Tell Me More * Subject: Dear [Decision Maker], As a REALTOR®, I know first-hand the effects the struggling housing market has had on our nation's families and communities. While some housing markets are moving in the right direction, others will take years to fully recover from the loss in value caused by the Great Recession.



It's important that Congress not add any roadblocks to a full and robust recovery. That's why I'm asking you to support an immediate extension of "The Mortgage Forgiveness Debt Relief Act."





* Personalize your message Without action before the end of the year, millions of families who hold "distressed properties" could face a tax penalty if they try to modify their mortgage or seek a short sale through their lender. Even those in the worst situation facing foreclosure would find themselves forced to pay a "foreclosure tax" if Congress doesn't act. This is because the amount of debt forgiven by the lender would be considered "phantom income" to the borrower even though they never receive any payment from the lender. No taxpayer should be forced to pay tax on money they've already lost with cash they never received. Today's distressed sales and restructurings come not as a result of bad loans or over-leveraged families but from a struggling economy and falling home prices. We should be doing everything we can to expedite responsible loan modifications and short sales to allow the housing market and our economy to fully recover.



Legislation has been introduced in both the House and Senate. I urge you to ask your party leaders to work together to move a tax extenders package to the floor, before the end of the year, that includes this important provision.



Sincerely,

[Your Name]

[Your Address]

[City, State ZIP] TAKE ACTION NOW Send this message to: Your Senators

Your Representative * Required fields * Your Email: * Title: Mr. Ms. Mrs. Miss Dr. * First Name: * Last Name: * Address 1: Address 2: * City: * State / Province: Choose a State AK AL AR AZ CA CO CT DC DE FL GA HI IA ID IL IN KS KY LA MA MD ME MI MN MO MS MT NC ND NE NH NJ NM NV NY OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VA VT WA WI WV WY AS FM GU MH MP PR PW VI * ZIP / Postal Code: Phone Number: Please uncheck this box if you do not wish to receive future emails from the Realtor Action Center. Remember me. Privacy Policy