Tom Price: The U.S. House needs ‘red state’ leadership
Hours before New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie tore into House Speaker John Boehner for pulling the plug on Hurricane Sandy aid, a Georgia congressman was getting his licks in from the GOP right.

U.S. Rep. Tom Price was on WMAL in Washington this morning, a conservative talk-radio station aimed at the D.C. elite, to discuss Tuesday’s House vote on the fiscal cliff.

Price voted against the measure and his speaker – as did every GOP member of the House from Georgia. But Price, who becomes vice-chairman of the House Budget Committee in the next Congress, is undoubtedly the most ambitious member of the Georgia delegation. And Boehner is up for re-election tomorrow.

Listen to Price’s interview in full here:

A truncated transcript follows:

Price: “At the end of the day these kinds of bills are never all good or all bad. My assessment was that it ultimately raised taxes and didn’t decrease any spending. In fact it increased spending.”

WMAL: “You voted against your speaker of the House.”

Price: “The vote is really fascinating. If you look at the votes that were ‘yes’ on the Republican side – there were 85 of them. Seventy of them come from blue states. I really think, and I’ve been talking about this for a couple months now. I think this is a red state-blue state issue.

“When we were talking about previous ‘solutions,’ it really broke down in our conference between Republicans who are from red states and those who are from blue states. It’s a different conversation that we need to have within our own conference as we move forward with the kind of positive solutions that I think are out there.”

WMAL: “Is there a leadership crisis within the Republican caucus?”

Price: “I don’t think so….

“At some point, you have to draw a line in the sand, and we have been unwilling as a conference to do that. I think that’s where we will come out of this debate and out of this process, recognizing that the president has not been an honest broker and has not been willing to put any spending reductions on the table….”

WMAL: “You’re saying this is a red-state, blue-state issue. We’ve got leadership from blue states. You’re from a red state. You’re saying, yes, we do need to draw a line in the sand….There needs to be a change here in the party, doesn’t there?”

Price: “I think you will see a significant change in perspective and a significant change in strategy, and it will come from the maturation of the now-sophomore class, of the 87 new folks who came last year, and the 37 new folks who are coming to the Republican conference right now….”

WMAL: “We’ve heard there are 20 or more Republicans who are willing to block the speaker’s election tomorrow. Have you heard anything about that?”

Price: “I don’t know anything about that.”

WMAL: “If something happens, would you be willing to step forward? A lot of people have mentioned your name.”

Price: “This palace intrigue is wonderful for these discussions, but the fact of the matter is, what we need to do is to get down to business and get spending under control in this country…”

WMAL: “You didn’t answer the question….”

Price: “I think we need red-state representation in both our leadership as well as the organizing committees that we have.”