For Donors to "We The People Will Fund The Wall"
Update: April 2019

The opt-in period for this campaign has ended. If you opted in before April 14, 2019, your donation will be sent to We Build the Wall Inc. If you asked for a refund prior to that point, it should have been issued already.

If you did not opt-in or ask for a refund, your refund will be issued between April 15-25.

Refunds arrive back to the original card 3-7 business days after they are issued. If you do not see your funds return on that timeline, please consult this article.

Donations remain open on the campaign, and future donations do not need an opt-in submission to go to We Build the Wall, Inc: https://www.gofundme.com/TheTrumpWall

For future updates on We Build the Wall’s activity, please visit the campaign or their website.

Original Article: January 2019

As explained in the January 11 update on the campaign, you have until April 10, 2019 to let GoFundMe know if you’d like your donation to be sent to the new 501(c)(4) organization: We Build The Wall, Inc. If we don't hear from you by April 10, we will refund your donation.

When the campaign was created, the campaign organizer specifically stated on the campaign page, “If we don’t reach our goal or come significantly close we will refund every single penny.” and "100% of your donations will go to the Trump Wall. If for ANY reason we don't reach our goal we will refund your donation.” Now that the specific plan for the use of funds raised on the campaign has changed from what was originally stated, donors need to choose how they want their money handled.

If you donated before January 11, 2019, and do not let GoFundMe know that you want your donation to be sent to We Build The Wall Inc, you will be automatically refunded on April 11, 2019.

You should have received an email with the subject line, “Important message from GoFundMe about your donation to We The People Will Fund The Wall” at the email address you used to donate. If you do not see the email in your inbox, please be sure to check your spam or junk folders. You will be able to take action on your donation through this email.