BREAKING NEWS: Miss United Continents 2017 arrested at JFK airport with 5kg of cocaine – States News
Miss United Continents 2017 zoiey smale , has been arrested at JFK airport for trying to smuggle 5 kilograms of cocaine in two bags of coffee inside two suitcases, authorities said it on Wednesday.

Customs and Border protection police officers searched her suitcases upon suspicion and found a plastic coffee bad containing white powder, officials said.

zoiey, who arrived with an early morning fight was taken to a private search room, where the officers found a second bag full of powder. Both tested positive of cocaine.

The estimate value of the cocaine is more than 500, 000 pounds, officials said it.

zoiey was arrested and handed off to port Authority police. She will be prosecuted by the London attorney on drug smuggling charges.

Zoiey Smale, 28, from Nottinghamshire, won Miss United Continents in June this year and was gearing up for the excitement of competing for an international title in the final round of the competition in Ecuador.

Just weeks after winning the UK round of the competition, the organisers of Miss United Continents told Zoiey she needed to ‘lose as much weight as possible’ to stand a chance of winning the competition.

After turning her back on the pageant world, Zoiey said she wants to raise awareness of ‘rogue’ beauty contests, in which she claims curvier women are kept hidden in the background and encouraged to wear sarongs in swimwear rounds, while slimmer women are paraded around like ‘escorts’.

Zoeiy was meant to travel to Guayaquil, Ecuador this September to compete for the title of Miss United Continents, but just weeks after being crowned the UK winner her dream collapsed.

In July, the national director who was supporting her through the final stages of the competition informed her that the Ecuadorian directors wanted her to lose weight.

This seizure is another example of US Border Agency being ever viglant in protecting the United State from the distribution of illicit drugs,” said Robert E. Perez Director of US Border Agency New York city field Operations.