Local Income Taxes: City- and County-Level Income and Wage Taxes Continue to Wane
Download Tax Foundation Fiscal Fact No. 280: Local Income Taxes: City- and County-Level Income and Wage Taxes Continue to Wane

Introduction

Most U.S. cities and counties do not impose a local income tax, but they are imposed by 4,943 jurisdictions in 17 states, encompassing over 23 million Americans. Varying from minute amounts in several states to an average 1.55 percent in Maryland (see Table 1), these taxes provide a long-standing and significant source of revenue to many cities in “Rust Belt” states in the northeastern United States.

All counties in Indiana and Maryland impose a local income tax (see Table 2). In Ohio, 593 municipalities and 181 school districts have such a tax. 2,469 municipalities and 469 school districts in Pennsylvania impose local income or wage taxes. Many cities and school districts in Iowa and Michigan also have these taxes.

Table 1: Local Income Tax Collections as a Percent of State Personal Income, 2008 State Average Local Income Taxes as a Percent of Total Income Source: Tax Foundation calculations based on tax collections data from the U.S. Census Bureau and income data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Table and report do not include the District of Columbia, which has a top individual income tax rate of 8.5 percent. (a) Collections from limited local income taxes in California, Colorado, Kansas, New Jersey, Oregon, and West Virginia are either not reported to the U.S. Census Bureau as local income taxes and/or amount to less than 0.01% of state personal income. San Francisco, California imposes a payroll tax of 1.5% on approximately 6,000 businesses with payrolls of larger than $250,000; the tax collected $342 million in 2010. In Colorado, Denver and two other municipalities impose charges of $2 to $4 per month per employee, again a modest amount compared with overall Colorado income. Kansas local income taxes are limited to interest, dividend, and securities transaction income. New Jersey has only one local income tax in Newark. Three municipalities in West Virginia impose service taxes of $2 to $3 per week per employee. Alabama 0.070% California (a) Colorado (a) Delaware 0.160% Indiana 0.245% Iowa 0.073% Kansas (a) Kentucky 0.759% Maryland 1.547% Michigan 0.130% Missouri 0.161% New Jersey (a) New York 1.005% Ohio 1.006% Oregon (a) Pennsylvania 0.772% West Virginia (a)

Local income taxes arose during the Great Depression: declining property tax revenues caused by rising foreclosures forced local governments to look for other ways to raise revenue. The first local income taxes emerged in Philadelphia in 1939 as the city sought to avoid bankruptcy. They spread gradually to select cities in Ohio (1946), Kentucky (1947), Missouri (1948), and Michigan (1962). New York City and Baltimore adopted municipal income taxes in 1966.

Rationale for Local Income Taxes

Income and wage taxes are generally applied to those who live or work in a jurisdiction. They can complement or replace other local revenue sources like property, business, sales, or tourist taxes. Unlike property taxes, local income taxes can also be applied to nonresidents. If abused, however, local income taxes could enable a jurisdiction to export its tax burden to nonresidents who are not the primary beneficiary of city- and county-provided services such as schooling, policing, parks, and social services.

However, in most cases, cities understand this need to avoid taxation in excess of benefits provided, and impose a lower rate on nonresidents than residents. In Maryland, for example, county and city income taxes range from 1.25 percent to 3.20 percent, but nonresidents pay a uniform rate statewide set at the lowest county rate (1.25 percent). Cities in Michigan and Pennsylvania generally impose income and wage taxes on nonresidents at a lower rate than residents, although Ohio communities generally impose the same rates on both groups.

Types of Local Income Taxes

Local income taxes appear under a variety of designations: wage taxes, income taxes, payroll taxes, local services taxes, and occupational privilege taxes. They are generally paid by the employee but withheld by the employer, although in some cases (such as in San Francisco, California and Portland, Oregon), they are paid directly by the employer. Some are imposed as a percentage of salaries or wages, while others are stated as a percentage of federal or state tax, and still others are flat amounts charged to all workers. Two West Virginia cities, for example, impose a flat charge of $2 or $3 per week on all those employed in the city. Appanoose County, Iowa-alone among Iowa counties-imposes a 1 percent emergency services surtax. Residents of Yonkers, New York pay 15 percent of their state tax as a “piggyback” local tax.

Like federal and state income taxes, some local wage taxes have provisions for exemption, such as excluding military income or low-income individuals.

In Maryland and New York City, residents pay their local income tax when they file their state income tax. However, there are examples of extreme compliance burdens associated with local income taxes collected by local authorities. As one example, taxpayers in Albion, Michigan, must fill out a city income tax form of 16 pages, with instructions, separate from state and federal income tax forms.

Recent Changes in Local Income Taxes

Over the past few decades, the number of local income taxes has declined, and although there are exceptions, the rates at which these taxes are imposed have dropped as well. For example, Philadelphia’s wage tax in 1995 was 4.96 percent for residents and 4.31 percent for nonresidents. It has gradually dropped to the current 3.928 percent for residents and 3.498 for nonresidents, and further cuts are expected in the medium to long term. In New York, the State Senate voted in June 2011 to exempt small businesses the city-wide 0.34 percent Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) payroll tax and phase it out completely by 2014.

On the other hand, New York City is postponing a scheduled reduction in its city income tax, preserving the current level for an additional three years. Portland, Oregon’s Tri-Met and Lane County districts have both increased rates to 0.6918 percent for residents and 0.67 percent for nonresidents. Residents in Reading, Pennsylvania saw their wage tax go from 2.7 percent to 3.6 percent over the past three years; the nonresident tax rose from 1.0 percent to 1.3 percent.

Conclusion

While most local income tax rates are low (1 percent to 3 percent), they generally have broad bases and are difficult to avoid. State and local officials need to ensure that these taxes do not discourage economic development or drive out mobile workers and businesses. Officials must also be careful not to impose excessive compliance costs associated with these taxes.

Table 2: Number of Local Income Tax Jurisdictions by State, 2011 State Number of Local Income Tax Jurisdictions Source: Tax Foundation calculations. Alabama 4 Alaska none Arizona none Arkansas none California 1 Colorado 3 Connecticut none Delaware 1 Florida none Georgia none Hawaii none Idaho none Illinois none Indiana 91 Iowa 297 Kansas 535 Kentucky 218 Louisiana none Maine none Maryland 24 Massachusetts none Michigan 22 Minnesota none Mississippi none Missouri 2 Montana none Nebraska none Nevada none New Hampshire none New Jersey 1 New Mexico none New York 4 North Carolina none North Dakota none Ohio 774 Oklahoma none Oregon 2 Pennsylvania 2,961 Rhode Island none South Carolina none South Dakota none Tennessee none Texas none Utah none Vermont none Virginia none Washington none West Virginia 3 Wisconsin none Wyoming none Total 4,943