Crist: I’d have voted for stimulus bill – Central Florida Political Pulse – Orlando Sentinel
Ludmilla Lelis of our Volusia County bureau just filed this report:

Gov. Charlie Crist, now a U.S. Senate candidate, said Tuesday he would have made the “pragmatic” decision to vote for the $787 billion federal stimulus bill, differentiating himself from fellow-Republican opponent Marco Rubio and the man he is trying to replace — Mel Martinez.

Speaking to a politically mixed crowd in Daytona Beach, Crist emphasized his support for the bill as practical and pragmatic, though it would have meant crossing party lines. Only three Republican senators backed the stimulus bill, and Martinez wasn’t one of them.

Now Florida stands to get about $15 billion over the next two years through different stimulus grants.

“A lot of that $15 billion dollars you sent to Washington, D.C., and my view is we ought to get it back," Crist told his audience. "Florida deserves her fair share.”

Crist spoke Tuesday at a luncheon by the nonpartisan Tiger Bay Club of Volusia County and the Daytona Beach-Halifax Area Chamber of Commerce at the Ocean Center. It was one of several stops at the eastern end of the Interstate-4 corridor, always important political territory in any statewide election.

His main speech focused on the just-ended legislative session, and though he took some questions from the crowd, he avoided direct answers about pending bills still unsigned on his desk. But for the first time since he announced for Senate a week ago, Crist did talk about federal issues.

He was asked his position on immigration by Claire Venables, a British native whose family runs several local businesses, including a Daytona Beach recruitment firm. Her husband, Mark, has been stuck in the U.K. because he can’t get his work visa renewed, though the family has been in business in the U.S. since 2002.

“It’s terribly important to secure our borders and stop illegal immigration for the very reason we can continue to have legal immigration,” Crist said. “There are people that will go to sleep tonight 90 miles south of Key West who dream of coming to Florida in the United States.

“If you come here the right way, if you’re willing to work when you get here, live by the rules, do better for your family, that has always helped our country get stronger.”

He told Venables that he wants to look at the immigration policy to make sure her family gets treated fairly.

Crist's basic message was: I’m the practical one. I’m the pragmatic one.

Crist repeated those qualities at least three times, in explaining why he backed the stimulus bill and why he would be a good person to send to Washington.

“It’s important to have something in Washington who works well with others,” he said,.