Beto O’Rourke Campaign Told Texas VFW to Remove Their American Flag
Beto O’Rourke, the Irish-American with a Latino nickname, is hoping to unseat actual Latino Ted Cruz as senator. His campaign’s latest stunt, however, won’t go over well with most Texans that will be casting votes in his race.

Navasota, Texas is a small town northwest of Houston, and it’s the kind of place that O’Rourke has been visiting in his quest to scrounge up votes for his underdog Senate bid.

According to a report by The Navasota Examiner, the O’Rourke campaign rented out the Navasota Veterans of Foreign Wars (Post #4006) hall for a rally on August 25, and made an unusual request of the post commander. They asked him to take down the American flag and Texas flags that were hanging just behind the stage.

take our poll - story continues below

Who are the happiest people? Who are the happiest people?

Who are the happiest people? * Republicans Democrats Christians

Email *

Name This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Completing this poll grants you access to Top Stories USA updates free of charge. You may opt out at anytime. You also agree to this site's Privacy Policy and Terms of Use.

Trending: Ilhan Omar Blames Israel for Pregnant Woman’s Death – Then the Truth Came Out

The commander refused with the words “hell no,” and the rally was held with the flags in place.

The writer of the article mentions that “with so many people in attendance, there were people from all ideological backgrounds and political affiliation throughout the hall.” If correct, the implication seems to be that O’Rourke’s rally was attracting some that might have been offended to see the American and Texas flags on display behind O’Rourke.

Here is a photo of the hall during the O’Rourke rally, with the flags in question on display.

The Navasota Examiner broke the story when it covered the O’Rourke rally.

According to VFW Post #4006 Commander Carl Dry, the Veterans of Foreign Wars is not a political organization and the rental agreement with the O’Rourke campaign was part of the standard rental contract for any event. “I do not normally attend rental events, but I attended Saturday to make sure things ran smoothly,” said Dry, who noted there were only two requests he could not allow at the VFW Post. “They wanted to open the doors (to the Flight Deck Lounge) and I couldn’t allow that and they wanted to take the flags down, I didn’t only say no, I said hell no, you don’t take the flags off the wall. I can’t believe any American would ask us to do that and I don’t know why he wanted them down or what he was going to put up instead.”

The O’Rourke campaign has not commented on the incident, but that report seems to follow a pattern with O’Rourke and his campaign. There seems to be an aversion to the American flag and symbols of patriotism.

O’Rourke made headlines when Democrats rallied around this video, in which he defended NFL players who knelt and protested the National Anthem and the American Flag.

That led to a number of TV appearances and celebrities jumping on the Beto bandwagon. That included an appearance this week on The Ellen Show, where O’Rourke had to explain his DUI arrest from years back.

Post your thoughts in the comments section below on the demand by the Beto O’Rourke campaign to take down the American flag. In addition, share this on social media.