Jindal takes a swing at Clinton on gun control and…misses?
Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal was outraged by Hillary Clinton’s latest gun proposal and he wants his supporters to be angry, too.

But Jindal himself is not unfamiliar with buyback programs, he approved one himself.

Clinton, at an event in New Hampshire on Friday, floated the idea of a national gun buyback program.

She compared the proposal to President Barack Obama’s “Cash for Clunkers,” which was designed to incentive getting rid of old, gas-guzzling vehicles. People could sell their low fuel efficiency cars to the federal government. It was voluntary.

The statement from Clinton came in response to a question from a voter who pointed to an Australian program, which confiscated guns. In responding, Clinton, a Democrat, said she thought it was a buyback and never detailed a confiscation program.

But many Republicans, upon hearing Clinton say that kind of program should be looked at, pounced, calling it advocating for gun confiscation.

“Calling it gun control doesn’t even (sic) do this justice — this is gun seizure,” Jindal said in a statement calling for people to sign a petition on his website.

“Secretary Clinton’s comment is an example of the nanny state on display. She won’t stop with just taking away our guns and our Second Amendment rights, she will come for everything else that she and her big government elitist colleagues think is bad for us dim-witted Americans.

But Jindal, who is at the bottom of the polls in the 2016 presidential race, isn’t unfamiliar with gun buyback laws.

He signed a law in 2014 authorizing buyback programs in his state. The bill, which encountered some opposition from anti-gun control groups, passed the Republican-controlled legislature with overwhelming support.

Under the previous law, only the city of New Orleans was authorized to conduct gun buyback programs. Under the law Jindal signed, any city or parish (the state’s equivalent of counties) could hold a similar program.

Jindal’s campaign insisted it wasn’t the same.

“Hillary Clinton was referring to confiscation at the federal level, which is why it is so concerning,” press secretary Shannon Dirmann said.

“The Louisiana buyback program is a voluntary, state level program and the NRA supports it. It lets gun collectors and people buy guns who legally can, rather than the police destroying them. It is important to note that Governor Jindal passed legislation to prohibit gun confiscation after Hurricane Katrina in Louisiana — and he wouldn’t allow it at the federal level.”