Giving Away Louisiana: Solar energy tax credit - The Advocate Special Reports
About $30 per resident

The solar program has cost each Louisiana resident an average of roughly $30 to date.

Overall, there are now about 15,000 solar installations in Louisiana, translating to 1 percent of the roughly 1.5 million households in the state.

“The large majority of the state is funding something for a select few folks,” Ponti said.

Moreover, the benefits have not been spread evenly across the state.

The most populous and urban parishes have been the biggest winners. Jefferson Parish leads the pack, with almost $36.7 million in tax credits going to residents there since the program began; Orleans is next with about $29.4 million. Those two parishes also got the biggest bump on a per-capita basis. Only eight of the state’s 64 parishes received more benefit than cost on a per-capita basis.

During the time the program has been up and running, costs of solar systems have significantly declined.

In 2008, the solar break allowed homeowners to buy a system that would cut the average electric bill by up to $500 per year. Technological improvements, lower costs for materials and improvements in efficiency have bumped that up to $1,300 in recent years, enough that a household taking advantage of the program could be profiting from it in less than five years. The program rules haven’t changed even as the deal became increasingly attractive.

Fonte, who has carefully tracked his utility bills since before South Coast Solar installed his system last December, expects his system will be paid off in about four years and after that will essentially be generating profit. He had originally considered buying a system after Hurricane Katrina, though at the time it would have cost $85,000 and incentives weren’t available. But the technology has improved and so have the incentives, bringing a system within reach.

“This way my tax money came back to me and I could do with it what I want to do with it,” said Fonte, who also noted the program had other benefits, such as increasing his home’s value. “You’re crazy not to do it if you have the ability to do it.”

To cover the cost of the system, the installers worked with a credit union to provide an interest-free loan for a year, to allow time for the system to be installed and the credits to be claimed. The state credits can be claimed as a refund in the first year if they exceed the amount owed in taxes.

A smaller incentive probably would have meant the out-of-pocket costs for the system would have been too high, Fonte said.

“I would have got shot down by my wife,” he said.” I’ve got two daughters; one’s in Catholic high school, one’s in Catholic college. All my money goes to school, pays the house note and everything else.”

The technological improvements and the declining price tag on the systems are another argument for phasing out the credits, Ponti said.

Enlarge Advocate photo by JOHN MCCUSKER -- Louisiana officials attribute most of the solar-energy expansion to two factors: a loophole in the law that allowed larger and more expensive systems to be installed, and the proliferation of companies offering to lease the system to residents who could not afford the upfront cost.

“The cost has been able to come down enough to where the industry should be able to sustain itself at this time,” he said.\

The rapid growth of the program did not stem entirely from the steadily improving return on investment. In fact, state officials attribute most of the expansion to two factors: a loophole in the law that allowed larger and more expensive systems to be installed, and the proliferation of companies offering to lease the system to residents who could not afford the upfront cost.

The initial version of the program capped the amount that could be claimed on one system to $12,500, but it did not restrict how many could be put a single residence. As a result, some companies began placing large arrays on homes that cost more than the intended $25,000 cap, but divided those into separate “systems” to claim credits on the full amount of the project cost.

“It was legal, but it was a hole that was in the law,” Ponti said. “Never at any point in time did people envision companies getting four tax credits on a single house.”

The growth of leasing also played a significant role. Some argue it has been the major driver in the current size of the program.

For PosiGen owner Tom Neyhart, whose company is now the only major player leasing solar systems in Louisiana, that’s a good thing, because it made solar available to lower- and middle-class homeowners who can’t afford to purchase a system outright. For those people, utility bills can eat up a substantial share of the household budget.

“I believe a lot was focused on trying to give choices to people,” Neyhart said. “The third-party leasing program is a way to give choices to people that don’t necessarily have the ability to write a check for $25,000 or $30,000 upfront.”

Under a leasing model, the solar system is owned by a third party, often a financial institution, and the homeowner leases the system back from the third party and uses the electricity provided by the solar panels to reduce his energy bill. The credits, meanwhile, are claimed by the leasing company.

The company bundles the panels with measures that improve the home’s energy efficiency and charges about $750 a year for the package. Combined, those programs can reduce an electric bill by about twice that much a year, Neyhart said.

“Multiply that by a 20-year lease. Even if electricity prices don’t go up at all, that’s going to skyrocket close to $20,000,” he said. “That’s money that’s being circulated in the Louisiana economy.”

Enlarge LSU economist Jim Richardson

Neyhart and others pointed to a 2012 study by LSU economist Jim Richardson that concluded that the solar program, which was “not aimed at economic development necessarily, outperforms certain tax credits that were specifically targeted for economic development purposes.”

The study says the state’s film program, for instance, generates a flurry of activity in a given year, but there “is no spillover effect into future years.” Installing solar panels, by contrast, has little immediate economic impact, but the systems free up money that homeowners would have otherwise spent on utility bills. The resulting spending will allow the state to recoup about 75 percent of its investment over the 30-year lifespan of a solar system, the study found.

It’s not entirely clear how many solar installations in the state are leased rather than owned. PosiGen alone has 5,000 customers, though that includes a handful in states such as New York and Connecticut. Those installations do not qualify for Louisiana’s tax credits.

Industry officials estimate leasing could now account for up to 70 percent of the total installations, though in the last fiscal year, only about 12 percent of tax credits went to leased systems, according to data from the Louisiana Department of Revenue.

Meanwhile, the federal program is due to be scaled back a year earlier and will go from 30 percent to 10 percent of the cost of a system.

The changes also barred companies from installing more than one system on a house and tightened up the rules in other ways, such as prohibiting installations on multifamily homes. That last provision could come up for debate in a future legislative session, Schmidt said, as it bars installations on New Orleans’ large stock of shotgun doubles.