Pakistan Could Use F-16 Jets Against India, U.S. Politicians Say
A Pakistani F-16 fighter performed a flypast during the Pakistan Day military parade in Islamabad on March 23, 2016.

A Pakistani F-16 fighter performed a flypast during the Pakistan Day military parade in Islamabad on March 23, 2016. Photo: Aamir Qureshi/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Members of the U.S. Congress on Wednesday raised doubts over the Obama administration’s decision to sell eight F-16 fighter jets to Pakistan, echoing New Delhi’s concerns that these weapons will improve Islamabad’s capabilities to fight India rather than combat terrorism.

During a hearing of the U.S. House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific, Rep. Matt Salmon said many American legislators “seriously question the judgment and timing of such a sale.”

“India-Pakistan tensions remain elevated,” Mr. Salmon said, “and some question whether the F-16s could ultimately be used against India or other regional powers.”

The U.S. government has said the fighter jets bolster Pakistan’s precision-strike capability, crucial to counterinsurgency and counterterrorism operations. India rebuts this argument.

“We disagree with their rationale that such arms transfers help to combat terrorism,” India’s Foreign Ministry said in a statement in February before summoning the U.S. ambassador in India.

U.S. military support to Pakistan has long been a thorn in India-U.S. relations, sowing deep distrust of Washington in the Indian foreign-policy establishment.

Rep. Brad Sherman said at the hearing Wednesday that the Obama administration would have to weigh “whether the F-16s constitute the least expensive, most efficient way for the Pakistani Air Force to go after the terrorists and the least disruptive weapon system to the balance of power between India and Pakistan.”

In recent years, U.S. politicians have grown increasingly frustrated with Pakistan’s policies, accusing Islamabad of providing a safe haven for the Taliban and of acting against U.S. interests while receiving tens of billions of dollars in military assistance from it.

“Pakistan’s priorities and values regarding terrorist groups are seriously misaligned with our own,” Mr. Salmon said, adding that the country “has used terror as a tool of statecraft, and terrorist proxy groups for the Pakistani military have carried out fatal attacks inside India.”

New Delhi accuses Pakistan of harboring and aiding terror groups such as the Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Mohammad that have launched attacks in India, including one in Mumbai in 2008 in which 166 people died. In January this year, terrorists that India believes belonged to Jaish stormed a major airbase close to the Pakistan border, killing seven people.

A recent Wall Street Journal story showed how Jaish, banned in Pakistan since 2002, continues to operate and grow in the eastern town of Bahawalpur.

Earlier this year, Republican Senator Bob Corker opposed the use of taxpayers’ money to subsidize the F-16s for Pakistan, citing Islamabad’s relationship with the Haqqani network, a militant group known for targeting U.S.-trained security forces in neighboring Afghanistan.

For breaking news, features and analysis from India, follow WSJ India on Facebook.