Fractals of Change:
Tom Evslin's career has taken him from nerd to CEO to novelist and consultant with a brief stop as Vermont's Transportation Secretary in the early 1980s.

Tom has recently retired as CEO of NG Advantage LLC, a company he and wife Mary cofounded which trucks natural gas to industrial and commercial customers. He remains as Chair of NG Advantage. The company was the first to bring the environmental and economic benefits of the clean-burning North American fuel to US custoemrs beyond the reach of pipelines and is still the industry leader.

In the great recession Tom was volunteer Chief Recovery Officer for the State of Vermont responsible for coordinating the state's use of federal stimulus funds and focusing them on the priorities of universal broadband penetration, a smart electrical grid, e-health, and e-education. Later he volunteered as CTO for the state,

Tom's novel hackoff.com: an historic murder mystery set in the Internet bubble and rubble is available from Amazon in hardcopy or Kindle form. A short story "The Interpreter's Tale" can be downloaded to Kindle. His personal blog Fractals of Change is at blog.tomevslin.com.

Tom was cofounder (with Mary), Chairman and CEO of ITXC Corp. The NASDAQ-listed company grew from startup in 1997 to the world's leading provider of wholesale VoIP and one of largest carriers of international voice minutes of any kind by 2004 when it was acquired.

He conceived, launched, and ran AT&T's first ISP, AT&T WorldNet Service. WorldNet popularized all-you-can-eat flatrate monthly pricing for Internet access and forced the rest of the industry, including AOL and MSN, to follow suit. Tom has been blamed and praised for this ever since. He is unrepentant.

At Microsoft, Tom was responsible for the server products in Microsoft BackOffice including Microsoft Exchange and for Exchange's predecessor Microsoft Mail.

Tom went to Microsoft when key assets of Solutions, Inc. (a software company he founded and he and Mary ran) were sold to Microsoft. In the 1970s Solutions developed the first commercial EFT software for banks. In the 1980s Solutions was the first developer of commercial communications software for the Macintosh.

Tom was formerly on the boards of the Vermont Telecommunications Authority and the Vermont Clean Energy Development Fund. In the private sector, is a board member of FeedBlitz LLC as well as NG Advantage LLC.

For many years Tom was Policy Chairman of the Voice on the Net Coalition and a member of the organization's Board of Directors.

Tom is an inventor on eight granted US patents.