Scott Opposes Latest Attempt to Force Approval of Keystone XL Pipeline
WASHINGTON, D.C. – Congressman Robert C. “Bobby” Scott (VA-03) issued the following statement on his vote against H.R. 3, the latest attempt by House Republicans to force an approval of the Keystone XL Pipeline:

“Supporters of the Keystone XL Pipeline believe that construction of the pipeline will create jobs and move our nation closer to energy independence by reducing our reliance on foreign oil. However, these beliefs fail to recognize the current economic climate. Last year, the United States produced more oil domestically than was imported, and gas prices are, and are expected to remain, near lows not seen in years. Even if this were not the case, much of the tar sands oil that would run through this new pipeline would not be sold in the United States and would have no effect on domestic gas prices, but would instead pass through our nation for eventual sale on international markets.

“Additionally, the long term economic benefits of this pipeline do not justify risking our nation's drinking water, farmlands, and tribal grounds. Cleanup costs from a 2010 tar sands oil pipeline spill in Kalamazoo, Michigan have exceeded $1 billion. To add insult to injury, companies that produce, ship, or refine tar sands oil are not required to pay into the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund, which conventional crude oil companies pay into, and therefore the cost of cleaning up tar sands oil spills will fall on the American taxpayer.

"According to the State Department's Final Environmental Impact Statement, the project would only directly create 2,000 temporary jobs and few as 35 permanent jobs. Last month, our economy grew by more than 250,000 jobs and is currently creating more jobs in two hours of an average work day than the temporary jobs that would be created by this project, and more jobs in one and a half average workday minutes than the permanent jobs created.

"Instead of exempting foreign corporations from federal permitting requirements, Congress should be working on policies that diversify our nation’s energy portfolio, reduce our reliance on fossil fuels, and support the President’s policies that have resulted in gas prices being reduced to lows not seen in years.”

# # #

Note: This press release was updated on January 12, 2015 when it was determined that the wrong data for gas prices was cited in the original release.