Gun Reform: Ending the Gun Violence Epidemic – Change can't wait.
Gun Reform

Last Valentine’s Day, I joined my twin daughters for a senior appreciation ceremony at their high school. I had just presented my two girls with bouquets of red roses when my phone started buzzing. You can imagine the panic among all of the parents as we learned of the active shooter situation unfolding just minutes down the road in Parkland.

Similarly, a few years ago as I was Christmas shopping, I was caught in a mass shooting scare. I saw crowds of people run through the mall in panic. I waited in the back of the mall with a few store employees as law enforcement secured the area with guns drawn. This isn’t rhetoric this hits close to home for Americans every single day. This is a national emergency.

As a result of Washington’s refusal to address gun violence, young people across the country have grown up traumatized by the gun violence epidemic. They know the exact lockdown procedure thanks to practice. Experts agree that these drills, when not conducted appropriately, can cause “physical and psychological harm to students, staff and the overall learning environment.”

As Mayor, I proposed and unanimously passed a measure in support of safer gun laws that would expand background checks and prevent terrorists from gaining access to guns. Last year, I sued the state to allow local leaders to protect our residents from gun violence because in Florida, it’s illegal for mayors to even bring up gun reform for discussion.

The trauma of this epidemic doesn’t go away when the shooting is over. One student in California survived one mass shooting only to be killed in another one. In Florida, survivor’s remorse claimed the lives of two Parkland shooting survivors, and snatched the life of a father whose daughter was brutally murdered in Sandy Hook.

When you have 96 people die from gun violence every day in America and there is no gun reform bill on the President’s desk, Washington is broken. When you can’t take your family to a movie or drop your child off at school without wondering whether or not it will be the last time that you see them, Washington is broken.

I’m running for President of the United States to change that. When I’m President, it will be the number one priority for my administration to prevent mass shootings. I believe law enforcement should remove mass shooting weaponry from the hands of those suffering from mental illness, those who have a history of domestic abuse, and anyone on the terrorist watch list.

It’s time to stop playing games with American lives. We cannot wait to have safe communities and schools. It will be my goal as your President to cut gun deaths in half by the end of my first term, with the goal to eliminate this threat entirely by the end of my presidency. It’s time we demand action from our government to keep us safe from gun violence and replace politicians if they won’t get to work to make it happen. One more child lost to gun violence is one too many. Change cannot wait to protect our people.