Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz : Press Releases : Tamiami Trail Bridge Opens in Everglades
EVERGLADES NATIONAL PARK, Fla. – Earlier today, officials in South Florida celebrated the grand opening of the one-mile Tamiami Trail bridge. This milestone Everglades restoration effort is the largest construction project in the history of the National Park Service.

EVERGLADES NATIONAL PARK, Fla. – Earlier today, officials in South Florida celebrated the grand opening of the one-mile Tamiami Trail bridge. This milestone Everglades restoration effort is the largest construction project in the history of the National Park Service.

U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz (FL-23) was integral in securing the necessary federal funding for the project, which will begin to restore natural water flows through the Everglades ecosystem by eliminating one-mile of the 10.7-mile-long barrier the Tamiami roadway presents to water flow south into Everglades National Park. Increased water volume and flow under the bridge will help re-establish seasonal water depths and flooding durations that are critical to the survival of many of the fish and wildlife species and stem saltwater intrusion into the Everglades south of Tamiami Trail.

“Since 2008 we’ve seen a dramatic increase in federal resources as well as the commencement of several major federal projects – from completing the Tamiami Trail bridge and opening it today, to improving the ecosystem at Picayune Strand and the Indian River Lagoon,” said Rep. Wasserman Schultz.

"This one-mile bridge is just the beginning. We must begin the next phase of this effort and I will fight for the funding to begin the additional 5.5 miles of bridging on the Tamiami Trail called for by federal managers. Today’s progress is great news for America’s Everglades and shows how committed President Obama’s administration is to Everglades restoration. It is important that Congress maintain the momentum of the last few years by fully funding the restoration priorities.

“Restoring our Everglades has significant environmental and economic benefits for Florida. In addition to the seven million Floridians who rely on the Everglades for their primary source of drinking water, a 2010 study conducted for the Everglades Foundation showed that for every dollar invested in Everglades restoration, $4 are generated in economic benefits. Restoration projects launched by the Administration already have generated 6,600 jobs and are expected to generate more. An $11.5 billion investment in Everglades restoration would result in $46.5 billion in gains to Florida’s economy and create more than 440,000 jobs over the next 50 years, by spurring construction and tourism activity.

“We are fortunate to have one of the world’s great wonders right here in South Florida, and restoring the Everglades serves as a reminder that we must leave this world better than we found it so that future generations can enjoy it too.”