Leadership Team
Working together with the Board of Directors, the Clinton Foundation's leadership team is responsible for all aspects of the Foundation's work around the world. Our leadership team consists of our CEO, our CFO, the leaders of our programmatic work (generally called CEO or executive director of individual Foundation initiatives and the Presidential Center), and the leaders of our essential support functions.

Leadership Team as of September 2015

Leaders of our Separate, Affiliated Entities

Donna E. Shalala

President

Donna E. Shalala is the president of the Clinton Foundation. Previously, she served as president of the University of Miami and Professor of Political Science. Donna received her A.B. in history from Western College for Women and her Ph.D. from Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs, Syracuse University. She served as President of Hunter College of CUNY from 1980 to 1987, and as Chancellor of the University of Wisconsin-Madison from 1987 to 1993. In 1993, President Clinton nominated her as Secretary for Health and Human Services (HHS) where she served for eight years. In 2008, President Bush presented her with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the Nation’s highest civilian award. A member of the Council on Foreign Relations, she served as a Peace Corps Volunteer in Iran from 1962-1964. In 2010, she received the Nelson Mandela Award for Health and Human Rights recognizing her dedication to improving the health and life chances of disadvantaged populations in South Africa and internationally.

Philip A. Berry

Chief Human Resources Officer

Philip A. Berry serves as the chief human resources officer, responsible for strategies to attract, develop, and retain talent for the Clinton Foundation. Prior to this he was the President of Philip Berry Associates LLC, a management consulting firm which focuses on executive coaching, global talent development, and organizational effectiveness. As the former vice president of Global Workplace Initiatives and Corporate Officer for Colgate-Palmolive, Philip led the company’s efforts to attract, develop, and retain a diverse workforce. Prior to joining Colgate-Palmolive, Philip acquired HR expertise at Procter & Gamble. He also worked at Digital Equipment and the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority as vice president of Human Resources. Philip is the vice chairman of the Board of Trustees for the City University of New York (CUNY) that has responsibility for the 24 public colleges within New York City and is acting chair of the CUNY Construction Fund. Philip received his M.B.A from Xavier University, his M.S.W. from Columbia University, his B.A. in Sociology from Queens College, and A.A. in Marketing from Manhattan Community College. Philip lives in Manhattan and has a wife, a son, and daughter.

Scott Curran

General Counsel

Scott Curran serves as general counsel for the Clinton Foundation. In this role, he manages legal matters and provides strategic counsel to senior leadership regarding the Foundation’s operations, partnerships, and programs. Scott is on the board of the Alliance for a Healthier Generation, founded by the Clinton Foundation and the American Heart Association, which works to reduce the prevalence of childhood obesity in the United States. Scott received a B.A. from the University of Illinois at Champaign/Urbana in speech communications, a J.D. from the Chicago-Kent College of Law, and a Masters in Public Service from the University of Arkansas Clinton School of Public Service, where he was a member of the inaugural class.

Amitabh Desai

Foreign Policy Director

As Foreign Policy Adviser, Ami helps shape all international programs, and manages relationships with heads of state and business and civil society leaders around the globe. Ami works closely with CCI, CGI, CDI, and CGEP, and has developed new partnerships in places like Myanmar, Jordan, Greece, and Northern Ireland. Ami helped create the Haiti Development Fund, established by President Clinton, Carlos Slim, and Frank Giustra in 2010 to invest in small and medium-sized businesses in Haiti; and is a board member of the Clinton Hunter Development Initiative. Ami also oversaw preparations for President Clinton's "Future of the Americas" meeting in Miami in December 2014. Previously, Ami served as legislative aide to then-U.S. Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, with responsibility for foreign affairs including Africa, humanitarian crises, and international trade. Ami also has worked at JP Morgan, on mergers & acquisitions; at the Greater New York Hospital Foundation; at the International Crisis Group; at the United Nations; and in Senator Kennedy’s office. Ami received a master’s degree in Foreign Policy from Columbia University in 2005, and graduated early with a bachelor’s degree in Public Health from Johns Hopkins University, where he is a member of the Second Decade Society. The son of immigrants from India, Ami lives in New York City with his wife and daughter.

Mark Gunton

Chief Executive Officer, Clinton Giustra Enterprise Partnership

Mark Gunton serves as CEO of the Clinton Giustra Enterprise Partnership. Before joining the Enterprise Partnership in February 2012, Mark spent 28 years in business and finance roles in Fortune 500 companies, mostly in the areas of supply chain and logistics. He has previously held global board positions at TNT Express, as CFO and separately as Managing Director of a $1 billion unit, spanning the continents of North America, South America, Africa, and parts of Asia. He is founder of the hugely successful roadside clinic network in Africa – the Northstar Alliance. In TNT he also pioneered the school-feeding employee twinning program with the World Food Programme. Prior to TNT, Mark worked for Dun and Bradstreet and Davy McKee in London, and KFC in Sydney. He has a bachelor’s degree in international development from the University of East Anglia, UK, and is a fellow of the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants.

Robert Harrison

Chief Executive Officer, Clinton Global Initiative

Bob Harrison is chief executive officer of the Clinton Global Initiative. Previously, Bob spent 22 years on Wall Street as an investment banker and attorney. In 1987, he joined Goldman Sachs, where he became a partner in its investment banking division. Before that, Bob practiced law in New York and Paris with Davis, Polk and Wardwell. Bob is Chairman of the Board of Cornell University, a Director of the Association of American Rhodes Scholars, and Honorary Chairman of the Henry Street Settlement Board. He received a B.A. in government from Cornell University, an M.A. in politics, philosophy, and economics from Oxford University (as a Rhodes Scholar), and a J.D. from Yale Law School.

Rain Henderson

Chief Executive Officer, Clinton Health Matters Initiative

Rain Henderson is the chief executive officer of the Clinton Health Matters Initiative (CHMI) at the Clinton Foundation. Rain previously served as deputy director of CHMI since the initiative launched in November 2012. In her current role, Rain is responsible for driving CHMI’s strategic vision and fostering partnerships across the public, private, and nonprofit sectors to advance the mission of improving the health and well-being of all people in the United States. Previously serving as the senior vice president of the Alliance for a Healthier Generation, a non-profit organization founded by the American Heart Association and Clinton Foundation, Rain was instrumental in helping to build the organization from a blueprint to an award-winning non-profit with a presence in 50 states and a positive impact on the lives of over six million children. Rain holds a M.P.A. from the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs and a B.A. in International Relations from Syracuse University.

Andrew Kessel

Chief Financial Officer

Andrew Kessel is the chief financial officer of the Clinton Foundation, a role he has held since joining the Foundation in 2004. Andrew has played a role in managing the growth of the Foundation in its transition to a global organization. He has had a career of service in the corporate financial world, most recently with Barclays PLC as a managing director for nine years. He previously worked at Kidder Peabody and Co. and also in the capital markets division of Citibank. He holds a Bachelor of Science in Economics from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.

Bari Lurie

Chief of Staff, Office of Chelsea Clinton

Bari Lurie joined the Clinton Foundation in August 2011 as chief of staff to Chelsea Clinton. In this capacity she helps shape and implement the strategic direction of the office, including Chelsea’s engagement across the Foundation. Prior to the Foundation, Bari was chief of staff at Tribeca Enterprises, working on growth strategies and managing the company’s signature partnership with Qatar. Before moving to New York, Bari worked on Secretary Hillary Rodham Clinton’s presidential campaign as well as her 2006 Senate race and for her political action committee, HILLPAC. Bari holds a B.A. in political communications from George Washington University.

Terri McCullough

Director, No Ceilings: The Full Participation Project

Terri McCullough is the director of No Ceilings: The Full Participation Project. No Ceilings is a Clinton Foundation initiative that brings together partner organizations to evaluate and share the progress girls and women have made in the 20 years since the UN Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing and chart the path forward for full participation in political, civil, economic and cultural life for girls and women in the 21st century. Terri joined the Foundation from the Tory Burch Foundation, which works to support women entrepreneurs in the U.S. through small loans, mentoring and entrepreneurial education. She previously served as chief of staff, advisor on women’s issues and in a number of other roles in the office of Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democratic Leader of the U.S. House of Representatives. Her non-profit experience includes positions at NARAL Pro-Choice America, PENCIL (Public Education Needs Civic Involvement in Learning), and Anna Deavere Smith’s Institute on the Arts and Civic Dialogue. She has a B.A. in politics from the University of California at Santa Cruz and lives in New York City with her husband, daughter, and son.

Patti Miller

Director, Too Small to Fail

Patti Miller is the director of Too Small to Fail for the Clinton Foundation. Too Small to Fail is a joint initiative of the Clinton Foundation and Next Generation to help parents and businesses take meaningful actions to improve the health and well-being of America’s youngest children, ages zero to five, and prepare them to succeed in the 21st century. Prior to joining the Foundation, Patti was the vice president of public policy for Sesame Workshop, the nonprofit producer of Sesame Street. Patti previously served as vice president of the Children & the Media Program at Children Now. In that role, she led a broad coalition in advocacy and policy efforts to improve the media environment for children. Patti holds an M.A. in social sciences in education from Stanford University and a B.A. in mass communications from the University of California at Berkeley.

Craig Minassian

Chief Communications Officer

Craig Minassian brings a unique background in strategic communications, content development and brand marketing to promoting the work of the Clinton Foundation as chief communications officer. Craig served as assistant press secretary and director of television news in the White House for President Clinton and on numerous presidential campaigns including Clinton/Gore ‘96 and Secretary Clinton’s 2008 campaign, as well as a senior advisor to the Democratic National Convention Committees in 2008 and 2012. Since 2005 he has worked with the Clinton Foundation, including as director of communications for the Clinton Global Initiative. Previously, Craig spent a significant portion of his career with HBO working on cause-related and topical programming including “Comic Relief" and the U.S. Comedy Arts Festival, and as a consultant and producer for networks including Comedy Central, MTV and ABC. In 2006, he launched Minassian Media, which helps some of the most impactful global organizations in health, climate, media, technology and social entrepreneurship tell their story. He also worked on World Cup USA‘94 and serves on the President's Council and School of Communication advisory board for the University of Miami, where he graduated in 1992.

Walker Morris

Chief Executive Officer, Clinton Development Initiative

Walker Morris is the chief executive officer of the Clinton Development Initiative (CDI), and is responsible for the overall management of CDI’s projects in Malawi, Rwanda, and Tanzania. In this role, Walker oversees CDI’s financial performance, strategic planning, staff development, and governmental relations. He previously served as director of business development for CDI. Prior to joining the Clinton Foundation in 2006, Walker served as President of Muirfield Broadcasting, Inc., a radio and television station operating company based in Southern Pines, North Carolina. Walker holds an M.A. in teaching from Duke University and a B.A. in English from the University of North Carolina – Chapel Hill.

MAURA PALLY

Senior Vice President of Programs

Maura Pally is the senior vice president of programs at the Clinton Foundation. In this role, Maura oversees the strategic and operational efforts of the Foundation’s 9 initiatives focusing on efficiency and impact, as well as ensuring alignment with the organization’s core mission. Prior to her current role, Maura was responsible for the Foundation's women and youth programs including managing the creation, development and implementation of No Ceilings: The Full Participation Project; Too Small to Fail; and Job One, an effort to help close the skills gap nationally. She also served as Acting CEO.

Maura joined the Clinton Foundation from Bloomberg Philanthropies where, as a member of the leadership team, she provided strategic direction for programmatic activities and oversight of operational management. Previously, she served as Acting Assistant and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs (ECA). As Acting Assistant Secretary, Maura led a bureau of 450 employees and a $635 million annual budget to fulfill ECA's mandate of facilitating public diplomacy through exchange programs, including the flagship Fulbright Scholarship Program. Maura oversaw the Department's exchange activities and budget strategy ensuring programs furthered the Administration's foreign policy objectives, and created new programs, including smARTpower and TechWomen to empower the next generation of women leaders in technology. Prior to joining the U.S. Department of State, Maura held several positions in the government and the private sector, including as a special assistant in the Office of White House Counsel under President Clinton and as Manager of Politics and Public Policy at Oxygen Media. She earned a B.A. from Brown University and a J.D. from the University of Southern California.

Back to top

Stephanie S. Streett

Executive Director

Stephanie S. Streett is the executive director of the Clinton Foundation. In this role she oversees the day-to-day operations of the Clinton Presidential Center, including the development and implementation of its educational programs, special events, exhibits, and services as well as staff management. She establishes and cultivates strategic partnerships and cooperative arrangements with state and local governments, the non-profit and private sector, community groups and other organizations. Stephanie also serves as the corporate secretary for the Clinton Foundation Board of Directors. She is the president of the Arkansas Alumni Association National Board of Directors and is co-chair of the Board of Directors for City Year Little Rock. She also serves on the Board of Directors for the Downtown Partnership of Little Rock, Arkansas and is a member of the International Women’s Forum Arkansas. During the Clinton Administration, Stephanie was appointed Assistant to the President and Director of Scheduling. Previously, she served as a staff member for the United States Senate Committee on the Budget. She received a B.S. in political science from the University of Arkansas. Stephanie and her husband Don Erbach reside in Little Rock and have three daughters.

Danielle Stilz

Chief Development Officer

Danielle Stilz is the chief development officer for the Clinton Foundation. She has been with the Foundation since 2012, having previously served as the deputy director of development. Danielle leads the development department’s vision and goals and fostering relationships with individuals, foundations, and corporations to advance the mission of the Foundation. Before joining the Foundation, Danielle was the development director for City Year Chicago where she oversaw all individual, corporate, and foundation fundraising, as well as government relations. Her career began in government where she promoted economic development policy for the State of Illinois. She then became finance director for the Governor of Illinois, where she was responsible for developing and executing successful fundraising strategies. She received her B.A. from the University of Iowa..

Dymphna van der Lans

Chief Executive Officer, Clinton Climate Initiative

Dymphna van der Lans serves as the CEO of the Clinton Climate Initiative, where she oversees climate and energy related programs within the Foundation. Prior to joining the Foundation, Dymphna served as the senior director for public policy programs at the German Marshall Fund of the United States where she was responsible for the strategic direction of the Energy & Society Program, Economic Policy Program, Immigration & Integration Program, and Urban and Regional Policy Program. Before GMF, Dymphna was the director of global renewables, infrastructure, and energy efficiency at a specialist investment banking firm in London. She worked for seven years at BP where her last appointment was as BP Alternative Energy’s director of distributed energy markets. The U.S. Department of Energy selected Dymphna as one of its inaugural ambassadors of its Clean Energy Education and Empowerment (C3E) initiative. The C3E program aims to advance the careers and leadership of professional women in the field of clean energy. Dymphna is also a Professorial Lecturer at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at the Johns Hopkins University where she teaches a course on energy transition, systems, innovation and leadership. Her native language is Dutch, and in addition, she speaks English and Chinese fluently and has conversation ability in both French and German. Dymphna holds advanced degrees from both Leiden University and the University of Beijing. She earned a Master’s in Business Administration from Rice University and is also a graduate from Dialogos, Leadership for Collective Intelligence, and the Kellogg School of Management’s Sales and Marketing Leadership Program.

Leaders of our Independent, Affiliated Initiatives

Ira Magaziner

Vice Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Clinton Health Access Initiative

Ira Magaziner is the vice chairman and chief executive officer of the Clinton Health Access Initiative (CHAI). From 1993 through 1998, Ira served as senior advisor to President Clinton for Policy Development at the White House where he supervised the development and implementation of the administration’s policy for commercialization of the Internet and worked with the First Lady on the development of the President’s Health Reform Initiative. Prior to his White House service, Ira founded and led Telesis, an international business strategy consulting firm with offices in North America, Europe, Asia and Australia. Ira graduated from Brown University as valedictorian of the class of 1969, and attended Balliol College, Oxford, as a Rhodes Scholar.

Dr. Howell Wechsler

Chief Executive Officer, Alliance for a Healthier Generation

Howell Wechsler, EdD, MPH, chief executive officer (CEO) of the Alliance for a Healthier Generation, is a national expert on childhood obesity, having previously served as the Director of the Division of Adolescent and School Health (DASH) at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). At the Alliance, Dr. Wechsler leads a team of more than 110 professional staff in 40 states and the District of Columbia taking action to reduce the prevalence of childhood obesity by making it easier for kids to be physically active and eat healthier foods. Prior to taking on the role of Alliance CEO in 2013, Dr. Wechsler spent 18 years at the CDC, joining as a health scientist in 1995 and most recently serving as the Director of DASH from 2004 to May 2013.