Frequently Asked Questions Regarding Dr. Larycia Hawkins' Administrative Leave from Wheaton College
January 15, 2016

While Wheaton College believes there are public misperceptions and misunderstandings regarding the actions and motives of its administration associated with the personnel matter of Dr. Larycia Hawkins, College leadership has made the decision at this time to remove the updated FAQs posted here January 14.





December 22, 2015

1. Why was Dr. Hawkins put on paid administrative leave?

Wheaton College placed Associate Professor of Political Science Dr. Larycia Hawkins on paid administrative leave on December 15 in order to give more time to explore significant questions regarding the theological implications of her recent public statements, including but not limited to those indicating the relationship of Christianity to Islam. The discussion and assessment to which she is entitled as a tenured faculty member is already underway, within an unprescribed timeframe to allow flexibility of the process.

2. What is administrative leave?

Administrative leave is a pause that allows for discussion and examination by all parties. Nothing is determined until all sides are carefully considered. It is a time for conversation and assessment. It is not a suspension, but rather a time for conversation and assessment, without a predetermined outcome. Any representations or media reports to the contrary are inaccurate.

3. How long will the administrative leave last?

The length of paid administrative leave varies by circumstance. There is no prescribed timing, and contrary to reports, Wheaton College has not given any indication to Dr. Hawkins of the length this process will take.

Dr. Hawkins will remain on paid administrative leave while she and the College continue the review process to which she is entitled. This will include an assessment of her views related to Wheaton’s Statement of Faith through respectful and fair dialogue on matters of strategic importance to our institutional identity and mission.

4. How can a tenured professor be placed on paid administrative leave?

Upon entering into an employment agreement, all faculty voluntarily commit to support and advance our biblical mission; accept and model the Statement of Faith with integrity, compassion and theological clarity; and live and teach within our Community Covenant. Potential conflicts with these core documents may lead to an administrative review for involved faculty, including those who are tenured.

5. Was Dr. Hawkins placed on paid administrative leave for wearing a hijab?

No.

Contrary to some media reports, social media activity and subsequent public perception, Dr. Hawkins’ paid administrative leave resulted from theological statements that seem inconsistent with Wheaton College’s doctrinal convictions, which she voluntarily agreed to support and uphold when she entered into an employment agreement with the College, and is in no way related to her race or gender.

6. What is the current status of efforts towards reconciliation between the College and Dr. Hawkins?

Wheaton College worked vigorously and in good faith to pursue the possibility of reconciliation with Dr. Hawkins. Extremely frank conversation and communication took place in recent days toward that end. On the part of the College, further theological clarification is necessary before such reconciliation can take place, and unfortunately Dr. Hawkins has stated clearly her unwillingness to participate in such further clarifying conversations. This represents an impasse on our efforts toward reconciliation.



Both parties are in discussions toward a final and comprehensive resolution. Because of the arrival of the Christmas holidays, however, it will be some time before the contours of that resolution are solidified. We solicit your prayers until that time.



7. Is it true that Christians and Muslims worship the same God?

While Islam and Christianity are both monotheistic, we believe there are fundamental differences between the two faiths, including what they teach about God’s revelation to humanity, the nature of God, the path to salvation, and the life of prayer.

As an institution of distinctively evangelical Christian identity, the core of our faith, as expressed in our Statement of Faith, is our belief that “the Lord Jesus Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures, as a representative and substitutionary sacrifice, triumphing over all evil; and that all who believe in Him are justified by His shed blood and forgiven of all their sins.” We affirm that salvation is through Christ alone.

8. I understand that Wheaton College has had speakers on campus, such as Yale theologian Miroslav Volf, who hold to the view that Christians and Muslims worship the same God; isn’t the response to Dr. Hawkins inconsistent?

In the interest of rigorous academic inquiry consistent with a Christian liberal arts education, Wheaton College exposes students to a variety of views to encourage them to think through difficult issues, embrace a mature adult faith with integrity, and learn how to articulate their own commitments. We host guest speakers who could not with integrity affirm our Statement of Faith. However, members of Wheaton’s faculty, who have voluntarily signed our Statement of Faith and the Community Covenant, commit to accept and model these foundational documents with integrity, compassion and theological clarity inside and outside of the classroom.

9. Aren’t professors able to express their own views and opinions on personal social media?

Wheaton recognizes that there may be a range of views among our faculty and staff regarding contemporary issues. However, we take the Statement of Faith seriously; as members of this voluntary community, all faculty and staff are expected not merely to sign it as a cursory requirement of employment, but also to affirm it as an expression of their own beliefs. As they participate in various causes, it is essential that faculty and staff engage and speak about issues in ways that faithfully represent the College’s Statement of Faith, which is at the core of our identity and mission.

10. Other faculty have expressed their views on this topic without an action being taken. How is Dr. Hawkins’ situation different?

Some recent faculty statements have generated confusion about complex theological matters, and could be interpreted as failing to reflect the distinctively Christian theological identity of Wheaton College. We have been, and will remain in dialogue with our faculty, staff and students in the days ahead to ensure that we articulate our love for our Muslim neighbors in ways that are consistent with our distinctive theological convictions.

In all matters of faculty and staff conflict with the Statement of Faith, Wheaton College undergoes dialogue to determine if agreement can be reached. Statements have been made in recent days raising similar questions by other faculty members from whom the College requested clarification. In those instances, the individuals rapidly and emphatically explained their opinions and affirmed their full consistency with the theological identity of Wheaton College.

11. Since Dr. Hawkins was placed on administrative leave, students have expressed their support by staging a demonstration, small group meetings with administration and on social media. Are their voices being heard by College leadership?

During the demonstration, President Ryken welcomed students into his office to dialogue with him about their concerns. As a liberal arts institution, Wheaton College values a robust exchange of ideas among faculty and students on the critical issues of the day. We encourage rigorous academic inquiry and civil discussion to explore the tough questions of a changing society within a biblically informed framework without compromising core principles of faith.

And while those voices have been heard, at the end of the day the College must exercise its best discretion on theological and personnel matters. The College maintains the right to hire to mission, and it is the responsibility of each staff, faculty member and student to support and advance the integrity of that mission.

12. Where is the Q&A video that was mentioned by a student in the Chicago Tribune?

While the actions to place Associate Professor of Political Science Dr. Larycia Hawkins on paid administrative leave is a decision made by the administration, College leadership has sought to earnestly listen to the concerns of its students regarding this matter.

A Q&A video was discussed with a small group of students. In that discussion, it was made clear that the administration was first seeking permission from Dr. Hawkins in an effort to not compromise ongoing discussions with her. While permission was repeatedly attempted, Dr. Hawkins could not be reached and permission was never granted; therefore, in the best interest of both parties, the creation of a video could no longer be considered.