Mitch McConnell overcame polio with the help of the government
Thursday morning, Capitol Police forcibly removed people with disabilities, many in wheelchairs and holding medical equipment, who were protesting the new healthcare bill outside House Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s office. Sane viewers wondered: What could inspire such disregard for the suffering of fellow Americans? Death and Taxes would like to humbly present one theory: self-loathing.

McConnell, you see, almost landed in a wheelchair himself. He contracted polio in his quadricep at the age of two while living in Alabama.

“My mother was, of course, like many mothers of young polio victims, perplexed about what to do, anxious about whether I would be disabled for the rest of my life,” McConnell said in 2005. “But we were fortunate. Where my mother was living while my dad was overseas was with her sister in east central Alabama, only about 40 or 50 miles from Warm Springs.”

The small town in Georgia is best known as the site where President Roosevelt overcame his own paralytic polio affliction. In 1926, Roosevelt purchased the mineral springs community and turned it into a polio rehabilitation center. McConnell’s mother would drive little Mitch to the facility for treatment.

Here’s McConnell, on the 50th anniversary of the polio vaccination, recounting on the Senate floor how close he came to losing the ability to walk. The senator says his first memory is buying shoes in Georgia after two years of successful physical therapy.

How did Warm springs fund McConnell’s therapy, you ask? This was two decades before Lyndon Johnson launched federal health coverage by signing into law the creation of Medicare and Medicaid. In the mid-30s, Roosevelt and his law partner Basil O’Connor founded the Georgia Warm Springs Foundation and started organizing fundraising balls around the country.

By 1938, however, the balls grew less effective and the president needed a new strategy. Using a phrase coined by vaudeville entertainer Eddie Cantor, “March of Dimes” — a spin on the popular newsreel series “March of Time” — Roosevelt founded the March of Dimes foundation and launched a campaign asking the public to mail ten-cent donations to the White House. Within a month, Roosevelt received around 2,680,000 dimes. The campaign continued through WWII.

McConnell started visiting Warm Springs in 1944. In other words, he overcame polio with the help of public money allocated by the White House.

Now he wants to take away government assistance from children who may be suffering from similar conditions.

[photo: Getty]