McDermott Will and Emery
LATEST UPDATE: April 9, 2018: Statement by Stephen M. Ryan



Today the US Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York executed a series of search warrants and seized the privileged communications between my client, Michael Cohen, and his clients. I have been advised by federal prosecutors that the New York action is, in part, a referral by the Office of Special Counsel, Robert Mueller.



The decision by the US Attorney’s Office in New York to conduct their investigation using search warrants is completely inappropriate and unnecessary. It resulted in the unnecessary seizure of protected attorney client communications between a lawyer and his clients. These government tactics are also wrong because Mr. Cohen has cooperated completely with all government entities, including providing thousands of non-privileged documents to the Congress and sitting for depositions under oath.









UPDATE: Statement by Stephen M. Ryan on behalf of Michael D. Cohen

Mr. Cohen has accepted the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence invitation to appear on October 25, 2017.

The following is a paraphrased version of Mr. Ryan's statement, which was communicated live immediately following Mr. Cohen's appearance on September 19, 2017:

Mr. Cohen appeared voluntarily for an interview with the Senate Select Intelligence Committee. Mr. Cohen looked forward to answering all their questions. Last week, the fact that Mr. Cohen was appearing for an interview was leaked to the press. We do not know who did this, and we did not. Accordingly, we provided a copy of the short opening statement Mr. Cohen intended to present today to the media. That statement was factual, accurate and respectful, and consistent with the information we had previously provided to the Committee. We stand by the statement. The Committee has chosen to postpone today’s voluntary interview and reschedule it for a later day. Mr. Cohen will continue to cooperate and will come back when the Committee is ready.

Stephen Ryan of McDermott Will & Emery represents Michael Cohen, Esq. of NYC in any governmental inquiries regarding the ‘Russia investigations’. Mr. Cohen is cooperating with all governmental inquiries.



Available Documents:

1. Mr. Cohen’s Statement to the US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) (September 19, 2017).

2. Mr. Cohen’s ‘Dossier’ Rebuttal previously provided to SSCI.

3. A summary regarding the Moscow Building Project previously provided to SSCI.