W.H. Staffers Defect, Releasing Private Tape Recording That Has Trump Dead Silent
Three of President Donald Trump’s former employees say they saw the former business mogul tape phone calls in Trump Tower before becoming President of the United States.

According to reports from the Wall Street Journal, a handful of former employees as well as a former associate of Trump say 45 sometimes taped phone calls in his New York City Trump Tower.

Given this information, it’s likely unsurprising that he alluded that he may have taped conversations within the White House, namely with former FBI Director James Comey.

An obviously bothered Trump tweeted: “James Comey better hope that there are no “tapes” of our conversations before he starts leaking to the press!”

James Comey better hope that there are no "tapes" of our conversations before he starts leaking to the press! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 12, 2017

The recording of conversations is legal in New York and in Washington, D.C., as long as one party is aware that said conversation is being recorded.

According to Trump’s personal attorney, Michael Cohen, he’s never seen evidence of any such taping having taken place.

‘In the decade that I worked for Mr. Trump, I have never seen a recording device attached to his phone, nor am I aware of any occasion where he taped a conversation.’

Former White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer wouldn’t comment on whether or not any tapes of conversations between President Trump and Comey exist.

Similarly, during an interview with Fox News, Trump declined to comment on the matter, instead saying:

‘That I can’t talk about. I won’t talk about that.’

Congress wrote a letter demanding the White House provide the House Oversight Committee with “all tapes of the president’s communications” with Comey, as well as Russian officials he’s met with at the White House.

In a letter to White House Counsel Donald McGhan, Congressman Raja Krishnamoorthi (D-IL.) wrote:

‘In light of the varied and divergent statements from the White House press briefing room regarding the firing of both former National Security Advisor Michael Flynn and former FBI Director James Comey, the production of such tapes would allow the facts of these terminations to come to light.’

In March 2017, Trump accused former President Barack Obama of wiretapping his phones in his New York City Trump Tower during the 2016 presidential election, but ultimately failed to provide any evidence to substantiate his claims.