Nathan Larson Is A Proud Pedophile — And Also A GOP Congressional Candidate
Since the election of Donald Trump, it seems like open season on running for office with shameful sexual tendencies and acts in tow. In December, the president endorsed Roy Moore, an alleged sexual assaulter and pedophile, over Doug Jones, a Democrat who prosecuted members of the KKK responsible for the infamous 16th Street Baptist church bombing. The most recent example is GOP congressional candidate Nathan Larson…who just admitted to being a pedophile to the Huffington Post.

“On the phone, he was open about his pedophilia and seemingly unfazed about his long odds of attaining government office. “‘A lot of people are tired of political correctness and being constrained by it,’ he said. ‘People prefer when there’s an outsider who doesn’t have anything to lose and is willing to say what’s on a lot of people’s minds.'”

To be clear, Larson seems to believe that an aversion to pedophilia constitutes “political correctness,” but it’s just “correctness.” This tactic is one that the president routinely employs – suggesting that any opposition to him exists because of moral panics and political correctness, rather than as a cause of his very real shortcomings. Not only does Larson feel comfortable saying this in public, but he also believes that he can (or should) win his race in spite of it.

Larson is running for Congress in Charlottesville, Virginia, where a white supremacist rally ended with the death of Heather Heyer, a counter-protester, when a white supremacist drove his car into the crowd. And according to his campaign manifesto, he would stick up for people like that…and much worse.

“In the manifesto, Larson called Nazi leader Adolf Hitler a ‘white supremacist hero.”’He urged Congress to repeal the Violence Against Women Act, adding, ‘We need to switch to a system that classifies women as property, initially of their fathers and later of their husbands’ He also showed sympathy for men who identify as involuntary celibates, or incels, suggesting it is unfair that they ‘are forced to pay taxes for schools, welfare, and other support for other men’s children.'”

Nathan Larson, and candidates like him, are the biggest challenge of the post-Trump era. Because if someone isn’t ashamed of being a pedophile, what could they possibly be ashamed of?

Featured Image Via YouTube Screengrab