The Feds Bust Barack Obama FELONY – This Is It
Barack Hussein Obama was just caught redhanded trying to convince Canadian President Justin Trudeau to help him take down President Donald Trump.

The New York Times published a piece on Thursday in which top Obama advisor Ben Rhodes admitted that Obama had called on Trudeau to work against the incoming president after he beat Hillary Clinton.

“Mr. Rhodes describes the reaction of foreign leaders,” the report stated. “Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan apologized for breaching protocol by meeting with Mr. Trump at Trump Tower in Manhattan after the election. Mr. Obama urged Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada to take on a more vocal role defending the values they shared.”

The always liberal New York Times seems to have no problem with the fact that Obama blatantly committed treason here.

Rhodes described how Obama had similar conversations with other world leaders as well. He stated that Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe apologized to Obama for meeting with Trump after the election. Rhodes said German Chancellor Angela Merkel told Obama that she felt obligated to run for a fourth term in office to counter then-President-elect Trump.

“Ms. Harris has been an invaluable community organizer and a well-regarded legislator,” said a statement from her attorneys. “Especially given her background, we are disappointed that Ms. Harris was indicted. “She has pleaded not guilty, and we look forward to her day in court and an opportunity there to present the full facts.”

Prosecutors, however, are not buying her story.

Rhodes claimed that Merkel had tears in her eyes as she said goodbye to Obama.

“She’s all alone,” Obama remarked when she left

How dramatic…

Frankly, it’s horrifying that Obama so blatantly conspired with numerous world leaders to convince them to help him take down the next president of this country. Obama needs to be investigated and held accountable for committing this treasonous act against the United States.

SHARE this story if you think Barack Obama should be LOCKED UP!

Source