Statement On House Republican Budget Resolution
Statement from House Budget Committee member Dave Brat on the House budget released today

Washington, DC (March 17, 2015) – Statement from Rep. Dave Brat (R-VA), a member of the House Budget Committee, on the House budget released today:

“Today, Republicans are presenting a budget that will balance the federal budget in less than 10 years through reductions in duplicative and wasteful spending; a budget that will fully repeal Obamacare and allow for alternatives that actually lower costs; and a budget that will reform entitlement programs to support those in need, prevent fraud, and ensure these programs are financially sustainable so they are available for future generations.

“House Republicans have released a budget that will take aim at fixing some of the greatest threats currently facing our nation.

“The first priority of this budget proposal is to balance the federal budget in less than 10 years by making $5.5 trillion in spending reductions over the course of that time. Under current policy, the federal government will spend $48.6 trillion over the next 10 years. Under this proposal, it will spend roughly $43.2 trillion. This budget responsibly reforms government spending while avoiding heavy-handed cuts – protecting key priorities while eliminating waste and modernizing programs. As former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen has said, our debt is ‘the single, biggest threat to our national security.’ This budget aims to tackle this threat head-on, because we cannot achieve national security without economic security.

“This budget fulfills Republicans’ pledge to voters to repeal Obamacare in its entirety – including all of the tax increases, job-killing regulations, and mandates – saving our nation more than $2 trillion. Instead of a complex structure of subsidies, mandates, and penalties, this budget increases access to affordable health care by expanding choices and flexibility for individuals, families, and businesses. For instance, this budget will empower states -- not Washington -- to tailor their Medicaid programs so that they can best serve the most vulnerable of their citizens. The budget also proposes to reform Medicare to harness the power of consumer choice that has made the prescription drug plan under Medicare Part D so popular.

“This budget will ensure better care for our veterans by working to enhance oversight over the Department of Veterans Affairs and its bureaucratic mismanagement. We will continue working to ensure that we provide sufficient resources to our veterans to more effectively provide benefits to those who have fought to defend our country and our way of life.

“This budget builds upon the work of the House Education and the Workforce Committee to consolidate federal job-training programs, which will produce better results for the millions of Americans looking to improve their skills in their search for jobs.

“This budget will provide some desperately needed reforms to entitlement programs. Federal spending for food stamps, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), has increased from $21 billion in 2002 to $76 billion in 2014. Our budget calls for reduced funding for federal advertising efforts to increase SNAP enrollment. Those savings are then shifted into programs that help people get off permanent dependency, such as job-training programs.

“This budget recommends easing the burden of regulations on American workers and their employers. It calls on Congress to enact legislation to reform our regulatory system by eliminating unnecessary red tape and by ensuring that regulations do not disproportionately disadvantage low-income Americans. Since President Obama took office in January 2009, the federal government has issued more than 468,500 pages of regulations. The overwhelming amount and burdensome nature of these regulations are hurting our economy. The National Association of Manufacturers estimates the total cost of regulations is as high as $2.03 trillion per year, and compliance costs fall ‘disproportionately on small businesses.’ This translates into fewer job opportunities for American workers and much higher costs for consumers.

“This budget also seeks to eliminate several corporate welfare programs, reaffirming our commitment to stopping cronyism. This budget makes clear that Washington should not be in the business of picking the winners and losers of our economy in the private sector. The best way to ensure a vibrant and strong economy is to allow innovators to thrive based on merit and the actual consumer demand for their products and services -- not based on the powerful friends they have in Washington.

“Today, six years into our very weak recovery, wages are stagnant, median income is down, debt has mounted on the backs of children not yet born, and economic growth is sputtering. Hard-working American families are struggling as average hourly wages are barely keeping pace with inflation, real median household income is just under $52,000 – one of the lowest levels since the mid-1990s – and an unhealthy percentage of the American workforce has dropped out of the labor market.

“Between the thousands of pages of ineffective and overburdening regulations, the millions of unemployed American workers, and the trillions in out-of-control spending, it is clear that we have trillion dollar problems that call for trillion dollar solutions. This budget – with its serious and common sense proposals – represents a solid first step toward reining in uncontrolled federal spending, turning our economy around, and creating an environment that spurs job creation and higher wages for all Americans.”

The proposed fiscal year 2016 House budget is here.