Appropriations Committee Approves Fiscal Year 2019 State and Foreign Operations Bill Includes funding to advance U.S. diplomatic priorities overseas, increase global security, assist our allies, and provide resources for areas in humanitarian crisis

Washington, June 20, 2018

The House Appropriations Committee today approved the fiscal year 2019 State and Foreign Operations Appropriations bill on a vote of 30-21. The legislation funds the State Department, the United States Agency for International Development, and other international activities.

The bill will target funding to advance U.S. diplomatic priorities, increase global security, assist America’s allies, and provide assistance for those displaced due to manmade crises and natural disasters.

In total, the bill provides $54 billion in both regular discretionary and Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) funding. This total is the same as the fiscal year 2018 enacted level. Within this amount, OCO funding totals $8 billion and supports operations and assistance in areas of instability and conflict, such as Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iraq, and other countries in the Middle East.

“This bill provides funding to ensure that America remains secure and that our diplomats and allies around the world have the tools they need to increase stability during this volatile time of international threats and unease,” Chairman Rodney Frelinghuysen said. “It will help advance peaceful and effective solutions to the many rising challenges facing the nation and the globe – including terrorism, threats from nuclear and chemical weapons, and emergency response efforts.”

“In the face of unprecedented challenges around the globe from terrorism and violent extremism, transnational crime and drugs, and humanitarian crises, I am proud that this legislation continues to strengthen our diplomatic and development tools – core components of our nation’s security framework,” said State and Foreign Operations Subcommittee Chairman Hal Rogers. “Together with our unmatched Armed Forces, our dedicated public servants and their partners help the United States lead by example and build a foundation for peace all over the world. In particular, this bill prioritizes funding for embassy security, combatting drug trafficking, global health and humanitarian assistance, and countering Russian aggression while maintaining vigilant oversight of every dollar spent.”

The following amendments to the bill were adopted by the full committee today:

Rep. Rogers – The manager’s amendment makes technical and noncontroversial changes to the bill and report. The amendment was adopted on a voice vote.

Rep. Wasserman Schultz – The amendment prohibits the use of funds to deny Members of Congress access to detention facilities housing foreign national minors in the U.S. The amendment was adopted on a voice vote.

For a summary of the bill, please click here.

For the bill report, please click here.

For the text of the bill, please click here.



#####