Dem Senator Kamala Harris Caught In Disgusting Racial Lie About Her Time In School As Proof Surfaces Showing Integration Occurred 2 Decades Prior
Kirsters Baish| On Monday, one of the mainstream media’s favorite Democratic Senators, Kamala Harris, sent out a tweet regarding the power that the Supreme Court holds. She wrote that she went to school at Berkeley during the year after they had integrated public schools in the area.

Harris wrote, “Two decades after Brown v. Board, I was only the second class to integrate at Berkeley public schools. Without that decision, I likely would not have become a lawyer and eventually be elected a Senator from California. That’s the power a Supreme Court Justice holds.”

Harris blatantly lied in her tweet, however. We have the pictures to prove it. She was born into a family with two successful parents. She attended Berkeley for just two years. Then she moved to Canada when she was seven years old with her mother. She attended both grade school and high school there.

Let’s get down to the nitty gritty. Harris was born in 1964, but she claims that she was somehow in the second class to integrate in the Berkeley public school system. This is a lie. The classrooms at the school were integrated for the first time in 1963. This was a year before she was born. Take a look at the 1963 Berkeley yearbook:

And below is a photo of the Berkeley yearbook in 1964, which is the year Kamala Harris was born.

So it turns out that she was off by roughly 20 years. Maybe she should stop trying to play the race card to try and gain sympathy from supporters. She should also learn to start getting her facts right.

This isn’t the first time that Harris has tried to cry discrimination. Back in 2017, Harris issued a statement regarding her concern about the Department of Justice under Attorney General Jeff Sessions’ rule and their stance on LGBT Issues. She then claimed that “racism in this country is real” while conducting a speech last year at the Human Rights Campaign National Dinner.

“We have been reminded racism in this country is real. Sexism, anti-Semitism are real in this country. Homophobia and transphobia are real in this country. And we must speak that truth so we can deal with it,” Harris said at the time.

“LGBT rights are under attack,” she went on. “Under attack by a Justice Department that now stands on the side of discrimination instead of equality.”

Senator Harris also specifically mentioned Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore for his opinion that homosexuality should not be legal in the United States. She also pointed to President Donald Trump for making the call to ban transgenders in the United States military.

Also during the Human Rights Campaign National Dinner, Hillary Clinton cracked a joke that Fox News believes that she is the one living in the White House considering how much time they spend reporting on her.

Leave it to Kamala to cry out racism or discrimination in order to get her way. We’ve seen it from her before. I’m sure we’ll see it from her again.