Former Democrat Claims Democrat Party Being Paid Millions by Cartels As Well!
Mexican Cartels Paid Off Mexican President with $100 Million – Former Democrat Claims Democrat Party Being Paid Millions by Cartels As Well!

Guest post by Joe Hoft

The Democrats aggressively block the President’s desire to protect Americans and build a border wall on the southern border with Mexico. Democrat attempts to block the wall in spite of significant evidence that it is needed indicate there is an unknown reason for their defiance.

In May of 2016, US Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi visited the President of Mexico along with other Congressmen, including little known Texas Congressman Beto O’Rourke. Pelosi stated about the meetings –

Discussing the delegation’s meetings in Mexico City, Pelosi said [emphasis added]: “We come here as a bipartisan and large delegation to express our respect for the people of Mexico and the country of Mexico; to acknowledge our shared border and our shared values and to learn more about how we can work together for the bright future for not only our two countries but for our hemisphere.” Pelosi said the delegation had a busy time in Mexico City. “When we arrived, we had our country team briefings; we had the privilege – some of us – of going to mass in the cathedral and hearing the sermon on Labor Day on the importance of workers in Mexico, a view we shared. We’ve met with members of the American Chamber of Commerce. We had the privilege of hearing from members of the civil society here in Mexico. We had a very beneficial meeting with Director General Zapata on the subject of the economy and on the subject of TPP especially. And then we had a glorious meeting, a really very thorough exchange of subjects and views – again about our shared values and our shared border – with the President [of Mexico]. Just now we finished a lunch, as you know, with Members of the Federal Deputies – Mexican Federal Deputies – and Senators. And this evening we will have a dinner meeting with the Foreign Minister,” Pelosi said.

Who knows what the discussions all entailed but since this date, the Mexican President has been aligned with Mexican cartels. As reported earlier this month he’s accused of taking millions from the cartels –

Former Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto accepted a $100m (£77m) bribe from drug cartel kingpin Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán, a witness has testified. Alex Cifuentes, who says he was a close associate of Guzmán for years, told a New York City courtroom that he had told authorities of the bribe in 2016. Guzmán is accused of being behind the Sinaloa drug cartel, which prosecutors say was the largest US drug supplier. Mr Peña Nieto served as the president of Mexico from 2012 to 2018. Guzmán, 61, has been on trial in Brooklyn since November after he was extradited from Mexico to face charges of trafficking cocaine, heroin and other drugs as leader of what the US has called the world’s largest drug cartel.

The timing of the former Mexican President being connected with Mexican cartels is rather significant. A former Democrat believes the real reason Democrats don’t want a wall on the US – Mexican border is related to the story above.

VOTE NOW: Should Trump cut foreign aid to countries who send migrants?

Jeffrey Peterson says the real reason the Democrats will never support the border wall – is that they are being paid off by the Mexican cartels.

With as much influence running up in to their system now in the form of direct and indirect #Mexican billions, Patriots might start to understand the #TRUTH about why these two are feeling so much pressure recently. pic.twitter.com/VcOWXTMKjq — Jeffrey Peterson🇺🇸 (@realJeffreyP) January 24, 2019

US Speaker Pelosi claims President Trump is in bed with the Russians despite all evidence to the contrary. However, it does appear that there is more evidence of Pelosi being in bed with Mexican cartels. Perhaps this is why she adamantly doesn’t want a wall.

She should be more concerned about what President @realDonaldTrump has on HER. Pelosi Accuses Trump of Being Blackmailed by Putin https://t.co/LXoqzssTEb via @gatewaypundit — Lisa Mei Crowley (@LisaMei62) January 27, 2019

Let’s hope that if it is in fact true, that we find the truth behind the Mexican cartel – Democrat connection sooner rather than later!

Note above picture from Mexico from provided by El Financiero-Bloomberg Mexico via Rio Grande Guardian.

Hat tip D. Manny