1861: The Civil War Awakening: Adam Goodheart: 9781400032198: Amazon.com: Books
I found this book thanks to the positive review of a GR friend (thanks Jim). The friendships GR cultivates is one of its best features. Now if only they would create a platform so that GR friends could engage in group messaging and discussion that would be fantastic. I guess I'll give them time to think about that as I'm sure one day one of those geeks will think of this as another way to confuse old timers with another hi-tech application.



Anyway those of us that enjoy reading history are all too familiar with the major events and personalities of history. We become so familiar that, at times, the material can become boring when nothing new is developed or opined. For that reason I really enjoy finding a book like this one. This book does deal with familiar events, at least the events occurring in 1861 and 1860 but it does something different with those events. It tells us how those major events and personalities were perceived by the common people that witnessed them and had to live with their results. It also gives us an understanding that some of these major events may have even been the result of actions by ordinary or uncredited actors in history. The notion that General Butler is credited with creating the concept of "contraband" to classify runaway slaves is one thing but that his actions were the foundation for the Emancipation Proclamation is quite another but it is probably true. The book also dwells on the perceptions people had of Lincoln as he entered the White House and how both the people and Lincoln evolved their thinking during the entry phase of the Lincoln Administration. I found this book to be most enlightening and in our present circumstances most reassuring. If the American people weathered what started in 1861 then shouldn't we be able to weather our present differences? I sure hope so. If not then we have shamed those, all of those, that went before us. (less)