Almanac of American Politics 2018: Columbia Books Inc: 9781938939563: Amazon.com: Books
Richard E. Cohen was co-author of The Almanac of American Politics from 2001 through 2010. He has written about Congress for National Journal, Politico and Congressional Quarterly. He is the author of several books, including Washington at Work: Back Rooms and Clean Air, a case study of the 1990 Clean Air Act, and Rostenkowski: The Pursuit of Power and the End of the Old Politics. He recently co-authored The Partisan Divide, with former Reps. Tom Davis of Virginia and Martin Frost of Texas. In 1990 he won the prestigious Everett McKinley Dirksen Award for distinguished reporting on Congress.



James A. Barnes is a senior writer for Ballotpedia.org and consultant to CNN projecting the outcomes of presidential, congressional and gubernatorial races for its election night and primary night coverage. He was formerly the chief political correspondent for National Journal magazine and founder of the National Journal Insiders Poll. He is co-author of “Public Opinion among Political Elites: The Insiders Poll as a Research Toll” in The Forum: A Journal of Applied Research in Contemporary Politics, 2013; and contributor to The State of American Politics (Rowman & Littlefield, 2001).



Charlie Cook is Editor and Publisher of the Cook Political Report and a political analyst for National Journal magazine, where he writes a twice weekly column. Charlie is considered one of the nation’s leading independent and non-partisan authorities on American politics and U.S. elections. In 2010, Charlie was a co-recipient of the American Political Science Association’s prestigious Carey McWilliams award to honor “a major journalistic contribution to our understanding of politics.” For the Spring semester of 2013, Charlie served as a Resident Fellow at the Institute of Politics at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.



Michael Barone is Senior Political Analyst for the Washington Examiner and a Resident Fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. He is a contributor to Fox News Channel and co-author of The Almanac of American Politics 1972-2016. He is also the author of Our Country: The Shaping of America from Roosevelt to Reagan, The New Americans: How the Melting Pot Can Work Again, and many other publications in the United States and several other countries. Mr. Barone received the Bradley Prize from the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation in 2010, the Barbara Olsen Award from The American Spectator in 2006 and the Carey McWilliams Award from the American Political Science Association in 1992.



About the Data Editor:Keating Holland was Director of Polling for CNN from 1993 until his retirement in 2014. He also supervised the network's decision desk on election nights as CNN's Director of Election Analysis from 2006 to 2014. During that time, Mr. Holland won two Emmys and a Peabody Award. To date, Mr. Holland has visited 423 of the 435 congressional districts in the United States.