Barack Obama: The Story: David Maraniss: 9781439160411: Amazon.com: Books
It is difficult to add anything new to what 72 other reviewers have already written, but I will, nevertheless, add my own thoughts. I bought this biography of Barack Obama because I am a supporter of his in addition to being attracted to the author of the book, David Maraniss, who wrote books on such icons as Roberto Clemente and Vince Lombardi.



This book is a straightforward account of our President' grandparents, parents, and siblings. The birth of our President doesn't occur until Chapter 7 in the book. Barack's parents were from Kansas and I found it interesting that his maternal grandfather was named Stanley Dunham while his maternal grandmother's favorite actress was Bette Davis who played in a movie entitled "In This Your Life" with the name of her character having the name of "Stanley." She thought this was so cool that when her daughter was born (Barack's mother) she gave her the name Stanley Ann Dunham.



The family moved around spending time in both Texas and Oklahoma before moving to Mercer Island in the state of Washington. From there it was on to Hawaii where Stanley Ann Dunham met Barack Obama, the President's father, while both were there studying. Marriage took place with our present President Barack Obama being born to them on August 4, 1961. The marriage didn't last with father Barack Obama returning to Kenya where he died in an automobile accident. He was a brilliant man, but was a womanizer and had significant problems with alcohol. Stanley Ann went to study anthropology in Indonesia while child Barack remained with his maternal grandparents in Hawaii. I found it interesting that while a senior in high school Barack Obama's basketball team was one of the top ten teams in the nation. Obama wasn't a starter, but he was on the team.



Following graduation from high school Obama went to Occidental College in the Los Angeles area for two years before transferring to Columbia University in New York City where he received his degree.



The final portion of the book covers the time he spent in Chicago as a community organizer on Chicago's troubled South Side. The book concludes with his acceptance to Harvard University.



This obviously is not a complete up-to-date biography of our President, and politics is not involved. However, the book has 571 pages of text and author David Maraniss has completed a lot of research to bring an objective account of this portion of Barack Obama's life. The reader may feel he is being told more than he wants in this book, and patience is required to keep all the people straight. I did find it to be a very worthwhile read.