God and Hillary Clinton: A Spiritual Life: Paul Kengor: 9780061136924: Amazon.com: Books
I reference the (in)famous movie, as with HRC, it seems there is something to offend everyone...



Where to start, reviewing a 'spiritual biography' of one of the most divisive public figures in recent US history. Well, firstly, this book isn't all that good. It's really not. I've read it several times and each time I'm kind of confused as to exactly why it's not very good. But it's pretty much the only book on the subject of what makes HRC tick, so I'm kind of stuck with it.



For nuts and bolts, it's fine; as biography it's okay. But when it gets to actually doing what it says it does: illuminate HRC's inner faith, this book just doesn't quite cut it. Kengor himself admits, now, that the book was unsuccessful, at least financially; he says it's because one faction disregarded HRC's faith as irrelevant, and the other faction disregarded her faith as somehow not 'REAL' Christianity. This book does establish that the subject is in fact a devoted, even devout, Christian, just not of the Fundamentalist variety, so... Kengor reveals himself as leaning Fundamentalist, and his biography is seriously slanted, if not completely biased, in that direction.



I think the reason this book is not that great is not really because it's bad, exactly. I think it's incomplete. For all his efforts Kengor doesn't seem to have a firm grasp of women's roles in the Methodist Church; one gets the impression he actually doesn't know very much about women personally. His book describes doctrines and teachings, but can't seem to grasp that within churches and religious organizations some groups, factions, especially women's factions, and extra-especially women's factions dedicated to charity work and community outreach and, you know, actually doing stuff with other people, may, through sheer practicality, deviate substantially from the stated written doctrines of the greater organization.



I would encourage readers of this book, people really interested in finding out what makes Hillary Rodham Clinton what and how she is, search out some books and narratives about women's organizations and outreach in the Methodist Church history. I did, and was very surprised to find that research resulted in a much greater appreciation and respect for who and what HRC is. Two books I highly recommend for a fuller picture are:



'As Among The Methodists', Elizabeth Lee

'St. Mark's and the Social Gospel', Ellen Blue



Okay, that's all I got.