The Fiery Trial: Abraham Lincoln and American Slavery: Eric Foner: 9780393340662: Amazon.com: Books
This analysis had not been done by Lincoln scholars before and it is just a sumptous read. I envy Prof. Foner's students at Columbia. I only learned about him by an appearance on Democracy Now. Foner has this wonderful gift of allowing for historical overview while getting right into the context of the times. The complexity is so astonishing, as of course, it always is, and as Foner notes, taking history's view often makes outcomes seem destined or inevitable. So it is very difficult to look back and take apart so many elements in some kind of dispassionate but still feeling way. I did not think I needed to read more on Lincoln because of having read so much and being enamored of the Lincoln scholars and their wonderful community. Foner does credit Michael Burlingame and, in fact, often relies on Burlingame's wonderful scholarship but then contributes this particular focus, this puzzling developmental relationship of Abraham Lincoln to his times.



Clearly, that president was a born mediator, able to see and know and address the views of others around him. He did shrewdly avoid taking any stands that would poorly impact on his political ambitions. While he hated slavery in principle, he could not imagine a social order suddently without it. We consider that less than idealistic of him but consider too, nearly everyone in his cabinet that wanted to be president had mostly ruled themself out by their having taken stands for or against slavery, abolition, or this or that party. So Lincoln wound up with the job and then seemed the only one with a spine enough and a devotion enough to George Washington's vision and tribulations to withstand the great pressures for compromise with secession. Only Lincoln would not budge and what a horrible messy war it was.



We cannot know what Lincoln would have done with Reconstruction but we do know what Andrew Johnson did. That's another Foner book.



Foner's great gift as I see it is fidelity to the tapestry of the times. Foner has not himself as a teacher or author gotten lost in the mystique of Lincoln and that's not easy and I suppose he must have decided early that field was just too populated with scholarship.



This is a great read even for those of us who've immersed in Burlingame and all the Lincoln scholars. Because it seems that Foner has been able to trace Lincoln's development and changes through time. Always the motives were mediative, never extreme. I would love to have seen Lincoln deal with Reconstruction and I feel certain he would have acknowledged the stresses on all parts and would have used martial law to prevent the abuses of the freedmen to give them time for education and self development. We did not get that. As I say, that's another book.