Immigrant Hits, Kills Baby With Car
A woman in Columbus, Ohio, was arrested, charged and convicted after she hit and killed a 7-month-old baby with her car.

A judge found Muhuba Mohamed guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide on Oct. 5 after she struck a man who was pushing an infant in a stroller along the side of the road on June 2, 2016. Mohamed then ran over a mailbox and crashed into a house, according to The Columbus Dispatch.

The man pushing the stroller was identified as 23-year-old Kenan Ferebee and the child was his 7-month-old son, Micah.

The baby was pronounced dead at an area hospital. The child's father was taken to a different hospital in critical condition, WBNS reported.

A witness said Mohamed had a phone in her hand at the time of the crash, but there was no evidence of texts or calls being made or received. Four days earlier on May 29, 2016, the woman was in an accident in which she crashed into a median, The Columbus Dispatch reports. In both cases, she was driving with a temporary permit without an accompanying licensed driver.

"Not one of those single things amounts to recklessness," Judge Laurel Beatty Blunt said. "But when you look at the totality of the circumstances, the court does rule that it does amount to reckless conduct."

Mohamed, a native of Somalia, reportedly faced a prison sentence if convicted, but was allowed to remain free until her sentencing.

"If an American did the same thing they would be in jail for a long time," one Mad World News reader commented on the site's Facebook page. "She should get the same or more being the 2nd accident in 4 days. Going off the side of the road and running over 2 innocent people killing a helpless baby. Come on people. Give her life in prison. She deserves more than that but I'm sure she won't get the death penalty. What in the hell kind of Justice system do we have now..."

"Define for me the difference between reckless conduct and recklessness," another wrote. "Maybe in OHIO they speak different English than I do, after all I am from a rural state and may not understand the high English as interpreted by more citified judges. Where is justice? If a Caucasian teenager did this... You finish the sentence."

"If she were an American and had 2 accidents in 4 days on a permit she would not be allowed to get a drivers license," added another. "She is not even an American Citizen so she has NO business even with a permit in the first place. She needs to be in prison NOW. You don't just replace someone's baby."