View as a webpage
GAGOP: JASON CARTER'S ADS AND VOTING RECORD DON'T MESH

(Atlanta, Georgia) - Atlanta liberal Senator Jason Carter today released two campaign ads that appear to endorse the pro-jobs, pro-education record of Republican Gov. Nathan Deal.

"In one of his campaign commercials, Carter says that 'we have to commit to an education system that's going to work for my kids and your kids,'" said Ryan Mahoney, spokesperson for the Georgia Republican Party. "During this year's legislative session, Gov. Deal's budget increased education spending by more than half a billion dollars. By voting no on that budget, Carter voted against teacher raises and restoring a full 180-day school year. During economic hardship, Gov. Deal cut the size of state government without raising taxes so that he could hold the line on education spending, his top priority. Even when all other state agencies took cuts, Gov. Deal increased education spending every year. Interestingly, Carter showed his support for the governor's efforts in 2011 and 2012 by voting for the Deal budgets, but then voted against the biggest increase in seven years. That's a vote against the schools his sons attend. It's a vote against teachers. It's politics before principle, and Georgians see through it.

"In the other ad, Carter labels himself a fiscal conservative and bipartisan leader. Georgians already have a real conservative, bipartisan governor. They don't need or want a phony one. Gov. Deal reduced the size of state government, cut taxes and refused federal programs that would force huge new spending on Georgia taxpayers. As a bipartisan leader, Gov. Deal passed landmark criminal justice reforms that will save taxpayers hundreds of millions, saved HOPE as a merit-based scholarship for future generations, made Georgia the No. 1 state for business and created more than 240,000 new private sector jobs.

"Carter's campaign appears to be promising that he'll be just like Gov. Deal. Georgians already have the real Deal."