All Arizona counties will verify ballot signatures through Nov. 14
CLOSE Kory Langhofer, attorney for the Arizona Republican Party, responds to settlement allowing all counties to verify ballot signatures through Nov. 14. Carly Henry, The Republic | azcentral.com

Judge Margaret Mahoney listens during a hearing in her Maricopa County Superior courtroom in Phoenix on Nov. 9, 2018, (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

Friday began with a social media uproar overallegations of Arizona voter fraud as the nation awaited the results of the state's too-close-to-call U.S. Senate race, and Arizona Republican groups prepared to take local elections officials to court.

Their lawsuit, in reality, contained no allegations of voter fraud. The legal challenge centered on a procedurallack of consistency in the time frame counties allow voters to correct signature issues on mail-in ballots.

About 20 minutes before the hearing, representatives of the Arizona Republican Party held a news conference and confidently told reporters, "The Democrats are stealing the election and we're not going to allow it."

In the end, the counties whose election practices they ended up changing were largely run by Republicans.

The events inside the courtroom were far less dramatic.

Minutes after the news conference and before the hearing, all of the counties and the Republican groups had come to an agreement. The judge approved it with little fanfare.

Per the settlement, all of Arizona's counties will allow voters to verify the signatures on their ballots through 5 p.m. on Nov. 14.

MORE: Sinema's lead over McSally widens in roller-coaster U.S. Senate race

The legal battle was likely little more than a messy pit stop on the long route left to determine the next U.S. senator from Arizona.

An attorney for the state Republican Party said after the hearing that the settlement was a win for Republican senate candidate Martha McSally, but it's not clear if it's true.

McSally was trailing Democrat Kyrsten Sinema by about 20,000 votes as of Friday night.

Lawsuit centers on signatures

The lawsuit centered on the length of time that voters have to rectify signature mismatches on the green envelopes that contain mail-in ballots.

When counties receive mail-in ballots, election workers attempt to check the signature against the voter's signature on record. If the workers cannot verify the signature, the county attempts to contact voters to allow them to confirm their ballot.

All of Arizona's 15 counties take part in this process before Election Day, but only a handful of them allow voters to continue "curing" their ballots after Election Day.

That inconsistency is what the Republican Party wanted a judge to rectify.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

MORE: Trump, Republicans claim election fraud amid tight McSally-Sinema race

Maricopa and Coconino counties, both of which have Democratic county recorders running their elections, had planned to allow voters to cure their ballots through Nov. 14. Apache and Pinal counties had planned to stop curing Friday, and Pima County had planned to stop Saturday.

The other counties stopped curing ballots at 7 p.m. on Election Day.

"Under the current varied practices of the defendant county recorders, the vote of citizens in rural counties is diluted because their recorders cut off the ability to cure early ballot signature issues, while voters in other counties such as Pima and Maricopa have a far greater likelihood of having their votes counted because their recorders continue to allow early ballots to be cured well past Election Day," the Republican groups argued in court records.

CLOSE Arizona Republicans push for equality in voting between rural and urban counties before court hearing on mail-in ballots on Nov. 9, 2018. Patrick Breen, Arizona Republic

McSally has performed strongest in rural counties, while Sinema is the front-runner in Maricopa and Pima counties, where vote curing is permitted for a longer period of time.

The Republican groups have argued that Maricopa, Pima, Coconino, Pinal and Apache counties should never have allowed vote curing after Election Day, but now that they have, the court should require all counties to permit voters to cure early ballots until 5 p.m. on Nov. 14.

That was ultimately what the counties agreed to do.

The number of ballots with signature issues in each county is unclear. Maricopa County Recorder Adrian Fontes said his office had around 5,600 as of Thursday afternoon. Navajo County has about 25, according to court records.

The settlement only applies to this election. The rules could change for future elections.

Both sides say, 'Count all votes'

The rhetoric about the lawsuit by both Republicans and Democrats was actually the same: "Count all votes."

When the lawsuit was initially filed Wednesday, it was unclear whether the Republicans were seeking to stop Maricopa and Pima counties from curing ballots, or if they were looking to extend the practice to all counties.

Democrats assumed it was the former, which spurred criticism and claims of Republican voter suppression both locally and nationally.

"I think every eligible United States citizen who is casting a valid ballot that is verified should have that ballot count," Maricopa County Recorder Adrian Fontes said.

By Thursday, Republicans said they were looking to expand the curing time frame for all counties, because they too wanted all ballots to count — including those in rural counties where recorders had stopped curing ballots.

At the news conference before the court hearing, McSally supporters held signs that read, "Rural Votes Matter," and "Count Every Vote."

Susan & I always drop off our early ballots on Election Day. No reason why anyone following the standard procedure shouldn’t have their vote counted. The same rules should apply for all voters, regardless of where you live in AZ. We’re intervening to make sure voters are heard. — Mark Brnovich (@GeneralBrnovich) November 9, 2018

Arizona Republican Attorney General Mark Brnovich intervened in the lawsuit. In a tweet, he said, "The same rules should apply for all voters, regardless of where you live in AZ."

In a tweet, state elections director Eric Spencer with the Republican-led Arizona Secretary of State's Office said the issue was "hotly debated" among county recorders in preparation for the 2018 election and no consensus could be reached.

He said the Secretary of State's Office decided at the time not to force a decision "amidst strongly conflicting views."

More challenges?

After the court hearing, Arizona Republican Party attorney Kory Langhofer suggested more legal challenges could be on the way.

"We're really concerned about the way ballots are being counted, particularly in Maricopa County," he said.

There are about 266,000 ballots left to process in Maricopa County. A bipartisan board of poll workers observe and assist with ballot processing.

Langhofer said that although the county has the "customary" number of Republican observers, it's not enough to ensure there hasn't been any fraud or errors.

"We're not done watching this. We're going to get back to work and make sure the rest of this goes right," he said.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/elections/2018/11/09/arizona-counties-verify-ballot-signatures-through-nov-14-lawsuit-republican-party-mcsally-sinema/1935158002/