Catherine Cortez Masto for Senate — FACT CHECK: While Congressman Heck Voted Against...
For Immediate Release

September 13, 2016

Contact: Press@CatherineCortezMasto.com

Las Vegas, NV – Another day, another outrageous attack ad funded by Congressman Heck’s Washington allies that lies about Catherine Cortez Masto’s record. The truth: Nevada’s rape kit backlog was a result of a lack of funding. Federal funding Nevada eventually secured came in part from actions initiated under Cortez Masto’s tenure as Attorney General. Meanwhile, in Washington, Congressman Heck voted three times against funding for victims of sexual assault and even voted against new funding to test rape kits.

“Congressman Heck’s Washington allies are once again lying about Catherine Cortez Masto’s record to distract voters from Heck voting three times in Washington against funding to test rape kits and help victims of sexual assault,” said Sarah Zukowski, spokesperson for Catherine Cortez Masto for Senate. “The truth is while Catherine Cortez Masto has a long record of fighting to help victims of sexual assault, Congressman Heck has voted time and again against providing help for rape victims.”

View the facts below:

SENATE LEADERSHIP FUND “NO IDEA” – AD PUSHBACK 9/13/16

CLAIM

RESPONSE

VOICEOVER: Catherine Cortez Masto failed Nevada rape victims. While Attorney General, thousands of rape kits were never sent for DNA analysis. But Cortez Masto had no idea.

TEXT: Catherine Cortez Masto Failed Nevada Rape Victims

Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, 7/15/14

“Untested rape kits…”

October 8, 2014

Las Vegas Review-Journal

REALITY: IT’S A MYTH THAT RAPE KIT BACKLOG CAME BECAUSE LAW ENFORCEMENT WAS NOT DOING THEIR JOB

Republican Deputy AG Wes Duncan: Backlog Came Because Detectives Working The Case Said There Wasn’t Good Enough Evidence To Pursue Charges Or The Victim Didn’t Want To Press Charges. During a discussion at the Southern Hills Republican Women’s Club, Wes Duncan said, “In cases that are in the backlog, or cases that are really old and they didn’t have DNA technology, or perhaps they couldn’t find the defendant, it was a stranger type rape situation, or perhaps a person that was just visiting Las Vegas may have been assaulted and they left, and they just wanted to put it behind them. So that’s kind of how the accumulation of those things occurred. It could also be that a detective was working on the case and said, ‘There’s really not good evidence. I’ve talked to the defendant, I’ve talked to the victim. We just are not going to give this case over to the prosecution.’“ [Southern Hills Republican Women’s Club, 6/28/16]

Sparks Police Sgt. Scott Tracy: Rape Kits Are Always Tested If The Suspect Is Unknown, But The Vast Majority Of Sexual Assaults Are Not Strangers. “Representatives for all three jurisdictions said a kit is always tested if the suspect is unknown. ‘If we have a stranger sexual assault, we send it out right away because it is a higher priority,’ Sgt. Scott Tracy of the Sparks Police Department said. ‘But the vast majority of sexual assaults are not strangers. The vast majorities, we know the suspects.’” [Reno Gazette-Journal, 9/16/15]

UNR Victims’ Advocate: It’s A Myth That Police Are Not Doing Their Jobs, Rape Kit Testing Is Not Necessary To Move Forward With Prosecution. “Justine Hernandez, the University of Nevada, Reno victims’ advocate, said the backlog in testing can be misinterpreted. ‘A common (misconception) is that if we have a lot of kits that are untested, that means the police are not doing their jobs or investigating properly,’ she said. ‘That’s really a myth because, for some cases, the kit is not necessary to move forward with prosecution or is actually at the victim’s request to not move forward.’” [Reno Gazette-Journal, 9/16/15]

REALITY: LOCAL POLICE AND DISTRICT ATTORNEYS HAD DISCRETION TO TEST RAPE KITS, NOT THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S OFFICE

In Nevada, Local Police & District Attorneys Had Discretion To Test Rape Kits. “Local police cited several reasons why a kit might not be tested: •Detective discretion: If the assailant is known, detectives might decide not to have the kit tested. •Suspect confession: In the past, a confession could make the test unnecessary. Washoe County Sheriff’s spokesman Bob Harmon said confessions are no longer considered an excuse for not testing the kit. •Victim recanting: Police must have a crime to investigate before they can analyze the DNA. If the victim says there is no crime, there is no investigation. […] Reno Police Sgt. Marcia Lopez, who oversees the sex crimes unit, said the decision to test a rape kit is usually left to the discretion of the detective or district attorney. She said there could be many reasons why a rape kit is not submitted to the lab. There’s a whole bunch of other things that are factored into the sexual assault kit that people don’t see,’ she said. ‘All they see is, this is the backlog and suspects are going free, when there’s a whole bunch of stuff people don’t understand.’” [Reno Gazette-Journal, 9/16/15]

Local Police Departments Noted Rape Kit Backlog Was Partly From Lack Of Funding.“The departments said the number can be attributed in part to lack of funding, but also the role DNA evidence plays in sexual-assault investigations. Rape kits consist of assailants’ DNA samples collected from victims following the assault. Specimens include hair, blood, skin and semen. These samples are then tested in a local crime lab for DNA, which is then matched against databases to search for a possible culprit. Victims do not have to report a crime to have a kit collected by a hospital, and can have the specimens preserved in case they decide to press charges at a later date.”

Rape Kit Testing Can Cost Between $1,000 To $1,500 Each. “Lack of funding: Kits cost anywhere from $1,000 to $1,500 apiece to test The lack of testing has drawn criticism across the state.” [Reno Gazette-Journal, 9/16/15]

QUESTIONER: Are you aware of this issue about the unprocessed rape kits?

TEXT: October 21, 2014 Advisory Commission on the Administration of Justice

“Are you aware of this issue about the unprocessed rape kits?”

CORTEZ MASTO: No, I am not aware of that issue. At least, it hasn’t come to our attention.

TEXT: “No. I am not aware of that issue.”

QUESTIONER: Maybe I can get you that information.

TEXT: “Maybe I can get you that information?”

THE TRUTH: CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO’S WORK TO TAKE ON THE BIG BANKS HELPED FUND NEVADA’S TESTING OF RAPE KITS

Las Vegas Sun: The IFC Approved The Use Of $1.7 Million From the JP Morgan Chase Settlement To Fund Rape Kits. According to an AP story by Ken Ritter, “Nevada lawmakers agreed Wednesday to allocate almost $3.7 million in settlement and grant money to test about 7,500 sexual assault evidence kits languishing in police vaults around the state, including some in Las Vegas dating back 30 years. […]The money allocated Wednesday includes $1.7 million from a settlement this summer with JPMorgan Chase in a debt collection practices case, Duncan said.” [Las Vegas Sun, 12/16/15]

Cortez Masto Encouraged Nevadans To File Testimony On Debt Collectors With Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. In February 2014, Cortez Masto press release stated, “Nevada Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto, through the Bureau of Consumer Protection encourages Nevadans who have had experiences with debt collectors - good and bad to participate in an online forum. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) will consider public input in formulating specific proposals about creating new federal guidelines for debt collection. ‘This is a great opportunity for Nevadans to submit feedback on their experiences with debt collectors and further influence policy’, said Masto.” [Nevada Attorney General press release, 2/13/14]

Cortez Masto: Nevada Consumers Are The Second Most Likely In The Country To File Complaints About Debt Collection With The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. In March 2014, Cortez Masto press release stated, “Nevada Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto reports that Nevada consumers are the second most likely in the country to file complaints about debt collection with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) according to a U.S. Public Interest Research Group (PIRG) Education Fund report released last Thursday. ‘One of the biggest consumer protection issues Nevadan’s face today is debt collection and targeting from collection departments,’ said Masto. ‘As always, we will continue to hold those accountable for taking advantage of consumers.’” [Nevada Attorney General press release, 3/5/14]

June 2015: CFPB And 47 Attorneys General Initiated Legal Action Against J.P. Morgan Chase’s Debt Collection Practices. According to a press release by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, “Today the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and Attorneys General in 47 states and the District of Columbia took action against JPMorgan Chase for selling bad credit card debt and illegally robo-signing court documents. […]Chase is ordered to permanently stop all attempts to collect, enforce in court, or sell more than 528,000 consumers’ accounts. Chase will pay at least $50 million in consumer refunds, $136 million in penalties and payments to the CFPB and states, and a $30 million penalty to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) in a related action.” [CFPB Press Release, 7/8/15]

CFPB: We Took Action Against J.P. Morgan Chase Based On Their Illegal Debt Collection Practices Between 2009-2013. According to a press release by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, “The CFPB found that Chase violated the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act’s prohibitions against unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts and practices. Chase sold faulty and false debts to third-party collectors, including accounts with unlawfully obtained judgments, inaccurate balances, and paid-off balances. Chase also sold debts that were owed by deceased borrowers. Chase also filed misleading debt-collections lawsuits against consumers using robo-signed and illegally sworn statements to obtain false or inaccurate judgments for unverified debts.” [CFPB Press Release, 7/8/15]

THE TRUTH: AS ATTORNEY GENERAL, CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO SECURED FUNDING FOR SEXUAL ASSAULT AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE VICTIMS

Headline: Las Vegas Sun: “Nevada AG Offers Grants To Combat Violence Against Women.”[Las Vegas Sun, 10/1/14]

Cortez Masto Announced $1.8 Million In Grants For Programs To Prevent Violence Against Women And Hold Offenders Accountable. “The Nevada Attorney General’s Office is offering about $1.8 million in grants for programs that seek to prevent violence against women. The grant opportunities will provide money to initiatives that protect victims and hold offenders accountable, according to a news release from the office of Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto. ‘The programs eligible for these grants should provide victim-centered intervention through nonprofit service providers, law enforcement, prosecution and courts,’ according to the release. The grants will be funded by federal Violence Against Women Act awards to the Attorney General’s Office. According to the request for applications, $1,474,960 in Services Training Officers Prosecution funding and $280,581 in Sexual Assault Services Provider money will be available.” [Las Vegas Sun, 10/1/14]

AG Cortez Masto’s Office Awarded $1.5 Million In STOP Violence Against Women Grants For Law Enforcement, Prosecution, Victim Services And Courts. “The Nevada state attorney general’s office says it has received a nearly $1.5 million federal Justice Department grant for STOP Violence Against Women programs. Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto said in a statement that sub-grants will be awarded by the end of the year in categories including law enforcement, prosecution, victim services and courts. Federal pass-through grants to the states were authorized by Congress in the Violence Against Women Act of 2005. Masto says the program aims to identify and support programs to reduce violent crimes against women and to bolster services for victims. Recipients are required to submit financial, administrative and program reports to the government to maintain grant funding.” [Associated Press, 10/27/10]

AG Cortez Masto Allotted $1.2 Million In Recovery Act Funds To STOP Violence Against Women Programs. “More than two dozen agencies across Nevada will receive more than $1.2 million for programs to reduce violence against women. Nevada Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto said Tuesday the money under the Recovery Act STOP violence Against Women grant program will create or retain the equivalent of 17.5 full-time positions in 28 agencies in the state. Nevada has been allotted economic stimulus funds for programs that meet federal and state objectives of the grant program. The attorney general’s office will administer the grant money to Nevada programs. The STOP Violence Against Women Program encourages the development of ways to combat violent crimes against women.” [Associated Press, 6/30/09]

THE TRUTH: CORTEZ MASTO’S OFFICE TRAINED NURSES AND LAW ENFORCEMENT TO HELP SEXUAL ASSAULT AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE VICTIMS

Cortez Masto’s Office Trained Nurses On Handling Sexual Assault Victims And Exams.“Pintar’s relatively diplomatic take came after Supervisor John McKenna raised questions about whether providing government money was the issue and Mayor Robert Crowell pointed out nurses are offered training on handling of sexual assault victims and exams by the office of Nevada Attorney General Catherine Cortez-Masto.” [Nevada Appeal, 8/29/14]

Headline: Elko Daily Free Press: “Attorney General’s Office To Host Training On Violence Prevention.” [Elko Daily Free Press,6/17/14]

Cortez Masto Held Trainings On Domestic Violence, Sexual Assault, And Human Trafficking. “The Nevada Attorney General’s Office will host a full-day training today discussing domestic violence, sexual assault and human trafficking. In July 2013, Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto traveled to Elko, Winnemucca, Lovelock, Wells and Battle Mountain to meet with law enforcement, community leaders and truckers about the need to patrol the Interstate 80 corridor, which her office said is a hub for sex trafficking, and stop perpetrators. In response to last year’s trip, the attorney general’s office will host trainings in Elko, Winnemucca and Lovelock today, Wednesday and Thursday, respectively. Speakers include Kareen Prentice, domestic violence ombudsmen for the attorney general’s office; Monica Player, attorney adviser for Battered Women’s Justice Project; Rachell Ekroos, forensic medical consultant for Center for Forensic Nursing Excellence International; and Jenna Novak, Polaris Project program specialist.” [Elko Daily Free Press, 6/17/14]

Headline: Associated Press: “Nevada Official Unveils Programs To Fight Domestic Abuse.”[Associated Press, 10/5/07]

Cortez Masto’s AG Office Produced Training Programs For Law Enforcement And Prosecutors Handling Domestic Violence Cases. “Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto announced two new programs aimed at helping domestic violence victims in Nevada, which leads the nation in the number of domestic violence deaths per capita in 2005. Cortez Masto said Thursday that one program will assist law enforcement with training and that the other will help Nevada prosecutors in handling domestic violence cases. ‘We should be doing so much more and so much better for Nevada’s families,’ Cortez Masto said, adding that the key is coordination among law enforcement, prosecutors, victim advocates and treatment providers. Law enforcement will be helped with an interactive training CD called ‘Domestic Violence & Elder Abuse Investigations.’ The CD was put together by the attorney general’s office, the Nevada Commission on Peace Officers’ Standards Training, or POST, and various agencies and groups within the city of Henderson. The 300 training discs will be used by more than 16,000 law enforcement officials across the state.” [Associated Press, 10/5/07]

THE TRUTH: CORTEZ MASTO LED THE FIGHT TO COMBAT SEXUAL ASSAULT AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IN NEVADA

Cortez Masto Led The Charge To Address And Combat Violence Against Women. “The Nevada Domestic Violence Fatality Review Team (DVFRT) held its inagural meeting on Thursday to address and combat rising violence against women, with Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto leading the charge. The Silver State leads the nation in the per capita number of women murdered as a result of domestic violence, a trend that for years has plagued urban areas such as Reno and Las Vegas, as well as rural areas such as Elko County and, particularly, in Native American communities. ‘It exists in every community in our state,’ Masto said. ‘Nobody escapes it.’ The state Legislature, at Masto’s behest, created the DVFRT last year and authorized a multi-disciplinary team comprised of prosecutors, police, domestic violence service providers, treatment providers and community and faith leaders to review the deaths of domestic violence victims.” [Daily Sparks Tribune, 1/12/12]

Cortez Masto Focused On Domestic Violence Prevention In Nevada For Years And Advocated For More State & Federal Funding For Victims. “‘People should understand that domestic violence crosses socioeconomic backgrounds, it could happen in any family and it could happen to anyone,’ explains Catherine Cortez Masto, former Nevada Attorney General. Cortez Masto focused on domestic violence prevention in Nevada for years and she says it comes down to educating the community in order to gain more support, ‘It is a lack of resources, not only do we have a lack of state funding we have a lack of federal funding. There is only so much that goes around to help individuals who are dealing with a domestic violence situation.’” [KRNV, 10/29/15]

Elko Daily Free Press Editorial: Cortez Masto Fought To Combat Domestic Violence And Left Behind A Legacy We Hope Others Follow. In January 2015, the Elko Daily Free Press editorial board wrote, “Before she left office, Catherine Cortez Masto released information to combat domestic violence in the state, which is something she battled throughout her time as attorney general. While she is no longer the state’s chief law enforcement officer, she has left behind a legacy we hope others follow. She led the way against domestic violence through the Nevada Council for the Prevention of Domestic Violence. The NCPDV’s mission is to combat domestic violence through awareness, legislation and the support of agencies involved in the fight against domestic violence, according to the AG’s office.” [Elko Daily Free Press, Editorial, 1/13/15]

THE TRUTH: LAW ENFORCEMENT GROUPS THAT EMCOMPASS ALMOST EVERY PEACE OFFICER IN NEVADA UNANIMOUSLY ENDORSED CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO FOR SENATE

KOH-AM: For The First Time In Nevada History All Law Enforcement Unions In Nevada Endorsed Cortez Masto. "For the first time in Nevada history, all the state’s law enforcement unions and associations have come together for a unanimous endorsement. The organizations backed former Nevada attorney general and candidate for U.S. Senate Catherine Cortez Masto, citing her record of working across the aisle to solve problems for Nevadans. Ron Gareer, career government affairs director for the Police Officers Research Association of Nevada on why they chose her: For the attack on law enforcement today I mean everything we do on the is second guessed by everybody. That lady understands what we’ve gone through, she understands what the families of these officers killed in line of duty are going through. We need that support and that’s why we support opponent republican representative Joe Heck.” [KOH-AM, 7/6/16]

Headline: Associated Press: “Nevada Police Unions Back Democrat Cortez Masto For Senate.” [Associated Press, 3/2/16]

Coalition Of Nevada Law Enforcement Unions Endorsed Cortez Masto For U.S. Senate. “A coalition of Nevada law enforcement unions is announcing support for Democratic Senate candidate Catherine Cortez Masto. Cortez Masto’s campaign announced endorsements Wednesday from the Nevada Association of Public Safety Officers, Peace Officers Research of Nevada, the Fraternal Order of Police and the Southern Nevada Conference of Police and Sheriffs. The latter group includes the Las Vegas Police Protective Association and organizations representing Henderson and Las Vegas police supervisors.” [Associated Press, 3/2/16]

The Law Enforcement Unions Cited Cortez Masto’s Work To Fight Human Trafficking And Support For Funding More Police Officers As Reasons For The Endorsement. “Cortez Masto’s previous job as Nevada’s attorney general involved frequent work with law enforcement. Representatives from the unions cited her initiatives to fight human trafficking and her support of funding more police hires as reasons for the endorsement.” [Associated Press, 3/2/16]

Cortez Masto Picked Up Support From Nevada Police Unions. “Former state Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto (D) picked up endorsements from the Nevada Association of Public Safety Officers, the Fraternal Order of Police, the Peace Officers Reserve of Nevada, and the Southern Nevada Conference of Police and Sheriffs Wednesday.” [National Journal,3/3/16]

VOICEOVER: Evidence not reviewed. Alleged rapists walking free. Unacceptable.

TEXT: Alleged Rapists Walking Free

Unacceptable for U.S. Senate

THE TRUTH: FEDERAL FUNDING HELPED NEVADA’S TESTING OF 30-YEAR BACKLOG OF RAPE KITS

Federal Grants Helped Provide Funding To Test Rape Kits That Had Been Sitting In Police Fridges And Files For As Long As 30 Years. “More than 7,000 DNA kits that have been stagnating in police fridges and files across Nevada for as long as 30 years will finally get tested. Nevada Attorney General Adam Laxalt announced Thursday morning that the state will receive up to $5.6 million to outsource the state’s 7,500 sexual assault evidence kits, 6,300 cases from Southern Nevada. Nearly $4 million of the fund comes from national grants: the Bureau of Justice Administration’s Sex Assault Kit Initiative grant is worth $1.9 million for the state, and the New York County district attorney’s office is awarding Las Vegas police $2 million from a $35 million pot for sexual assault DNA tests from the county’s forfeitures and seizures.” [Las Vegas Review-Journal, 9/10/15]

… BUT CONGRSSMAN HECK VOTED THREE TIMES AGAINST FUNDING TO HELP VICTIMS OF SEXUAL ASSAULT AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, AND FOR TESTING RAPE KITS

Heck Voted Against $3 Million For COPS Program, $1 Million For Violence Against Women Prevention And Prosecution Programs, And Grants To Address Backlogs Of Sexual Assault Kits. In May 2014, Heck voted against a: “Moore, D-Wis., motion to recommit the bill to the House Appropriations Committee and report it back immediately with an amendment which would increase by $1 million each, funds provided in the bill for Violence Against Women Prevention and Prosecution programs, grants to combat violence against women, State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance and grants to address backlogs of sexual assault kits. It would increase by $3 million each, funds provided in the bill for Community Oriented Policing Services and for hiring under this program.” The motion was rejected by a 185-220 vote. [CQ, 5/30/14; motion to recommit H.R. 4660, Vote 268,5/30/14]

Heck Voted Against Increasing Funds By $20.5 Million For Programs That Aid In The Prevention And Prosecution Of Acts Of Violence Against Women. In May 2012, Heck voted against a: “Nadler, D-N.Y., motion to recommit the bill to the House Appropriations Committee and report it back immediately with an amendment that would increase by $20.5 million the amount provided in the bill for programs that aid in the prevention and prosecution of acts of violence against women. It would reduce by the same amount general administrative funding for the Commerce and Justice departments and the Office of Science and Technology.” The motion was rejected by a 181-233 vote. [CQ, 5/10/12; motion to recommit H.R. 5326, Vote 248, 5/10/12]

Heck Voted Against Providing An Additional $3 Million For The Violence Against Women Prevention And Prosecution Programs And $3 Million For The Juvenile Justice Programs. In June 2015, Heck voted againstthe: “Brownley, D-Calif., motion to recommit the bill to the House Appropriations Committee with instructions to report back immediately with an amendment that would provide an additional $3 million for sexual assault victims assistance within the Violence Against Women Prevention and Prosecution Programs account and an additional $3 million for missing and exploited children programs in the Juvenile Justice Programs account. It would decrease funding for the Justice Information Technology Account by $6 million.” The motion was rejected by a vote of 184-240. [CQ, 6/3/15; H.R. 2578, Vote 296, 6/3/15]

REALITY: HECK CO-SPONSORED BILL THAT WOULD HAVE WEAKENED VAWA PROTECTIONS FOR VICTIMS

Heck Co-Sponsored House GOP Version Of VAWA. In May 2012, Heck co-sponsored and voted for: “Passage of the bill that would authorize $660 million per year through fiscal 2017 to reauthorize and modify grant and assistance programs enacted under the Violence Against Women Act. The bill would authorize funds for law enforcement training programs, prosecution and victim services. It also would impose mandatory criminal penalties for certain aggravated sexual crimes, modify visa programs for immigrant victims of domestic violence and make changes to current law protections for housing services provided to victims of violence and abuse.” [CQ, 5/16/12; H.R. 4970, Vote 258,5/16/12; H.R. 4970, Co-Sponsored, 5/11/12]

House GOP Opposed Senate Bill For Including Specific Protections For LGBT And Immigrants. “The Senate approved a bill last month with bipartisan support, voting 68-31 with every Republican woman supporting the measure. That version expands coverage to offer services to more illegal immigrants who are victims of domestic abuse. It also specifies that the law include gay, lesbian and transgender victims. Human Rights Watch released a report Wednesday showing immigrant farmworkers are especially at risk for domestic abuse and argued provisions in the Senate bill – not the House version – ‘would go some way toward fixing the problem and should be enacted.’ House Republicans oppose those changes, saying they are unnecessary because the law already covers all victims, and instead favor a narrower version of renewing the law.” [CNN, 5/16/12]

National Coalition Against Domestic Violence: House Bill “Weakens Vital Improvements Contained In Recently Passed Senate VAWA Bill.” “H.R. 4970 weakens vital improvements contained in the recently passed Senate VAWA bill (S. 1925), including provisions designed to increase the safety of Native women and the needs of the LGBT community. In addition, H.R. 4970 includes damaging provisions that roll back years of progress to protect the safety of immigrant victims.” [National Coalition Against Domestic Violence Letter, 5/14/12]

American Bar Association: House Bill “A Retreat From The Battle Against Domestic And Sexual Violence.” “H.R. 4970 does not continue this tradition of improvement. Unlike the recently passed Senate bill (S. 1925), which reflects discussions with more than 2,000 advocates and experts across the country, H.R. 4970 is a retreat from the battle against domestic and sexual violence. The proposed legislation fails to incorporate critical improvements to address the needs of underserved populations, such as victims who are members of faith communities and those who are denied services because of their sexual orientation or gender identity, and strips critical protections from existing law.” [American Bar Association Letter, 5/14/12]

REALITY: CONGRESSMAN HECK VOTED REPEATEDLY AGAINST GIVING NEVADA LAW ENFORCEMENT THE RESOURCES THEY NEED TO FIGHT CRIME

Heck Voted Against AB 461 That Ensured Clark County Used The MORE COPS Tax To Hire More Police And Allowed Nye County To Impose A Half-Percent Sales Tax In Order To Hire More Police And Firefighters. According to the Legislative Counsel’s Digest of AB 461, “The Clark County Sales and Use Tax Act of 2005 authorized the Board of County Commissioners of Clark County to impose up to one-half of 1 percent sales and use tax to employ and equip additional police officers for various police departments in Clark County. Section 1 of this bill adds a requirement that any governmental entity that authorizes expenditures from the tax revenues for a police department must submit periodic reports to the Legislature concerning the use of that money, and authorizes the Legislative Commission to review and investigate those expenditures. Sections 3-22 of this bill are modeled on the provisions of the Clark County Sales and Use Tax Act of 2005, and authorize the Board of County Commissioners of Nye County to impose an additional sales tax of up to one-half of 1 percent for the purposes of recruiting, employing and equipping additional firefighters, deputy sheriffs and other public safety personnel and constructing, improving and equipping public safety facilities in Nye County. Any proposed change in the use of the proceeds of the tax must be submitted to the voters and be approved by the Legislature. Section 17.5 of this bill contains requirements identical to those in section 1 of this bill concerning reporting of expenditures of the tax revenues and the review and investigation of those expenditures.” Heck Voted Against The Bill. [AB 461, LCB Digest; Senate Floor Vote, 5/25/07]

Heck Voted For Budget Control Act, Known As Sequestration. In August 2011, Heck voted for: “Passage of the bill that would provide a process to reduce the deficit by up to $2.4 trillion. The measure would allow the president to raise the debt limit immediately by $400 billion, with an additional $500 billion subject to a resolution of disapproval. It would set discretionary spending caps that would reduce the deficit by $917 billion in fiscal 2012 through 2021 and establish a firewall between security and non-security spending for fiscal 2012 and 2013. It would establish a bipartisan, bicameral committee tasked with making recommendations to reduce the deficit by $1.5 trillion. It would require across-the-board cuts to non-exempt discretionary and mandatory accounts by up to $1.2 trillion over fiscal 2013 through 2021 if committee reductions totaling $1.2 trillion were not enacted. The measure would require Congress to vote on a balanced-budget constitutional amendment by the end of 2011. It also would provide for an additional debt limit increase of $1.2 trillion to $1.5 trillion, subject to a resolution of disapproval.” The bill passed by a vote of 269-161. [CQ, 8/1/11; S. 365, Vote 690,8/1/11]

Sequestration Cut COPS Grants By 44 Percent. “Among the programs that would be cut in January if sequestration takes effect are the Byrne Justice Assistance Grant program, which was cut 34 percent in fiscal 2012, and the Community Oriented Policing Services hiring grants, which saw a 44 percent cut. Both programs are priorities for states and localities and have advocates on both sides of the aisle in Congress.” [Roll Call,10/24/12]

Survey Found Federal Criminal Justice Grants Have Declined 43 Percent Over The Past Two Years Impacting Programs, Including The Hiring Of Police Officers. “A survey released by the National Criminal Justice Association and the Vera Institute of Justice earlier this month found that state and local law enforcement agencies already have been forced to make cutbacks in personnel and services as a result of declining federal aid, which the two organizations said is at ‘historically low levels.’ Federal funding for criminal justice grant programs has declined 43 percent over the past two years, the survey said. The cuts have affected programs that pay for drug interdiction programs, drug treatment for prisoners, criminal background checks, the incarceration of immigrants imprisoned on criminal charges and the hiring of police officers.” [Roll Call, 10/24/12]

Las Vegas Metro Benefited From COPS Program. In June 2015, Acting Associate Attorney General Stuart F. Delery wrote, “For example, after a dramatic increase in officer-involved shootings in 2011, the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department Sheriff recognized a problem and called the COPS Office for help. As part of a multi-year, voluntary collaborative review process, the COPS Office identified 75 findings and made recommendations that the department could implement to reduce the number of officer-involved shootings. Three years after the initial report was issued, the Las Vegas department has implemented almost every recommendation. Officer-involved shootings involving unarmed suspects have been significantly reduced. The use of tasers, pepper spray, and batons has declined. And the number of arrests has gone down, while public safety and community relations have improved considerably. Las Vegas is just one of the jurisdictions that have benefited from the COPS Office’s expertise.” [U.S. Justice Department, “The Importance Of Preserving Critical Funding For Community Policing,” 6/3/15]

Local Police Departments Were Among Those Feeling The Pain Most Acutely, When The Federal Government Slashed $38 Billion Resulting In The Loss Of Hundreds Of Millions In U.S. Justice Department Grants. “When the federal government slashed $38 billion from its budget last month, among those feeling the pain most acutely were local police departments. The loss of hundreds of millions in U.S. Justice Department grants — a casualty of the 11th-hour spending compromise — will affect everything from obtaining bulletproof vests to maintaining already dwindling police forces for some struggling Chicago-area law enforcement agencies.” [Chicago Tribune, 5/11/11]

Heck Has Voted Four Times For Republican Budgets That Would Slash Federal Aid To State And Local Governments. In April 2011, Heck voted for:” Adoption of the concurrent resolution that would allow $2.859 trillion in new budget authority for fiscal 2012, including up to $1.019 trillion in non-emergency discretionary spending. It calls for $659 billion in security spending and $360 billion in non-security spending. It proposes converting the federal share of Medicaid to a block grant to states. It calls for converting Medicare for persons currently younger than 55 into a ‘premium support system’ through which the government would pay private insurance companies directly for each enrollee. It also proposes consolidating the current six tax brackets and cutting the corporate tax rate and the top individual tax rate to 25 percent. It assumes the extension of the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts beyond 2012 and projects that the budget deficit would be reduced to $391 billion by fiscal 2021.” The bill was adopted by a vote of 235-193. [CQ, 4/15/11; H Con Res 34, Vote 277,4/15/11; H Con Res 112, Vote 151, 3/29/12; H.Con.Res 96, Vote 177, 4/10/14; S.Con.Res 11, Vote 183, 4/30/15]

Ryan Budget Cuts To State And Local Services Would Be Far Deeper Than Cuts Under Sequestration. [Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 12/5/12]

Ryan Budget Would Cut Funds To Hire Police Officers & Buy Equipment, Shifting The Cost To State And Local Budgets. “This form of discretionary federal aid would be subject to cuts under the Ryan budget. If it were scaled back substantially, states and localities would need to bear a larger share of the costs of disaster response and recovery, or attempt to make do with less during difficult times. Federal discretionary funds also help states, cities, and other local governments hire police officers. Big cuts in funds to hire police officers would shift more of the cost of hiring these officers to state and local budgets. […] Justice Assistance Grants (JAG). Most of these grants go to help local law enforcement agencies train police officers, supply them with police cars, bullet proof vests, and other equipment, cover overtime, and deter crime. The rest helps states and localities operate other aspects of their criminal justice systems, including prosecuting criminals, taking other actions to reduce crime, and protecting victims and witnesses. Funds to hire state & local police officers (COPS). These funds help state and local law enforcement agencies hire police officers. In 2011, these grants helped to fund or maintain over 1,000 law enforcement positions nationally.” [Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 12/5/12]

Ryan Budget Would Cut Grants To State And Local Government By 22 Percent. “The Ryan plan would cut non-defense discretionary programs nearly $1.2 trillion below the already tough annual budget caps imposed on these programs by the Budget Control Act. Under the Ryan budget, funding for these programs would be cut by an additional 22 percent in 2014 and later years beyond the cuts already needed to comply with the BCA caps. If grants to state and local governments were cut by the same 22 percent that non-defense discretionary funding as a whole would be reduced, then states and localities would lose nearly $28 billion in 2014 alone. Over the nine years through 2021, states and localities would absorb a cumulative federal funding cut of $247 billion.” [Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 12/5/12]

VOICEOVER: Senate Leadership Fund is responsible for the content of this advertising.

REALITY: WASHINGTON REPUBLICANS ARE SPENDING MILLIONS TO BAIL OUT CONGRESSMAN HECK AND SALVAGE HIS CAREER AFTER HE PUT HIS PARTY AHEAD OF NEVADA FAMILIES

Senate Leadership Fund To Spend $6 Million On Heck In Nevada. “The Senate Leadership Fund plans to spend big money defending Republicans in a quartet of battleground seats this fall, the super PAC said Tuesday, a strong indication of which states the group expects — and doesn’t expect — to be competitive in November. […] The group said it also plans to spend $6.2 million in Pennsylvania, $8.1 million in Ohio, and $6 million in Nevada. Pennsylvania and Ohio are represented by Republican Sens. Patrick J. Toomey and Rob Portman, respectively, and Democrats have targeted both as prime pickup opportunities in 2016. Nevada is potentially the GOP’s only realistic chance to win a Democratic-held seat in 2016. Republican Rep. Joe Heck is taking on former state Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto for Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid’s seat. Reid is retiring.” [Roll Call, 6/28/16]

Heck Has Voted With His Party 90 Percent Of The Time. According to CQ, Heck voted with his party 87% of the time in 2014, 93% of the time in 2013, 89% of the time in 2012, and 90% of the time in 2011. [CQ Vote Studies, Accessed5/18/16]

Roll Call: Heck Was On The “Good Side” Of The More Conservative Wing Of The Republican Party. “Heck has managed to stay on the good side of the more conservative wing of the Republican Party, which could help him fend off a serious primary challenge from the right. Republicans hope to avoid the situation they faced in 2010, when a crowded, messy primary resulted in the nomination of Sharron Angle, a flawed and gaffe-prone candidate who lost what was seen as a winnable race against Reid.” [Roll Call,5/11/15]

MSNBC: Heck Voted For A “Far Right” Budget Scraping Medicare, Opposed Minimum Wage Increases, Was A Staunch Opponent Of Reproductive Rights, And Called Social Security A Pyramid Scheme.“Republican Rep. Joe Heck is a prominent U.S. Senate candidate in Nevada, and at first blush, the conservative congressman, running for an open seat, appears to be well positioned. Nevada is a fast-growing swing state with a diverse population, and Heck has previously won with fairly broad support. But it won’t be easy. Heck voted for a far-right budget plan that tried to scrap Medicare; he’s opposed minimum-wage increases; the GOP candidate is a staunch opponent of reproductive rights; and he’s even condemned Social Security as a pyramid scheme.” [MSNBC, 9/2/15]

REALITY: WASHINGTON REPUBLICANS ARE TRYING TO DISTRACT FROM CONGRESSMAN HECK’S LOYAL SUPPORT FOR DONALD TRUMP

CNN: Heck Didn’t “Dance Around The Question” When Asked If He Trusted Trump With His Finger On The Nuclear Button. “In Donald Trump we don’t trust. A number of lawmakers on Capitol Hill refusing to say they have faith in a possible president Trump handling the nation’s nuclear codes, and that is coming from republicans! As Donald Trump tries to sell voters on his national security credentials, some republicans in congress are struggling with a key question. CNN’s Manu Raju: “Do you trust Trump having his finger on the nuclear button? […] And congressman Joe Heck, running to be Nevada’s next senator, isn’t dancing around the question.” [CNN, 9/8/16]

Heck Said He “Completely Supported” Trump Having The Nuclear Button. “In Donald Trump we don’t trust. A number of lawmakers on Capitol Hill refusing to say they have faith in a possible president Trump handling the nation’s nuclear codes, and that is coming from republicans! As Donald Trump tries to sell voters on his national security credentials, some republicans in congress are struggling with a key question. CNN’s Manu Raju: “Do you trust Trump having his finger on the nuclear button? […] And congressman Joe Heck, running to be Nevada’s next senator, isn’t dancing around the question. Raju: ‘are you completely supporting him?’ Rep. Joe Heck: ‘I am.’” [CNN, 9/8/16]

Heck On Trusting Trump With The Nuclear Button: “Why Wouldn’t I?” “In Donald Trump we don’t trust. A number of lawmakers on Capitol Hill refusing to say they have faith in a possible president Trump handling the nation’s nuclear codes, and that is coming from republicans! As Donald Trump tries to sell voters on his national security credentials, some republicans in congress are struggling with a key question. CNN’s Manu Raju: “Do you trust Trump having his finger on the nuclear button? […] And congressman Joe Heck, running to be Nevada’s next senator, isn’t dancing around the question […] Raju: ‘do you trust him having his finger on the nuclear button?’ Rep. Joe Heck: ‘I do.’ Raju: ‘Why do you say that?’Rep. Joe Heck: ‘Why wouldn’t I?’” [CNN, 9/8/16]





Heck Criticized Republicans For Publicly Denouncing Trump, Saying It “Only Comes Back To Look Bad On The Party As A Whole.” “With the current presidential election, many Republicans are coming forward to say that they will not be voting for the Republican nominee, Donald Trump, in November. Heck said that Republicans publicly denouncing Donald Trump only comes back to look bad on the party as a whole.” [The Record Courier,8/12/16]

Heck Refused To Denounce Trump: “You’re Entitled To Vote For Whoever You Want, But You Don’t Have To Add Gasoline To The Fire.” “‘You’re entitled to vote for whoever you want, but you don’t have to add gasoline to the fire,’ said Heck. Heck said that the important thing would be for the party to come together in November to defeat the Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton.” [The Record Courier, 8/12/16]

Jon Ralston: Congressman Heck Has “Chosen Party Over Trump’s Noxious Candidacy. So Let’s Just Call It What It Is: Fear Of Political Damage.” In his morning flash, Jon Ralston wrote, “First, Gov. Brian Sandoval expanded on his support for whomever the GOP nominee is and repeated his silliness that he caucused for Marco Rubio but does not endorse him. What? Then, after I mocked it, his press secretary reminded me that Sandoval once said he would not back Trump (as if that’s helpful). It’s a simple choice, really: You either take a stand against the guy or you don’t. Sandoval, Sen. Dean Heller, Rep. Joe Heck and others have chosen party over Trump’s noxious candidacy. So let’s just call it what it is: Fear of political damage.” [Ralston Morning Flash, 3/3/16]

Heck: “I Have High Hopes That We Will See Donald Trump Become The Next President.”“‘I have high hopes that we will see Donald Trump become the next president,’ he said. ‘Though I don’t necessarily agree with how he talks about women and minorities and all of his policy positions, but if he wants to make America great again by bringing jobs back to America, then I am willing to help him achieve those goals and hold him accountable. And as the next U.S. senator from Nevada, I will make sure I stand as a check against anything that is not in our best interest.’” [Pahrump Valley Times, 6/1/16]

KTNV: Heck “Swatted Away Suggestions” That Trump’s Rhetoric And Immigration Policies Would Hurt His Chances. “Heck also swatted away suggestions that Republican presidential front runner Donald Trump’s divisive rhetoric and plans to deport 11 million undocumented migrants would hurt his chances, saying that he won his demographically diverse congressional district by increasingly larger margins over the last three elections.” [KTNV,3/14/16]

Heck On Donald Trump: “He’s Out There Talking About What He Needs To Talk About To Run For President.” “So, what does Congressman Joe Heck, Nevada’s Republican candidate for US Senate, think of the guy at the top of the GOP presidential polls? ‘I don’t talk about Donald,’ Heck told News 3 after a morning event put on by the Las Vegas Metro Chamber of Commerce. ‘He’s out there talking about what he needs to talk about to run for President,’ Heck added after ‘Eggs and Issues,’ the Chamber’s breakfast debrief with local newsmakers. The Thursday event was held at Vdara in CityCenter.” [KSNV, 8/27/15]

###