Santorum defends votes for “Bridge to Nowhere” and other political earmarks
Muscatine, Ia. – Former U.S. Sen. Rick Santorum is defending his votes to spend federal money on politically earmarked projects, including the so-called “Bridge to Nowhere” in Alaska that was never built.

Earmarks are the practice of a member of Congress directing spending to be used on specific programs, typically within the lawmakers’ own state or congressional district. Such targeted spending has often criticized as a wasteful use of taxpayers’ dollars and an example of pork barrel politics.

Santorum, who spoke to reporters after a town hall meeting with about 100 people at the Button Factory restaurant Thursday, said he “absolutely” acknowledges using earmarks to help his constituents in Pennsylvania during his 12 years in the U.S. Senate.

““Go and look at the Constitution. Who has the responsibility to spend money? Clearly, in the Constitution it is the Congress,” Santorum said. “Now what has happened is that the system was abused and it got a bad name and as a result of that, I have said, “Look. The Congress has lost the public trust and they have to be suspended.” “

Santorum, who is predicting his Republican presidential candidacy has a strong chance of a top three finish in Tuesday’s Iowa Caucuses, came under attack in Iowa on Thursday from rival GOP candidate Rick Perry. The Texas governor questioned Santorum’s credentials as a conservative, both during Perry’s speeches and in a new radio advertisement released Thursday.

“Sen. Santorum, he is a prolific earmarker,” Perry said during a campaign stop Thursday in Cedar Rapids. “I love Iowa pork, but I don’t like Washington pork. That’s the problem. That Washington pork is the one we’ve got to watch out for. It will give you a stomach ache that lasts for a long, long time. …. Well, senator, I’m calling you out.”

However, Perry himself entered Texas into controversial contracts with Washington lobbyists who helped bring billions of dollars in federal money to Perry’s home state, some of it via earmarks, according to an August report in the Huffington Post.

Lobbying disclosure reports filed with the Secretary of the Senate show that Perry’s lobbyists focused heavily on two topics: transportation appropriations and federal health care funding. This included $754.4 million from 231 earmarks for Texas transportation projects, according to a database of the nonpartisan budget watchdog Taxpayers for Common Sense.

Santorum said there are some earmarks that he is proud of, including one that provided federal money for the Pittsburgh Tissue Engineering Institute. The Army had refused to fund a program for regenerative medicine to grow back fingers and organs, saying it didn’t have the resources, he said. So he earmarked the money and after four years the Army took over the program.

He said Army officials told him,, “Thank God you did this because we were wrong.” He added, “Guess what? We are growing back tissue. We are doing things, and it is because of that earmark.”

But some earmarks were controversial, Santorum acknowledged.

“People say that I voted for “The Bridge to Nowhere.” I did. I went with the federalist argument, which is, “Who am I in Pennsylvania to tell Alaska what their highway priorities should be?” You had a city that was separated from its airport, and of course in Alaska you have to travel by air, and you had to have a ferry. There were times when they couldn’t get across.”

The Bridge to Nowhere was proposed to link the town of Ketchikan, Alaska, with Gravina Island, which includes the Ketchikan airport and 50 residents. The project had an estimated cost of $398 million. Congress removed the earmark for the bridge in 2005. after a furor erupted in which the project was criticized as one of the worst abuses of federal spending.

Des Moines Register Staff Writer Josh Hafner contributed to this story.