Shariah | Definition, History, & Examples
The religious law of Islam is seen as the expression of God’s command for Muslims and, in application, constitutes a system of duties that are incumbent upon all Muslims by virtue of their religious belief. Known as the Sharīʿah (literally, “the path leading to the watering place”), the law represents a divinely ordained path of conduct that guides Muslims toward a practical expression of religious conviction in this world and the goal of divine favour in the world to come.

The second major distinction between the Sharīʿah and Western legal systems is a consequence of the Islamic concept of the law as the expression of the divine will. With the death of the Prophet Muhammad in 632, direct communication of the divine will to human beings ceased, and the terms of the divine revelation were henceforth fixed and immutable. The overall image of the Sharīʿah is thus one of unchanging continuity , an impression that generally holds true for some areas of the law, such as ritual law. However, revelation can be interpreted in varying ways, and, over time, the diversity of possible interpretations has produced a wide array of positions on almost every point of law. In the premodern period, the ʿulamāʾ (Muslim religious scholars) held a monopoly over interpretation of the law, but, since the 19th century, their monopoly has been challenged by Westernized elites and laypeople. The question of which interpretations become normative at any given time is complex. Early Western studies of Islamic law held the view that while Islamic law shaped Muslim societies, the latter had no influence on Islamic law in return. However, this position has become untenable . Social pressures and communal interests have played an important role in determining the practice of Islamic law in particular contexts—both in the premodern period and to an even greater extent in the modern era.

In classical form, the Sharīʿah differs from Western systems of law in two principal respects. In the first place, the scope of the Sharīʿah is much wider, since it regulates the individual’s relationship not only with neighbours and with the state, which is the limit of most other legal systems, but also with God and with the individual’s own conscience . Ritual practices—such as the daily prayers, almsgiving, fasting, and pilgrimage—are an integral part of Sharīʿah law and usually occupy the first chapters in legal manuals. The Sharīʿah is concerned as much with ethical standards as with legal rules, indicating not only what an individual is entitled or bound to do in law but also what one ought, in conscience, to do or to refrain from doing. Accordingly, certain acts are classified as praiseworthy (mandūb), which means that their performance brings divine favour and their omission divine disfavour, and others as blameworthy (makrūh), which has the opposite implications . However, in neither case is there any legal sanction of punishment or reward, nullity or validity. The Sharīʿah is thus not merely a system of law but also a comprehensive code of behaviour that embraces both private and public activities.

Although Sharīʿah doctrine is all-embracing, Islamic legal practice has always recognized jurisdictions other than that of the qadis. Because the qadis’ courts were hidebound by a cumbersome system of procedure and evidence , they did not prove a satisfactory organ for the administration of justice in all respects, particularly as regards criminal , land, and commercial law . Hence, under the broad heading of the sovereign’s administrative power (siyāsah), competence in these spheres was often relegated to other courts, known collectively as maẓālim courts, and the qadis’ monopoly was confined to private family and civil law . As the expression of a religious ideal, Sharīʿah doctrine was always the focal point of legal activity, but it never formed a complete or exclusively authoritative expression of the laws that governed the lives of Muslims in practice.

Sharīʿah law is a candidly pluralistic system, the philosophy of the equal authority of the different schools being expressed in a putative dictum of the Prophet: “Difference of opinion among my community is a sign of God’s bounty.” Outside the four schools of Sunni Islam stand the minority groups of the Shīʿites and the Ibāḍīs, whose versions of the Sharīʿah differ considerably from those of the Sunnis. Shīʿite law, in particular, grew out of a fundamentally different politico-religious system, in which the rulers, or imams , were held to be divinely inspired and therefore the spokesmen of the Lawgiver himself. Geographically, the division between the various schools and sects became fairly well defined as qadis’ courts in different areas became wedded to the doctrine of one particular school. Thus, Ḥanafī law came to predominate in the Middle East and the Indian subcontinent; Mālikī law in North, West, and Central Africa; Shāfiʿī law in East Africa , the southern parts of the Arabian Peninsula , Malaysia , and Indonesia ; Ḥanbalī law in Saudi Arabia ; Shīʿite law in Iran and the Shīʿite communities of India and East Africa; and Ibāḍī law in Zanzibar , Oman , and parts of Algeria .

Al-Shāfiʿī’s thesis formed the basis of the classical theory of the roots of jurisprudence (uṣūl al-fiqh), which crystallized in the early 10th century. Juristic “effort” to comprehend the terms of the Sharīʿah is known as ijtihād , and legal theory charts the course that ijtihād must follow. In seeking the answer to a legal problem, the jurist must first consult the Qurʾān and Hadith. If no specific solution can be discovered in divine revelation, the jurist must employ analogy (qiyās) or certain subsidiary principles of reasoning, such as istiḥsān (juristic discretion) and istiṣlāh (consideration of welfare). As an attempt to define God’s law, the ijtihād of individual scholars can result only in a tentative conclusion, termed ẓann (“conjecture”), which is contrasted with the ideal of certain (yaqīn) knowledge.

Al-Shāfiʿī’s insistence on the importance of the Sunnah as a source of law prompted great activity in the collection and classification of Hadith reports, particularly among his own supporters, who formed the Shāfiʿī school, and the followers of Ibn Ḥanbal, who formed the Ḥanbalī school . Muslim scholarship maintained that the classical compilations of Hadith—especially those of al-Bukhārī (died 870) and Muslim (died 875)—constituted an authentic record of the Prophet’s precedents. However, Western Orientalists have traditionally been skeptical of the attribution of most alleged Prophetic hadiths, arguing that they represent the views of later scholars fictitiously ascribed to the Prophet to give doctrines greater authority.

These legal schools with regional roots had to contend with another 8th-century development: the systematic collection of reports concerning the sayings and actions attributed to the Prophet Muhammad ( Hadith ). The regional schools had already made use of such traditions, but their wide-scale collection and dissemination meant that the schools were confronted with hitherto unknown prophetic traditions that contradicted their established positions. Generally speaking, the Mālikīs and the Ḥanafīs gave greater weight to their regional traditions in resolving this tension, whereas two school-founding jurists of the subsequent generation, Muḥammad ibn Idrīs al-Shāfiʿī (died 820) and Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal (died 855), sought to transcend localism by granting priority to authentic traditions. Ibn Ḥanbal drew on both prophetic traditions and the opinions of early Muslim jurists throughout Muslim lands. Al-Shāfiʿī, by contrast, rejected the putative precedential authority of regional legal traditions and of the early jurists in general. Instead, he proposed a system in which the Qurʾān and the Prophetic example ( Sunnah ) were the only authoritative sources of law and then developed a toolkit of methods for systematically deriving legal rules from the sources and extending these rules to areas not directly covered by the sacred texts. A prominent element of this toolkit was analogical reasoning ( qiyās ).

Different regions within the Islamic empire developed divergent regional legal traditions, which were reproduced in study circles, or ḥalqah (so named because the teacher was, as a rule, seated on a dais or cushion with the pupils gathered in a semicircle before him). The most active study circles were found in the Hejaz (a region on the west coast of the Arabian Peninsula) and Iraq , although those in Syria and Egypt also played a role. With the emergence of written legal culture , the regional traditions faced a need to justify their doctrines in a systematic way and to engage with traditions from other regions. Encased in books, the doctrines of the regional schools became mobile and could be spread beyond their original locations. As a result, the locus of school identity shifted from places to the individuals responsible for their elaboration and codification. In particular, the school of Medina became associated with Mālik ibn Anas (died 795), Medina’s most prominent jurist in the late 8th century, and came to be known as the Mālikī school, and the school of Kūfah turned into the Ḥanafī school, named after its greatest jurist, Mālik’s contemporary Abū Ḥanīfah (died 767).

Muslim jurisprudence , the science of ascertaining the precise terms of the Sharīʿah, is known as fiqh (literally, “understanding”). Beginning in the second half of the 8th century, oral transmission and development of this science gave way to a written legal literature devoted to exploring the substance of the law and the proper methodology for its derivation and justification. Throughout the medieval period, the basic doctrine was elaborated and systematized in a large number of commentaries, and the voluminous literature thus produced constitutes the traditional textual authority of Sharīʿah law.

For the first Muslim community , established under the leadership of the Prophet Muhammad at Medina in 622, the Qurʾānic revelations laid down basic standards of conduct. But the Qurʾān is in no sense a comprehensive legal code: only about 10 percent of its verses deal with legal issues. During his lifetime, Muhammad, as the supreme judge of the community, resolved legal problems as they arose by interpreting and expanding the general provisions of the Qurʾān, thereby establishing a legal tradition that was to continue after his death. With the rapid expansion of the Islamic realm under Muhammad’s political successors, the Muslim polity became administratively more complex and came into contact with the laws and institutions of the lands that the Muslims conquered. With the appointment of judges, or qadis , to the various provinces and districts, an organized judiciary came into being. The qadis were responsible for giving effect to a growing corpus of administrative and fiscal law, and they pragmatically adopted elements and institutions of Roman -Byzantine and Persian-Sāsānian law into Islamic legal practice in the conquered territories. Depending on the discretion of the individual qadi , judicial decisions were based on the rules of the Qurʾān where these were relevant, but the sharp focus in which the Qurʾānic laws were held in the Medinan period was lost with the expanding horizons of activity.

The substance of traditional Sharīʿah law

Sharīʿah duties are broadly divided into those that an individual owes to God (the ritual practices, or ʿibādāt) and those that the individual owes to other human beings (interpersonal matters, or muʿāmalāt). Only the latter category of duties, which constitutes law in the Western sense, is described here.

Penal law Offenses against another person, from homicide to assault, are punishable by retaliation (qiṣāṣ), the offender being subject to precisely the same treatment as the victim. This type of offense is regarded as a civil injury rather than a crime in the technical sense, since it is not the state but only the victim or the victim’s family who has the right to prosecute and to opt for compensation or blood money (diyah) in place of retaliation. For a handful of specific crimes, the punishment is fixed (ḥadd): death for apostasy, amputation of the hand for theft and of the hand and foot for highway robbery, death by stoning for extramarital sexual relations (zinā) when the offender is married and 100 lashes when the offender is unmarried, and 80 lashes for an unproved accusation of unchastity (qadhf) and for the drinking of any intoxicant. Beyond the ḥadd crimes, both the determination of offenses and decisions regarding the punishment meted out for them lie within the discretion of the executive or the courts.

Law of transactions A legal capacity to transact belongs to any person “of prudent judgment” (rāshid), a quality that is normally deemed to accompany physical maturity or puberty. The law presumes that (1) boys below the age of 12 and girls below the age of 9 have not attained puberty and (2) by the age of 15 puberty has been attained for both sexes. Persons who are not rāshid, on account of minority or mental deficiency, are placed under interdiction: their affairs are managed by a guardian, and they cannot transact effectively without the guardian’s consent. The basic principles of the law are laid down in the four root transactions: (1) sale (bayʿ), transfer of the ownership or corpus of property for a consideration; (2) hire (ijārah), transfer of the usufruct (right to use) of property for a consideration; (3) gift (hibah), gratuitous transfer of the corpus of property, and (4) loan (ʿāriyah), gratuitous transfer of the usufruct of property. These basic principles are then applied to the various specific transactions of, for example, pledge, deposit, guarantee, agency, assignment, land tenancy, partnership, and charitable foundations (waqf). Waqf is a uniquely Islamic institution in which founders relinquish their ownership of real property to God and dedicate the income or usufruct of the property in perpetuity to some pious or charitable purpose. This may include settlements in favour of the founder’s own family. The doctrine of ribā significantly influences the Islamic law of transactions. Basically, this is the prohibition of usury, but the notion of ribā was rigorously extended to cover, and therefore preclude, any form of interest on a capital loan or investment. And since this doctrine was coupled with the general prohibition on gambling transactions, Islamic law does not, in general, permit any kind of speculative transaction the results of which, in terms of the material benefits accruing to the parties, cannot be precisely forecast.

Family law A patriarchal outlook is the basis of the traditional Islamic law of family relationships. Fathers have the right to contract their daughters, whether minor or adult, in marriage, but jurists agree that an adult woman who is no longer a virgin must give her explicit consent to a marriage. The question of whether a virgin daughter has the right to object to a marriage contracted for her by her father has been the subject of debate among jurists, given that a widely accepted saying of Muhammad seems to imply this right. Some jurists have held that the daughter’s objection should be taken into account but is not binding, while others have considered such an objection to preclude the marriage. In Ḥanafī and Shīʿite law, an adult woman may conclude her own marriage contract, but her guardian may have the marriage annulled if his ward has married beneath her social status. In traditional Islamic family law, husbands have the right of polygamy and may be validly married at the same time to a maximum of four wives. Upon marriage, a husband is obliged to pay his wife a dower, the amount of which may be fixed by agreement or by custom. During the marriage, he is bound to maintain and support her, provided that she shows no recalcitrance toward him. A wife who rejects her husband’s dominion by leaving the family home without just cause forfeits her right to maintenance. A divorce may be effected simply by the mutual agreement of the spouses. Such a divorce, known as khulʿ, requires the payment of some financial consideration by the wife to the husband for her release—most commonly a return of the dower. In addition, according to all schools except the Ḥanafī school, a wife may obtain a judicial decree of divorce on the grounds of some matrimonial offense committed by the husband, such as cruelty, desertion, or failure to provide. However, the husband alone has the power to terminate a marriage unilaterally by repudiation (ṭalāq) of his wife. Ṭalāq is an extrajudicial process: a husband may repudiate his wife at will, and his motive for doing so is not subject to scrutiny by the court or any other official body. A repudiation repeated three times constitutes a final and irrevocable dissolution of the marriage. However, a single pronouncement may be revoked at will by the husband during the wife’s waiting period (ʿiddah), which lasts for three months following the repudiation (or any other type of divorce pronouncement) or, if the wife is pregnant, until the birth of the child. The legal position of children within the family group with regard to guardianship, maintenance, and right of succession depends on their legitimacy. A child is legitimate if it can be reasonably assumed to have been conceived during the lawful wedlock of the parents. For a legal relationship to exist between a father and his illegitimate child, the father must publicly claim the child as his own, but there is always a legal tie between a mother and her illegitimate child. Guardianship of a child (the right to make decisions concerning, e.g., education and marriage) and of the property of minor children belongs to the father or another close male agnate relative. However, the right of custody (ḥaḍānah) of young children whose parents are divorced or separated belongs to the mother or another female maternal relative.

Law of succession An individual’s power of testamentary disposition is basically limited to one-third of his or her net estate (i.e., the assets remaining after the payment of funeral expenses and debts). Two-thirds of the estate passes to the legal heirs of the deceased under the compulsory rules of inheritance. There is a fundamental divergence between the Sunni and Shīʿite schemes of inheritance. Sunni law is essentially a system of inheritance by male agnate relatives, or ʿaṣabah—i.e., relatives who, if they are more than one degree removed from the deceased, trace their connection to the deceased through male links. Among the ʿaṣabah, priority is determined by: (1) class, with descendants excluding ascendants, who in turn exclude brothers and their issue, who in turn exclude uncles and their issue; (2) degree, with relatives nearer in degree to the deceased excluding the more remote within each class; and (3) strength of blood ties, with germane, or full-blood, connections excluding consanguine, or half-blood, connections among collateral relatives. This agnatic system is mitigated by allowing surviving spouses and a limited number of females and nonagnates—daughters; sons’ daughters; mothers; grandmothers; germane, consanguine, and uterine sisters; and uterine brothers—to inherit a fixed fractional portion of the estate in certain circumstances. But the females among these relatives receive only half the share of the male relatives of the same class, degree, and blood tie, and no female excludes from inheritance any male agnate, however remote. No other female or nonagnatic relative has any right of inheritance in the presence of a male agnate. If, for example, the deceased is survived by his wife, his daughter’s son, and a distant agnatic cousin, the wife will be restricted to one-fourth of the inheritance, the grandson will be excluded altogether, and the cousin will inherit three-fourths of the estate. Shīʿite law rejects the criterion of the agnatic tie and regards both maternal and paternal connections as equally strong grounds of inheritance. In the Shīʿite system, as in Sunni law, the surviving spouse always inherits a fixed portion, but all other relatives, including females and nonagnates, are divided into three classes: (1) parents and lineal descendants; (2) grandparents, brothers and sisters, and their issue; and (3) uncles and aunts and their issue. Any relative of class 1 excludes any relative of class 2, who in turn excludes any relative of class 3. Within each class, the nearer in degree excludes the more remote, and the full-blood excludes the half-blood. While, therefore, a male relative normally takes double the share of the corresponding female relative, females and nonagnates are much more favourably treated in Shīʿite law than they are in Sunni law. In the case mentioned above, the wife would receive one-fourth, but the remaining three-fourths would go to the daughter’s son, or indeed to the daughter’s daughter, and not to the agnatic cousin. Under Shīʿite law the only restriction upon testamentary power is the one-third rule, whereas Sunni law does not allow any bequest in favour of a legal heir. Under both systems, however, bequests that infringe these rules are not necessarily void and ineffective; when testators have acted beyond their powers, the bequests may still be ratified by the legal heirs. Further protection is afforded to the rights of the legal heirs by the doctrine of death sickness. Any gifts made by a dying person in contemplation of his death are subject to precisely the same limitations as bequests and, if they exceed these limits, will be effective only with the consent of the legal heirs.