News & Alerts
October is Domestic Violence Awareness Month: Candlelight Vigil Oct. 3, at 6 p.m., City Hall The Cambridge Police Department today announced that it will be leading and participating in a number of initiatives throughout October as part of Domestic Violence Awareness Month.

Cambridge Police to Participate in 3rd Annual National Coffee with a Cop Day Commissioner Bard and the Cambridge Police Department are pleased to announce that the Department will once again be participating in National Coffee with a Cop Day at two locations next month.

Cambridge Police Hires Recovery Coach after Grant Concludes The Cambridge Police Department today announced that it has hired Jared Stanley, as a part-time Recovery Coach. Stanley initially joined the Department in March 2018 through a grant.

Cambridge Police Department Hires New Director of Clinical Support Services Dr. James Barrett has joined the Cambridge Police Department as its new Director of Clinical Support Services. Dr. Barrett works out of the Department’s newly structured Family and Social Justice Section and oversees the Clinical Support Services Unit.

Fatal Hit and Run Investigation in Cambridge Leads to Arrest Ashley Monturio, 41 of Pembroke, has been charged with leaving the scene of an accident causing death in connection with today’s fatal hit and run that occurred at approximately 12:30 p.m. in the area of 150 Erie Street in Cambridge.

Cambridge Public Safety Encourages Residents to Sign Up for Smart911 As Part Of National Preparedness Month As part of this year’s initiative, public safety agencies in the City of Cambridge are stressing the importance of creating a Smart911 profile to assist first responders with their response.

Cambridge Police Highlight Latest Scams Victimizing Residents and Provide Protection Tips The Cambridge Police Department wants to remind residents of the various scams that are currently targeting and victimizing citizens in Cambridge and in communities across the country.

Cambridge Police Arrest Suspect Following Gunshot Incidents in The Port Cambridge Police arrested a suspect after responding to two gunshot incidents that occurred in the area of Columbia Street and Main Street.

44 Cambridge Youth Graduate from Cambridge Youth Police and Fire Academies The special festivities concluded the six-week, 120-hour instructional Mayor’s Summer Youth Employment Program designed to expose participating youth, ages 14-18, to the various duties associated with public safety.