Swanton Sector Border Patrol Agents Arrest 8, Seize Drugs, Paraphernalia during Checkpoint Operation
Woodstock, N.H. – U.S. Border Patrol agents based out of the Beecher Falls Border Patrol Station, had a busy couple of days from September 26 –28, including arresting eight illegal aliens and seizing various narcotics and drug paraphernalia. The sector established the checkpoint on Interstate 93 in New Hampshire.

“Swanton Sector utilizes inspection checkpoints as part of our defense-in-depth strategy” said Swanton Sector Chief Patrol Agent John C. Pfeifer. “U.S. Border Patrol checkpoints are part of an intricate, multi-faceted strategic plan focusing on information, integration and rapid response capabilities, which aid in border security.”

Swanton Sector Border Patrol agents run

checkpoint operations.

During the 3-day operation, Swanton Sector agents encountered and arrested eight people who did not possess valid immigration status, two of whom were visa overstays. Agents arrested illegal aliens from Bulgaria, Ecuador, El Salvador and Guatemala.

In addition to the immigration violations, agents seized drugs and drug paraphernalia including 71.3 grams of marijuana, 297.4 grams of marijuana edibles, and 5 oz. of hash oil. The subjects and contraband were turned over to the New Hampshire State Police for further investigation and prosecution.

The Swanton Sector is responsible for securing the land border between ports of entry in Vermont, New Hampshire and northeastern New York. The assistance of citizens is invaluable to their border security mission and they welcome community members to help them keep our nation’s borders safe and report suspicious activity at 1-800-689-3362.

The United States Border Patrol is currently hiring. As a Border Patrol agent, you are focused 24/7 on securing our international land border and coastal waters, safeguarding the American people from terrorists and their weapons, drug smuggling and illegal entry of undocumented aliens. To learn more about a career with the Border Patrol visit us at: https://www.cbp.gov/careers/frontline-careers/bpa.