Swanton Sector Border Patrol Agents Arrest 25 Aliens, Seize Drugs, Paraphernalia during Checkpoint Operation
Lincoln, N.H. – U.S. Border Patrol agents based out of the Beecher Falls Border Patrol Station, had a busy weekend August 25 – 27, including arresting 25 illegal aliens and seizing various narcotics and drug paraphernalia. The sector established the checkpoint with the support of the Woodstock Police Department, on Interstate 93 in New Hampshire.

“Checkpoints are just one of the tools we utilize to enforce the immigration and other federal laws of our nation,” said Swanton Sector Chief Patrol Agent John C. Pfeifer. “In addition to technology, manpower and intelligence, checkpoints help to deny access to major routes of egress away from the border and into our communities in the interior of the U.S.”

Border Patrol agents conduct checkpoint

operations in Lincoln, N.H.

During the 3-day operation, Swanton Sector agents encountered and arrested 25 people who did not possess valid immigration status, 14 of whom were visa overstays from Colombia. Agents also arrested other illegal aliens from Colombia, Brazil, Ecuador and Mexico.

In addition to the immigration violations, agents seized drugs and drug paraphernalia including 2 pounds of marijuana and smaller amounts of cocaine, psilocybin mushrooms and hash oil. The subjects and contraband were turned over to the Woodstock Police Department for further investigation and prosecution.

Agents also encountered one U.S. citizen who ran the checkpoint fleeing at a high rate of speed for nearly 5 miles. Woodstock Police were able to stop the driver who was arrested and charged with three felonies including reckless driving, possessing a controlled substance and endangering the welfare of a minor.

The Swanton Sector is responsible for securing the land border between ports of entry in Vermont, New Hampshire and northeastern New York. The assistance of citizens is invaluable to their border security mission and they welcome community members to help them keep our nation’s borders safe and report suspicious activity at 1-800-689-3362.

The United States Border Patrol is currently hiring. As a Border Patrol Agent, you are focused 24/7 on securing our international land border and coastal waters, safeguarding the American people from terrorists and their weapons, drug smuggling and illegal entry of undocumented aliens. To learn more about a career with the Border Patrol visit us at: https://www.cbp.gov/careers/frontline-careers/bpa