immigration group puts up billboard slamming senator
Immigration group puts up billboard slamming senator



The Dustin Inman Society has funded a billboard on Bells Ferry Road in Woodstock that criticizes Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) for his statements on immigration.

Special to the Tribune slideshow

CANTON — An immigration reform group from Cobb County has put up a billboard in Cherokee County that accuses a U.S. senator from South Carolina of saying “his state has a labor shortage and wants more immigrants.”In its text, the billboard on Bells Ferry Road near Woodstock bashes Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham and informs passersby that “South Carolina welcomes the undocumented.” This accusation is based on comments made by Graham at an Easley, S.C., Rotary function in February.Graham also had a hand in the Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013, which was introduced to the U.S. Senate this week.The Dustin Inman Society funded the billboard, which went up Monday.Cobb County resident D.A. King formed the nonprofit organization in 2005 in the name of a Cherokee County teenager killed by an immigrant living in the country illegally in a 2000 car accident in Ellijay. Inman was travelling with his mother and father, Kathy and Billy Inman, when they were struck from behind. Kathy Inman was paralyzed in the crash, King said Thursday.After closing his insurance company in 2003, King said he has been active in politics and has lobbied for immigration reform on the state and national levels.Billy and Kathy Inman have also become active in the same movement. They met King in 2004 and have since come on board with King’s organization.King accuses Graham’s involvement in the new immigration bill as being for dishonest reasons.“Lindsey Graham is deep in the pocket of big business, whose endless goal is to obtain ever cheaper labor,” he said.King said it was the Inman family’s roots in Cherokee County and the high traffic on Bells Ferry Road that led his group to place the billboard there, instead of in Cobb County where they are based. It is the first in what King said the group hopes will be a series of similar billboards.Though the billboard on Bells Ferry Road singles out Graham and even lists his Pendleton, S.C., office phone number, King said he hopes it will prompt Georgia residents to contact Georgia senators Saxby Chambliss and Johnny Isakson, both Republicans, and ask them where they stand on the bill.