Trends in Deaths Involving Heroin and Synthetic Opioids Excluding Methadone, and Law Enforcement Drug Product Reports, by Census Region — United States, 2006–2015
Discussion

Three interconnected trends drove increases in unintentional or undetermined deaths involving heroin and synthetic opioids in the United States during 2006–2015: increases in the supply and use of heroin (3), mixing of fentanyl into the heroin supply, and increases in deaths involving synthetic opioids without heroin. Large increases in the heroin supply coincided with increases in deaths involving heroin across all U.S. Census regions, with the largest increases in the Northeast and Midwest. In 2016, many state and local law enforcement agencies in these regions reported that heroin could be easily obtained in their communities and was the top drug threat (2). The increasing availability of heroin comes at a time when an estimated 2 million persons reported a substance use disorder involving misuse of prescription opioids and nearly 600,000 reported a substance use disorder involving heroin in 2015.¶¶ Increased heroin availability combined with high potency and relatively low price might have made heroin a viable substitute because its effects are similar to those of prescription opioids (7). The strongest risk factor for heroin use and dependence is misuse of or dependence on prescription opioids; approximately 75% of persons who initiate heroin first misused prescription opioids (7), although only a small percentage of persons misusing prescription opioids begin using heroin.***

The second trend contributing to increases in deaths involving heroin and synthetic opioids is the mixing of fentanyl into the heroin supply by drug traffickers and persons misusing opioids. In 2015, DEA and CDC released a nationwide alert and a public health advisory††† about large increases in fentanyl drug reports and deaths across multiple states in the Northeast, Midwest, and South, beginning in late 2013 (8). The high potency and rapid onset of action of fentanyl and fentanyl analogs and the difficulty of mixing nonlethal doses makes fentanyl more dangerous to use than heroin (8). Approximately half of the increase in deaths involving heroin after 2013 is attributable to increases in deaths involving use of both heroin and fentanyl. In the Northeast and Midwest, the U.S regions reporting the sharpest increases in fentanyl drug reports, deaths involving use of both heroin and synthetic opioids accounted for 77% of the total increase in deaths involving heroin. One possible reason for the relative stability of total deaths involving synthetic opioids and fentanyl drug reports in the West is that the form of heroin sold primarily west of the Mississippi River (black tar heroin) is difficult to mix with fentanyl, whereas white powder heroin, the type primarily sold east of the Mississippi, is more easily mixed with fentanyl (2). Reports from 14 states§§§ have shown that increases in deaths involving fentanyl (from 2,418 in 2014 to 4,980 in 2015) accounted for most of the increase in deaths involving synthetic opioids (from 2,658 in 2014 to 4,806 in 2015). These data, coupled with recent public health and law enforcement reports, continue to demonstrate that increases in deaths involving synthetic opioids are primarily driven by IMF (2,5,6).

Finally, multiple factors are likely driving the substantial increases in deaths involving synthetic opioids without heroin after 2013. First, the difficulty in distinguishing deaths involving morphine from deaths involving heroin might result in misclassifying some deaths as involving synthetic opioids without heroin (9). Also, drug products containing IMF are rapidly evolving, with IMF distributed in counterfeit prescription pills (4), mixed with and sold as cocaine, or sold as powders to persons using heroin with and without their knowledge that the product contains fentanyl (2,6).

The findings in this report are subject to at least five limitations. First, deaths involving heroin and synthetic opioids are likely underestimated because 17% of death certificates for drug overdose deaths lack information on the specific drug(s) involved, and this percentage varies widely by state (1). Second, although analyses excluded intentional deaths, it is possible that deaths involving heroin and synthetic opioids of undetermined intent might include homicides or suicides; however, only 7% of the analyzed deaths were categorized as undetermined. Third, toxicologic testing for synthetic opioids might have increased during 2006–2015, leading to higher rates because of better detection. Fourth, deaths involving synthetic opioids were a proxy for change in deaths involving fentanyl, but deaths involving other synthetic opioids, like tramadol, were included, which might result in underestimating increases in deaths involving fentanyl. Finally, NFLIS drug reports might vary because of jurisdictional differences in drug evidence submission and testing practices.

The heroin and IMF drug market in the United States is rapidly expanding in the context of widespread prescription opioid misuse. As a result, opioid-involved deaths are currently at peak reported levels. Enhanced, timely surveillance of the illicit drug supply and opioid overdoses is critical to rapidly track and respond to broad changes in the illicit opioid drug market, including the introduction of fentanyl analogs. Comprehensive testing of opioid overdose deaths is needed because fentanyl analogs, including potent analogs such as carfentanil, are increasingly distributed in illicit markets¶¶¶ (10). Evidence-based interventions such as implementing safer opioid prescribing,**** increasing naloxone availability,†††† and linking persons at high risk for an opioid overdose (e.g., persons treated in the emergency department for an overdose or persons released from prison, with a history of substance use disorder§§§§) to medication-assisted treatment, as well as geographically tailored responses linking law enforcement and public health, could help reduce opioid-involved morbidity and mortality. Finally, community-based services, like syringe exchange programs, can be leveraged to prevent infectious disease transmission among persons who inject drugs and as opportunities to connect persons with substance use disorders into care, risk-reduction services, and long-term recovery.