Data & Statistics on Autism Spectrum Disorder
New Data on Autism Spectrum Disorder in 4-Year-Old Children

CDC scientists published a report on the prevalence and characteristics of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) among 4-year-old children.

(Published April 11, 2019)

ADDM Network update

New CDC funding will expand knowledge about children with autism spectrum disorder.

(Published December 13, 2018)

Key Findings: Opioids Prescribed Just Before Pregnancy Associated With Autism

A study from the Waisman Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, in collaboration with the CDC, found that mothers who were prescribed opioids just before becoming pregnant were more likely to have a child with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or a child with other developmental disabilities (DDs) and some autism symptoms.

(Published: August 21, 2018)

Key Findings: Autism is Associated with Amount of Time Between Births

A study from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and research partners found that shorter and longer time periods between births are linked to having a child with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The findings from this study can help healthcare providers convey information to their patients about the ideal timing between pregnancies.

(Published: December 6, 2017)

Key Findings: Prevalence of Self-injurious Behaviors Among Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder

The Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders has published a new study showing that nearly 28% of 8-year-old children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) behave in ways that can lead to self-injury.

(Published: October 21, 2016)

Key Findings: Prevalence and Characteristics of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among 4-Year-Old Children

Data from a CDC pilot project, published in the Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, suggest that progress has been made in identifying children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) at younger ages.

(Published December 9, 2015)

Key Findings: Autism symptoms among children enrolled in the Study to Explore Early Development

A new analysis looking at autism spectrum disorder (ASD) symptoms among young children enrolled in CDC’s Study to Explore Early Development (SEED).

(Published June 6, 2015)

Key Findings: The association between assisted reproductive technology and autism spectrum disorder

New studies on the relationship between ART and autism.

(Published March 20, 2015)

ADDM Network update

New CDC funding will expand knowledge about children with autism spectrum disorder.

(Published January 2, 2015)

Classifying autism in research studies

Using standardized diagnostic instruments to classify children with autism to help find causes of the disorder.

(Published October 27, 2014)

Key Findings

Unhealthy weight among adolescents with autism.

(Published March 17, 2014)

Risk Factors for Autism

Read key findings from new CDC research.

(Published: March 17, 2014)

Key Findings

Potential impact of DSM-5 criteria on autism spectrum disorder prevalence estimates.

(Published: January 22, 2014)