City of Chicago :: Affordable Requirements Ordinance
The City of Chicago's Affordable Requirements Ordinance requires residential developments that receive city financial assistance or involve city-owned land to provide a percentage of units at affordable prices. The ordinance applies to residential developments of 10 or more units and requires that developers provide 10 percent of their units at affordable prices. The ordinance also applies if:

A zoning change is granted that increases project density or allows a residential use not previously allowed

The development is a "planned development" within the downtown area

Income Limits

For-sale units produced through the Affordable Requirements Ordinance must be affordable to households at or below 100 percent of Area Median Income (AMI). Rental units must be affordable to households earning up to 60 percent of AMI.

The Maximum Affordable Monthly Rents are available here.

Long-term Affordability

Units built under the Affordable Requirements Ordinance are required to remain affordable over time. Some units will have recapture mortgages to regulate the long-term affordability. At the time of purchase, the City records a 30-year lien for the difference between the unit's market price and its affordable price. Other units will be targeted for the Chicago Community Land Trust (CCLT). These units will have a 30-year restrictive covenant with a maximum resale price. The maximum resale price will be the original purchase price plus a percentage of the market appreciation, and in most cases will be a below market price.

See a list of rental properties made available through the ordinance and other city programs. To receive updates on for-sale units as they become available, please send an email to aro@cityofchicago.org to be added to the Chicago Community Land Trust newsletter/mailing list.





2007 ARO

Projects submitted* before October 13, 2015 and that receive City Council approval by July 13, 2016 should utilize the following guidelines and use the following forms.

2015 ARO

Projects submitted* on or after Oct. 13, 2015 should utilize the following guidelines and use the following forms.

ARO Pilots

The Near North-Near West and Milwaukee Corridor ARO Pilots apply to projects within the boundaries of the Pilot areas that have not received Committee on Zoning or Plan Commission approval by Nov. 1, 2017. Projects involving City land or financial assistance are exempted if they have been introduced to City Council by Nov. 1, 2017. These two Pilots are set to sunset on Dec. 31, 2020.

The Pilsen-Little Village ARO Pilot applies to projects within the boundaries of the Pilot area that did not receive Committee on Zoning or Plan Commission approval by Jan. 1, 2019. Projects involving City land or financial assistance are exempted if they have been introduced to City Council by Nov. 1, 2017. This Pilots is set to sunset on Dec. 31, 2023.

To determine if a project is located within a Pilot area, enter the project address in the ARO Web Form.

The ordinances can also be found online.

Related Links:

*"Submitted" means (i) with respect to an application for zoning approval or the sale of city land, an ordinance authorizing the rezoning or city land sale has been introduced to City Council; or (ii) with respect to financial assistance, a complete application has been received and accepted by DPD.