Senate OKs wage hike
The Democratic-led Senate sent Gov. Rod Blagojevich legislation Thursday to increase the state's minimum wage by a dollar an hour, a move that would make Illinois' new $7.50 wage rate among the nation's highest and place it atop neighboring Midwest states.

Blagojevich, who championed the increase during his successful re-election campaign, said he looked forward to signing the bill into law. After taking effect in July, the rate would continue to rise a quarter a year until it hits $8.25 an hour in 2010.

"People working 40 hours a week, 52 weeks a year earning minimum wage bring home just $13,000," Blagojevich said in a statement. "That's just not enough. Raising the minimum wage will make it a little easier for these families to get by. It means more than $2,080 a year in extra wages next year for workers to meet the obligations of daily life."

The 40-17 vote in the Senate culminated a rancorous two-week veto session in which lawmakers moved to give themselves and other top state officials hefty pay raises but failed to address pending electricity rate increases for Commonwealth Edison customers starting in January.

An agreement on raising the state's minimum wage became the major accomplishment of this month's veto session, largely because of campaign commitments and the support of organized labor.

"Hundreds of thousands of low-wage workers will receive a higher wage," said Sen. Kimberly Lightford (D-Maywood). "It puts more income into their households. It allows them a better opportunity to be removed out of poverty and to be rewarded for the work that they are doing."

But Senate Minority Leader Frank Watson (R-Greenville) said he feared businesses would choose to operate out of neighboring states that abide by the lower federal minimum wage rate of $5.15 an hour.

"It ought to be done nationally so there is some consistency to it," Watson said.

Waiting for a new Democratic-controlled Congress to approve a national rate around $7.25 an hour was not an option because President Bush may not go along, Lightford said.

Mayor Richard Daley supported a state wage increase after his veto of a labor-backed city ordinance setting a minimum rate for so-called big-box retail stores in Chicago. He called the bill a "true victory for the people who need our support the most, the low-income working families of Illinois."

The state with the highest minimum wage is Washington, where the current rate is $7.63 an hour. Oregon is now at $7.50, Massachusetts will hit that level on Jan. 1 and go to $8 an hour a year later, according to an AFL-CIO analysis. Michigan, now at $6.95 and going to $7.15 in July, is the highest among neighboring states to Illinois.

Early in his first term, Blagojevich approved increasing the state's minimum wage rate to its current $6.50 an hour.

To address some business concerns, the legislation would allow employers to pay 50 cents an hour less than the minimum wage to some employees during their first 90 days on the job as well as to youths under age 18.

While the legislature agreed on a minimum wage increase, political brinkmanship between the two powerful Chicago Democrats who lead the House and Senate failed to block a scheduled 22 percent increase in electrical utility rates to go into effect Jan. 1 for residential Commonwealth Edison customers. Downstate customers of Ameren face a rate increase of as much as 55 percent.

Senate President Emil Jones and House Speaker Michael Madigan each pursued separate agendas on the rate-hike issue.

Madigan pushed for a three-year extension of a rate freeze that has been in place for the last decade, while Jones contended utilities were entitled to recoup higher costs. He pushed through the Senate his own bill Thursday to phase in rate increases for ComEd customers at 7 percent for the next two years and 8 percent in the third year, but the House adjourned without considering it.

Senate debate became so emotional that Sen. Ira Silverstein (D-Chicago) said his 80-year-old mother, Ethel, asks him every day what he will do to stop the rate increases.

"Honestly, I don't have an answer for her," Silverstein said. "We all have a hundred or a thousand Ethel Silversteins in our district. And we're going to leave here and we're going to blame everybody. .. However, the people of Illinois are sick of the blame, they're sick of the rhetoric, and they want some action done."

Madigan failed earlier this week to win an immediate three-year rate freeze but said he would bring the plan back in January, when it needs fewer votes to pass. On Thursday, he said the Jones phase-in plan was a "bill for utilities" that "was drafted in close cooperation with utility companies."

But Jones has repeatedly chided Madigan for proposing a bill that was motivated by populist "political reasons."

"If utility companies go along with that proposed irresponsible legislation in the House, they'll go belly up," Jones said. Chiding Madigan for failing to consider his proposal, Jones said: "Don't adjourn and run home. Stay here and deal with this legislation."

Senators also approved a funding bill to give themselves a 15.6 percent pay raise, acting to fatten their wallets even more than the original 10 percent hike they voted to give themselves two weeks ago. The funds, approved on a 37-19 vote, were tucked into legislation that included money for cost-of-living increases for social service caregivers and to pay other state expenses.

Sen. Christine Radogno (R-Lemont), who voted against the funding bill, contended supporters of the pay hikes added it to a bill funding social workers to provide themselves with political cover. But Sen. Donne Trotter (D-Chicago) said criticism over the pay raises was "disingenuous" because lawmakers who voted against them will likely take the extra money.