Rauner shouldn't delay borrowing money to pay Illinois' bills, comptroller says
Democratic Comptroller Susana Mendoza is again raising the pressure on Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner, calling on him to move forward with a proposal that would allow the state to borrow $6 billion to begin paying down Illinois' massive pile of unpaid bills.

Lawmakers signed off on the plan last month when they put in place a budget and tax increase over the governor's objections, but it's up to Rauner's budget office to put the borrowing wheels in motion.

Mendoza said Monday that she has reached out to the Republican administration several times but hasn't heard back whether Rauner's office will move forward. A spokeswoman for Rauner countered that the comptroller "isn't telling the whole story."

The back and forth is the latest in an ongoing feud between Rauner and Mendoza. As the keeper of the state's checkbook, Mendoza has great leeway to decide who gets paid when, and in some cases whether to stop payments altogether. She's been unafraid to make decisions that have angered Rauner, including suspending funding that the governor wanted to upgrade the state's aging technology systems.

On the flip side, Rauner has gone after Mendoza over how she's prioritized spending, often questioning her judgment when service providers announce plans to close without immediate payment from the state. Both sides accuse the other of cherry-picking issues to make the other look bad.

At an unrelated news conference at the Thompson Center, Rauner said the borrowing plan was "not an optimal answer" and suggested he's looking to work on new plans. Democrats who control the General Assembly, though, might not be interested in renegotiating a budget they approved to break the stalemate last month.

"We will be working with the General Assembly on proposals to actually have an appropriation to pay down debt and have a plan to reduce it and also to have reforms so we don't stay in this position — where we actually have truly balanced budgets today and going forward," Rauner said.

Rauner was unable to win changes including freezing property taxes, curbing workers' compensation costs and weakening union rights. He said, though, that his proposals are "the only answer for our indebtedness, and going out and borrowing more is not going to help the problem."

When it comes to borrowing, Mendoza says the delay is costing taxpayers $2 million a day that the state owes in interest when it fails to pay bills on time. Despite an end to Illinois' lengthy budget stalemate last month, the state's backlog of unpaid bills still sits at nearly $14.4 billion, and some contractors have been left waiting six months or more for payment.

"As the state's chief fiscal and accountability officer, I'm not going to stand by quietly while we burn through millions of your tax dollars at 12 percent interest, and neither should you," Mendoza said in a video posted on her Facebook page. "So I am asking you to once again join me in speaking up. Call the governor, and ask him to immediately get to work on the bond authorization plan. You can make a difference."

Rauner spokeswoman Laurel Patrick said the comptroller has the ability to take money from other specialized state accounts to begin paying down some of the bills.

Patrick said tapping into those funds could reduce the bill backlog by as much as $1.2 billion once federal money is included. She said the governor's office will not make a "final decision" on borrowing until that happens.

"The comptroller should act now," Patrick said. "Our office contacted hers last week identifying potential fund transfers and interfund borrowing options to begin paying down the backlog. This would reduce the backlog of bills, reduce interest costs and provide clarity for bonding options."

Mendoza's office says it has already begun accessing that money but said that was "never envisioned as a substitute for refinancing the debt."

"Our office is appropriately managing our responsibilities, but until the governor does his job, taxpayers will continue to be on the hook for $2 million a day in late payment interest penalties," spokesman Abdon Pallasch said.

Chicago Tribune's Rick Pearson contributed.

mcgarcia@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @MoniqueGarcia