NYC terror suspect Sayfullo Saipov briefly lived in Cincinnati suburb, registered a business here
CLOSE Here's a primer on the native land of Sayfullo Saipov, the suspect in the New York City truck terror incident that killed eight on Oct. 31. Mark Wert/The Enquirer

Authorities stand near a damaged Home Depot rental truck after a motorist drove onto a bike path near the World Trade Center memorial in October, striking and killing several people. (Photo: Bebeto Matthews/Associated Press)

The driver identified by law enforcement officials in Tuesday's New York City terror attack registered a business and briefly lived in Greater Cincinnati.

A Symmes Township family from Uzbekistan watched the Tuesday news of the attack in New York City with disbelief.

The suspect, Sayfullo Saipov, 29, now of Paterson, New Jersey, had stayed with them for two weeks in 2010 in the family’s townhouse at Brisben Place in Symmes Township.

“He was really calm,” said Dilnoza Abdusamatova, who was a teenager when Saipov stayed at her parents' townhouse. “He always used to work. He wouldn’t go to parties or anything. He only used to come home and rest and leave and go back to work.”

Authorities in New York said Saipov drove a rented Home Depot pickup into a bike lane Tuesday afternoon killing eight and injuring 11. Saipov was shot by an officer at the scene and transported to a New York hospital, officials said. He's expected to survive.

This undated photo provided by St. Charles County Department of Corrections via KMOV shows the Sayfullo Saipov. A man in a rented pickup truck mowed down pedestrians and cyclists along a busy bike path near the World Trade Center memorial on Tuesday, Oct. 31, 2017, killing several. Officials who were not authorized to discuss the investigation and spoke on the condition of anonymity identified the attacker Saipov. (St. Charles County Department of Corrections/KMOV via AP) (Photo: AP)

Saipov’s father in Uzbekistan asked Rustam Iskhakov to house Saipov while he tried to get his green card, said Abdusamatova, one of Iskhakov’s children. A U.S. official confirmed to The Associated Press details of the family's account of Saipov's immigration.

He didn’t stay for long, Abdusamatova said. He moved out of their home after two weeks and moved to Florida shortly thereafter at the invitation of a friend, she said.

Abdusamatova doesn’t remember what he did for a living while here, but public records show Saipov registered a business at the Symmes Township address in 2011.

The family was shocked to learn Saipov had a business registered to their address. Ohio Secretary of State records show Saipov registered "Sayf Motors Inc." in May 2011. A 2013 marriage certificate out of Summit County, Ohio obtained by the USA TODAY Network lists Saipov's occupation as "truck driver."

A December 2012 traffic ticket issued in Missouri to Saipov also indicates he worked as a truck driver.

Also registered at the same address is Uzb Trans, which Iskhakov’s children said their father drove for. He's now a truck driver for another company. They say he never worked with Saipov and don’t know why he would register a business at their address.

Iskhakov and his wife have since moved to another townhouse in the same complex.

Abdusamatova said her father was on the road Tuesday night and couldn’t comment.

Iskhakov’s son, Bekhzod Abdusamatov, said they haven’t spoken to Saipov since he moved out seven years ago.

“My father, Rustam, never had any businesses with the guy,” he said.

Brooke Carey, who has lived across the street from the Brisben Place address in a similar townhouse, recognized Saipov's photo when it was shown to her Tuesday night.

"I recognize the face," Carey said. "I remember him keeping to himself."

She said she never spoke to him, but saw him several times.

Buy Photo Wellington Place, where terror suspect Sayfullo Saipov, lived for two weeks. (Photo: The Enquirer/Keith BieryGolick)

On Halloween night, dozens of children made their way along the sidewalks gathering candy even as media crews descended on the neighborhood.

Carey said Wellington Place is a safe, gated, family-oriented neighborhood.

"It's a wonderful community. The people are wonderful," she said. "The same people have lived here a long time. It's very diverse. Everybody gets along."

Online records also show a previous address for Saipov in Stow, Ohio, outside of Akron. Other records listed a Cuyahoga Falls address. Lt. Chad Johnson of the Cuyahoga Falls Police Department said his department had no interaction with Saipov.

Saipov also registered a business, "Bright Auto LLC" at the Cuyahoga Falls address in August of 2013. Several residents of that apartment complex said Wednesday they didn't know him or hadn't heard of him.

Buy Photo The apartment complex in Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio where Sayfullo Saipov lived for a time. (Photo: The Enquirer/Courtney Day)

The Associated Press reported Saipov has a Florida license but may have been living most recently in New Jersey. He had also driven for Uber, the ride-hailing company said. An Ohio marriage license shows that a truck driver with one of Saipov's addresses and his name, spelled slightly differently, married a fellow Uzbek in 2013.

During his time in Fort Myers, Florida, several years ago, Saipov was "a very good person," an acquaintance, Kobiljon Matkarov, told The New York Times.

"He liked the U.S. He seemed very lucky, and all the time, he was happy and talking like everything is OK. He did not seem like a terrorist, but I did not know him from the inside," Matkarov said. He said Saipov later moved to New Jersey and began driving for Uber. San Francisco-based Uber said he started over six months ago.

Another Uzbek truck driver in Ohio painted a slightly different picture of Saipov to the AP Wednesday. Mirrakhmat Muminov said Saipov was argumentative and "not happy with his life."

Due to traffic tickets, Saipov lost his truck insurance and companies stopped hiring him, Muminov told the AP.

The AP also reported Tuesday night that investigators recovered from the truck used in the attack a note supporting law enforcement's assertion the attack was an act of terror.

More: Cincinnati area mosque denounces NYC terror attack, has no record of suspect Sayfullo Saipov

In a statement, the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR), the nation's largest Muslim civil rights and advocacy organization, said, "CAIR condemns today’s horrific and cowardly attack in Manhattan and offers sincere condolences to the loved ones of those killed and injured. Since the goal of such heinous crimes is to divide our nation, it is incumbent on Americans of all faiths and backgrounds to frustrate that criminal objective by standing united in the face of terror."

Saipov meticulously planned the attack and left a note in his vehicle proclaiming that the "Islamic State would endure forever," law enforcement authorities said Wednesday.

In a hospital-bed interview with authorities, Saipov “requested to display ISIS’s flag in his hospital room and stated that he felt good about what he had done,” a criminal complaint filed Wednesday stated.

He was charged with providing material support and resources to a designated foreign terrorist organization and violence and destruction of motor vehicles.

Saipov told investigators during the hospital interview that he was inspired to carry out an attack in the U.S. by ISIS videos he watched on his cell phone and began planning the attack approximately one year ago, the complaint said. Roughly two months ago he “decided to use a truck in order to inflict maximum damage against civilians,” the complaint said.

"He appears to have followed almost exactly to a 'T' the instruction that ISIS has put out on social media on how to carry out some attack," John Miller, New York Police deputy commissioner, told reporters Wendesday. "It appears that he has been planning it for a number of weeks."

Courtney Day, the USA TODAY and the Associated Press contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/2hud9kF