PX: Exploiting Mike DeWine's gun problem
Jon Husted held a shotgun in his campaign launch video on YouTube. (Photo: Screen grab of Jon Husted's YouTube video)

Jon Husted is keeping his sights set on gun rights in the battle to win over Trump voters in the Ohio governor's race.

The Republican's campaign unveiled a 16-member gun owners' coalition on Friday, another move by Husted to try to establish the Second Amendment as a defining issue in the GOP primary.

The coalition includes leaders from a who's who of gun rights groups – National Rifle Association, Ohio Gun Collectors Association, Buckeye Firearms and Ohioans for Concealed Carry. The coalition has two Greater Cincinnati members – NRA board member and Butler County resident Sean Maloney and Lebanon City Councilwoman Wendy Monroe.

WHAT IT MEANS: Many political watchers believe Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine and Secretary of State Husted are the top contenders in a crowded GOP primary, which is expected to be nasty and expensive. DeWine has the strongest name recognition in the race, and Husted is attempting to draw a distinction between the establishment Republicans.

Gun rights advocates really like one of these men. And it's not DeWine.

Husted has an A+ rating from the NRA, a fact he pointed out when he launched his campaign in May. In his campaign launch video, Husted raised eyebrows with footage of him holding a shotgun and peering through the gun barrel.

As Ohio House Speaker in 2006, Husted led an effort to override a veto by then-Gov. Bob Taft, who wanted to put some restrictions on the state's concealed carry law.

Meanwhile, DeWine has been mostly persona non grata to gun rights advocates for decades. In Congress, he took several stances supporting gun control, such as cosponsoring a bill requiring background checks at gun shows.

In 2006, the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence endorsed DeWine in his U.S. Senate race.

NEWSLETTERS Get the News Alerts newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Be the first to be informed of important news as it happens in Greater Cincinnati. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-876-4500. Delivery: Varies Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for News Alerts Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

WHY IT MATTERS: Second Amendment advocates are very much part of Trump's base.

The NRA has praised the president for appointing a pro-gun rights justice to the Supreme Court. Neil Gorsuch's appointment gave the high court a 5-4 majority that is going to interpret the Second Amendment in a manner the NRA should like.

And in April, Trump became the first sitting president to speak at the NRA's annual meeting since Ronald Reagan in 1983.

IS THERE TIME? DeWine still has eight months to work on his relationship with pro-gun advocates. Second Amendment supporters have proven to be forgiving in the past. They once didn't like Gov. John Kasich for favoring a ban on assault weapons while he was in Congress. But he mended fences over time and improved his NRA rating from a B in the 2010 governor's race to an A- in 2014.

DeWine knows his record on the Second Amendement could be a political liability, and he's worked during his time as AG to change his reputation. Last year, DeWine obtained an exception from the feds to make it easier for Ohioans to buy guns. People purchasing guns no longer are required to undergo a background check if they already have a concealed-carry permit.

But it could be tough for DeWine to dramatically change things ahead of the 2018 primary after so many years of voting for gun restrictions – especially with Husted aggressively exploiting his opponent's record on the issue.

Politics Extra is a column looking inside Greater Cincinnati and Ohio politics. Follow Enquirer political columnist Jason Williams on Twitter @jwilliamscincy and send email to jwilliams@enquirer.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/2vRyzRX