6,000 call for change at Asheville's March For Our Lives
CLOSE Thousands marched from the Vance Monument downtown to the Martin Luther King, Jr. Park in the Asheville March for Our Lives on Saturday, March 24, 2018. Angeli Wright/awright@citizen-times.com

Buy Photo Claxton Elementary School teacher Rebecca Wertheim becomes emotional while listening to speeches as she holds a sign reading "#armmewith books not bullets" at the Martin Luther King, Jr. Park during the Asheville March for Our Lives on Saturday, March 24, 2018. (Photo: Angeli Wright/awright@citizen-times.com)Buy Photo

ASHEVILLE - As 16-year-old Anna Dittman took the stage Saturday during the March For Our Lives, tears were already streaming down the faces of teens huddled shoulder-to-shoulder in the dreary cold.

As Dittman shared what it was like to run from bullets while a shooter went on a rampage during Feb. 14 shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., the crowd was overcome with emotion.

She was one of a dozen people invited to speak at the march, which drew a crowd of more than 6,000, according to a count by the Asheville Police Department. Like the Women's March earlier this year, the Asheville rally was organized by high school girls from WNC and passion was at the core of their mission — to bring an end to gun violence in schools.

"Enough is enough!" attendees chanted in unison while marching.

Marchers met at Pack Square, and to signify the rally's start, names of the 17 victims from the Parkland shooting were read aloud by event organizers Jessica Villatoro and Aryelle Jacobsen, both seniors at Reynolds High. The crowd walked to Martin Luther King Jr. Park, where speeches and performances further inspired demonstrators.

There were countless reasons people gave for marching in the event, which took place at the same time as marches in cities small and large across the nation. But anger and a sense of restlessness united the crowd, many of whom had personal connections of some kind to Parkland — family members living in the area, alumni of Stoneman Douglas and some who have second homes in the neighborhood surrounding the school.

Kim Mannine was among those marching in Asheville with a close connection to the quiet community that lost 17 members when a gunman opened fire on Valentine's Day. Mannine lived in Parkland from 2000-07 and her son would’ve attended Stoneman Douglas High had she not elected to send him to Catholic school instead.

Mannine didn’t have connections to any of the Parkland victims, but she was distraught by the news nonetheless.

“I would’ve been out here no matter what, but that hit close to home for sure,” Mannine said.

Students from elementary, middle and high schools accounted for the majority of demonstrators, and most were not shy about expressing their growing fears about gun violence.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-672-2472. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"There have been two major threats made to the school (Roberson) since January," said Emma Kent, 15, a sophomore at that school. "It is not OK to threaten to bring guns to schools."

Kent, a Roberson sophomore, attended the rally with students from Asheville High School.

"I am here today to honor the lives that were lost in Parkland and to say that I am tired of feeling unsafe in school," said Anthony Harper, 15, a sophomore at Asheville High. "I am so afraid for my life that I am now afraid to learn." Harper was among the organizers of the school's March 14 walkout.

Teachers and classroom assistants flooded the Asheville march. They held signs reading, "This teacher has had #ENOUGH," using the hashtag that has become a symbol of the movement that has captivated the nation and empowered youths.

Madeline Lafferty is a teacher's assistant in Asheville and was marching because she said her anxiety has reached an all-time high as an educator preparing for a mass shooter threat.

Buy Photo Lillian Godsey, 16, a sophomore at Roberson High School, becomes emotional while listening to speeches at the Martin Luther King, Jr. Park during the Asheville March for Our Lives on Saturday, March 24, 2018. (Photo: Angeli Wright/awright@citizen-times.com)

"It's terrifying to think about, but I have been forced to consider what I would do if someone with a gun comes into my room to shoot my kids," Lafferty said.

Tate MacQueen, a teacher and career counselor at Erwin High, was one of the rally's keynote speakers.

"The price of freedom cannot be the 19 shootings in the first three months of this year," MacQueen said. "This is no longer someone else's problem and we need to vote like our lives depend on it — because our lives depend on it."

Urging demonstrators to vote was a resounding theme of the rally.

Owen Bailey, a Swannanoa resident, wasn’t carrying a sign with him during the march. Instead, he carried a clipboard and a stack of voter registration cards.

“I’m here to help kids register to vote, so they can do something about gun violence by voting,” he said. “They can make their voices heard at the polls.”

Speaker after speaker called on people to channel their anger into political action.

Emotions run high at the March for Our Lives event in Asheville on Saturday, March 24, 2018. (Photo: Alexandria Bordas/Asheville Citizen Times)

Stoneman Douglas student Dittman was in Asheville with her mother, Wendy, for spring break, a trip that had been planned long ago to a city they said they have visited many times and love. Instead of cancelling, Wendy Dittman said she encouraged her daughter to reach out to the Asheville organizers to participate.

"I had two daughters in the school that day, and my eldest is in D.C. marching," Wendy Dittman said. "I felt like Anna was meant to be here and to see the movement happening outside of Parkland, so it could to give her the motivation to keep going when she goes back home knowing people from around the nation are supporting our cause."

Anna Dittman wept at the podium, clutching a crumpled piece of paper containing her speech. The crowd cheered her on as she composed herself and steadied her voice.

On the day of the shooting, Dittman attended a candlelight vigil for victims, where she was overwhelmed by grief.

"As I walked to the stage carrying a bouquet of flowers, I cried harder than I ever had, thinking I can't believe I am doing this," Dittman said through tears. "A girl I had never met before hugged me tightly and told me that it would be OK — there is a strange beauty in the bonds of a community which become stronger after such an awful tragedy."

Students of all ages take part in the March for Our Lives event in Asheville on Saturday, March 24, 2018. (Photo: Sam DeGrave/Asheville Citizen Times)

Polk County student organizer Emily Hogan closed the Asheville event by calling out North Carolina politicians. She said she was tired of them putting their money over others' lives, and promised that the students out rallying were going to one day run for office.

"We have been fighting for this for years and we have been marching, and writing and calling to get our administrators to listen but it didn't work," Hogan said. "Do you hear me Richard Burr? Because the $7 million you took from the (National Rifle Association) shows your priorities even if you are not running for re-election.

"Do you hear me Thom Tillis? Because the $4.5 million you took from the NRA will not be enough when we come for your seat. Do you hear me Patrick McHenry? Because the $43,000 you took from the NRA will not be enough come November."

Hogan left an invigorated crowd with one question: "How can we ensure that what happened in Parkland does not happen again?"

"Vote them out!" demonstrators chanted back.

College Street wasn’t the only place Asheville residents were marching Saturday. A delegation of 15 Asheville area teenagers and adults went to Washington, D.C., to march among hundreds of thousands.

Lynn Michie was among the adults who traveled from Western North Carolina to the nation’s capital, where she said she was shocked by the “ridiculously huge crowd” and inspired by the young people from Parkland, who led the march.

“It would’ve been so easy for them to circle the wagons and focus on their grief and families,” Michie said. “Instead they have seized the moment to offer themselves to help bring transformation to our whole country.”

With Michie was Sadie McNair, a 17-year-old junior at Reynolds High School. The way McNair sees it, Saturday was about more than restricting access to firearms, it was about tying together all the social movements of late, including the Women’s Movement and Black Lives Matter. And she said she’s proud to be a part of the generation that led the march.

“The fact that this is a movement led by young people is one of the most powerful things about it for me," McNair said. “I honestly think this march is just the beginning of the movement and we aren’t going to stop until we get what we want.”

This march was not the end of the movement — on April 20, the anniversary of Columbine, schools around the nation have organized a day of action to prevent gun violence in schools.

Read or Share this story: https://www.citizen-times.com/story/news/2018/03/24/live-asheville-march-our-lives-brings-out-hundreds-pack-square/455573002/