Fire, City of Madison, Wisconsin
Entry Level Salary & Benefits

Job Title: Firefighter Job Status: Full Time Work Week: 48 Hours (24 Hour Shift) Biweekly Starting Salary* $1,930.95 Annual Salary $50,204.70 Probationary Period Eighteen (18) Months Benefits* Vacation

Sick Leave

Health Insurance

Designated Holiday Leave

Retirement

Workers Compensation

Income Protection Plan

Training

Tuition Program

Life Insurance

Taxed Deferred Compensation Program

* Further information can be obtained from the City of Madison Human Resources Department.

Promotions

Firefighters compete for promoted positions in the department.



A Fire Officer or Lieutenant oversees a crew at each station. On emergency calls, the Lieutenant will take command of the scene until a Chief Officer arrives. The officer has many different responsibilities, but ultimately, is responsible for the actions and safety of the crew.



Apparatus Engineer (AE) is another promoted position. This is the driver/operator of the engine or ladder. They need to be thoroughly familiar with the equipment, function and operation of all apparatus. Every morning, the AE checks the vehicle for proper operations. Everything from the light bulbs to the engine oil is checked and documented. At an emergency scene, the AE operates the pumps or the aerial ladders.

Reclassification

Paramedics are some of the busiest people on the department. An MFD ambulance might respond on 22 calls in a 24 hour period. Did you know that Madison had one of the first paramedic ambulances in the country? After being selected for paramedic training, these firefighters must complete 6 months of intensive medical training before they are allowed to work on one of Madison's ambulances. Paramedics are well versed in pre-hospital medicine and respond to a wide variety of calls – anything ranging from cardiac arrest and automobile accidents to less complicated requests for service, like a nosebleed or broken arm. Madison Fire Department paramedics receive the highest level of training available in the emergency medical services field.

Training

The City of Madison Fire Department Training Unit consists of training officers who work as drillmasters under the supervision of a Division Chief.



The Training Manager is responsible for planning, coordinating, and directing all training activities for the department. This is a massive effort as it includes driver training, officer development training, and various specialized training modules, such as handling of hazardous materials emergencies.



Training responsibilities also include the training of all new personnel. The City of Madison Fire Department´s Training Center is located at 1750 Pearson Street.