Fact check: Did a Mississippi poll worker wear a T-shirt featuring a noose?
CLOSE While chanting "no more hate in our state," members of the Poor People's Campaign burned a Mississippi flag and a Confederate battle flag outside the governor's mansion on Monday. Wochit

A Madison County voter slides her paper ballot into a counting machine Tuesday, Nov. 6, 2018 in Ridgeland, Miss. Voters have a number of races to consider, including judiciary and federal offices and some local issues. (Photo: Rogelio V. Solis, AP)

A DeSoto County election commissioner is refuting social media allegations that a poll worker wore a shirt with Confederate imagery and a noose while assisting voters at a precinct.

District 2 Election Commissioner Barry Chatham said he was aware of the image that began circulating on Twitter on Tuesday.

Chatham said poll workers at the Summershill Volunteer Fire Department Station in Olive Branch, a Memphis suburb, did not remember seeing the shirt.

More: 'There's your flag, Phil': Activists burn Mississippi flag outside governor's mansion

He was adamant the individual pictured was not a precinct volunteer or employee.

“All agreed if someone had came in wearing that shirt, they would have remembered,” Chatham said.

The picture was originally uploaded by a Twitter user with the handle @smokeydaQue1212. In the photo, a white male wearing a T-shirt labeled with the phrase “Mississippi Justice” can be seen touching a voting machine.

The Confederate battle emblem forms a square in the center of the man’s shirt, and a noose is visible in the emblem’s background.

The photo’s caption indicated the picture was taken at an Olive Branch precinct on Tuesday.

One hour later the user added: “Wait, I forgot to mention he was one of the poll workers.”

The Clarion Ledger has reached out to the Twitter user for more details.

Ashleigh Parker, who voted at the precinct, said she witnessed the unidentified man voting.

"I was in line with my boys at the same time. I was disgusted and horrified. We all were," she wrote on Twitter. "He does not speak for the majority of our city. I wish I had spoken up but I didn't want attention to him."

I was actually there and he was not a poll worker. He was asked to use a overflow machine at the front table where some of the poll workers were seated because it was very busy at that point. — Ashleigh Parker (@23ashparker_) November 7, 2018

Parker also said the man was not a poll worker but was voting at an "overflow machine at the front table where some of the poll workers were seated."

Chatham did not name the individual who took the picture but said a receiving manager alleged the man became “disgruntled” after waiting more than an hour for the arrival of a provisional ballot.

“He knew full well that person wearing that shirt was not a poll worker,” Chatham said.

He also took exception with the photo being taken, saying cameras and cellphones are not allowed in. When the Clarion Ledger pointed out it's common practice for the news media to take photos of individuals voting, Chatham acknowledged the exception but reiterated the precinct had signs prohibiting cellphone usage.

Asked how he knew the real name of the individual who took the photo, Chatham explained the same image was also shared on Facebook. Chatham said the manager confirmed the Facebook user who posted the photo was the same individual who became upset with waiting for a provisional ballot.

The commissioner said he was not aware of any investigation into the allegation.

More: Confederate group loses fight over Ole Miss' Civil War monuments changes

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-850-5343. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Asked if he understood why the T-shirt could be interpreted as voter intimidation or hate speech, Chatham replied the only forbidden item of clothing in a precinct would be that related to a campaign.

The Secretary of State's office is aware of the photo, according to spokeswoman Leah Rupp Smith, who said the agency referred complaints to the proper authorities.

"Statute does not stipulate a dress code for voters inside polling places, other than restricting voters from using clothing to campaign for a candidate or initiative on the ballot," she said. "This office, however, does not condone the propagation of violent or offensive messages of any nature during the voting process."

Contact Bracey Harris at 601-961-7248 or bharris2@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: https://www.clarionledger.com/story/news/politics/2018/11/07/did-mississippi-poll-worker-wear-t-shirt-featuring-noose/1920459002/