The Hamburger Report
Under the Microscope:

A Molecular Analysis of Burger Products

Hamburgers are a classic American food. Its origins are murky, but some speculate that the first burger was served in the late 1880s by Fletcher Davis of Athens, Texas, in the form of fried ground beef patties with mustard and onion sandwiched between bread. Since then, we’ve been grilling burgers in the backyard, ordering them from fast food menus by the hundreds of thousands each day, and re-imagining the simple sandwich with high-end ingredients, flavors, and toppings at chef-driven restaurants around the country.

Despite the nostalgia cooked into a ground beef patty, the beef industry is beginning to struggle. Beef sales are rising at a higher rate than other proteins, but in large part due to an increase in the cost of production. Over the past 5 years, overall spending on beef has increased, but the volume of sales has remained flat. Consumers are visiting all of the “fresh” sections of the grocery store in higher frequency, except for the fresh meat department where high prices are sending them looking for alternatives.

At the same time, reports on the benefits of cutting down on red meat – for health, the environment, or otherwise – have spurred an increase in less-traditional burger products, such as veggie, fish, and chicken burgers.

It’s unclear how the beef industry will differentiate in a volatile meat industry or whether alternative burger products will begin to gain market share.

Survival in the food industry hinges on trust. Suppliers, manufacturers, and retailers should all have the ability to know beyond a shadow of a doubt that the food they’re getting – whether in its raw form or processed and packaged – is what they expect it to be so that they can be confident in the quality and safety of the food they’re ultimately selling to consumers.

This report provides new insights into the burger product industry to give suppliers, manufacturers, and retailers a representative overview of the supply chain at large and provides insights based on an objective molecular analysis into how we can strengthen the good and improve the bad.