Climate levy – the debate and proposals for cutting CO2 emissions
In an effort to cut power-sector emissions, the Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and Energy, Sigmar Gabriel, in March 2015 proposed that old, coal-fired electricity plants pay a levy when they exceed a certain CO 2 emissions level. The levy would encourage the highly polluting plants to save CO 2 , but it has met fierce opposition from industry and unions. They fear it is the start of a move to eliminate coal from the power sector, threatening livelihoods in the coal industry.

The country has just five years left to achieve its goal of cutting emissions by 40 percent from 1990 levels, as pledged. Analyses show it cannot do so without extra efforts. Despite the expansion of renewable energies, Germany still derives over 40 percent of its power from coal, more than most European countries. The following is a blow-by-blow account of the climate levy saga, starting with the latest development.

EU Commission approves state aid for closure of lignite-fired power plants

27 May 2016

The European Commission has found German plans to grant €1.6 billion public financing for mothballing and subsequently closing eight lignite-fired power plants to be in line with EU state aid rules. "The measure promotes EU environmental objectives, as it helps Germany to achieve its CO2 emission target, without unduly distorting competition in the Single Market. […] potential distortions of competition created by the aid are largely offset by the environmental benefits,” the Commission said in a press release. Whilst the costs for closing the plants will be borne by the operators themselves, Germany plans to compensate the operators for their foregone profits, the commission said.

German federal economics and energy minister Sigmar Gabriel called the decision in a press release “an important step for the continued realisation of the power market law, as well as the standby reserve”. According to the economy ministry's press release, this allowed Germany to take 13 percent (2.7 gigawatts) of lignite coal capacity off the market in the coming years, which allowed Germany to reach its national carbon emissions targets.

Read the EU Commission’s release in English here and the economy ministry' release in German here.

Cabinet decides power market reform, including brown coal standby reserve

04 November

The German government has approved wide reaching reforms of the power market and recent agreements about the transferral of lignite power plants into an emergency reserve before permanent phase-out. “With today’s cabinet decisions, we have opened a new chapter for the power market of the future”, said economy and energy minister Sigmar Gabriel in a statement.

Greenpeace criticised in a statement the government had created a “big present for the coal industry” and said more coal plants needed to be closed to reach climate targets. The environment and consumer protection NGO DUH said the government had chosen the most expensive way to reduce CO 2 emissions.

Read the ministry’s press release here and find more information on the new power market law in German here and here.

Government agrees brown coal standby reserve with utilities

26 October

Coal power plant operators will gradually transfer 2.7 gigawatts (GW) of brown coal capacity into an emergency standby reserve as of 2016, the energy ministry and utilities RWE, Vattenfall and Mibrag agreed. The lignite plants will no longer operate, but will be mothballed as a “last resort” to secure power supply for four years before shutting down for good, a ministry press release said. The lignite reserve will cost around 230 million euros annually for seven years, i.e. 1.61 billion euros in total, the ministry said. Grid fees for consumers will increase by 0.05 cent per kilowatt-hour.

Economy and Energy Minister Sigmar Gabriel said: “The measure is important for reaching our climate targets and to make sure that affected regions will not suffer structural interruptions.”

RWE announced that it would transfer five power plant units with a capacity of 1.5 GW into the standby reserve. “It hits the company hard and means a huge burden for our employees. After all, our power generation from Rhenish lignite will decline by 15 percent,” said Peter Terium, CEO of RWE AG. The “necessary personnel downsizing” would be “socially cushioned,” the RWE release reads.

It was clear that 8 lignite fired power stations units would be transferred into the reserve by 2020 and shut down step by step, Michael Vassiliadis, head of the miner’s union IG BCE said. “What’s important about this is that the job cuts will happen without having to let people go.” He said the next thing that the government had to deliver was a programme for regional development to compensate for the job cuts in lignite mining areas.

The plan will save 11 to 12.5 million tonnes of CO 2 in 2020 – an emissions cut that is necessary for Germany to achieve its national 2020 climate target. That is part of the 22 million tonnes it needs to cut to meet the target. The rest will come from energy efficiency measures. Emission reductions will be evaluated in 2018. If they are not sufficient, power station operators will have to suggest further measures, the ministry said.

Environmental NGO Germanwatch said the agreement on a lignite standby reserve was the first time in German history that coal power stations were taken offline to limit climate change, marking the beginning of the end of brown coal in Germany. However, the coal compromise was “bought at a high price," it said. Instead of power station operators paying a climate levy, they would be subsidised to shut down their plants, including two RWE units that should have been shut down due to their old age anyway, Christoph Bals, Germanwatch policy director, said. This made reaching Germany’s 2020 climate target far more unlikely.

Read the ministry press release in German here.

Read a Bloomberg article in English here.

Bloomberg: Germany considers emissions levy as CO 2 reduction target wobbles

14 October

Germany may have to introduce a tax on emissions in order to meet its target of cutting CO 2 emissions by 40 percent from 1990 levels by 2020, Franzjosef Schafhausen, the deputy director general of climate change policy in the Environment Ministry, told Bloomberg in an interview.

Read the interview in English here and a summary on CLEW here.

EU commission might yet thwart the lignite reserve

18 September



The planned reserve of lignite-fired power stations isn't necessary to keep Germany’s power supply secure and therefore is in breach of EU law, an analysis by Hamburg law firm Rechtsanwälte Günther and Energy Brainpool, commissioned by Greenpeace Germany shows. The economic analysis of the power market by Energy Brainpool showed that Germany has massive overcapacities. Even in 2023 when the last nuclear power station will go offline, there would still be an excess 11 gigawatts of power plant capacity, four times the amount envisaged for the lignite power reserve. If under these circumstances Germany couldn’t justify the reserve, the EU commission wouldn’t approve it under current state-aid rules, the lawyers conclude.

Read the analysis in German here.

14 September

The European Commission has doubts about whether the German government’s plan to put some old lignite power plants in a so-called capacity reserve is in line with EU state aid rules, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung reported, citing unnamed sources in the Commission.

9 September

A leaked draft of the new electricity market law shows the government is sticking to its plan to pay for a number of old brown coal power plants, which will be taken off-grid to serve as an emergency reserve.

Read an article on the draft law here.

14 August

Legal experts at the Bundestag (parliament) found that the coal reserve might constitute state aid, which might be difficult to justify before the European Commission.

Late-night deal -- the end of the levy



3 July

German commentators criticised the costs of the deal while environmental groups gave the compromise a mixed reception.

2 July

In late-night negotiations, the ruling government coalition buried the levy proposal, choosing instead to mothball and later decommission some lignite power plants that are most harmful to the climate in terms of emissions.

Read an article on the decision here and a factsheet with key elements of the deal here.

Read a summary of reactions here.

1 July

In the run-up to the crucial decision, media commentators continued their heavy criticism of the union proposal, arguing it meant much less in terms of emissions reduction at a much higher cost than the coal levy. The government was repeatedly attacked for giving in to the "coal lobby."

Decision on climate levy envisaged for 1 July

29 June 2015

A number of media commentators looked into the higher costs the alternative plan would mean for taxpayers or power consumers. At the same time, environmental groups urged Chancellor Angela Merkel to back the original plan, while the German Advisory Council on the Environment called for a timetable for the gradual phase-out of power generation from coal by 2040.

25 June 2015

Media commentators and many energy experts interpreted energy minister Sigmar Gabriel's comments as a clear sign that the climate levy was off the table. Now they wonder whether the alternative proposal would be enough to reach the emissions target, and who would have to pay for the new measures.

24 June 2015

Energy minister shows preference for alternative CO 2 reduction proposal from power sector, saying if a climate levy on old coal plants risks structural ruptures, other options might have to be pursued.

Economy and Energy Minister Gabriel said months of debate over emission cuts from the power sector now left him with two options – following through with the climate levy, which he still believed to be the most cost-efficient instrument, or going with a proposal by the trade unions and power companies.

Power plant operators were convinced the climate levy would force the closure of power plants and lignite mines, while Gabriel still believed this wouldn’t be the case, he said on Wednesday.

“When experts say there will be no structural ruptures but the companies and the unions say there will be, it’s well-advised to assume the worst case scenario and better to get ready for possible alternatives that achieve the same goal,” Gabriel said. “But you have then to be prepared to pay the necessary price.”

In the light of this, Gabriel said he welcomed an alternative to the climate levy proposed by Michael Vassiliadis, head of industry and mining union IG BCE, and Garrelt Duin, economy minister of the federal state of North-Rhine Westphalia. Duin's state would bear the brunt of any measure as it is home to lignite mines, plants and the two largest utilities, E.ON and RWE.

Duin confirmed the alternative plan in an interview with regional TV station WDR. The final decision was due on July 1, but he was confident that "there will be an alternative," Duin was quoted as saying.

Their proposal involves shutting down some coal-fired power plants, step-by-step. Some old hard coal plants would be the first to close. They would be replaced by modern gas-fired combined heat and power (CHP) plants, which would be brought into the support system for existing CHP.

This would achieve a CO 2 reduction of about 4 million tonnes, according to the proposal. A further contribution would be made by the lignite industry, which would close down power plants with a capacity of 2.7 gigawatts (GW) in stages, achieving a CO 2 reduction of 12.5 million tonnes by 2020. These lignite power stations would be transferred into a capacity reserve.

Another 5.5 tonnes of CO 2 would then have to be cut in other areas, to achieve the 22 million tonnes of extra savings by the power sector decided by the government in December 2014.

“We have prepared precise proposals, ranging from replacing old heating to climate action in cities and municipalities. But this has a price which will have to be paid from the federal budget,” Gabriel explained.

The argument for paying that price was a societal one. “The Energiewende will only happen if we take everybody with us. If we shut out members of society and allow the impression to take hold that their worries about jobs and livelihoods have to stand back in favour of the big goals, we will lose support for the Energiewende.”

“I think with the two alternatives we can take a political decision and I am sure we will manage that in the coalition talks on 1 July,” Gabriel concluded.

Following Gabriel’s speech to journalists, head of utility lobby BDEW, Hildegard Müller, commented that Gabriel “has shown clear sympathy for the union’s proposal.” She criticised that while Gabriel was strongly advocating the benefits of market forces in the energy only market (EOM), his own instrument (the climate levy) was “adjustable at every corner” later on, something that would in no way inspire the confidence of the energy sector, she told the Clean Energy Wire.

The miners' union IG BCE said in a statement after Gabriel's speech that there was now an important opportunity to link climate action with "economic sense" and "social responsibility". It added that the minister clearly did not want a structural rupture.

"Basically the door is now open for a solution which does not overburden companies nor regions," said IG BCE head Michael Vassiliadis.

Entering the last round

15 June 2015

A reserve for old coal-fired power stations as suggested by trade union IG BCE and industry association BDI would generally be a suitable alternative to the concept of the climate levy, think-tank Agora Energiewende says in a press-release. But it would have to accommodate at least 4 to 6 gigawatts of lignite capacity, in order to cut more CO 2 emissions than a business-as-usual scenario. The reserve would have to include 18 to 20 old lignite blocks, Patrick Graichen, director of Agora Energiewende said. Otherwise the money would be spent on plants that would have been mothballed anyway. Agora Energiewende shows in a table which proposals for reducing emissions from the power sector are currently on the table and how much CO 2 each could save.

Consultancy Enervis suggests in a study commissioned by Agora Energiewende, that by mothballing the oldest lignite and hard coal fired power stations a few years earlier than technically planned, emissions from the power sector could be reduced by 40 percent in 2020 (compared to 1990), while the wholesale power price would increase by max. 0.4 cent/kilowatt-hour.

Having examined the IG BCE / BDI proposal’s calculations for a “capacity reserve for security of supply and climate action,” Claudia Kemfert, of German Institute for Economic Research (DIW) told the Clean Energy Wire: “We don’t need the proposed capacity reserve to secure power supply. And when looking at the climate effect, transferring 2 gigawatts of power station capacity into the reserve would be an absurdly small contribution – it would save an estimated five to 10 million tonnes CO 2 . According to Kemfert, the reserve would not help to close the gap between business-as-usual cuts in CO 2 and higher reductions needed for achieving the 2020 target, very much like Agora Energiewende also found.

Since the power stations in the IG BCE/BDI reserve would receive payments, plants that were scheduled to go offline anyway, would be given “a golden handshake” – this would be unacceptable, Kemfert told CLEW. According to Kemfert, the reserve would not even prevent the “domino effect” which was one of the main reasons for trade unions and industry to oppose the ministry proposal for a climate levy. “If some lignite stations are mothballed, this leads to higher costs for the aligned mines. Following the logic of the lignite plant operators, this would lead to more shut-downs and a ‘social black-out’, but now the companies admit that there is still some leeway for plants to go offline or into the reserve.”

11 June 2015

Speaking at a press conference, the head of chemicals and energy industries union IG BCE, Michael Vassiliadis said all proposals in the current debate with the Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy were still on the table and all parties were open to discussing them further. The IG BCE had made its concerns over the risks of the climate levy heard.

In recent weeks, discussions have been focused mainly on which and how many power stations could be put on reserve, Vassiliadis said. After very cumbersome talks, the IG BCE had been able to prove to climate levy advocates that “in reality, rather than in a calculated model,” the levy would lead to immediate power station closures. Due to the combination of the nuclear phase-out, CO 2 reductions, other market distortions and the growth of renewables, power companies simply didn’t have the flexibility for any cross-financing to adapt to the climate levy.

“We are at a point where we can solidly show how the 22 million tonnes can be saved,” Vassiliadis said. From his point of view, an agreement could be reached in the coming week.

Representatives of the German Wind Energy Association (BWE) argued that a national measure to implement the G7 pledge was needed, saying the government should back energy minister Gabriel and the climate levy. “The climate levy is a way to kick off a secure process for the next 20-25 years, which will give planning security for all actors,” Jan Hinrich Glahr (BWE Berlin-Brandenburg) and Klaus Schulze Langenhorst (BWE North-Rhine Westphalia) said in a statement. Current over-capacities of coal in the power market were leading to market distortions, which in turn is boosting CO 2 emissions, despite growing renewable energy sources in Germany.

10 June 2015

On Tuesday, 9 June, energy minister Sigmar Gabriel (SPD) met with trade union and state representatives to discuss CO 2 reductions from the coal sector. Industry representatives offered to “voluntarily” take 2,500 megawatts (MW) worth of power stations offline and transfer more into a new reserve (see below) if the minister scrapped his climate levy, Andreas Mihm wrote in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung after the meeting. But the ministry wants 1,000 MW more, the author writes. Participants told Mihm negotiations would continue over the coming days. They seemed hopeful of an agreement before the coalition government's talks next week, which are aimed at coordinating policy, Mihm writes.

The Rheinische Post quoted Member of Parliament Hubertus Heil (SPD) as saying that the different measures proposed would now be thoroughly evaluated and by the end of June there would be a decision on a new instrument.