Processing rape kits saves heartache and money, Cuyahoga prosecutors tell congressional task force
WASHINGTON, D. C. - Anthony Sowell's horrific crime spree revealed systemic problems with how Cleveland-area law enforcement agencies handled rape cases, Cuyahoga County Prosecutor Michael C. O'Malley told a newly-formed congressional task force dedicated to fighting sexual violence.

Though Sowell was jailed for rape before he committed 11 murders that imprisoned him for life, his DNA wasn't entered into criminal databases upon his initial prison release. If it had - and if authorities had seriously investigated complaints about him from women who escaped his clutches - his murder spree might have been cut short, witnesses told the Bipartisan Task Force to End Sexual Violence at a Capitol Hill hearing.

Sowell's case spurred Ohio authorities to begin analyzing some 14,000 rape kits - including 6,700 in Cuyahoga County - that law enforcement didn't process over the years because of the cost and hassle it involved before modern techniques and federal and state crime-fighting money made it easier.

U.S. Rep. Dave Joyce to co-chair congressional task force to fight sexual violence

"These kits represent victims, victims who are still waiting for justice," Rep. Dave Joyce, a Bainbridge Township Republican who co-chairs the task force, said as he kicked off the group's first fhearing. "That's why this issue is a priority for this task force."

Now, Cuyahoga County has tested all its backlogged rape kits. Doing so solved 661 cases so far that couldn't have been prosecuted otherwise, O'Malley's investigations chief, Richard Bell, testified. He said he expects nearly 1,000 defendants will eventually be indicted because of the rape kit tests.

The first 593 rapists whose offenses weren't initially investigated went onto commit more crimes that cost an estimated $440 million in economic harm to the state, said Bell. He said research conducted by Case Western Reserve University showed that "for every rape kit tested, the community saves $8,893 in future economic harm."

He said a 2011 Ohio law that requires anyone arrested for a felony to get DNA swabs from police as they are fingerprinted has also helped catch criminals by letting law enforcement know if a suspect's DNA matches those found at other crimes, like rapes, murders or burglaries. But Bell said some of those arrested have fallen through the DNA-gathering cracks, and investigators will need funding to collect their missing samples.

DNA from thousands of Cuyahoga County felony arrests never taken, not in CODIS crime-solving database

Bell said convicted criminals have told prosecutors that the drive to collect DNA from newly-arrested felons and go through DNA samples from old cases made them realize that they might get caught, and some stopped committing crimes because of it.

"There is a deterrent effect here," said Bell, who urged continued federal funding for efforts to investigate and end sexual violence against women.

Other witnesses discussed the need to treat sexual violence victims with more respect.

Lavinia Masters described how authorities in Texas made her feel she'd done something wrong when a stranger burst into her living room and raped her at knifepoint when she was 13. She said she also felt victimized when she learned her rape kit was never processed, and subsequently decided to become an advocate for victims of sexual assault.

Actress Mariska Hargitay - who recently produced a documentary about the national rape kit backlog called "I Am Evidence" - noted that women complained about Sowell before he was charged with murder, but weren't believed. She said just because someone knows the person who sexually assaulted them "doesn't mean it's not rape," and that rapists' crimes often escalate.

"This is a man who raped and then it escalated and then he murdered 11 women," she said of Sowell.

Hargitay said that since 2010, more than 200,000 untested rape kits nationwide have been accounted for, with help from federal grants that enabled them to be processed. But she said that just eight states, including Ohio, have passed laws that require the testing of current and backlogged rape kits. In most areas, whether to test rape kits is left to the discretion of local authorities.

"Only when law enforcement agencies account for the untested kits in their custody can communities begin to take steps to test those kits, hold offenders accountable and bring justice to sexual assault survivors whose cases have languished, often for years, or even decades," said a statement from Hargitay.