Payday lending bill advances out of Ohio legislative committee
COLUMBUS, Ohio - A House committee advanced a bill Wednesday morning that would cap fees and interest rates on payday loan businesses - after more than a year of the bill stalling and less than a week after the chamber's speaker, Cliff Rosenberger, resigned amid a reported FBI inquiry into his ties with the industry.

The House Government Accountability and Oversight Committee cleared House Bill 123 with a vote of 9 to 1.

The bill would allow loans of up to $500. Payments would be capped at 5 percent of a consumer's monthly income. Loans would have an interest rate cap of 28 percent, plus up to another $20 per month in fees.

Republican Rep. Bill Seitz of Cincinnati opposed the legislation, after he tried to get an amendment through that would ease the regulations on payday lenders.

Moments before the committee killed Seitz's amendment, committee Chair Rep. Louis Blessing said that a coalition pushing for payday lending changes had opposed Seitz's amendment and wanted the bill to march forward in its current form.

"Rep. Seitz brings up numerous, numerous good points in his amendment," Blessing said. "And we can take those up in the Senate."

The suggestion that the Senate adopt changes to a bill that the House wants is highly unusual. Usually a chamber passes a bill in the version it wants because it doesn't always have control over what occurs in the other chamber.

Reps. Kyle Koehler, a Republican from Springfield, and Michael Ashford, a Toledo Democrat, introduced the bill March 21, 2017 to tighten restrictions on payday lenders that Ohioans had enacted a decade ago.

In 2008, Ohio voters adopted a measure to cap payday loans at 28 percent APR. Then the lenders registered to do business under a different section of Ohio lending law. The Pew Charitable Trust found Ohio borrowers on average pay 591 percent APR - the country's highest rate.

Last year, Rosenberger said he wanted to take a serious look at payday lending, but H.B. 123 has lingered in the House Government Accountability and Oversight Committee.

Payday loan reformers say the payday industry's lobbying influence at the Ohio Statehouse is to blame.

A review of Ohio campaign finance records by cleveland.com found payday and auto title loan companies and their executives contributed at least $464,000 to state lawmakers since January 2015.

Payday loan reform bill stalls (again) amid Rosenberger FBI inquiry

The FBI is reportedly interested in a trip Rosenberger took to the U.K. in August. Rosenberger attended with legislative leaders from other states and Ohio Rep. Nathan Manning and several lobbyists - including two who represent auto title loan company Select Management Resources, sources have told cleveland.com.

The FBI isn't commenting on whether any investigation is underway.

Seitz, a House GOP leader who didn't attend the trip but was overseeing the bill at the time, said Rosenberger and attendees discussed proposed payday industry regulations.

Ted Saunders, CEO of the parent company of Checksmart, said at Wednesday's hearing neither his company - nor the Ohio Consumer Lenders Association - paid for, sanctioned or had knowledge of Rosenberger's trip.

"A handful of people in my industry shined a negative light on my industry," he said.

He said the bill in its current form is "unworkable" and based on a Colorado law that hurt business and jobs. The number of loans in that state has decreased by 40 percent since it was adopted. Saunders said stores will be shuttered, people will be laid off and consumers won't get loans they need.

Saunders asked lawmakers to not adopt the bill and to continue with behind-the-scenes negotiations between advocates and the industry.

"I think the scandal itself has brought guilt by association," he said, asking lawmakers for more time to meet with consumer advocates to negotiate an acceptable bill.

But Rep. Ryan Smith, who is running for House speaker, said it was time to move the bill.

"Quite frankly the idea that we're making progress in (negotiation) meetings when everything is stalled, stalled, stalled," he said. "it's pretty obvious what's happening."

Later, Smith said his comment wasn't a critique on Rosenberger but on the payday lenders, who he doesn't believe want any changes in the law.

Springfield Pastor Carl Ruby, a leader of Ohioans for Payday Loan Reform, said the coalition was happy with Wednesday's vote.

"It has been a long, difficult road to get this bill through committee,'' he said. "I thank the majority of committee members who finally saw how much this will help hundreds of thousands of Ohio families trapped in debt and save them millions of dollars each year."

Interim House Speaker Kirk Schuring has said he wants the bill on the House floor in May.