H.R.5120 - 107th Congress (2001-2002): Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2003
Array ( [actionDate] => 2002-07-24 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: On passage Passed by the Yeas and Nays: 308 - 121 (Roll no. 341). [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

There are 3 summaries for H.R.5120. Passed House amended (07/24/2002) Reported to House without amendment (07/15/2002) Introduced in House (07/15/2002) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Passed House amended (07/24/2002)

Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2003 - Makes appropriations for FY 2003 for the Treasury Department, the U.S. Postal Service, the Executive Office of the President, and certain independent agencies.

Title I: Department of the Treasury - Treasury Department Appropriations Act, 2003 - Makes appropriations to the Department of the Treasury for FY 2003 for: (1) departmental offices; (2) department-wide systems and capital investments programs for development and acquisition of automatic data processing equipment, software, and services; (3) the Office of Inspector General; (4) the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration; (5) the Air Transportation Stabilization Program Account; (6) repair, alteration, and improvement of the Treasury building and annex; (7) expanded access to financial services for low- and moderate-income individuals; (8) the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; (9) the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center; (10) interagency crime and drug enforcement; (10) the Financial Management Service; (11) the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; (12) the U.S. Customs Service; (13) the Bureau of the Public Debt; (14) the Internal Revenue Service (IRS); and (15) the U.S. Secret Service.

Provides for funding of the U.S. Mint through the United States Public Enterprise Fund for costs associated with the production of circulating coins, numismatic coins, and protective services, including both operating expenses and capital investments.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

(Sec. 119) Amends the Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 1998 to extend for an additional year the period for a personnel management demonstration project for designated critical positions in the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.

(Sec. 120) Prohibits funds made available by this Act from being used: (1) by the United States Mint to construct or operate any museum without the explicit approval of specified congressional committees; or (2) for the production of Customs Declarations that do not inquire whether the passenger had been in the proximity of livestock.

(Sec. 122) Directs the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center to establish an accrediting body to establish standards for assessing Federal law enforcement training programs.

Title II: Postal Service - Postal Service Appropriations Act, 2003 - Makes FY 2003 appropriations for payments to the Postal Service Fund for revenue foregone on free and reduced rate mail.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

Title III: Executive Office of the President and Funds Appropriated to the President - Executive Office Appropriations Act, 2003 - Makes FY 2003 appropriations for: (1) the Executive Office of the President, including compensation of the President; (2) the Office of Homeland Security; (3) the Executive Residence at the White House; (4) special assistance to the President and the official residence of the Vice President; (5) the Council of Economic Advisers; (6) the Office of Policy Development; (7) the National Security Council; (8) the Office of Administration; (9) the Office of Management and Budget (OMB); (10) the electronic government fund; (11) election administration reform; (12) the Office of National Drug Control Policy; (13) the Counterdrug Technology Assessment Center; (14) Federal drug control programs, including amounts for the High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas (HIDTA) Program and for a national anti-drug campaign for youth; and (15) unanticipated needs.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

Title IV: Independent Agencies - Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 2003 - Makes FY 2003 appropriations for: (1) the Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled; (2) the Federal Election Commission; (3) the Federal Labor Relations Authority; (4) the General Services Administration (GSA), including amounts for the Federal Buildings Fund, Government-wide policy and operations, the Office of Inspector General, and allowances and office staff for former Presidents; (5) the Merit Systems Protection Board; (6) the Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National Environmental Policy Foundation; (7) the Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund to carry out activities authorized in the Environmental Policy and Conflict Resolution Act of 1998; (8) the National Archives and Records Administration, including amounts to repairs and restore the Archives and preserve the Freedmen's Bureau records; (9) the National Historical Publications and Records Commission; (10) the Office of Government Ethics; (11) the Office of Personnel Management, including an amount for the Office of Inspector General; (12) Government contributions for health and life insurance benefits for annuitants; (13) the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund; (14) the Office of Special Counsel; (15) the U.S. Tax Court; and (16) the White House Commission on the National Moment of Remembrance.

Sets forth authorized uses of, and limitations on, such funds.

Title V: General Provisions (This Act) - Sets forth authorized and prohibited uses of funds made available under this Act.

(Sec. 506) Sets forth Buy American provisions, including those providing that in the case of any equipment or products that may be authorized to be purchased with financial assistance provided by this Act, it is the sense of Congress that entities receiving such assistance should, in expending it, purchase only American-made equipment and products.

(Sec. 509) Prohibits funds to be used for abortions or the payment of administrative expenses for any Federal employees health benefit plan which covers abortion, except where the mother's life is endangered or in the case of rape or incest.

(Sec. 512) Prohibits funds made available in this Act from being used by the Executive Office of the President to request from the Federal Bureau of Investigation any official background investigation report on any individual except when: (1) such individual has given his or her express written consent for such a request not more than six months prior to the date of such request and during the same presidential administration; or (2) such request is required due to extraordinary circumstances involving national security.

Title VI: General Provisions (Departments, Agencies, and Corporations) - Sets forth authorized and prohibited uses of funds appropriated for Federal departments, agencies, and corporations.

(Sec. 619) Bars the use of funds made available for the Customs Service in this Act to allow the importation of any good produced or manufactured by forced or indentured child labor.

(Sec. 621) Prohibits the funds made available in this or any other Act from being obligated or expended for any employee training that: (1) does not meet identified needs for knowledge, skills, and abilities bearing directly upon the performance of official duties; (2) contains elements likely to induce high levels of emotional response or psychological stress in some participants; (3) does not require prior employee notification of the content and methods to be used in the training and written end of course evaluation; (4) contains any methods or content associated with religious or quasi-religious belief systems or "new age" belief systems; or (5) is offensive to, or designed to change, participants' personal values or lifestyle outside the workplace.

(Sec. 630) Permits a woman to breastfeed her child at any location in a Federal building or on Federal property if the woman and her child are otherwise authorized to be present at this location.

(Sec. 633) Amends the Government Management Reform Act of 1994 to extend franchise fund pilot programs.

(Sec. 634) Prohibits a Federal agency from collecting personally identifiable information relating to an individual's access to or use of any Federal Government Internet site.

(Sec. 635) Bars funds appropriated by this Act from being used to enter into or renew a contract which provides for prescription drug coverage, except where the contract also includes a provision for contraceptive coverage. Provides that nothing in this section shall apply to a contract with any of two specified religious plans and any existing or future plan whose carrier objects to such coverage on the basis of religious beliefs.

(Sec. 636) Recognizes the United States Anti-Doping Agency as the official anti-doping agency for Olympic, Pan American, and Paralympic sport in the United States.

(Sec. 637) Requires the Inspector General of each applicable department or agency to report to the Appropriations Committee on priority procedures for locating offices and facilities in rural areas, as directed by the Rural Development Act of 1972.

(Sec. 638) Requires each agency to include with its budget submission a report on the use of official time during the prior fiscal year.

(Sec. 639) Requires the head of each agency to identify which of its programs and activities are susceptible to significant improper payments, including estimated annual amounts in its budget submission. Requires agencies with improper payments above a certain level to take remedial steps to reduce such payments.

(Sec. 640) States that the average pay for annuity purposes of an officer or member of the U.S. Secret Service who retired during FY 1995 shall be their basic salary at the time of retirement.

(Sec. 641) Eliminates by 2003 the freeze of current rate for locality-based comparability adjustments for officers or members of the U.S. Secret Service Uniformed Division or Park Police.

(Sec. 643) Mandates a 4.1 percent increase in rates of basic pay for the statutory pay systems in FY 2003 with respect to pay schedules and locality-based comparability payments under Federal civil service law. States that such increase shall be paid from appropriations made to each applicable department or agency for salaries and expenses for FY 2003.

(Sec. 646) Prohibits the use of funds to implement sanctions on private commercial sales of agricultural commodities, medicines, or medical supplies to Cuba, except as specified.

(Sec. 647) Prohibits the use of funds to enforce the travel ban to Cuba.

(Sec. 648) Prohibits the use of funds to enforce any restrictions on remittances to nationals of Cuba.

(Sec. 649) Prohibits the use of special forfeiture funds to pay a contract with the Ogilvy & Mather Corporation for an antidrug national media campaign.

(Sec. 650) Prohibits the use of funds to enforce Federal agency outsourcing quotas or conversion of Federal employees to private contractor performance.

(Sec. 651) Prohibits the IRS from using any funds for activities that violate current pension age discrimination laws.