H.R.3547 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2014
Array ( [actionDate] => 2013-12-12 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in Senate: Passed Senate with an amendment and an amendment to the Title by Unanimous Consent. [externalActionCode] => 17000 [description] => Passed Senate )

Array ( [actionDate] => 2013-12-02 [displayText] => Passed/agreed to in House: On motion to suspend the rules and pass the bill Agreed to by the Yeas and Nays: (2/3 required): 376 - 5 (Roll no. 612).(text: CR H7369) [externalActionCode] => 8000 [description] => Passed House )

There are 5 summaries for H.R.3547. Public Law (01/17/2014) House agreed to Senate amendment with amendment (01/15/2014) Passed Senate amended (12/12/2013) Passed House without amendment (12/02/2013) Introduced in House (11/20/2013) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Public Law No: 113-76 (01/17/2014)

(This measure has not been amended since the House agreed to the Senate amendment with an amendment on January 15, 2014. The summary of that version is repeated here.)

Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2014 - (Sec. 5) Makes appropriations for FY2014.

(Sec. 6) Declares that each amount designated in this Act for Overseas Contingency Operations/Global War on Terrorism pursuant to the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act) shall be available (or rescinded, if applicable) only if the President subsequently so designates all such amounts and transmits the designations to Congress.

(Sec. 7) Declares that if, for FY2014, new budget authority provided in appropriation Acts exceeds the discretionary spending limit for any category set forth in the sequestration requirements of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act due to estimating differences with the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), an adjustment to the discretionary spending limit in such category for FY2014 shall be made by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in the amount of that excess, but not to exceed 0.2% of the sum of the adjusted discretionary spending limits for all categories for that fiscal year.

(Sec. 8) Space Launch Liability Indemnification Extension Act - Extends through December 31, 2016, the application deadline for licenses with respect to which the Secretary of Transportation (DOT) is required to pay third-party claims in excess of a commercial space launcher's required insurance coverage.

Division A: Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2014 - Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2014 - Title I: Agricultural Programs - Appropriates FY2014 funds for the following Department of Agriculture (USDA) programs and services: (1) Office of the Secretary of Agriculture (Secretary); (2) Office of the Chief Economist; (3) National Appeals Division; (4) Office of Budget and Program Analysis; (5) Office of the Chief Information Officer; (6) Office of the Chief Financial Officer; (7) Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights; (8) Office of Civil Rights; (9) agriculture buildings and facilities and rental payments; (10) hazardous materials management; (11) Office of Inspector General; (12) Office of the General Counsel; (13) Office of Ethics; (14) Office of the Under Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics; (15) Economic Research Service; (16) National Agricultural Statistics Service; (17) Agricultural Research Service; (18) National Institute of Food and Agriculture; (19) Native American Institutions Endowment Fund; (20) extension and integrated activities; (21) Office of the Under Secretary for Marketing and Regulatory Programs; (22) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service; (23) Agricultural Marketing Service; (24) Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration; (25) Office of the Under Secretary for Food Safety; (26) Food Safety and Inspection Service; (27) Office of the Under Secretary for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services; (28) Farm Service Agency; (29) Risk Management Agency; (30) Federal Crop Insurance Corporation Fund; and (31) Commodity Credit Corporation Fund.

Title II: Conservation Programs - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) Office of the Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment, and (2) Natural Resources Conservation Service, including the watershed rehabilitation program.

Title III: Rural Development Programs - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) Office of the Under Secretary for Rural Development, (2) rural development salaries and expenses, (3) Rural Housing Service, (4) Rural Business-Cooperative Service, and (5) Rural Utilities Service.

Title IV: Domestic Food Programs - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) Office of the Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition and Consumer Services; and (2) Food and Nutrition Service.

Title V: Foreign Assistance and Related Programs - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) the Foreign Agricultural Service, (2) Food for Peace Act (P.L. 480) program title I and title II grants, (3) Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) export loans, and (4) McGovern-Dole international food for education and child nutrition program grants.

Title VI: Related Agencies and Food and Drug Administration - Appropriates funds for the following: (1) Food and Drug Administration (FDA), (2) Farm Credit Administration, and (3) Commodities Futures Trading Commission.

Title VII: General Provisions - Specifies certain uses and limits on or prohibitions against the use of funds appropriated by this Act.

(Sec. 702) Authorizes the Secretary to transfer unobligated balances to the Working Capital Fund for plant and capital equipment acquisition, which shall remain available until expended.

(Sec. 703) Prohibits appropriations under this Act from remaining available for obligation beyond the current fiscal year unless expressly provided for.

(Sec. 704) Limits negotiated indirect costs on cooperative agreements between USDA and nonprofit organizations to 10%.

(Sec. 705) Makes USDA appropriations for direct and guaranteed loans available for: (1) the Rural Development Loan Fund program account, (2) the Rural Electrification and Telecommunication Loans program account, and (3) the Rural Housing Insurance Fund program account.

(Sec. 706) Prohibits funds made available to USDA under this Act from being used to acquire new information technology systems or significant upgrades.

(Sec. 707) Makes funds available in the current fiscal year for agricultural management assistance under the Federal Crop Insurance Act and for specified conservation programs under the Food Security Act of 1985 until expended for current fiscal year obligations.

(Sec. 708) Makes eligible for economic development and job creation assistance under the Rural Electrification Act in the same manner as a borrower under such Act any former Rural Utilities Service borrower that has repaid or prepaid an insured, direct, or guaranteed loan under such Act, or any not-for-profit utility that is eligible to receive an insured or direct loan under such Act.

(Sec. 709) Prohibits, regarding the specialty crop research initiative, funds from being used to prohibit the provision of certain in-kind support from non-federal sources.

(Sec. 710) Makes unobligated balances for salaries and expenses for the Farm Service Agency and the Rural Development mission area under this Act available for information technology expenses through September 30, 2015.

(Sec. 711) Authorizes the Secretary to permit a state agency to use funds provided in this Act to exceed a specified maximum amount of liquid infant formula when issuing liquid infant formula to participants.

(Sec. 712) Prohibits first-class travel by employees of agencies funded under this Act.

(Sec. 713) States that with regard to certain programs established or amended by the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 to be carried out using CCC funds: (1) such funds shall be available for salaries and administrative expenses without regard to certain allotment and fund transfer limits, and (2) the use of such funds shall not be considered to be a fund transfer or allotment for purposes of applying such limits.

(Sec. 714) Limits funds made available in FY2014 or preceding fiscal years under P.L. 480 to reimburse the CCC for the release of certain commodities under the Bill Emerson Humanitarian Trust Act.

(Sec. 715) Limits funds available for USDA advisory committees, panels, commissions, and task forces.

(Sec. 716) Prohibits funds under this Act from being used to pay indirect costs charged against any agricultural research, education, or extension grant awards issued by the National Institute of Food and Agriculture that exceed 30% of total federal funds provided under each award.

(Sec. 717) Extends the FY2013 funding level for supplemental nutrition assistance (SNAP, formerly known as the food stamp program) employment and training programs to FY2014.

(Sec. 718) Prohibits the use of any Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) funds for the watershed rehabilitation program, or more than $70 million for the environmental quality incentives program.

(Sec. 719) Limits funds for the following domestic food assistance categories under the Act of August 24, 1935: (1) child nutrition program entitlement commodities, (2) state option contracts, and (3) defective commodity removal. Limits funds for the fresh fruit and vegetable program until October 1, 2014. Rescinds specified unobligated balances available in FY2014 for domestic food assistance.

(Sec. 720) Prohibits the use of funds for user fee proposals that fail to provide certain budget impact information.

(Sec. 721) Prohibits, without congressional notification, funds available under this Act or under previous appropriations Acts from being used through a reprogramming of funds to: (1) eliminate or create a new program, (2) relocate or reorganize an office or employees, (3) privatize federal employee functions, or (4) increase funds or personnel for any project for which funds have been denied or restricted.

Prohibits, without congressional notification, funds available under this Act or under previous appropriations Acts from being used through a reprogramming of funds in excess of $500,000 or 10%, whichever is less: (1) to augment an existing program, (2) to reduce by 10% funding or personnel for any existing program, or (3) that results from a reduction in personnel which would result in a change in existing programs.

(Sec. 722) Authorizes the Secretary to assess a one-time fee for any guaranteed business and industry loan that does not exceed 3% of the guaranteed principal portion of the loan.

(Sec. 723) Prohibits the use of USDA, FDA, Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), or Farm Credit Administration (FCA) funds from being used to transmit to any non-USDA, non-Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), non-CFTC, or non-FCA employee questions or responses to questions that are a result of information requested for the appropriations hearing process.

(Sec. 724) Prohibits the use of funds under this Act by any executive branch entity to produce a prepackaged news story for U.S. broadcast or distribution unless it contains audio or text notice that it was produced or funded by such executive entity.

(Sec. 725) Requires USDA agencies to reimburse each other for employees detailed for longer than 30 days.

(Sec. 726) Prohibits specified nonrecourse marketing assistance loans for mohair.

(Sec. 727) Cancels a specified amount of unobligated balances in the Natural Resources Conservation Service, Resource Conservation and Development Account. (States that no amounts may be cancelled from those designated by Congress as an emergency requirement pursuant to the Concurrent Resolution on the Budget or the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 [Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act], as amended.)

(Sec. 728) Appropriates funds for direct reimbursement payments for geographically disadvantaged farmers or ranchers.

(Sec. 729) Appropriates funds for a pilot program to demonstrate the use of new technologies that increase the rate of growth of re-forested hardwood trees on private nonindustrial forests lands, enrolling lands on the coast of the Gulf of Mexico that were damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

(Sec. 730) Directs the Secretary, the FDA Commissioner, and the FCA Chairman to submit to Congress a spending plan by program, project, and activity for the funds made available under this Act.

(Sec. 731) Rescinds specified funds from unobligated balances available to USDA under the "Agriculture Buildings and Facilities and Rental Payments" account.

States that no amount may be rescinded from funds to the General Services Administration (GSA) for rent and funds for payments to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) for building security activities.

(Sec. 732) Makes specified funds available for agricultural commodity assistance to recipient nations only if adequate controls are in place to ensure that emergency food aid is received by the intended beneficiaries and not otherwise diverted.

(Sec. 733) Rescinds specified funds from unobligated funds available to USDA for single family rural housing guaranteed loans for FY2007-FY2010.

(Sec. 734) Rescinds specified CCC funds from unobligated balances for the bioenergy program for advanced biofuels.

(Sec. 735) Directs the Secretary to expand the pilot program for packaging direct loans for single family rural housing to states and communities not served by such pilot program.

(Sec. 736) Limits funds available for administration of the plan for repair or replacement of bulk fuel storage tanks in Alaska that are not in compliance with applicable federal or state law.

(Sec. 737) Prohibits the use of funds made available by this Act to reclassify any area eligible for rural housing programs on September 30, 2013, as ineligible for such programs.

(Sec. 738) Authorizes funds received by the Secretary in the global settlement of any federal litigation concerning federal mortgage loans during FY2012 to be obligated and expended by the Rural Housing Service for costs associated with servicing single family housing loans guaranteed by the Service.

(Sec. 739) Appropriates funds to implement non-renewable agreements on eligible lands, including flooded agricultural lands.

(Sec. 740) Designates the federal building located at 64 Nowelo Street, Hilo, Hawaii, as the Daniel K. Inouye United States Pacific Basin Agricultural Research Center.

(Sec. 741) Rescinds specified CCC funds from unobligated balances for biorefinery assistance.

(Sec. 742) Authorizes the Secretary to increase the program level by up to 25% for certain loans and loan guarantees that do not require budget authority. Requires congressional notification prior to implementing any such increase.

(Sec. 743) Obligates specified funds for an assessment of the existing and prospective scope of domestic hunger and food insecurity.

Directs the Secretary to enter into an agreement with a tax-exempt private-sector organization that has recognized expertise in domestic hunger affairs to conduct this assessment.

Establishes the National Commission on Hunger which shall: (1) provide policy recommendations to Congress and the Secretary regarding programs and funds to combat domestic hunger and food insecurity; and (2) develop recommendations to encourage public-private partnerships, faith-based sector engagement, and community initiatives to reduce the need for government nutrition assistance programs, while protecting the safety net for the most vulnerable members of society.

(Sec. 744) Limits the amount of funds that may be used to write, prepare, or publish a final or an interim rule to implement "Implementation of Regulations Required Under Title XI, of the Food, Conservation and Energy Act of 2008; Conduct in Violation of the Act."

(Sec. 745) Prohibits funds under this Act from being used to inspect horses for slaughter purposes.

(Sec. 746) Directs the Secretary to set aside specified additional funds for Rural Economic Area Partnership (REAP) Zones.

(Sec. 747) Makes certain sequestered fees for FDA available until expended for the same purpose for which such funds were originally appropriated.

(Sec. 748) Makes additional Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service funds available until September 30, 2015, for one-time control and management and activities related to citrus greening.

(Sec. 749) Declares that certain credit card refunds or rebates transferred to the Working Capital Fund: (1) shall not be made available for obligation without congressional notification and approval; but (2) shall be available for obligation only for the acquisition of plant and capital equipment necessary for the delivery of financial, administrative, and information technology services of primary benefit to USDA agencies.

(Sec. 750) Extends specified CCC conservation programs through FY2015.

Division B: Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2014 - Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2014 - Makes appropriations for FY2014 for the Departments of Commerce and Justice, for science-related programs, and for related agencies.

Title I: Department of Commerce - Department of Commerce Appropriations Act, 2014 - Makes appropriations for the Department of Commerce for FY2014 for: (1) the International Trade Administration; (2) the Bureau of Industry and Security; (3) the Economic Development Administration; (4) the Minority Business Development Agency; (5) economic and statistical analysis programs; (6) the Bureau of the Census; (7) the National Telecommunications and Information Administration; (8) the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO); (9) the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST); (10) the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA); and (11) departmental management, including for the Office of Inspector General.

Title II: Department of Justice - Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2014 - Makes appropriations for the Department of Justice (DOJ) for FY2014 for: (1) general administration, including for the Office of Inspector General; (2) the United States Parole Commission; (3) legal activities, including for the antitrust division, the Offices of the United States Attorneys, the United States Trustee Program, the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission, the Community Relations Service, and the Assets Forfeiture Fund; (4) the United States Marshals Service; (5) the National Security Division; (6) interagency crime and drug enforcement; (7) the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), including for costs related to the outfitting, activation, and operation of facilities supporting the examination, exploitation, and storage of improvised explosive devices and explosive materials; (8) the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA); (9) the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF); (10) the federal prison system, including for Federal Prison Industries, Incorporated; (11) the Office on Violence Against Women for violence against women prevention and prosecution programs; (12) Office of Justice programs, including for state and local law enforcement assistance (including for the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant program, the State Criminal Alien Assistance Program, competitive and evidence-based programs to reduce gun crime and gang violence, grants to states to upgrade criminal and mental health records in the National Instant Criminal Background Check System, DNA-related and forensic programs and activities, offender reentry programs and research, and the Comprehensive School Safety Initiative), juvenile justice programs, and public safety officer benefits; and (13) community oriented policing services programs.

(Sec. 202) Prohibits the use of funds to: (1) pay for an abortion, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term, or in the case of rape; or (2) require any person to perform or facilitate an abortion.

(Sec. 216) Prohibits the use of funds made available under this Act, other than for the national instant criminal background check system, by a federal law enforcement officer to facilitate the transfer of an operable firearm to an individual known or suspected to be an agent of a drug cartel, unless U.S. law enforcement personnel continuously monitor or control the firearm at all times.

Title III: Science - Science Appropriations Act, 2014 - Makes appropriations for FY2014 for: (1) the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP); (2) the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), including for the Office of Inspector General; and (3) the National Science Foundation (NSF), including for the Office of the National Science Board and the Office of Inspector General.

Title IV: Related Agencies - Makes appropriations for FY2014 for: (1) the Commission on Civil Rights, (2) the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), (3) the International Trade Commission, (4) the Legal Services Corporation, (5) the Marine Mammal Commission, (6) the Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR), and (7) the State Justice Institute.

Title V: General Provisions - (Sec. 501) Sets forth requirements, restrictions, and limitations on the use of funds appropriated by this Act.

(Sec. 506) Makes any person who mislabels a product sold in or shipped to the United States as "Made in America" ineligible to receive any contract or subcontract funded by this Act.

(Sec. 509) Prohibits the use of funds to promote the sale or export of tobacco or tobacco products or to seek the removal by any foreign country of restrictions on marketing of such products, except for restrictions which are not applied equally to all tobacco products of the same type.

(Sec. 515) Sets forth conditions for the use of funds by the Departments of Commerce and Justice, NASA, or NSF to acquire a high-impact or moderate-impact information system.

(Sec. 516) Prohibits the use of funds to support or justify the use of torture by any official or contract employee of the U.S. government.

(Sec. 518) Prohibits any federal agency from obligating or expending appropriated funds to pay administrative expenses or the compensation of any U.S. officer or employee to deny any application submitted for a permit to import U.S. origin curios or relics firearms, parts, or ammunition.

(Sec. 520) Prohibits the use of funds to authorize or issue a national security letter in contravention of specified statutes authorizing the FBI to issue national security letters.

(Sec. 524) Rescinds specified amounts of unobligated balances available to: (1) the Department of Commerce's National Telecommunications and Information Administration, and (2) DOJ for specified accounts.

(Sec. 527) Prohibits the use of funds in a manner that is inconsistent with the principal U.S. negotiating objective with respect to trade remedy laws to preserve the ability of the United States to: (1) enforce vigorously its trade laws, including antidumping, countervailing duty, and safeguard laws; (2) avoid agreements that lessen the effectiveness of domestic and international disciplines on unfair trade or that lessen the effectiveness of domestic and international safeguards to ensure that U.S. workers, agricultural producers, and firms can compete fully on fair terms and enjoy the benefits of reciprocal trade concessions; and (3) address and remedy market distortions that lead to dumping and subsidization.

(Sec. 528) Prohibits the use of funds to: (1) transfer or release to or within the United States Khalid Sheikh Mohammed or any other detainee who is not a U.S. citizen or a member of the U.S. Armed Forces and who is or was held on or after June 24, 2009, at the U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by the Department of Defense (DOD); or (2) construct, acquire, or modify any facility in the United States, its territories, or possessions to detain or imprison such a detainee.

(Sec. 532) Prohibits the use of funds for NASA or OSTP to develop, design, plan, promulgate, implement, or execute a bilateral policy, program, order or contract to participate, collaborate, or coordinate bilaterally with China or any Chinese-owned company unless such activities are specifically authorized by a law enacted after this Act's enactment. Specifies that such limitations shall not apply to activities that NASA or OSTP has certified: (1) pose no risk of resulting in the transfer of technology, data, or other information with national security or economic security implications to China or a Chinese-owned company; and (2) will not involve knowing interactions with officials who have been determined by the United States to have direct involvement with violations of human rights.

(Sec. 533) Prohibits the use of funds to pay the salaries or expenses of personnel to deny, or fail to act on, an application for the importation of any model of shotgun if: (1) all other legal requirements with respect to the proposed importation are met; and (2) no application for the importation of such model of shotgun, in the same configuration, had been denied by the Attorney General prior to January 1, 2011, on the basis that the shotgun was not particularly suitable for or readily adaptable to sporting purposes.

Division C: Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2014 - Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2014 - Title I: Military Personnel - Appropriates funds for FY2014 for active-duty and reserve personnel in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force (the military departments) and for National Guard personnel in the Army and Air Force.

Title II: Operation and Maintenance - Appropriates funds for FY2014 for operation and maintenance (O&M) for the military departments, other agencies of the Department of Defense (DOD), the reserve components, and the Army and Air National Guard. Appropriates funds for: (1) the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces; (2) environmental restoration for the Army, Navy, Air Force, and DOD and at formerly used defense sites; (3) overseas humanitarian, disaster, and civic aid programs; (4) assistance to the republics of the former Soviet Union and to countries outside of the former Soviet Union for facilitating the elimination and the safe and secure transportation and storage of nuclear, chemical, and other weapons; and (5) the Department of Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund.

Title III: Procurement - Appropriates funds for FY2014 for procurement by the military departments, including for the procurement of aircraft, missiles, weapons, tracked combat vehicles, and ammunition and for shipbuilding and conversion by the Navy. Appropriates funds for: (1) defense-wide procurement, and (2) certain procurements under the Defense Production Act of 1950.

Title IV: Research, Development, Test and Evaluation - Appropriates funds for FY2014 for research, development, test and evaluation (RDT&E) by the military departments and other DOD agencies. Appropriates funds for the independent activities of the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation.

Title V: Revolving and Management Funds - Appropriates funds for: (1) the Defense Working Capital Funds, and (2) National Defense Sealift Fund programs, projects, and activities, and for expenses of the National Defense Reserve Fleet.

Title VI: Other Department of Defense Programs - Appropriates funds for: (1) DOD medical and health care programs; (2) the destruction of the U.S. stockpile of lethal chemical agents and munitions and of other chemical warfare materials that are not in such stockpile; (3) drug interdiction and counter-drug activities of DOD; and (4) the Office of the Inspector General.

Title VII: Related Agencies - Appropriates funds for: (1) the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System Fund, and (2) the Intelligence Community Management Account.

Title VIII: General Provisions - Sets forth authorized, restricted, and prohibited uses of authorized funds.

(Sec. 8007) Requires DOD to submit a report to the congressional defense committees to establish the baseline for application of FY2014 reprogramming and transfer authorities.

(Sec. 8010) Allows for the use of procurement funds for multiyear contracts for: (1) the E-2D Advanced Hawkeye; (2) an SSN 774 Virginia class submarine; (3) KC-130J, C-130J, HC-130J, MC-130J, and AC-130J aircraft; and (4) government furnished equipment.

(Sec. 8012) Prohibits the management of DOD civilian personnel on the basis of any end-strength during FY2014.

(Sec. 8021) Authorizes DOD to incur obligations of up to $350 million for DOD military compensation, construction projects, and supplies and services in anticipation of receipts of contributions from the government of Kuwait.

(Sec. 8023) Prohibits the use of funds to establish a new federally funded research and development center (FFRDC). Limits the federal compensation to be paid to FFRDC members or consultants. Prohibits the use of FY2013 funds for new building construction, cost-sharing payments for projects funded by government grants, absorption of contract overruns, or certain charitable contributions. Limits the staff years of technical effort that may be funded for FFRDCs from FY2013 funds.

(Sec. 8024) Provides Buy American requirements with respect to the DOD procurement of carbon, alloy, or armor steel plating.

(Sec. 8027) Requires the Secretary of Defense to report to Congress on the amount of DOD purchases from foreign entities in FY2014.

(Sec. 8029) Authorizes the Secretary of the Air Force to convey to Indian tribes located in Nevada, Idaho, North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Oregon, Minnesota, and Washington relocatable military housing units currently located at Grand Forks, Malmstrom, Mountain Home, Elllsworth, and Minot Air Force Bases that are excess to the needs of the Air Force. Requires the Operation Walking Shield Program to resolve any housing unit conflicts arising after such conveyance.

(Sec. 8035) Prohibits the use of funds: (1) by a DOD entity without compliance with the Buy American Act; (2) to establish additional field operating agencies of DOD elements, except for those funded within the National Foreign Intelligence Program and Army agencies established to eliminate, mitigate, or counter the effects of improvised explosive devices or to improve the effectiveness and efficiencies of biometric activities, or for certain defense mortuary activities; (3) to adopt any new camouflage design or fabric for any uniform for use by an armed force; (4) to convert to contractor performance a function currently performed by DOD civilian employees, unless specific conditions are met; (5) for assistance to the Democratic People's Republic of North Korea, unless specifically appropriated for such purpose; and (6) to reduce the civilian medical and medical support personnel assigned to military treatment facilities below the September 30, 2003, level.

(Sec. 8040) Rescinds specified funds from various accounts under prior defense appropriations Acts.

(Sec. 8045) Prohibits the transfer to any other department or agency, except as specifically provided in an appropriations law, of funds available to DOD or the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) for drug interdiction or counter-drug activities.

(Sec. 8049) Prohibits current fiscal year DOD funds from being obligated or expended to transfer to another nation or international organization defense articles or services for use in any United Nations (UN) peacekeeping or peace enforcement operation or for any other international peacekeeping, peace enforcement, or humanitarian assistance operation, unless Congress is given 15 days' advance notice.

(Sec. 8056) Authorizes the DOD Secretary, on a case-by-case basis, to waive limitations on the procurement of defense items from a foreign country if: (1) the Secretary determines that such limitations would invalidate cooperative or reciprocal trade agreements for the procurement of defense items, and (2) such country does not discriminate against the same or similar defense items procured in the United States for that country. Provides exceptions.

(Sec. 8057) Prohibits the use of appropriated funds for any training, equipment, or assistance for a unit of a foreign security force if the Secretary has received credible information that such unit has committed a gross violation of human rights. Requires the monitoring of such information. Authorizes the Secretary to waive such prohibition under extraordinary circumstances and requires a report to the defense committees within 15 days after any such waiver.

(Sec. 8062) Authorizes members of the National Guard serving on full-time duty to support ground-based elements of the National Ballistic Missile Defense System.

(Sec. 8063) Prohibits appropriated funds from being used to transfer specified armor-piercing ammunition to any nongovernmental entity, except an entity performing demilitarization services for DOD.

(Sec. 8064) Authorizes the Chief of the National Guard Bureau to waive payment for the lease of non-excess DOD personal property to certain, youth, social, or fraternal nonprofit organizations.

(Sec. 8068) Authorizes the transfer of specified DOD O&M funds to the Global Security Contingency Fund, after congressional notification.

(Sec. 8069) Appropriates funds for the construction and furnishing of additional Fisher Houses to meet the needs of family members confronted with the illness or hospitalization of a military beneficiary.

(Sec. 8070) Earmarks specified procurement and RDT&E funds for the Israeli Cooperative Programs (missile defense).

(Sec. 8075) Requires the FY2014 budget to include separate budget justification documents for costs of U.S. Armed Forces' participation in contingency operations for the military personnel, O&M, procurement, and RDT&E accounts.

(Sec. 8076) Prohibits funds from being used for RDT&E, procurement, or deployment of nuclear armed interceptors of a missile defense system.

(Sec. 8077) Appropriates funds to DOD for grants to the United Service Organizations and the Red Cross.

(Sec. 8079) Prohibits funds from being available for integration of foreign intelligence information unless such information has been lawfully collected and processed during the conduct of authorized foreign intelligence activities.

(Sec. 8080) Requires reserve members called or ordered to active duty in a national emergency to be notified in writing of their expected mobilization period. Allows the Secretary to waive such requirement in order to respond to a national security emergency or to meet dire operational requirements.

(Sec. 8084) Earmarks specified Navy O&M funds for the Asia Pacific Regional Initiative Program for enabling the Pacific Command to execute theater security cooperation activities such as humanitarian assistance and for the payment of incremental and personnel costs of training and exercising with foreign security forces.

(Sec. 8087) Requires the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) to report to the intelligence committees to establish the baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for FY2014. Prohibits funds provided for the National Intelligence Program (NIP) from being available for reprogramming or transfer until the report is submitted, unless the DNI certifies to such committees that the reprogramming or transfer is necessary as an emergency requirement.

(Sec. 8088) Makes specified Intelligence Community Management Account funds available for transfer by the DNI to other departments and agencies for government-wide information sharing activities.

(Sec. 8090) Directs the DNI to submit annually to Congress a future-years intelligence program reflecting estimated expenditures and proposed appropriations included in the President's budget.

(Sec. 8092) Requires DOD to continue to report incremental contingency operations costs for Operation Enduring Freedom on a monthly basis, and any other operation designated and identified by the Secretary on a semiannual basis.

(Sec. 8094) Makes O&M funds available for remittances and transfers to the Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund.

(Sec. 8095) Requires any agency receiving funds appropriated under this Act to post on its public website any report required to be submitted to Congress in this or any other Act, upon the determination by such agency head that it shall serve the national interest. Provides exceptions when posting the report would compromise national security or for reports containing proprietary information.

(Sec. 8096) Provides specific requirements on the use of this Act's funds for any federal contract in excess of $1 million with respect to contractor resolution of claims under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Allows the Secretary to waive such requirements to avoid harm to national security.

(Sec. 8097) Prohibits funds from being distributed to the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN) or its subsidiaries.

(Sec. 8098) Earmarks specified O&M funds for operations of the integrated Captain James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center in Chicago, Illinois.

(Sec. 8099) Prohibits the Office of the DNI from employing more senior executive employees than specified in the classified annex.

(Sec. 8101) Allows DOD funds to be used for the purchase of heavy and light armored vehicles for the physical security of personnel or for force protection purposes, up to a limit of $250,000 per vehicle.

(Sec. 8102) Earmarks specified DOD O&M funds for grants to support critical existing and enduring military installations and missions on Guam. Requires the Secretary to notify the defense committees at least 15 days prior to obligating funds for such purpose.

(Sec. 8103) Prohibits DOD funds from being used to occupy more than 3,000 parking spaces provided under the BRAC (base realignment and closure) 133 project. Allows a partial waiver under certain conditions.

(Sec. 8104) Directs the Secretary to report quarterly the number of civilian personnel end strength by appropriation account for each account used to finance federal civilian personnel salaries.

(Sec. 8105) Prohibits any funds from being used to modify specified appropriations and budget structures for the National Intelligence Program. Allows the Secretary and the DNI to jointly study and develop proposals for alternative financial management processes for the purpose of achieving auditable financial statements and improving fiscal reporting. Requires the Secretary and the DNI, if developing such proposals, to present them to all affected agencies and to the defense, appropriations, and intelligence committees.

(Sec. 8106) Authorizes the DNI, in the national interest, to transfer up to $2 billion of funds made available under this Act for the National Intelligence Program for higher priority items than those for which such funds were originally appropriated.

(Sec. 8107) Earmarks specified funds from the Ship Modernization, Operations and Sustainment Fund for operating, equipping, and modernizing certain guided missile cruisers and dock landing ships.

(Sec. 8108) Requires: (1) the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness to conduct a review of superintendents of military service academies, including their appropriate role and performance evaluation process; and (2) review findings to be submitted to the defense and appropriations committees.

(Sec. 8109) Reduces by $380 million the total amount appropriated in this Act, to reflect savings due to favorable foreign exchange rates.

(Sec. 8110) Prohibits DOD funds from being used to transfer or release to or within the United States or its territories or possessions Khalid Sheikh Mohammed or any other detainee who is not a citizen or member of the Armed Forces and who is or was held by DOD on or after June 24, 2009, at U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba (Guantanamo).

(Sec. 8111) Prohibits DOD funds from being used to transfer any individual detained at Guantanamo to the custody or control of that individual's country of origin or any other foreign country or entity except in accordance with detainee transfer requirements of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2014.

(Sec. 8112) Prohibits DOD funds from being used to construct, acquire, or modify any facility in the United States or its territories or possessions to house any individual who, as of June 24, 2009, is located at Guantanamo, and who: (1) is not a U.S. citizen or a member of the Armed Forces; and (2) is either in DOD custody or control or otherwise under detention at Guantanamo.

(Sec. 8113) Prohibits the use of funds to enter into a contract with, make a grant to, or provide a loan or loan guarantee to any corporation: (1) against which an unpaid federal tax liability has been assessed, or (2) that was convicted of a felony criminal violation within the preceding 24 months.

(Sec. 8114) Prohibits the use of funds: (1) in contravention of federal criminal laws against human trafficking or the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000, (2) to support any military training or operation that includes child soldiers, (3) in contravention of the War Powers Resolution, or (4) to contract with any person or entity convicted of fraud against the federal government.

(Sec. 8121) Prohibits DOD funds from being used to contract with, or make a grant, loan, or loan guarantee to, Rosoboronexport. Allows a waiver on a case-by-case basis if the Secretary certifies that it is in the national security interest to do so. Requires, after any such waiver, a report from the Secretary with respect to Rosoboronexport's arms supply activities with the Assad regime in Syria.

(Sec. 8123) Prohibits the use of funds: (1) for the purchase or manufacture of U.S. flags unless such flags are treated as covered items under Buy American requirements; (2) in contravention of Uniform Code of Military Justice requirements and procedures concerning actions for certain sex-related offenses; or (3) for the direct personal benefit of the President of Afghanistan.

(Sec. 8124) Appropriates funds to DOD to implement the Sexual Assault Special Victims Program.

(Sec. 8127) Makes funds available for ex gratia payments by U.S. local military commanders for damage, personal injury, or death incident to combat operations of the U.S. Armed Forces in a foreign country. Outlines payment conditions and requires a written record of any payments made. Requires an annual report from the Secretary to the defense and appropriations committees on the payment program.

(Sec. 8128) Prohibits the use of funds to conduct any environmental impact analysis related to Minuteman III silos that contain a missile as of the date of enactment of this Act.

(Sec. 8129) Reduces by $8 million the amounts appropriated in titles I and II of this Act, to be applied against funding for general and flag officers within the military personnel and O&M appropriations.

(Sec. 8130) Prohibits funds from being used: (1) to transition elements of the 18th Aggressor Squadron out of Eielson Air Force Base (Alaska); (2) to cancel the avionics modernization program of record for C-130 aircraft; (3) to grant an enlistment waiver in the case of individuals convicted of certain sex crimes; (4) to reduce the force structure at Lajes Field, Azores, Portugal, below the number of personnel assigned there on October 1, 2012, until the Secretary submits a previously-required certification; (5) in contravention of certain Civil Reserve Airlift Fleet transportation requirements; (6) to fund the performance of a flight demonstration team outside the United States when such a demonstration within the United States was canceled due to insufficient funding; (7) to carry out reductions under the New START Treaty except as authorized under the NDAA for Fiscal Year 2014; (8) to implement an enrollment fee for the TRICARE for Life program; or (9) in contravention of limitations on providing certain missile defense information to the Russian Federation.

(Sec. 8139) Prohibits funds from being used by the National Security Agency (NSA) to: (1) conduct a surveillance acquisition under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 for the purpose of targeting a U.S. person; or (2) acquire, monitor, or store the contents of any electronic communication of a U.S. person from a public provider of such services pursuant to such Act.

(Sec. 8140) Reduces by $866.5 million the amount appropriated in title II of this Act, to reflect excess cash balances in DOD working capital funds.

(Sec. 8141) Earmarks specified Army working capital funds for the Industrial Mobilization Capacity Account, under specified conditions.

Title IX: Overseas Contingency Operations - Appropriates funds for FY2014 for overseas contingency operations and the global war on terrorism, including for: (1) military, reserve, and National Guard personnel; (2) O&M, (3) the Afghanistan Infrastructure Fund; (4) the Afghanistan Security Forces Fund; (5) procurement, including National Guard and reserve equipment; (6) RDT&E; (7) Defense Working Capital Funds; (8) the Defense Health Program; (9) drug interdiction and counter-drug activities; (10) the Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Fund; and (11) the Office of the Inspector General.

(Sec. 9002) Authorizes the Secretary, in the national interest, to transfer up to $4 billion of the amounts made available to DOD in this title between any such appropriations for that fiscal year. Requires prompt congressional notification of each transfer.

(Sec. 9004) Authorizes the Secretary to use funds appropriated in this title to purchase motor vehicles for use by military and civilian DOD employees in Iraq and Afghanistan, with a limit of $75,000 per passenger vehicle and $250,000 per each heavy or light armored vehicle.

(Sec. 9005) Authorizes the use of up to $30 million to fund the Commander's Emergency Response Program (urgent humanitarian relief and reconstruction assistance in Afghanistan).

(Sec. 9006) Allows DOD O&M funds to be used to provide supplies, services, transportation, and other logistical support to coalition forces supporting military and stability operations in Afghanistan. Requires quarterly reports from the Secretary to the defense committees regarding such support.

(Sec. 9007) Prohibits any funds from being obligated or expended to: (1) establish any military installation or base for providing for the permanent stationing of U.S. Armed Forces in Iraq or Afghanistan, or (2) exercise U.S. control over any oil resource of Iraq.

(Sec. 9008) Prohibits funds from being used in contravention of specified laws enacted or regulations promulgated to implement the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

(Sec. 9009) Prohibits funds provided for the Afghanistan Security Forces Funds from being obligated prior to the approval of a financial and activity plan by the Afghanistan Resources Oversight Council of DOD.

(Sec. 9011) Earmarks specified Army O&M funds to allow the Task Force for Business and Stability Operations in Afghanistan to carry out strategic business and economic assistance activities in Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. Requires the Secretary, at least 15 days in advance of making funds available for any such project costing $5 million or more, to submit to the defense committees a detailed justification and timeline for the project.

(Sec. 9012) Allows the use of specified O&M funds to support U.S. government transition activities in Iraq by funding operations and activities of the Office of Security Cooperation in Iraq and security assistance teams. Requires 15 days' prior notification from the Secretary to the defense committees with respect to each proposed site.

(Sec. 9013) Rescinds a specified amount from: (1) the General Provision: Retroactive Stoploss, 2009 account; and (2) the Other Procurement, Army account.

(Sec. 9014) Prohibits DOD O&M funds from being used for payments to Pakistan as reimbursement for support provided with respect to U.S. military operations unless the Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of State, certifies to the appropriations committees that the government of Pakistan: (1) is cooperating with the United States in certain counterterrorism efforts, (2) is not supporting terrorist activities against U.S. or coalition forces in Afghanistan, (3) is dismantling improvised explosive device networks and preventing the proliferation of nuclear-related material and expertise; (4) is implementing policies to protect judicial independence and due process of law; (5) is issuing visas for U.S. visitors engaged in counterterrorism efforts and assistance programs in Pakistan; and (6) is providing humanitarian organizations access to detainees, internally displaced persons, and other Pakistani civilians affected by the conflict. Authorizes the DOD Secretary to waive such restrictions on a case-by-case basis by certifying to such committees that it is in the U.S. national security interest to do so.

(Sec. 9015) Prohibits funding to Syria in contravention of the War Powers Resolution, including the introduction of U.S. military forces into Syria where imminent involvement on hostilities is clearly indicated.

(Sec. 9016) Prohibits funds available for the Afghanistan Infastructure Fund from being used to plan, develop, or construct any project for which construction has not commenced before the date of enactment of this Act.

Title X: Military Disability Retirement and Survivor Benefit Annuity Restoration - (Sec. 10001) Makes inapplicable to members retired due to disability and to retired pay used to compute certain Survivor Benefit Plan annuities a reduced annual adjustment, beginning on December 1, 2015, of retired pay for members under the age of 62 (as provided under the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013).

Division D: Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2014 - Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2014 - Title I: Corps of Engineers-Civil - Appropriates funds to the Department of the Army, Corps of Engineers-Civil, for: (1) civil functions pertaining to river and harbor, flood and storm damage reduction, shore protection, and aquatic ecosystem restoration (including the Mississippi River alluvial valley below Cape Girardeau, Missouri); (2) the regulatory program pertaining to navigable waters and wetlands; (3) the formerly utilized sites remedial action program for clean-up of early atomic energy program contamination; (4) flood control and coastal emergencies, including hurricanes and other natural disasters; (5) the civil works program in the headquarters of the Corps of Engineers and the offices of the Division Engineers; and for the Humphreys Engineer Center Support Activity, the Institute for Water Resources, the United States Army Engineer Research and Development Center, and the United States Army Corps of Engineers Finance Center allocable to the civil works program; and (6) the Office of Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil Works).

(Sec. 101) Prohibits funds provided either in this Act or by previous appropriations Acts from remaining available for obligation or expenditure in FY2014 through a reprogramming that would: (1) either create, initiate, or eliminate a new program, project, or activity; (2) increase funds or personnel for any program, project, or activity for which funds are either denied or restricted by this Act without prior approval from congressional committees on appropriations; (3) propose to use for a different purpose any funds directed for a specific activity, without prior approval from such committees; or (4) augment or reduce existing programs, projects, or activities in excess of specified amounts without prior approval from such committees.

Permits reprogramming under specified conditions for: (1) general investigations, (2) general construction, and (3) operation and maintenance (including the Mississippi River and Tributaries, and formerly utilized sites remedial action program).

Discourages submission to the congressional appropriations committees of any reprogramming for less than $50,000 (de minimus reprogrammings).

Exempts from the general prohibition against reprogramming any project or activity funded under the continuing authorities program.

Directs the Corps of Engineers to report to the congressional appropriations committees a baseline for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities for the current fiscal year.

(Sec. 102) Prohibits the use of funds made available in this title to award or modify any contract that commits funds beyond the amounts appropriated for that program, project, or activity that remain unobligated, except that such amounts may include any funds that have been made available through reprogramming pursuant to Sec. 101.

(Sec. 103) Prohibits the use of funds to award any continuing contract that commits additional funding from the Inland Waterways Trust Fund before enactment of a long-term mechanism to enhance revenues in this Fund sufficient to meet the cost-sharing authorized in the Water Resources Development Act of 1986.

(Sec. 104) Directs the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works to submit to certain congressional committees any report of the Chief of Engineers Report on a water resource matter.

(Sec. 105) Authorizes the Secretary of the Army (Secretary in this title) to implement measures recommended in a specified efficacy study, with appropriate modifications or emergency measures, to prevent aquatic nuisance species from dispersing into the Great Lakes by way of any hydrologic connection between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River Basin.

(Sec. 106) Authorizes such Secretary to transfer to the Fish and Wildlife Service any funds necessary to mitigate for fisheries lost due to Corps of Engineers projects.

(Sec. 107) Terminates the authorization for: (1) a navigation project consisting of a 4-foot channel located at the entrance to Ipswich Harbor, Ipswich River, Massachusetts; (2) a specified portion of the project for navigation, Chicago Harbor, Illinois; and (3) a specified portion of the project for navigation, Warwick Cove, Rhode Island.

(Sec. 110) Amends the Water Resources Development Act of 2007 to increase the authorized costs of the navigation project, Miami Harbor, Miami-Dade County, Florida.

(Sec. 111) Modifies the project for flood control, Little Calumet River, Indiana, to authorize the Secretary to implement the project at a specified total cost, with specified estimated federal and non-federal costs.

(Sec. 112) Declares a specified limitation relating to total project costs in the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 inapplicable during FY2014 and FY2015 to any project that receives funds made available by this Act.

(Sec. 113) Requires the Cape Arundel Disposal Site (Maine), selected by the Department of the Army as an alternative dredged material disposal site, to remain open for 5 years after enactment of this Act until the remaining disposal capacity of the site has been utilized, or until completion of an Environmental Impact Statement to support final designation of an Ocean Dredged Material Disposal Site for southern Maine, whichever first occurs, provided that the site conditions remain suitable for such purpose and that the site may not be used for disposal of more than 80,000 cubic yards from any single dredging project.

(Sec. 114) Prohibits funds from being used to continue a specified study conducted by the Army Corps of Engineers, pursuant to the Water Resources Development Act of 2007, of the Missouri River and its tributaries regarding actions to mitigate losses of aquatic and terrestrial habitat, recover certain federally listed endangered species, and restore the ecosystem to prevent further declines among other native species.

(Sec. 115) Prohibits the use by the Corps of Engineers of Energy and Water Development appropriations to develop, adopt, implement, administer, or enforce any change to regulations in effect on October 1, 2012, pertaining to the definitions of "fill material" or "discharge of fill material" for the purposes of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.

(Sec. 116) Authorizes cost sharing during FY2014 for any work required to be undertaken on a flood control project because of impacts to that project from a navigation project.

Title II: Department of the Interior - Makes appropriations for FY2014 to the Department of the Interior for: (1) the Central Utah Project Completion Account; (2) the Bureau of Reclamation (Bureau), including for water and related natural resources, the Central Valley Project Restoration Fund, California Bay-Delta Restoration, and administrative expenses in the Office of the Commissioner (the Denver office) as well as offices in the Bureau's five regions.

(Sec. 201) Prohibits the availability of funds for obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming that would: (1) create or initiate a new program, project, or activity; (2) eliminate an existing program, project, or activity; (3) increase funds for any program, project, or activity for which funds have been denied or restricted by this Act without prior approval from congressional appropriations committees; or (4) restart or resume any program, project or activity for which funds are either not provided in this Act, or for which funds are transferred in excess of specified limits without prior approval from such appropriations committees.

Prohibits the availability of funds, without prior approval from such committees, for any reprogramming that transfers funds in excess of: (1) 15% for any program, project, or activity for which $2 million or more is available at the beginning of the fiscal year; or (2) $300,000 for any program, project, or activity for which less than $2 million is available at the beginning of the fiscal year.

Extends the same prohibition, without prior approval from such committees, for any reprogramming that transfers more than: (1) $500,000 from either the Facilities Operation, Maintenance, and Rehabilitation category or the Resources Management and Development category to any program, project, or activity in the other category; or (2) $5 million to provide adequate funds for settled contractor claims, increased contractor earnings due to accelerated rates of operations, and real estate deficiency judgments when necessary to discharge Bureau legal obligations.

(Sec. 202) Prohibits the use of funds to determine the final point of discharge for the interceptor drain for the San Luis Unit until the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary in this title) and the state of California have developed a plan which conforms to California water quality standards as approved by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to minimize any detrimental effect of the San Luis drainage waters.

Directs the Secretary to classify as reimbursable or nonreimbursable and collected until fully repaid the costs of the Kesterson Reservoir Cleanup Program and the costs of the San Joaquin Valley Drainage Program pursuant to specified alternative repayment plans.

Requires future federal obligations of funds regarding drainage service or drainage studies for the San Luis Unit to be fully reimbursable by San Luis Unit beneficiaries of such service or studies.

(Sec. 203) Prohibits the Bureau, until completion of a specified pipeline reliability study and any necessary changes are made to Technical Memorandum 8140-CC-2004-1 ("Corrosion Considerations for Buried Metallic Water Pipe"), from using that Memorandum as the sole basis to deny funding or approval of a project or to disqualify any material from use in severely corrosive soils.

Requires the Bureau to notify the congressional appropriations committees before advertising any project with a buried metallic pipeline where severely corrosive soils are anticipated to be encountered.

Requires the Bureau to give expeditious consideration to granting any deviation from the corrosion prevention requirements the Bureau proposes for a project (including liability waivers if appropriate) that is requested by the entity that will be the ultimate project owner.

Requires peer review by appropriate non-Bureau experts of any proposal to update the Technical Memorandum.

(Sec. 204) Authorizes the Secretary to participate in non-federal groundwater banking programs in California, including making payments for: (1) the storage of Central Valley Project water supplies, (2) the purchase of stored water, (3) the purchase of shares or an interest in ground banking facilities, or (4) the use of Central Valley Project water as a medium of payment for groundwater banking services.

(Sec. 205) Deems a specified transfer of irrigation water among specified Central Valley Project contractors to meet certain conditions in the Reclamation Projects Authorization and Adjustment Act of 1992.

Authorizes the Secretary, acting through the Director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Bureau Commissioner, to initiate and complete programmatic environmental compliance in order to facilitate voluntary water transfers within the Central Valley Project.

Directs the Bureau Commissioner to report quadrennially to the congressional appropriations committees on: (1) the status of efforts to facilitate and improve water transfers within the Central Valley Project, and water transfers between the Central Valley Project and other water projects in California; (2) an evaluation of potential effects of this Act upon federal programs, Indian tribes, Central Valley Project operations, the environment, groundwater aquifers, refuges, and communities; and (3) recommended ways to facilitate and improve the process for such transfers.

(Sec. 206) Amends the Reclamation States Emergency Drought Relief Act of 1991 to extend its authorities through FY2017.

(Sec. 207) Amends the Calfed Bay-Delta Authorization Act to extend through FY2015 the Calfed Bay-Delta program and the authorization of appropriations.

(Sec. 208) Authorizes the Secretary to partner with, provide a grant to, or enter into a cooperative agreement with local joint powers authorities formed by irrigation districts, other local water districts, and local governments, to advance congressionally authorized planning and feasibility studies for water storage projects.

(Sec. 209) Amends the Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System Act of 2000 to extend to through FY2020 the authorization of appropriations for planning, design, and construction of: (1) the Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water System, and (2) the Dry Prairie Rural Water System.

Title III: Department of Energy - Makes appropriations for FY2014 to the Department of Energy (DOE) for energy and science programs, including: (1) energy efficiency and renewable energy, (2) electricity delivery and energy reliability, (3) nuclear energy, (4) fossil energy research and development, (5) naval petroleum and oil shale reserves, (6) the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR), (7) the Northeast Home Heating Oil Reserve, (8) the Energy Information Administration, (9) non-defense environmental cleanup, (10) the Uranium Enrichment Decontamination and Decommissioning Fund, (11) science activities, (12) the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E), (13) the Title 17 Innovative Technology Loan Guarantee Program, (14) the Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing Loan Program, (15) departmental administration, (16) the Office of the Inspector General, (17) the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) and atomic energy defense weapons activities, (18) defense nuclear nonproliferation activities, (19) naval reactors activities, (20) Office of the NNSA Administrator, (21) atomic energy defense environmental cleanup, and (22) other defense activities including plant and capital expenses for atomic energy defense and classified activities.

Approves expenditures from the Bonneville Power Administration Fund for high voltage line construction to specified service areas. Prohibits any new direct loan obligations from the Fund during FY2014.

Makes FY2014 appropriations for operation and maintenance of: (1) the Southeastern Power Administration; (2) the Southwestern Power Administration; (3) the Western Area Power Administration, including construction and rehabilitation; (4) the Falcon and Amistad Dams Operating and Maintenance Fund; and (5) the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).

(Sec. 301) Prohibits the use of any funds or authority made available for DOE under this Act to initiate or resume any program, project, or activity, or to prepare or initiate Requests For Proposals or similar arrangements for a program, project, or activity which has not been funded by Congress.

Prohibits the use of funds made available under this Act to make grant allocations or discretionary grant or contract awards of $1 million or more, or perform certain related duties, unless DOE notifies the congressional appropriations committees at least three business days in advance. Requires DOE, in addition, to submit quarterly reports to such committees detailing each grant allocation or discretionary grant award totaling less than $1 million provided during the previous quarter.

Prohibits DOE from entering into certain multi-year transactions under DOE-Energy Programs unless such transactions are funded for the full period of performance as anticipated at the time of award, or a transaction conditions the federal obligation upon the availability of future-year budget authority and DOE notifies certain congressional committees at least three days in advance.

Authorizes the reprogramming of funds for any program, project, or activity. Requires DOE to notify certain congressional committees at least 30 days before the use of any proposed reprogramming which would cause a program, project, or activity funding level to increase or decrease by more than $5 million or 10%, whichever is less.

Prohibits the availability of funds for obligation or expenditure through a reprogramming that would: (1) create, initiate, or eliminate a new program, project, or activity; (2) increase funds or personnel for any program, project, or activity for which funds are denied or restricted by this Act; or (3) reduce funds directed to be used for a specific program, project, or activity by this Act.

Authorizes DOE to waive a requirement or restriction that applies to the use of funds made available for DOE if compliance would pose substantial risk to human health, the environment, welfare, or national security. Instructs the Secretary to notify the congressional appropriations committees of any such waiver within three days after the activity to which a requirement or restriction would otherwise have applied.

(Sec. 302) Permits the availability to the same appropriation accounts of unexpended balances of prior appropriations provided for activities in this Act.

(Sec. 303) Deems funds for intelligence activities to be specifically authorized by Congress during FY2014 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY2014.

(Sec. 304) Prohibits the use of funds to: (1) construct specified high-hazard nuclear facilities unless independent oversight is conducted by the Office of Health, Safety, and Security to ensure compliance with nuclear safety requirements; or (2) approve a Critical Decision-2 or Critical Decision-3 under a specified DOE Order for construction projects where the total project cost exceeds $100 million, until a separate independent cost estimate has been developed.

(Sec. 306) Restricts to a maximum period of two calendar years the validity of any DOE determination that the sale or transfer of uranium will not have an adverse material impact on the domestic uranium mining, conversion, or enrichment industry.

Requires DOE to report to congressional appropriations committees not less than 30 days before the provision of uranium in any form: (1) the amount of uranium to be provided and the expected provision date, (2) an estimate of its gross market value on the expected provision date, (3) the value of the services DOE expects to receive in exchange for the uranium, and (4) the recipient of the uranium.

(Sec. 307) Amends the Continuing Appropriations Resolution, 2007 to change from annual to once every three years the mandatory review by the Comptroller General (GAO) of DOE's execution of the program of Incentives for Innovative Technologies under the Energy Policy Act of 2005, consisting of guarantees for certain projects, including gasification and liquefaction projects, that: (1) avoid, reduce, or sequester air pollutants or anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases; and (2) employ new or significantly improved technologies as compared to commercial technologies in service in the United States at the time the guarantee is issued.

(Sec. 308) Prohibits the use of funds made available by this Act to pay the salaries of DOE employees to implement the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 with respect to the Weatherization Assistance Program.

(Sec. 309) Permits DOE to authorize up to 6% of the funds made available by DOE for activities at federally-owned, contractor-operated laboratories for use by such laboratories for directed research and development.

(Sec. 310) Prohibits the use of funds made available under this Act for DOE Energy Programs, Science, for any multiyear contract or other transaction agreement of $1 million or less unless the agreement is funded for the full period of performance anticipated at the time of award.

(Sec. 311) Directs DOE to submit to certain congressional appropriations committees: (1) a tritium and enriched uranium management plan that assesses the national security demand for tritium and low and highly enriched uranium through 2060, and (2) an analysis of alternatives for each major warhead refurbishment program that reaches Phase 6.3.

(Sec. 312) Directs the Secretary of Energy (Secretary in this title) to report to the congressional defense committees on each major warhead refurbishment program that reaches the Phase 6.3 milestone (and by April 1, 2014, for the B61-12 life extension program), including an analysis of alternatives meeting certain criteria.

(Sec. 313) Authorizes the Secretary to appoint for up to 4 years exceptionally well-qualified individuals to as many as 120 scientific, engineering, or other critical technical positions, without regard to specified requirements.

(Sec. 314) Amends the Energy Independence and Security Act to repeal the requirement that DOE make available to refinery operators information on planned refinery outages to encourage reductions of the quantity of refinery capacity that is out of service at any time.

(Sec. 315) Amends the Department of Energy Organization Act to change to once every four years the surveys the Administrator of the Energy Information Administration is required to conduct regarding: (1) energy consumption in U.S. manufacturing industries (currently every two years), and (2) residential and commercial energy use (currently every three years).

(Sec. 316) Authorizes DOE to use appropriated funds to study possible conversion to contractor performance of functions performed by federal employees at the New Brunswick Laboratory.

(Sec. 317) Reduces by $7 million funds appropriated in this Act for non-defense programs in order to reflect savings from limiting foreign travel for DOE contractors.

(Sec. 318) Declares that first tier subcontracts awarded by Management and Operating contractors sponsored by DOE to small business concerns, small businesses concerns owned and controlled by service disabled veterans, qualified HUB Zone small business concerns, small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals, and small business concerns owned and controlled by women shall be considered toward the annually established agency and government-wide goals for small business participation in procurement contracts awarded.

(Sec. 319) Directs the Secretary to establish an independent Commission to Review the Effectiveness of the National Energy Laboratories.

(Sec. 320) Requires that the congressional appropriations committees receive a 30-day advance notification of at-risk award fees for Management and Operating contractors that result in award term extensions, including a detailed explanation of any waiver or adjustment made to such extensions by the NNSA's Fee Determining Official.

(Sec. 321) Authorizes DOE to transfer specified funds to National Nuclear Security Administration, Weapons Activities after DOE provides the congressional appropriations committees a cost-benefit analysis of available and prospective domestic enrichment technologies for national security needs.

(Sec. 322) Prohibits funds made available in this Act from being used to implement or enforce: (1) specified federal energy conservation standards for general service incandescent lamps, intermediate base incandescent lamps, candelabra base incandescent lamps; and (2) specified energy conservation standards governing BPAR incandescent reflector lamps, BR incandescent reflector lamps, and ER incandescent lamps.

Title IV: Independent Agencies - Makes FY2014 appropriations to: (1) the Appalachian Regional Commission; (2) the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board; (3) the Delta Regional Authority; (4) the Denali Commission; (5) the Northern Border Regional Commission and the Southeast Crescent Regional Commission; (6) the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), including the Office of Inspector General; (7) the Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board; and (8) the Office of the Federal Coordinator for Alaska Natural Gas Transportation Projects.

(Sec. 401) Authorizes the Inspector General of the NRC to exercise, with respect to the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board, the same statutory authorities exercised with respect to the NRC.

(Sec. 402) Requires the NRC Chairman to notify other NRC members and specified congressional committees not later than one day after the Chairman begins performing specified functions under the Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1980, or after a member of the NRC who was delegated emergency functions under that Plan begins performing those functions, including an explanation of the circumstances warranting the exercise of such authority.

(Sec. 403) Requires the NRC, when responding to congressional requests for information, to comply with the July 5, 2011, version of Chapter VI of its Internal Commission Procedures.

Title V: General Provisions - (Sec. 501) Prohibits the use of funds appropriated by this Act to influence congressional action on legislation or appropriation pending before Congress.

(Sec. 502) Prohibits the use of funds to enter into a contract, memorandum of understanding, or cooperative agreement with, make a grant to, or provide a loan or loan guarantee to any corporation that was convicted of a felony criminal violation under any federal law within the preceding 24 months, where the awarding agency is aware of the conviction, unless the agency has considered suspension or debarment of the corporation and determined that this further action is not necessary to protect government interests.

(Sec. 503) Extends the same prohibition to any corporation that has any unpaid federal tax liability that has been assessed, for which all judicial and administrative remedies have been exhausted or have lapsed, and that is not being paid in a timely manner, where the awarding agency is aware of the unpaid tax liability, unless it has considered suspension or debarment of the corporation and determined that this further action is not necessary.

(Sec. 504) Prohibits funds made available by this Act to DOE from being transferred to any federal department, agency, or instrumentality, except pursuant to certain statutory transfer authorities, or any authority whereby a federal department, agency, or instrumentality may provide goods or services to another such entity.

Requires the head of a department or agency funded in this Act that utilizes any transfer authority to report semiannually to certain congressional committees, detailing such transfer authority.

(Sec. 505) Prohibits the use of funds to contravene Executive Order No. 12898 of February 11, 1994 ("Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations").

Division E: Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2014 - Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2014 - Title I: Department of the Treasury - Department of the Treasury Appropriations Act, 2014 - Makes appropriations for FY2014 to the Department of the Treasury for: (1) departmental offices, (2) department-wide systems and capital investments programs, (3) the Office of Inspector General, (4) the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, (5) the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), (6) the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, (7) the Bureau of the Fiscal Service, (8) the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, (9) the U.S. Mint for the U.S. Mint Public Enterprise Fund, (10), the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund Program Account, and (11) the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).

Sets forth certain transfers of funds, plus a rescission of certain funds from the Treasury Forfeiture Fund.

(Sec. 102) Requires the IRS to: (1) maintain a training program for IRS employees in taxpayers' rights, dealing courteously with taxpayers, cross-cultural relations, ethics, and impartial application of tax law; and (2) institute and enforce policies and procedures that will safeguard the confidentiality of taxpayers' information and protect them against identity theft.

(Sec. 104) Makes funds for the IRS under any Act available for improved facilities and increased staffing to provide sufficient and effective 1-800 help line service for taxpayers.

(Sec. 105) Bars the use of IRS funds to make a video unless the Service-Wide Video Editorial Board determines in advance that making the video is appropriate, taking into account its cost, topic, tone, and purpose.

(Sec. 106) Requires: (1) the IRS to issue a notice of confirmation of any address change relating to an employer making employment tax payments, (2) such notice to be sent to both the employer's former and new address, and (3) an IRS officer or employee to give special consideration to an offer-in-compromise from a taxpayer who has been the victim of fraud by a third party payroll tax preparer.

(Sec. 107) Bars the use of IRS funds to target U.S. citizens for exercising any right guaranteed under the First Amendment to the Constitution.

(Sec. 108) Bars the use of funds made available in this Act by the IRS to target groups for regulatory scrutiny based on their ideological beliefs.

(Sec. 109) Requires the IRS Commissioner to transfer to either the IRS Taxpayer Services, Enforcement, or the Operations Supports accounts specified additional funds, to be available through FY2015, to be used solely to:

improve the delivery of services to taxpayers,

improve the identification and prevention of refund fraud and identity theft, and

address international and offshore compliance issues .

(Sec. 113) Bars the use of funds to the Department of the Treasury or the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to redesign the $1 Federal Reserve note.

(Sec. 115) Prohibits the U.S. Mint from using any federal funds to construct or operate any museum without the explicit approval of specified congressional committees.

(Sec. 116) Prohibits the use of funds to merge the U.S. Mint and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing without the explicit approval of the same congressional committees.

(Sec. 117) Deems any funds appropriated by this Act, or made available by the transfer of funds in this Act, for intelligence activities to be specifically authorized by Congress for purposes of the National Security Act of 1947 during FY2014, until enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY2014.

(Sec. 118) Requires up to $5,000 to be made available from the Bureau of Engraving and Printing's Industrial Revolving Fund for necessary official reception and representation expenses.

(Sec. 119) Requires the Secretary to submit a Capital Investment Plan to congressional appropriations committees within 30 days after the submission of the President's annual budget.

(Sec. 120) Requires the Office of Financial Stability and the Office of Financial Research to: (1) report quarterly to specified congressional committees on their respective activities; and (2) make their officials available, upon committee request, to testify on the reports' contents.

(Sec. 121) Requires the Secretary to report to congressional appropriations committees on the amount of total funds charged to each office by the Working Capital Fund, including the amount charged for each service provided by it to each office and a detailed explanation of how the charge for each service is calculated.

Title II: Executive Office of the President and Funds Appropriated to the President - Executive Office of the President Appropriations Act, 2014 - Makes appropriations for FY2014 for designated White House agencies, including the Executive Residence and: (1) the Council of Economic Advisers; (2) the National Security Council (NSC) and the Homeland Security Council; (3) the Office of Administration; (4) the Office of Management and Budget (OMB); (5) the Office of National Drug Control Policy; (6) various other specified federal drug control programs; (7) federal integrated, efficient, secure, and effective uses of information technology; (8) unanticipated needs; (9) data-driven innovation; and (10) special assistance to the President and the official residence of the Vice President.

Sets forth certain transfers of funds.

(Sec. 202) Requires the Director of OMB to submit to congressional appropriations committees a report on the costs of implementing the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.

(Sec. 203) Requires the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy to submit to congressional appropriations committees, within 60 days after enactment of this Act, and before the initial obligation of more than 20% of the funds appropriated in any account for the Office, a detailed narrative and financial plan on the proposed uses of all funds under the account by program, project, and activity.

(Sec. 203) Limits the availability of appropriations to such Office in this Act to: (1) a 2% transfer between appropriated programs upon the advance approval of congressional appropriations committees; and (2) up to $1 million for reprogramming within a program, project, or activity upon such approval.

Title III: The Judiciary - Judiciary Appropriations Act, 2014 - Makes appropriations to the Judiciary for FY2014 for: (1) the U.S. Supreme Court; (2) the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit; (3) the U.S. Court of International Trade; (4) the courts of appeals, district courts, and other judicial services, including retired justices and judges as well as defender services; (5) fees of jurors and commissioners; (6) court security; (7) the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts; (8) the Federal Judicial Center; and (9) the U.S. Sentencing Commission.

Sets forth certain transfers of funds.

(Sec. 304) Provides for the mandatory or discretionary delegation, in certain circumstances, of the duties and powers of the Administrator of General Services to an appropriate federal agency (currently, an appropriate executive agency only).

(Sec. 305) Requires the U.S. Marshals Service to provide, as a pilot program, specified security services (except investigations) for courthouses which federal law authorizes the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to provide.

(Sec. 306) Authorizes the U.S. Supreme Court, the Federal Judicial Center, and the U.S Sentencing Commission to enter into contracts, to the same extent as executive agencies, for: (1) acquisition of severable services for a period that begins in one fiscal year and ends in the next, and (2) for multiple years for acquisition of property and services.

(Sec. 307) Amends the Judicial Improvement Act of 1990 to prohibit the filling of the first vacancy in the office of district judge in: (1) the district of Kansas occurring 23 (currently, 21) years and six months or more after the confirmation date of the judge named to fill the temporary judgeship; and (2) the district of Hawaii occurring 20 (currently, 19) years and six months or more after such confirmation date. (In effect lengthens by one year the respective temporary judgeships in the districts of Kansas and Hawaii.)

Amends the Transportation, Treasury, Housing and Urban Development, the Judiciary, the District of Columbia, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, of 2006 to prohibit the filling of the first vacancy in the office of district judge in the eastern district of Missouri occurring 21 (currently, 20) years and six months or more after the confirmation date of the judge named to fill the temporary judgeship. (In effect lengthens by one year the period of the respective temporary judgeship in such district.)

Amends the 21st Century Department of Justice Appropriations Authorization Act to prohibit the filling of the first vacancy in the office of district judge in: (1) the northern district of Alabama, the district of Arizona, the southern district of Florida, the district of New Mexico, and the eastern district of Texas occurring 12 years (currently, 11 years) or more after the confirmation date of the judge named to fill the respective temporary judgeships; and (2) the central district of California occurring 11 years (currently, 10 years) and 6 months or more after the confirmation date of the judge named to fill the temporary judgeship. (In effect lengthens by one year the period of the temporary judgeship in that district.)

Title IV: District of Columbia - District of Columbia Appropriations Act, 2014 - Makes appropriations to the District of Columbia for FY2014, including amounts for the federal payments: (1) for District of Columbia Resident Tuition Support, (2) for emergency planning and security costs in the District, (3) to District of Columbia Courts, (4) for Defender Services in District of Columbia Courts, (5) to the Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia, (6) to the District of Columbia Public Defender Service, (7) to the District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority, (8) to the Criminal Justice Coordinating Council, (9) to the Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure and the Judicial Nomination Commission, (10) for school improvement, (11) for the D.C. National Guard, and (12) for testing and treatment of HIV/AIDS.

Requires certain funds appropriated for operating expenses to be subject to specified proposals of the Fiscal Year 2014 Proposed Budget and Financial Plan submitted to Congress by the District of Columbia.

Title V: Independent Agencies - Makes appropriations for FY2014 for independent agencies, including: (1) the Administrative Conference of the United States; (2) the Christopher Columbus Fellowship Foundation; (3) the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC); (4) the Election Assistance Commission (EAC), including election reform activities; (5) the Federal Communication Commission (FCC); (6) the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), for its Office of Inspector General; (7) the Federal Election Commission (FEC); (8) the Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA); (9) the Federal Trade Commission (FTC); (10) the General Services Administration (GSA); (11) government-wide policy activities and operating expenses; (12) the GSA Office of Inspector General; (13) the electronic government fund; (14) allowances and office staff for former presidents; (15) the Office of Citizen Services and Innovative Technologies, including the Federal Citizen Services Fund; (16) the Harry S Truman Scholarship Foundation; (17) the Merit Systems Protection Board; (18) Morris K. Udall and Stewart L. Udall Foundation; (19) the Environmental Dispute Resolution Fund; (20) the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), including the Office of Inspector General; (21) the National Historical Publications and Records Commission grants program; (22) the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA); (23) the credit union Community Development Revolving Loan Fund; (24) the Office of Government Ethics; (25) the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), including the Office of Inspector General; (26) the Office of Special Counsel; (27) the Postal Regulatory Commission; (28) the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board; (29) the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board; (30) the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC); (31) the Selective Service System; (32) the Small Business Administration (SBA), including entrepreneurial development programs and the Office of Inspector General and the Office of Advocacy; (33) the U.S. Postal Service, including the Office of Inspector General; and (34) the U.S. Tax Court.

Sets forth certain transfers of funds.

(Sec. 501) Amends the Virginia Graeme Baker Pool and Spa Safety Act to revise eligibility requirements for the state swimming pool safety grant program to include swimming pools constructed in the state after the date the state submits a grant application to the CPSC.

(Currently, such requirements include swimming pools constructed after the date that is six months after enactment of the Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 2012.)

Extends the state swimming pool safety grant program through FY2016.

Revises minimum state law requirements for such grants to repeal requirements that:

all pools and spas be equipped with devices and systems designed to prevent entrapment by pool or spa drains;

all pools and spas that have a main drain, other than an unblockable drain, be equipped with a drain cover that meets the consumer product safety standard; and

periodic notification is provided to owners of residential swimming pools or spas about compliance with the entrapment protection standards of the ASME/ANSI A112.19.8 performance standard.

(Sec. 510) Amends the Universal Service Antideficiency Temporary Suspension Act to extend through December 31, 2015, the waiver of certain limitations on: (1) expending, obligating, or apportioning appropriations with respect to the collection or receipt of federal universal service contributions under the Communications Act of 1934; and (2) expending or obligating funds attributable to such contributions for universal service support programs.

(Sec. 511) Prohibits the use of FCC funds to modify, amend, or change its rules or regulations for universal service support payments to implement the February 27, 2004, recommendations of the Federal-State Joint Board on Universal Service regarding single connection or primary line restrictions on universal service support payments.

Title VI: General Provisions (This Act) - Sets forth permissions for and restrictions upon the use of funds under this Act.

(Sec. 606) Prohibits the expenditure of funds under this Act by an entity unless it agrees that such expenditure will comply with the Buy American Act.

(Sec. 607) Prohibits the availability of funds under this Act to any person or entity that has been convicted of violating the Buy American Act.

(Sec. 610) Prohibits the availability of funds under this Act for use by the Executive Office of the President to request from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) any official background investigation report on any individual, except when: (1) such individual has given his or her express written consent for such request within six months before the date of such request and during the same presidential administration, or (2) such request is required due to extraordinary circumstances involving national security.

(Sec. 611) Makes certain cost accounting standards promulgated under the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act inapplicable to a Federal Employees Health Benefits Program (FEHBP) contract.

(Sec. 612) Authorizes OPM to accept and utilize (without regard to any restriction on unanticipated travel expenses) funds made available to OPM pursuant to court approval for resolving litigation and implementing any settlement agreements regarding the nonforeign area cost-of-living allowance program.

(Sec. 613) Prohibits the expenditure of funds appropriated under this Act for abortions or abortion related administrative expenses in connection with any health plan under the FEHBP, except where the mother's life would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term, or in cases of rape or incest.

(Sec. 615) Makes the restriction on purchasing nondomestic articles, materials, and supplies set forth in the Buy American Act inapplicable to the acquisition by the federal government of commercial information technology.

(Sec. 616) Prohibits an officer or employee of any regulatory agency or commission funded by this Act from accepting, on behalf of that agency, or such agency or commission from accepting, payment or reimbursement from a nonfederal entity for travel-related expenses to enable an officer or employee to attend and participate in any meeting or similar function relating to official duties, when the entity offering payment or reimbursement is subject to regulation by such agency or commission, or represents such person or entity, unless the person or entity is a nonprofit tax-exempt organization.

(Sec. 617) Permits the use of funds made available to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and the SEC for the interagency funding and sponsorship of a joint advisory committee to advise on emerging regulatory issues.

(Sec. 618) Requires the Department of the Treasury, the Executive Office of the President, the Judiciary, the FCC, the FTC, GSA, the NARA, the SEC, and SBA to provide congressional appropriations committees a quarterly accounting of the cumulative balances of any unobligated funds received during any previous fiscal year.

(Sec. 619) Requires any executive agency covered by this Act, except GSA and the U.S. Postal Service, which is otherwise authorized to enter into contracts for either leases or the construction or alteration of real property for office, meeting, storage, or other space, to consult with GSA before issuing a solicitation for offers of new leases or construction contracts (and in the case of succeeding leases, before entering into negotiations with the current lessor). Authorizes such an agency with authority to enter into an emergency lease to do so during any period declared by the President to require emergency leasing authority.

(Sec. 620) Prohibits the use of FTC funds to complete the draft report entitled "Interagency Working Group on Food Marketed to Children: Preliminary Proposed Nutrition Principles to Guide Industry Self-Regulatory Efforts" unless the Working Group complies with Executive Order 13563 ("Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review").

(Sec. 621) Bars the use of funds to pay the salaries and expenses of the:

Director, White House Office of Health Reform,

Assistant to the President for Energy and Climate Change,

Senior Advisor to the Secretary of the Treasury assigned to the Presidential Task Force on the Auto Industry and Senior Counselor for Manufacturing Policy, and

White House Director of Urban Affairs.

(Sec. 622) Prohibits the use of funds made available by this Act to enter into a contract, memorandum of understanding, or cooperative agreement with, make a grant to, or provide a loan or loan guarantee to, any corporation with any unpaid federal tax liability, for which all judicial and administrative remedies have been exhausted or have lapsed, and that is not being paid in a timely manner, where the awarding agency is aware of this unpaid tax liability. Waives this prohibition if the agency has considered suspension or debarment of the corporation and determined that such an action is not necessary to protect the interests of the government.

(Sec. 623) Prohibits the use of such funds to enter into the transactions cited in Sec. 622 with a corporation that was convicted or had one of its officers or agents acting on the corporation's behalf convicted of a felony criminal violation under any federal law within the preceding 24 months, where the awarding agency is aware of the conviction. Waives this prohibition if the agency has considered suspension or debarment of the corporation and determined that such an action is not necessary to protect the interests of the government.

(Sec. 624) Appropriates amounts required under current law for:

compensation of the President;

payments to the Judicial Officers' Retirement Fund, the Judicial Survivors' Annuities Fund, and the U.S. Court of Federal Claims Judges' Retirement Fund;

payment of government contributions for health benefits of federal retired employees, and life insurance benefits for such employees;

payment to finance the unfunded liability of new and increased annuity benefits under the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund; and

payments of annuities authorized to be paid from the Fund by statutory requirements other than the Federal Employees' Retirement System (FERS) and the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS).

(Sec. 625) Prohibits the use of FCC funds to remove the conditions imposed on commercial terrestrial operations in the FCC Order and Authorization adopted on January 26, 2011 (DA 11-133), or otherwise permit such operations, until the FCC has resolved concerns of potential widespread harmful interference by such commercial terrestrial operations to commercially available Global Positioning System (GPS) devices.

(Sec. 626) Authorizes the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board to obligate funds for the scholarship program established by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 in an aggregate amount not exceeding the amount of funds collected by the Board as of December 31, 2013, including accrued interest, resulting from the assessment of monetary penalties. Requires funds available for obligation in FY2014 to remain available until expended.

(Sec. 627) Amends the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) with respect to the requirement that the chief executive of a recipient governmental entity certify that: (1) federal funds received for infrastructure investment have received full review and vetting, and (2) the chief executive accepts responsibility that such investment is an appropriate use of taxpayer dollars.

Amends the Jobs Accountability Act (within the ARRA) to repeal certain reporting requirements by recipients on the use of ARRA funds.

Requires each agency that made recovery funds available to any recipient to make available to the public, beginning February 1, 2014, detailed spending data as prescribed by OMB and pursuant to the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006. (Currently, within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter, each such agency must make the information submitted in the reports publicly available by posting the information on a website.)

Repeals the requirement tha