Text - H.R.4760 - 115th Congress (2017-2018): Securing America's Future Act of 2018
H. R. 4760

To amend the immigration laws and the homeland security laws, and for other purposes.

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Mr. Goodlatte (for himself, Mr. McCaul, Mr. Labrador, Ms. McSally, Mr. Sensenbrenner, and Mr. Carter of Texas) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committees on Education and the Workforce, Homeland Security, Foreign Affairs, Ways and Means, Armed Services, Oversight and Government Reform, Agriculture, Transportation and Infrastructure, and Natural Resources, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

A BILL

To amend the immigration laws and the homeland security laws, and for other purposes.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. Short title; table of contents.

(a) Short title.—This Act may be cited as the “Securing America’s Future Act of 2018”.

(b) Table of contents.—The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

SEC. 1101. Family-sponsored immigration priorities.

(a) Immediate relative redefined.—Section 201 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1151) is amended—

(1) in subsection (b)(2)(A)—

(A) in clause (i), by striking “children, spouses, and parents of a citizen of the United States, except that, in the case of parents, such citizens shall be at least 21 years of age.” and inserting “children and spouse of a citizen of the United States.”; and

(B) in clause (ii), by striking “such an immediate relative” and inserting “the immediate relative spouse of a United States citizen”;

(2) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following: “(c) Worldwide level of family-Sponsored immigrants.— (1) The worldwide level of family-sponsored immigrants under this subsection for a fiscal year is equal to 87,934 minus the number computed under paragraph (2). “(2) The number computed under this paragraph for a fiscal year is the number of aliens who were paroled into the United States under section 212(d)(5) in the second preceding fiscal year who— “(A) did not depart from the United States (without advance parole) within 365 days; and

“(B) (i) did not acquire the status of an alien lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence during the two preceding fiscal years; or

“(ii) acquired such status during such period under a provision of law (other than subsection (b)) that exempts adjustment to such status from the numerical limitation on the worldwide level of immigration under this section.”; and

(3) in subsection (f)—

(A) in paragraph (2), by striking “section 203(a)(2)(A)” and inserting “section 203(a)”;

(B) by striking paragraph (3);

(C) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3); and

(D) in paragraph (3), as redesignated, by striking “(1) through (3)” and inserting “(1) and (2)”.

(b) Family-Based visa preferences.—Section 203(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1153(a)) is amended to read as follows:

“(a) Spouses and minor children of permanent resident aliens.—Family-sponsored immigrants described in this subsection are qualified immigrants who are the spouse or a child of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. Such immigrants shall be allocated visas in accordance with the number computed under section 201(c).”.

(c) Aging out.—Section 203(h) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1153(h)) is amended—

(1) by striking “(a)(2)(A)” each place such term appears and inserting “(a)(2)”;

(2) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:

“(1) IN GENERAL.—Subject to paragraph (2), for purposes of subsections (a)(2) and (d), a determination of whether an alien satisfies the age requirement in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) of section 101(b)(1) shall be made using the age of the alien on the date on which a petition is filed with the Secretary of Homeland Security.”.

(3) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (4) as paragraphs (3) through (5), respectively;

(4) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:

“(2) LIMITATION.—Notwithstanding the age of an alien on the date on which a petition is filed, an alien who marries or turns 25 years of age prior to being issued a visa pursuant to subsection (a)(2) or (d), no longer satisfies the age requirement described in paragraph (1).”; and

(5) in paragraph (5), as so redesignated, by striking “(3)” and inserting “(4)”.

(d) Conforming amendments.—

(1) DEFINITION OF V NONIMMIGRANT.—Section 101(a)(15)(V) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(V)) is amended by striking “section 203(a)(2)(A)” each place such term appears and inserting “section 203(a)”.

(2) NUMERICAL LIMITATION TO ANY SINGLE FOREIGN STATE.—Section 202 of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1152) is amended—

(A) in subsection (a)(4)—

(i) by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B) and inserting the following:

“(A) 75 PERCENT OF FAMILY-SPONSORED IMMIGRANTS NOT SUBJECT TO PER COUNTRY LIMITATION.—Of the visa numbers made available under section 203(a) in any fiscal year, 75 percent shall be issued without regard to the numerical limitation under paragraph (2).

“(B) TREATMENT OF REMAINING 25 PERCENT FOR COUNTRIES SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (e).—

“(i) IN GENERAL.—Of the visa numbers made available under section 203(a) in any fiscal year, 25 percent shall be available, in the case of a foreign state or dependent area that is subject to subsection (e) only to the extent that the total number of visas issued in accordance with subparagraph (A) to natives of the foreign state or dependent area is less than the subsection (e) ceiling.

“(ii) SUBSECTION (e) CEILING DEFINED.—In clause (i), the term ‘subsection (e) ceiling’ means, for a foreign state or dependent area, 77 percent of the maximum number of visas that may be made available under section 203(a) to immigrants who are natives of the state or area, consistent with subsection (e).”; and

(ii) by striking subparagraphs (C) and (D); and

(B) in subsection (e)—

(i) in paragraph (1), by adding “and” at the end;

(ii) by striking paragraph (2);

(iii) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2); and

(iv) in the undesignated matter after paragraph (2), as redesignated, by striking “, respectively,” and all that follows and inserting a period.

(3) PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING IMMIGRANT STATUS.—Section 204 of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1154) is amended—

(A) in subsection (a)(1)—

(i) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking “to classification by reason of a relationship described in paragraph (1), (3), or (4) of section 203(a) or”;

(ii) in subparagraph (B)—

(I) in clause (i), by redesignating the second subclause (I) as subclause (II); and

(II) by striking “203(a)(2)(A)” each place such terms appear and inserting “203(a)”; and

(iii) in subparagraph (D)(i)(I), by striking “a petitioner” and all that follows through “section 204(a)(1)(B)(iii).” and inserting “an individual younger than 21 years of age for purposes of adjudicating such petition and for purposes of admission as an immediate relative under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) or a family-sponsored immigrant under section 203(a), as appropriate, notwithstanding the actual age of the individual.”;

(B) in subsection (f)(1), by striking “, 203(a)(1), or 203(a)(3), as appropriate”; and

(C) by striking subsection (k).

(4) WAIVERS OF INADMISSIBILITY.—Section 212 of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1182) is amended—

(A) in subsection (a)(6)(E)(ii), by striking “section 203(a)(2)” and inserting “section 203(a)”; and

(B) in subsection (d)(11), by striking “(other than paragraph (4) thereof)”.

(5) EMPLOYMENT OF V NONIMMIGRANTS.—Section 214(q)(1)(B)(i) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1184(q)(1)(B)(i)) is amended by striking “section 203(a)(2)(A)” each place such term appears and inserting “section 203(a)”.

(6) DEFINITION OF ALIEN SPOUSE.—Section 216(h)(1)(C) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1186a(h)(1)(C)) is amended by striking “section 203(a)(2)” and inserting “section 203(a)”.

(7) CLASSES OF DEPORTABLE ALIENS.—Section 237(a)(1)(E)(ii) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1227(a)(1)(E)(ii)) is amended by striking “section 203(a)(2)” and inserting “section 203(a)”.

(e) Creation of nonimmigrant classification for alien parents of adult united states citizens.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 101(a)(15) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)) is amended—

(A) in subparagraph (T)(ii)(III), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon;

(B) in subparagraph (U)(iii), by striking “or” at the end;

(C) in subparagraph (V)(ii)(II), by striking the period at the end and inserting “; or”; and

(D) by adding at the end the following:

“(W) Subject to section 214(s), an alien who is a parent of a citizen of the United States, if the citizen—

“(i) is at least 21 years of age; and

“(ii) has never received contingent nonimmigrant status under division D of the Securing America’s Future Act.”.

(2) CONDITIONS ON ADMISSION.—Section 214 of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1184) is amended by adding at the end the following: “(s) (1) The initial period of authorized admission for a nonimmigrant described in section 101(a)(15)(W) shall be 5 years, but may be extended by the Secretary of Homeland Security for additional 5-year periods if the United States citizen son or daughter of the nonimmigrant is still residing in the United States. “(2) A nonimmigrant described in section 101(a)(15)(W)— “(A) is not authorized to be employed in the United States; and

“(B) is not eligible for any Federal, State, or local public benefit.

“(3) Regardless of the resources of a nonimmigrant described in section 101(a)(15)(W), the United States citizen son or daughter who sponsored the nonimmigrant parent shall be responsible for the nonimmigrant’s support while the nonimmigrant resides in the United States.

“(4) An alien is ineligible to receive a visa or to be admitted into the United States as a nonimmigrant described in section 101(a)(15)(W) unless the alien provides satisfactory proof that the United States citizen son or daughter has arranged for health insurance coverage for the alien, at no cost to the alien, during the anticipated period of the alien’s residence in the United States.”.

(f) Effective date; applicability.—

(1) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 2018.

(2) INVALIDITY OF CERTAIN PETITIONS AND APPLICATIONS.—

(A) IN GENERAL.—No person may file, and the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Secretary of State may not accept, adjudicate, or approve any petition under section 204 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1154) filed on or after the date of enactment of this Act seeking classification of an alien under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) with respect to a parent of a United States citizen, or under section 203(a)(1), (2)(B), (3) or (4) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1151(b)(2)(A)(i), 1153(a)(1), (2)(B), (3), or (4)). Any application for adjustment of status or an immigrant visa based on such a petition shall be invalid.

(B) PENDING PETITIONS.—Neither the Secretary of Homeland Security nor the Secretary of State may adjudicate or approve any petition under section 204 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1154) pending as of the date of enactment of this Act seeking classification of an alien under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) with respect to a parent of a United States citizen, or under section 203(a)(1), (2)(B), (3) or (4) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1151(b)(2)(A)(i), 1153(a)(1), (2)(B), (3), or (4)). Any application for adjustment of status or an immigrant visa based on such a petition shall be invalid.

(3) APPLICABILITY TO WAITLISTED APPLICANTS.—

(A) IN GENERAL.—Notwithstanding the amendments made by this section, an alien with regard to whom a petition or application for status under paragraph (1), (2)(B), (3) or (4) of section 203(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1153(a)), as in effect on September 30, 2018, was approved prior to the date of the enactment of this Act, may be issued a visa pursuant to that paragraph in accordance with the availability of visas under subparagraph (B).

(B) AVAILABILITY OF VISAS.—Visas may be issued to beneficiaries of approved petitions under each category described in subparagraph (A), but only until such time as the number of visas that would have been allocated to that category in fiscal year 2019, notwithstanding the amendments made by this section, have been issued. When the number of visas described in the previous sentence have been issued for each category described in subparagraph (A), no additional visas may be issued for that category.

SEC. 1102. Elimination of diversity visa program.

(a) In general.—Section 203 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1153) is amended by striking subsection (c).

(b) Technical and conforming amendments.—

(1) IMMIGRATION AND NATIONALITY ACT.—The Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.) is amended—

(A) in section 101(a)(15)(V), by striking “section 203(d)” and inserting “section 203(c)”;

(B) in section 201—

(i) in subsection (a)—

(I) in paragraph (1), by adding “and” at the end; and

(II) by striking paragraph (3); and

(ii) by striking subsection (e);

(C) in section 203—

(i) in subsection (b)(2)(B)(ii)(IV), by striking “section 203(b)(2)(B)” each place such term appears and inserting “clause (i)”;

(ii) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) as subsections (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g), respectively;

(iii) in subsection (c), as redesignated, by striking “subsection (a), (b), or (c)” and inserting “subsection (a) or (b)”;

(iv) in subsection (d), as redesignated—

(I) by striking paragraph (2); and

(II) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2);

(v) in subsection (e), as redesignated, by striking “subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section” and inserting “subsection (a) or (b)”;

(vi) in subsection (f), as redesignated, by striking “subsections (a), (b), and (c)” and inserting “subsections (a) and (b)”; and

(vii) in subsection (g), as redesignated—

(I) by striking “(d)” each place such term appears and inserting “(c)”; and

(II) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking “subsection (a), (b), or (c)” and inserting “subsection (a) or (b)”;

(D) in section 204—

(i) in subsection (a)(1), by striking subparagraph (I);

(ii) in subsection (e), by striking “subsection (a), (b), or (c) of section 203” and inserting “subsection (a) or (b) of section 203”; and

(iii) in subsection (l)(2)—

(I) in subparagraph (B), by striking “section 203 (a) or (d)” and inserting “subsection (a) or (c) of section 203”; and

(II) in subparagraph (C), by striking “section 203(d)” and inserting “section 203(c)”;

(E) in section 214(q)(1)(B)(i), by striking “section 203(d)” and inserting “section 203(c)”;

(F) in section 216(h)(1), in the undesignated matter following subparagraph (C), by striking “section 203(d)” and inserting “section 203(c)”; and

(G) in section 245(i)(1)(B), by striking “section 203(d)” and inserting “section 203(c)”.

(2) IMMIGRANT INVESTOR PILOT PROGRAM.—Section 610(d) of the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1993 (Public Law 102–395) is amended by striking “section 203(e) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1153(e))” and inserting “section 203(d) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1153(d))”.

(c) Effective date.—The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the first day of the first fiscal year beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 1103. Employment-based immigration priorities.

(a) Increase in visas for skilled workers.—The Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.) is amended—

(1) in section 201(d)(1)(A), by striking “140,000” and inserting “195,000”; and

(2) in section 203(b)—

(A) in paragraph (1), by striking “28.6 percent of such worldwide level” and inserting “58,374”;

(B) in paragraphs (2) and (3), by striking “28.6 percent of such worldwide level” each place it appears and inserting “58,373”; and

(C) by striking “7.1 percent of such worldwide level” each place it appears and inserting “9,940”.

(b) Effective date.—The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the first day of fiscal year 2019 and shall apply to the visas made available in that and subsequent fiscal years.

SEC. 1104. Waiver of rights by B visa nonimmigrants.

Section 101(a)(15)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(B)) is amended by adding before the semicolon at the end the following: “, and who has waived any right to review or appeal of an immigration officer’s determination as to the admissibility of the alien at the port of entry into the United States, or to contest, other than on the basis of an application for asylum, any action for removal of the alien”.

SEC. 2101. Short title.

This title may be cited as—

(1) the “Agricultural Guestworker Act”; or

(2) the “AG Act”.

SEC. 2102. H–2C temporary agricultural work visa program.

(a) In general.—Section 101(a)(15)(H) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)) is amended by striking “; or (iii)” and inserting “, or (c) having a residence in a foreign country which he has no intention of abandoning who is coming temporarily to the United States to perform agricultural labor or services; or (iii)”.

(b) Definition.—Section 101(a) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:

“(53) The term ‘agricultural labor or services’ has the meaning given such term by the Secretary of Agriculture in regulations and includes—

“(A) agricultural labor as defined in section 3121(g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;

“(B) agriculture as defined in section 3(f) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(f));

“(C) the handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, or grading prior to delivery for storage of any agricultural or horticultural commodity in its unmanufactured state;

“(D) all activities required for the preparation, processing or manufacturing of a product of agriculture (as such term is defined in such section 3(f)) for further distribution;

“(E) forestry-related activities;

“(F) aquaculture activities; and

“(G) the primary processing of fish or shellfish, except that in regard to labor or services consisting of meat or poultry processing, the term ‘agricultural labor or services’ only includes the killing of animals and the breakdown of their carcasses.”.

SEC. 2103. Admission of temporary H–2C workers.

(a) Procedure for admission.—Chapter 2 of title II of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1181 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 218 the following:

“SEC. 218A. Admission of temporary H–2C workers.

“(a) Definitions.—In this section and section 218B:

“(1) DISPLACE.—The term ‘displace’ means to lay off a United States worker from the job for which H–2C workers are sought.

“(2) JOB.—The term ‘job’ refers to all positions with an employer that—

“(A) involve essentially the same responsibilities;

“(B) are held by workers with substantially equivalent qualifications and experience; and

“(C) are located in the same place or places of employment.

“(3) EMPLOYER.—The term ‘employer’ includes a single or joint employer, including an association acting as a joint employer with its members, who hires workers to perform agricultural labor or services.

“(4) FORESTRY-RELATED ACTIVITIES.—The term ‘forestry-related activities’ includes tree planting, timber harvesting, logging operations, brush clearing, vegetation management, herbicide application, the maintenance of rights-of-way (including for roads, trails, and utilities), regardless of whether such right-of-way is on forest land, and the harvesting of pine straw.

“(5) H–2C WORKER.—The term ‘H–2C worker’ means a nonimmigrant described in section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(c).

“(6) LAY OFF.—

“(A) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘lay off’—

“(i) means to cause a worker’s loss of employment, other than through a discharge for inadequate performance, violation of workplace rules, cause, voluntary departure, voluntary retirement, or the expiration of a grant or contract (other than a temporary employment contract entered into in order to evade a condition described in paragraph (4) of subsection (b)); and

“(ii) does not include any situation in which the worker is offered, as an alternative to such loss of employment, a similar position with the same employer at equivalent or higher wages and benefits than the position from which the employee was discharged, regardless of whether or not the employee accepts the offer.

“(B) CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in this paragraph is intended to limit an employee’s rights under a collective bargaining agreement or other employment contract.

“(7) UNITED STATES WORKER.—The term ‘United States worker’ means any worker who is—

“(A) a citizen or national of the United States; or

“(B) an alien who is lawfully admitted for permanent residence, is admitted as a refugee under section 207, or is granted asylum under section 208.

“(8) SPECIAL PROCEDURES INDUSTRY.—The term ‘special procedures industry’ includes sheepherding, goat herding, and the range production of livestock, itinerant commercial beekeeping and pollination, itinerant animal shearing, and custom combining and harvesting.

“(b) Petition.—An employer that seeks to employ aliens as H–2C workers under this section shall file with the Secretary of Homeland Security a petition attesting to the following:

“(1) OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT.—The employer will offer employment to the aliens on a contractual basis as H–2C workers under this section for a specific period of time during which the aliens may not work on an at-will basis (as provided for in section 218B), and such contract shall only be required to include a description of each place of employment, period of employment, wages and other benefits to be provided, and the duties of the positions.

“(2) TEMPORARY LABOR OR SERVICES.—

“(A) IN GENERAL.—The employer is seeking to employ a specific number of H–2C workers on a temporary basis and will provide compensation to such workers at a wage rate no less than that set forth in subsection (k)(2).

“(B) DEFINITION.—For purposes of this paragraph, a worker is employed on a temporary basis if the employer intends to employ the worker for no longer than the time period set forth in subsection (n)(1) (subject to the exceptions in subsection (n)(3)).

“(3) BENEFITS, WAGES, AND WORKING CONDITIONS.—The employer will provide, at a minimum, the benefits, wages, and working conditions required by subsection (k) to all workers employed in the job for which the H–2C workers are sought.

“(4) NONDISPLACEMENT OF UNITED STATES WORKERS.—The employer did not displace and will not displace United States workers employed by the employer during the period of employment of the H–2C workers and during the 30-day period immediately preceding such period of employment in the job for which the employer seeks approval to employ H–2C workers.

“(5) RECRUITMENT.—

“(A) IN GENERAL.—The employer—

“(i) conducted adequate recruitment before filing the petition; and

“(ii) was unsuccessful in locating sufficient numbers of willing and qualified United States workers for the job for which the H–2C workers are sought.

“(B) OTHER REQUIREMENTS.—The recruitment requirement under subparagraph (A) is satisfied if the employer places a local job order with the State workforce agency serving each place of employment, except that nothing in this subparagraph shall require the employer to file an interstate job order under section 653 of title 20, Code of Federal Regulations. The State workforce agency shall post the job order on its official agency website for a minimum of 30 days and not later than 3 days after receipt using the employment statistics system authorized under section 15 of the Wagner-Peyser Act (29 U.S.C. 49l–2). The Secretary of Labor shall include links to the official Web sites of all State workforce agencies on a single webpage of the official Web site of the Department of Labor.

“(C) END OF RECRUITMENT REQUIREMENT.—The requirement to recruit United States workers for a job shall terminate on the first day that work begins for the H–2C workers.

“(6) OFFERS TO UNITED STATES WORKERS.—The employer has offered or will offer the job for which the H–2C workers are sought to any eligible United States workers who—

“(A) apply;

“(B) are qualified for the job; and

“(C) will be available at the time, at each place, and for the duration, of need.

This requirement shall not apply to United States workers who apply for the job on or after the first day that work begins for the H–2C workers.

“(7) PROVISION OF INSURANCE.—If the job for which the H–2C workers are sought is not covered by State workers’ compensation law, the employer will provide, at no cost to the workers unless State law provides otherwise, insurance covering injury and disease arising out of, and in the course of, the workers’ employment, which will provide benefits at least equal to those provided under the State workers compensation law for comparable employment.

“(8) STRIKE OR LOCKOUT.—The job that is the subject of the petition is not vacant because the former workers in that job are on strike or locked out in the course of a labor dispute.

“(c) Public examination.—Not later than 1 working day after the date on which a petition under this section is filed, the employer shall make the petition available for public examination, at the employer’s principal place of employment.

“(d) List.—

“(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of Homeland Security shall maintain a list of the petitions filed under this subsection, which shall—

“(A) be sorted by employer; and

“(B) include the number of H–2C workers sought, the wage rate, the period of employment, each place of employment, and the date of need for each alien.

“(2) AVAILABILITY.—The Secretary of Homeland Security shall make the list available for public examination.

“(e) Petitioning for admission.—

“(1) CONSIDERATION OF PETITIONS.—For petitions filed and considered under this subsection—

“(A) the Secretary of Homeland Security may not require such petition to be filed more than 28 days before the first date the employer requires the labor or services of H–2C workers;

“(B) within the appropriate time period under subparagraph (C) or (D), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall—

“(i) approve the petition;

“(ii) reject the petition; or

“(iii) determine that the petition is incomplete or obviously inaccurate or that the employer has not complied with the requirements of subsection (b)(5)(A)(i) (which the Secretary can ascertain by verifying whether the employer has placed a local job order as provider for in subsection (b)(5)(B));

“(C) if the Secretary determines that the petition is incomplete or obviously inaccurate, or that the employer has not complied with the requirements of subsection (b)(5)(A)(i) (which the Secretary can ascertain by verifying whether the employer has placed a local job order as provider for in subsection (b)(5)(B)), the Secretary shall—

“(i) within 5 business days of receipt of the petition, notify the petitioner of the deficiencies to be corrected by means ensuring same or next day delivery; and

“(ii) within 5 business days of receipt of the corrected petition, approve or reject the petition and provide the petitioner with notice of such action by means ensuring same or next day delivery; and

“(D) if the Secretary does not determine that the petition is incomplete or obviously inaccurate, the Secretary shall not later than 10 business days after the date on which such petition was filed, either approve or reject the petition and provide the petitioner with notice of such action by means ensuring same or next day delivery.

“(2) ACCESS.—By filing an H–2C petition, the petitioner and each employer (if the petitioner is an association that is a joint employer of workers who perform agricultural labor or services) consent to allow access to each place of employment to the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Homeland Security for the purpose of investigations and audits to determine compliance with the immigration laws (as defined in section 101(a)(17)).

“(f) Roles of agricultural associations.—

“(1) TREATMENT OF ASSOCIATIONS ACTING AS EMPLOYERS.—If an association is a joint employer of workers who perform agricultural labor or services, H–2C workers may be transferred among its members to perform the agricultural labor or services on a temporary basis for which the petition was approved.

“(2) TREATMENT OF VIOLATIONS.—

“(A) INDIVIDUAL MEMBER.—If an individual member of an association that is a joint employer commits a violation described in paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (i) or subsection (j)(1), the Secretary of Agriculture shall invoke penalties pursuant to subsections (i) and (j) against only that member of the association unless the Secretary of Agriculture determines that the association participated in, had knowledge of, or had reason to know of the violation.

“(B) ASSOCIATION OF AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYERS.—If an association that is a joint employer commits a violation described in subsections (i)(2) and (3) or (j)(1), the Secretary of Agriculture shall invoke penalties pursuant to subsections (i) and (j) against only the association and not any individual members of the association, unless the Secretary determines that the member participated in the violation.

“(g) Expedited administrative appeals.—The Secretary of Homeland Security shall promulgate regulations to provide for an expedited procedure for the review of a denial of a petition under this section by the Secretary. At the petitioner’s request, the review shall include a de novo administrative hearing at which new evidence may be introduced.

“(h) Fees.—The Secretary of Homeland Security shall require, as a condition of approving the petition, the payment of a fee to recover the reasonable cost of processing the petition.

“(i) Enforcement.—

“(1) INVESTIGATIONS AND AUDITS.—The Secretary of Agriculture shall be responsible for conducting investigations and audits, including random audits, of employers to ensure compliance with the requirements of the H–2C program. All monetary fines levied against employers shall be paid to the Department of Agriculture and used to enhance the Department of Agriculture’s investigative and auditing abilities to ensure compliance by employers with their obligations under this section.

“(2) VIOLATIONS.—If the Secretary of Agriculture finds, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, a failure to fulfill an attestation required by this subsection, or a material misrepresentation of a material fact in a petition under this subsection, the Secretary—

“(A) may impose such administrative remedies (including civil money penalties in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation) as the Secretary determines to be appropriate; and

“(B) may disqualify the employer from the employment of H–2C workers for a period of 1 year.

“(3) WILLFUL VIOLATIONS.—If the Secretary of Agriculture finds, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, a willful failure to fulfill an attestation required by this subsection, or a willful misrepresentation of a material fact in a petition under this subsection, the Secretary—

“(A) may impose such administrative remedies (including civil money penalties in an amount not to exceed $5,000 per violation, or not to exceed $15,000 per violation if in the course of such failure or misrepresentation the employer displaced one or more United States workers employed by the employer during the period of employment of H–2C workers or during the 30-day period immediately preceding such period of employment) in the job the H–2C workers are performing as the Secretary determines to be appropriate;

“(B) may disqualify the employer from the employment of H–2C workers for a period of 2 years;

“(C) may, for a subsequent failure to fulfill an attestation required by this subsection, or a misrepresentation of a material fact in a petition under this subsection, disqualify the employer from the employment of H–2C workers for a period of 5 years; and

“(D) may, for a subsequent willful failure to fulfill an attestation required by this subsection, or a willful misrepresentation of a material fact in a petition under this subsection, permanently disqualify the employer from the employment of H–2C workers.

“(j) Failure To pay wages or required benefits.—

“(1) IN GENERAL.—If the Secretary of Agriculture finds, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, that the employer has failed to provide the benefits, wages, and working conditions that the employer has attested that it would provide under this subsection, the Secretary shall require payment of back wages, or such other required benefits, due any United States workers or H–2C workers employed by the employer.

“(2) AMOUNT.—The back wages or other required benefits described in paragraph (1)—

“(A) shall be equal to the difference between the amount that should have been paid and the amount that was paid to such workers; and

“(B) shall be distributed to the workers to whom such wages or benefits are due.

“(k) Minimum wages, benefits, and working conditions.—

“(1) PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT OF H–2C WORKERS PROHIBITED.—

“(A) IN GENERAL.—Each employer seeking to hire United States workers for the job the H–2C workers will perform shall offer such United States workers not less than the same benefits, wages, and working conditions that the employer will provide to the H–2C workers. No job offer may impose on United States workers any restrictions or obligations which will not be imposed on H–2C workers.

“(B) INTERPRETATION.—Every interpretation and determination made under this section or under any other law, regulation, or interpretative provision regarding the nature, scope, and timing of the provision of these and any other benefits, wages, and other terms and conditions of employment shall be made so that—

“(i) the services of workers to their employers and the employment opportunities afforded to workers by the employers, including those employment opportunities that require United States workers or H–2C workers to travel or relocate in order to accept or perform employment—

“(I) mutually benefit such workers, as well as their families, and employers; and

“(II) principally benefit neither employer nor employee; and

“(ii) employment opportunities within the United States benefit the United States economy.

“(2) REQUIRED WAGES.—

“(A) IN GENERAL.—Each employer petitioning for H–2C workers under this subsection (other than in the case of workers who will perform agricultural labor or services consisting of meat or poultry processing) will offer the H–2C workers, during the period of authorized employment as H–2C workers, wages that are at least the greatest of—

“(i) the applicable State or local minimum wage;

“(ii) 115 percent of the Federal minimum wage, or 150 percent of the Federal minimum wage; or

“(iii) the actual wage level paid by the employer to all other individuals in the job.

“(B) SPECIAL RULES.—

“(i) ALTERNATE WAGE PAYMENT SYSTEMS.—An employer can utilize a piece rate or other alternative wage payment system so long as the employer guarantees each worker a wage rate that equals or exceeds the amount required under subparagraph (A) for the total hours worked in each pay period. Compensation from a piece rate or other alternative wage payment system shall include time spent during rest breaks, moving from job to job, clean up, or any other nonproductive time, provided that such time does not exceed 20 percent of the total hours in the work day.

“(ii) MEAT OR POULTRY PROCESSING.—Each employer petitioning for H–2C workers under this subsection who will perform agricultural labor or services consisting of meat or poultry processing will offer the H–2C workers, during the period of authorized employment as H–2C workers, wages that are at least the greatest of—

“(I) the applicable State or local minimum wage;

“(II) 115 percent of the Federal minimum wage;

“(III) the prevailing wage level for the occupational classification in the area of employment; or

“(IV) the actual wage level paid by the employer to all other individuals in the job.

“(3) EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE.—

“(A) IN GENERAL.—

“(i) REQUIREMENT.—Each employer petitioning for workers under this subsection shall guarantee to offer the H–2C workers and United States workers performing the same job employment for the hourly equivalent of not less than 50 percent of the work hours set forth in the work contract.

“(ii) FAILURE TO MEET GUARANTEE.—If an employer affords the United States workers or the H–2C workers less employment than that required under this subparagraph, the employer shall pay such workers the amount which the workers would have earned if the workers had worked for the guaranteed number of hours.

“(B) CALCULATION OF HOURS.—Any hours which workers fail to work, up to a maximum of the number of hours specified in the work contract for a work day, when the workers have been offered an opportunity to do so, and all hours of work actually performed (including voluntary work in excess of the number of hours specified in the work contract in a work day) may be counted by the employer in calculating whether the period of guaranteed employment has been met.

“(C) LIMITATION.—If the workers abandon employment before the end of the work contract period, or are terminated for cause, the workers are not entitled to the 50 percent guarantee described in subparagraph (A).

“(D) TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.—

“(i) IN GENERAL.—If, before the expiration of the period of employment specified in the work contract, the services of the workers are no longer required due to any form of natural disaster, including flood, hurricane, freeze, earthquake, fire, drought, plant or animal disease, pest infestation, regulatory action, or any other reason beyond the control of the employer before the employment guarantee in subparagraph (A) is fulfilled, the employer may terminate the workers’ employment.

“(ii) REQUIREMENTS.—If a worker’s employment is terminated under clause (i), the employer shall—

“(I) fulfill the employment guarantee in subparagraph (A) for the work days that have elapsed during the period beginning on the first work day and ending on the date on which such employment is terminated;

“(II) make efforts to transfer the worker to other comparable employment acceptable to the worker; and

“(III) not later than 72 hours after termination, notify the Secretary of Agriculture of such termination and stating the nature of the contract impossibility.

“(l) Nondelegation.—The Department of Agriculture and the Department of Homeland Security shall not delegate their investigatory, enforcement, or administrative functions relating to this section or section 218B to other agencies or departments of the Federal Government.

“(m) Compliance with bio-Security protocols.—Except in the case of an imminent threat to health or safety, any personnel from a Federal agency or Federal grantee seeking to determine the compliance of an employer with the requirements of this section or section 218B shall, when visiting such employer’s place of employment, make their presence known to the employer and sign-in in accordance with reasonable bio-security protocols before proceeding to any other area of the place of employment.

“(n) Limitation on H–2C workers’ stay in status.—

“(1) MAXIMUM PERIOD.—The maximum continuous period of authorized status as an H–2C worker (including any extensions) is 18 months for workers employed in a job that is of a temporary or seasonal nature. For H–2C workers employed in a job that is not of a temporary or seasonal nature, the initial maximum continuous period of authorized status is 36 months and subsequent maximum continuous periods of authorized status are 18 months.

“(2) REQUIREMENT TO REMAIN OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES.—In the case of H–2C workers who were employed in a job of a temporary or seasonal nature whose maximum continuous period of authorized status as H–2C workers (including any extensions) have expired, the aliens may not again be eligible to be H–2C workers until they remain outside the United States for a continuous period equal to at least 1 ⁄ 12 of the duration of their previous period of authorized status an H–2C workers. For H–2C workers who were employed in a job not of a temporary or seasonal nature whose maximum continuous period of authorized status as H–2C workers (including any extensions) have expired, the aliens may not again be eligible to be H–2C workers until they remain outside the United States for a continuous period equal to at least the lesser of 1 ⁄ 12 of the duration of their previous period of authorized status as H–2C workers or 45 days.

“(3) EXCEPTIONS.—

“(A) The Secretary of Homeland Security shall deduct absences from the United States that take place during an H–2C worker’s period of authorized status from the period that the alien is required to remain outside the United States under paragraph (2), if the alien or the alien’s employer requests such a deduction, and provides clear and convincing proof that the alien qualifies for such a deduction. Such proof shall consist of evidence such as arrival and departure records, copies of tax returns, and records of employment abroad.

“(B) There is no maximum continuous period of authorized status as set forth in paragraph (1) or a requirement to remain outside the United States as set forth in paragraph (2) for H–2C workers employed as a sheepherder, goatherder, in the range production of livestock, or who return to the workers’ permanent residence outside the United States each day.

“(o) Period of Admission.—

“(1) IN GENERAL.—In addition to the maximum continuous period of authorized status, workers’ authorized period of admission shall include—

“(A) a period of not more than 7 days prior to the beginning of authorized employment as H–2C workers for the purpose of travel to the place of employment; and

“(B) a period of not more than 14 days after the conclusion of their authorized employment for the purpose of departure from the United States or a period of not more than 30 days following the employment for the purpose of seeking a subsequent offer of employment by an employer pursuant to a petition under this section (or pursuant to at-will employment under section 218B during such times as that section is in effect) if they have not reached their maximum continuous period of authorized employment under subsection (n) (subject to the exceptions in subsection (n)(3)) unless they accept subsequent offers of employment as H–2C workers or are otherwise lawfully present.

“(2) FAILURE TO DEPART.—H–2C workers who do not depart the United States within the periods referred to in paragraph (1) will be considered to have failed to maintain nonimmigrant status as H–2C workers and shall be subject to removal under section 237(a)(1)(C)(i). Such aliens shall be considered to be inadmissible pursuant to section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) for having been unlawfully present, with the aliens considered to have been unlawfully present for 181 days as of the 15th day following their period of employment for the purpose of departure or as of the 31st day following their period of employment for the purpose of seeking subsequent offers of employment.

“(p) Abandonment of employment.—

“(1) REPORT BY EMPLOYER.—Not later than 72 hours after an employer learns of the abandonment of employment by H–2C workers before the conclusion of their work contracts, the employer shall notify the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of Homeland Security of such abandonment.

“(2) REPLACEMENT OF ALIENS.—An employer may designate eligible aliens to replace H–2C workers who abandon employment notwithstanding the numerical limitation found in section 214(g)(1)(C).

“(q) Change to H–2C status.—

“(1) WAIVER.—In the case of an alien described in paragraph (4), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall waive the ground of inadmissibility under paragraphs (6)(C) and (9)(B) of section 212(a) with respect to conduct that occurred prior to the alien first receiving status as an H–2C worker, solely in order to provide the alien with such status.

“(2) ALIEN DESCRIBED.—An alien described in this paragraph is an alien who—

“(A) was unlawfully present in the United States on October 23, 2017;

“(B) performed agricultural labor or services in the United States for at least 5.75 hours during each of at least 180 days during the 2-year period ending on October 23, 2017; and

“(C) has departed the United States within 180 days of the issuance of final rules carrying out the AG Act, and remains outside the United States.

“(r) Trust fund To assure worker return.—

“(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund (in this section referred to as the ‘Trust Fund’) for the purpose of providing a monetary incentive for H–2C workers to return to their country of origin upon expiration of their visas.

“(2) WITHHOLDING OF WAGES; PAYMENT INTO THE TRUST FUND.—

“(A) IN GENERAL.—Notwithstanding the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) and State and local wage laws, all employers of H–2C workers shall withhold from the wages of all H–2C workers other than those employed as sheepherders, goatherders, in the range production of livestock, or who return to the their permanent residence outside the United States each day, an amount equivalent to 10 percent of the gross wages of each worker in each pay period and, on behalf of each worker, transfer such withheld amount to the Trust Fund.

“(B) JOBS THAT ARE NOT OF A TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL NATURE.—Employers of H–2C workers employed in jobs that are not of a temporary or seasonal nature, other than those employed as a sheepherder, goatherder, or in the range production of livestock, shall also pay into the Trust Fund an amount equivalent to the Federal tax on the wages paid to H–2C workers that the employer would be obligated to pay under chapters 21 and 23 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 had the H–2C workers been subject to such chapters.

“(3) DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.—Amounts paid into the Trust Fund on behalf of an H–2C worker, and held pursuant to paragraph (2)(A) and interest earned thereon, shall be transferred from the Trust Fund to the Secretary of Homeland Security, who shall distribute them to the worker if the worker—

“(A) applies to the Secretary of Homeland Security (or the designee of the Secretary) for payment within 120 days of the expiration of the alien’s last authorized stay in the United States as an H–2C worker, for which they seek amounts from the Trust Fund;

“(B) establishes to the satisfaction of the Secretary of Homeland Security that they have complied with the terms and conditions of the H–2C program;

“(C) once approved by the Secretary of Homeland Security for payment, physically appears at a United States embassy or consulate in the worker’s home country; and

“(D) establishes their identity to the satisfaction of the Secretary of Homeland Security.

“(4) ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.—The amounts paid into the Trust Fund and held pursuant to paragraph (2)(B), and interest earned thereon, shall be distributed annually to the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of Homeland Security in amounts proportionate to the expenses incurred by such officials in the administration and enforcement of the terms of the H–2C program.

“(5) LAW ENFORCEMENT.—Notwithstanding any other provision of law, amounts paid into the Trust Fund under paragraph (2), and interest earned thereon, that are not needed to carry out paragraphs (3) and (4) shall, to the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts, be made available until expended without fiscal year limitation to the Secretary of Homeland Security to apprehend, detain, and remove aliens inadmissible to or deportable from the United States.

“(6) INVESTMENT OF TRUST FUND.—

“(A) IN GENERAL.—It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to invest such portion of the Trust Fund as is not, in the Secretary’s judgment, required to meet current withdrawals. Such investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States.

“(B) CREDITS TO TRUST FUND.—The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the Trust Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Trust Fund.

“(C) REPORT TO CONGRESS.—It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to hold the Trust Fund, and (after consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security) to report to the Congress each year on the financial condition and the results of the operations of the Trust Fund during the preceding fiscal year and on its expected condition and operations during the next fiscal year. Such report shall be printed as both a House and a Senate document of the session of the Congress in which the report is made.

“(s) Procedures for special procedures industries.—

“(1) WORK LOCATIONS.—The Secretary of Homeland Security shall permit an employer in a Special Procedures Industry that does not operate at a single fixed place of employment to provide, as part of its petition, a list of places of employment, which—

“(A) may include an itinerary; and

“(B) may be subsequently amended at any time by the employer, after notice to the Secretary.

“(2) WAGES.—Notwithstanding subsection (k)(2), the Secretary of Agriculture may establish monthly, weekly, or biweekly wage rates for occupations in a Special Procedures Industry for a State or other geographic area. For an employer in a Special Procedures Industry that typically pays a monthly wage, the Secretary shall require that H–2C workers be paid not less frequently than monthly and at a rate no less than the legally required monthly cash wage in an amount as re-determined annually by the Secretary.

“(3) ALLERGY LIMITATION.—An employer engaged in the commercial beekeeping or pollination services industry may require that job applicants be free from bee-related allergies, including allergies to pollen and bee venom.”.

(b) At-Will employment.—Chapter 2 of title II of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1181 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 218A (as inserted by subsection (a) of this section) the following:

“SEC. 218B. At-will employment of temporary H–2C workers.

“(a) In general.—An employer that is designated as a ‘registered agricultural employer’ pursuant to subsection (c) may employ aliens as H–2C workers. However, an H–2C worker may only perform labor or services pursuant to this section if the worker is already lawfully present in the United States as an H–2C worker, having been admitted or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status pursuant to section 218A, and has completed the period of employment specified in the job offer the worker accepted pursuant to section 218A or the employer has terminated the worker’s employment pursuant to section 218A(k)(3)(D)(i). An H–2C worker who abandons the employment which was the basis for admission or status pursuant to section 218A may not perform labor or services pursuant to this section until the worker has returned to their home country, been readmitted as an H–2C worker pursuant to section 218A and has completed the period of employment specified in the job offer the worker accepted pursuant to section 218A or the employer has terminated the worker’s employment pursuant to section 218A(k)(3)(D)(i).

“(b) Period of stay.—H–2C workers performing at-will labor or services for a registered agricultural employer are subject to the period of admission, limitation of stay in status, and requirement to remain outside the United States contained in subsections (o) and (n) of section 218A, except that subsection (n)(3)(A) does not apply.

“(c) Registered agricultural employers.—The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a process to accept and adjudicate applications by employers to be designated as registered agricultural employers. The Secretary shall require, as a condition of approving the application, the payment of a fee to recover the reasonable cost of processing the application. The Secretary shall designate an employer as a registered agricultural employer if the Secretary determines that the employer—

“(1) employs (or plans to employ) individuals who perform agricultural labor or services;

“(2) has not been subject to debarment from receiving temporary agricultural labor certifications pursuant to section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(a) within the last three years;

“(3) has not been subject to disqualification from the employment of H–2C workers within the last five years;

“(4) agrees to, if employing H–2C workers pursuant to this section, fulfill the attestations contained in section 218A(b) as if it had submitted a petition making those attestations (excluding subsection (k)(3) of such section) and not to employ H–2C workers who have reached their maximum continuous period of authorized status under section 218A(n) (subject to the exceptions contained in section 218A(n)(3)) or if the workers have complied with the terms of section 218A(n)(2); and

“(5) agrees to notify the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of Homeland Security each time it employs H–2C workers pursuant to this section within 72 hours of the commencement of employment and within 72 hours of the cessation of employment.

“(d) Length of designation.—An employer’s designation as a registered agricultural employer shall be valid for 3 years, and the Secretary may extend such designation for additional 3-year terms upon the reapplication of the employer. The Secretary shall revoke a designation before the expiration of its 3-year term if the employer is subject to disqualification from the employment of H–2C workers subsequent to being designated as a registered agricultural employer.

“(e) Enforcement.—The Secretary of Agriculture shall be responsible for conducting investigations and audits, including random audits, of employers to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. All monetary fines levied against employers shall be paid to the Department of Agriculture and used to enhance the Department of Agriculture’s investigatory and audit abilities to ensure compliance by employers with their obligations under this section and section 218A. The Secretary of Agriculture’s enforcement powers and an employer’s liability described in subsections (i) through (j) of section 218A are applicable to employers employing H–2C workers pursuant to this section.”.

(c) Prohibition on family members.—Section 101(a)(15)(H) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)) is amended by striking “him;” at the end and inserting “him, except that no spouse or child may be admitted under clause (ii)(c);”.

(d) Numerical cap.—Section 214(g)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1184(g)(1)) is amended—

(1) in subparagraph (A), by striking “or” at the end;

(2) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end and inserting “; or”; and

(3) by adding at the end the following:

“(C) under section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(c)—

“(i) except as otherwise provided under this subparagraph, may not exceed 40,000 for aliens issued visas or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status under such section for the purpose of performing agricultural labor or services consisting or meat or poultry processing;

“(ii) except as otherwise provided under this subparagraph, may not exceed 410,000 for aliens issued visas or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status under such section for the purpose of performing agricultural labor or services other than agricultural labor or services consisting of meat or poultry processing;

“(iii) if the base allocation under clause (i) or (ii) is exhausted during any fiscal year, the base allocation under such clause for that and subsequent fiscal years shall be increased by the lesser of 10 percent or a percentage representing the number of petitioned-for aliens (as a percentage of the base allocation) who would be eligible to be issued visas or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status described in that clause during that fiscal year but for the base allocation being exhausted, and if the increased base allocation is itself exhausted during a subsequent fiscal year, the base allocation for that and subsequent fiscal years shall be further increased by the lesser of 10 percent or a percentage representing the number of petitioned-for aliens (as a percentage of the increased base allocation) who would be eligible to be issued visas or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status described in that clause during that fiscal year but for the increased base allocation being exhausted (subject to clause (iv));

“(iv) if the base allocation under clause (i) or (ii) is not exhausted during any fiscal year, the base allocation under such clause for subsequent fiscal years shall be decreased by the greater of 5 percent or a percentage representing the unutilized portion of the base allocation (as a percentage of the base allocation) during that fiscal year, and if in a subsequent fiscal year the decreased base allocation is itself not exhausted, the base allocation for fiscal years subsequent to that fiscal year shall be further decreased by the greater of 5 percent or a percentage representing the unutilized portion of the decreased base allocation (as a percentage of the decreased base allocation) during that fiscal year (subject to clause (iii) and except that the base allocations under clauses (ii) shall not fall below 410,000);

“(v) the numerical limitations under this subparagraph shall not apply to any alien—

“(I) who—

“(aa) was physically present in the United States on October 23, 2017; and

“(bb) performed agricultural labor or services in the United States for at least 5.75 hours during each of at least 180 days during the 2-year period ending on October 23, 2017; or

“(II) who has previously been issued a visa or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status pursuant to subclause (a) or (b) of section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii), but only to the extent that the alien is being petitioned for by an employer pursuant to section 218A(b) who previously employed the alien pursuant to subclause (a) or (b) of section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii) beginning no later than October 23, 2017.”.

(e) Intent.—Section 214(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1184(b)) is amended by striking “section 101(a)(15)(H)(i) except subclause (b1) of such section” and inserting “clause (i), except subclause (b1), or (ii)(c) of section 101(a)(15)(H)”.

(f) Clerical amendment.—The table of contents for the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.) is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 218 the following:

SEC. 2104. Mediation.

Nonimmigrants having status under section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(c)) may not bring civil actions for damages against their employers, nor may any other attorneys or individuals bring civil actions for damages on behalf of such nonimmigrants against the nonimmigrants’ employers, unless at least 90 days prior to bringing an action a request has been made to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to assist the parties in reaching a satisfactory resolution of all issues involving all parties to the dispute and mediation has been attempted.

SEC. 2105. Migrant and seasonal agricultural worker protection.

Section 3(8)(B)(ii) of the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (29 U.S.C. 1802(8)(B)(ii)) is amended by striking “under sections 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(a) and 214(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.” and inserting “under subclauses (a) and (c) of section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii), and section 214(c), of the Immigration and Nationality Act.”.

SEC. 2106. Binding arbitration.

(a) Applicability.—H–2C workers may, as a condition of employment with an employer, be subject to mandatory binding arbitration and mediation of any grievance relating to the employment relationship. An employer shall provide any such workers with notice of such condition of employment at the time it makes job offers.

(b) Allocation of costs.—Any cost associated with such arbitration and mediation process shall be equally divided between the employer and the H–2C workers, except that each party shall be responsible for the cost of its own counsel, if any.

(c) Definitions.—As used in this section:

(1) The term “condition of employment” means a term, condition, obligation, or requirement that is part of the job offer, such as the term of employment, job responsibilities, employee conduct standards, and the grievance resolution process, and to which applicants or prospective H–2C workers must consent or accept in order to be hired for the position.

(2) The term “H–2C worker” means a nonimmigrant described in section 218A(a)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by this title.

SEC. 2107. Eligibility for health care subsidies and refundable tax credits; required health insurance coverage.

(a) Health care subsidies.—H–2C workers (as defined in section 218A(a)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by this title)—

(1) are not entitled to the premium assistance tax credit authorized under section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and shall be subject to the rules applicable to individuals who are not lawfully present set forth in subsection (e) of such section; and

(2) shall be subject to the rules applicable to individuals who are not lawfully present set forth in section 1402(e) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. 18071(e)).

(b) Refundable tax credits.—H–2C workers (as defined in section 218A(a)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by this title), shall not be allowed any credit under sections 24 and 32 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. In the case of a joint return, no credit shall be allowed under either such section if both spouses are such workers or aliens.

(c) Requirement regarding health insurance coverage.—Notwithstanding the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) and State and local wage laws, not later than 21 days after being issued a visa or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status under section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(c)), an alien must obtain health insurance coverage accepted in their State or States of employment and residence for the period of employment specified in section 218A(b)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act. H–2C workers under sections 218A or 218B of the Immigration and Nationality Act who do not obtain and maintain the required insurance coverage will be considered to have failed to maintain nonimmigrant status under section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act and shall be subject to removal under section 237(a)(1)(C)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1227(a)(1)(C)(i)).

SEC. 2108. Study of establishment of an agricultural worker employment pool.

(a) Study.—The Secretary of Agriculture shall conduct a study on the feasibility of establishing an agricultural worker employment pool and an electronic Internet-based portal to assist H–2C workers (as such term is defined in section 218A of the Immigration and Nationality Act), prospective H–2C workers, and employers to identify job opportunities in the H–2C program and willing, able and available workers for the program, respectively.

(b) Contents.—The study required under subsection (a) shall include an analysis of—

(1) the cost of creating such a pool and portal;

(2) potential funding sources or mechanisms to support the creation and maintenance of the pool and portal;

(3) with respect to H–2C workers and prospective H–2C workers in the pool, the data that would be relevant for employers;

(4) the merits of assisting H–2C workers and employers in identifying job opportunities and willing, able, and available workers, respectively; and

(5) other beneficial uses for such a pool and portal.

(c) Report.—Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit to the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report containing the results of the study required under subsection (a).

SEC. 2109. Prevailing wage.

Section 212(p) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(p)) is amended—

(1) in paragraph (1), by inserting after “subsections (a)(5)(A), (n)(1)(A)(i)(II), and (t)(1)(A)(i)(II)” the following: “of this section and section 218A(k)(2)(B)(ii) ”; and

(2) in paragraph (3), by inserting after “subsections (a)(5)(A), (n)(1)(A)(i)(II), and (t)(1)(A)(i)(II)” the following: “of this section and section 218A(k)(2)(B)(ii) ”.

SEC. 2110. Effective dates; sunset; regulations.

(a) Effective dates; regulations.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—Sections 2102 and 2104 through 2106 of this title, subsections (a) and (c) through (f) of section 2103 of this title, and the amendments made by the sections, shall take effect on the date on which the Secretary issues the rules under paragraph (3), and the Secretary of Homeland Security shall accept petitions pursuant to section 218A of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as inserted by this Act, beginning no later than that date. Sections 2107 and 2109 of this title shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

(2) AT-WILL EMPLOYMENT.—Section 2103(b) of this title and the amendments made by that subsection shall take effect when—

(A) it becomes unlawful for all persons or other entities to hire, or to recruit or refer for a fee, for employment in the United States an individual (as provided in section 274A(a)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1324a(a)(1))) without participating in the E-Verify Program described in section 403(a) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1324a note) or an employment eligibility verification system patterned on such program’s verification system; and

(B) the E-Verify Program responds to inquiries made by such persons or entities described in subparagraph (A) by providing confirmation, tentative nonconfirmation, and final nonconfirmation of an individual’s identity and employment eligibility in such a way that indicates whether the individual is eligible to be employed in all occupations or only to perform agricultural labor or services under sections 218A and 219B of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by section 2103 of this title, and if the latter, whether the nonimmigrant would be in compliance with their maximum continuous period of authorized status and requirement to remain outside the United States under section 218A(n) of such Act, as added by section 2103(a) of this title, and on what date the alien would cease to be in compliance with their maximum continuous period of authorized status.

(3) REGULATIONS.—Notwithstanding any other provision of law, not later than the first day of the seventh month that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall issue final rules, on an interim or other basis, to carry out this title.

(b) Operation and sunset of the H–2A program.—

(1) APPLICATION OF EXISTING REGULATIONS.—The Department of Labor H–2A program regulations published at 73 Federal Register 77110 et seq. (2008) shall be in force for all petitions approved under sections 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(a) and 218 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(h)(ii)(a); 8 U.S.C. 1188) beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, except that the following, as in effect on such date, shall remain in effect, and, to the extent that any rule published at 73 Federal Register 77110 et seq. is in conflict, such rule shall have no force and effect:

(A) Paragraph (a) and subparagraphs (1) and (3) of paragraph (b) of section 655.200 of title 20, Code of Federal Regulations.

(B) Section 655.201 of title 20, Code of Federal Regulations, except the paragraphs entitled “Production of Livestock” and “Range”.

(C) Paragraphs (c), (d) and (e) of section 655.210 of title 20, Code of Federal Regulations.

(D) Section 655.230 of title 20, Code of Federal Regulations.

(E) Section 655.235 of title 20, Code of Federal Regulations.

(F) The Special Procedures Labor Certification Process for Employers in the Itinerant Animal Shearing Industry under the H–2A Program in effect under the Training and Employment Guidance Letter No. 17–06, Change 1, Attachment B, Section II, with an effective date of October 1, 2011.

(2) SUNSET.—Beginning on the date on which employers can file petitions pursuant to section 218A of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by section 2103(a) of this title, no new petitions under sections 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(a) and 218 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(a); 8 U.S.C. 1188) shall be accepted.

SEC. 2111. Report on compliance and violations.

(a) In general.—Not later than 1 year after the first day on which employers can file petitions pursuant to section 218A of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by section 2103(a) of this title, the Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall submit to the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report on compliance by H–2C workers with the requirements of this title and the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended by this title. In the case of a violation of a term or condition of the temporary agricultural work visa program established by this title, the report shall identify the provision or provisions of law violated.

(b) Definition.—As used in this section, the term “H–2C worker” means a nonimmigrant described in section 218A(a)(4) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by section 2103(a) of this title.

SEC. 3101. Cancellation of additional visas.

(a) In general.—Section 222(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1202(g)) is amended—

(1) in paragraph (1)—

(A) by striking “Attorney General” and inserting “Secretary”; and

(B) by inserting “and any other nonimmigrant visa issued by the United States that is in the possession of the alien” after “such visa”; and

(2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking “(other than the visa described in paragraph (1)) issued in a consular office located in the country of the alien's nationality” and inserting “(other than a visa described in paragraph (1)) issued in a consular office located in the country of the alien's nationality or foreign residence”.

(b) Effective date.—The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to a visa issued before, on, or after such date.

SEC. 3102. Visa information sharing.

(a) In general.—Section 222(f) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1202(f)(2)) is amended—

(1) by striking “issuance or refusal” and inserting “issuance, refusal, or revocation”;

(2) in paragraph (2), in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking “and on the basis of reciprocity” and all that follows and inserting the following “may provide to a foreign government information in a Department of State computerized visa database and, when necessary and appropriate, other records covered by this section related to information in such database—”;

(3) in paragraph (2)(A)—

(A) by inserting at the beginning “on the basis of reciprocity,”;

(B) by inserting “(i)” after “for the purpose of”; and

(C) by striking “illicit weapons; or” and inserting “illicit weapons, or (ii) determining a person’s deportability or eligibility for a visa, admission, or other immigration benefit;”;

(4) in paragraph (2)(B)—

(A) by inserting at the beginning “on the basis of reciprocity,”;

(B) by striking “in the database” and inserting “such database”;

(C) by striking “for the purposes” and inserting “for one of the purposes”; and

(D) by striking “or to deny visas to persons who would be inadmissible to the United States.” and inserting “; or”; and

(5) in paragraph (2), by adding at the end the following:

“(C) with regard to any or all aliens in the database specified data elements from each record, if the Secretary of State determines that it is in the national interest to provide such information to a foreign government.”.

(b) Effective date.—The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 3103. Restricting waiver of visa interviews.

Section 222(h) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1202(h)(1)(B)) is amended—

(1) in paragraph (1)(C), by inserting “, in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security,” after “if the Secretary”;

(2) in paragraph (1)(C)(i), by inserting “, where such national interest shall not include facilitation of travel of foreign nationals to the United States, reduction of visa application processing times, or the allocation of consular resources” before the semicolon at the end; and

(3) in paragraph (2)—

(A) by striking “or” at the end of subparagraph (E);

(B) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (F) and inserting “; or”; and

(C) by adding at the end the following:

“(G) is an individual—

“(i) determined to be in a class of aliens determined by the Secretary of Homeland Security to be threats to national security;

“(ii) identified by the Secretary of Homeland Security as a person of concern; or

“(iii) applying for a visa in a visa category with respect to which the Secretary of Homeland Security has determined that a waiver of the visa interview would create a high risk of degradation of visa program integrity.”.

SEC. 3104. Authorizing the Department of State to not interview certain ineligible visa applicants.

(a) In general.—Section 222(h)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1202(h)(1)) is amended by inserting “the alien is determined by the Secretary of State to be ineligible for a visa based upon review of the application or” after “unless”.

(b) Guidance.—Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall issue guidance to consular officers on the standards and processes for implementing the authority to deny visa applications without interview in cases where the alien is determined by the Secretary of State to be ineligible for a visa based upon review of the application.

(c) Reports.—Not less frequently than once each quarter, the Secretary of State shall submit to the Congress a report on the denial of visa applications without interview, including—

(1) the number of such denials; and

(2) a post-by-post breakdown of such denials.

SEC. 3105. Visa refusal and revocation.

(a) Authority of the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Secretary of State.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—Section 428 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 236) is amended by striking subsections (b) and (c) and inserting the following: “(b) Authority of the Secretary of Homeland Security.— “(1) IN GENERAL.—Notwithstanding section 104(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1104(a)) or any other provision of law, and except as provided in subsection (c) and except for the authority of the Secretary of State under subparagraphs (A) and (G) of section 101(a)(15) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)), the Secretary— “(A) shall have exclusive authority to issue regulations, establish policy, and administer and enforce the provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.) and all other immigration or nationality laws relating to the functions of consular officers of the United States in connection with the granting and refusal of a visa; and

“(B) may refuse or revoke any visa to any alien or class of aliens if the Secretary, or designee, determines that such refusal or revocation is necessary or advisable in the security or foreign policy interests of the United States.

“(2) EFFECT OF REVOCATION.—The revocation of any visa under paragraph (1)(B)—

“(A) shall take effect immediately; and

“(B) shall automatically cancel any other valid visa that is in the alien’s possession.

“(3) JUDICIAL REVIEW.—Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including section 2241 of title 28, United States Code, or any other habeas corpus provision, and sections 1361 and 1651 of such title, no court shall have jurisdiction to review a decision by the Secretary of Homeland Security to refuse or revoke a visa, and no court shall have jurisdiction to hear any claim arising from, or any challenge to, such a refusal or revocation.

“(c) Authority of the Secretary of State.—

“(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of State may direct a consular officer to refuse a visa requested by an alien if the Secretary of State determines such refusal to be necessary or advisable in the security or foreign policy interests of the United States.

“(2) LIMITATION.—No decision by the Secretary of State to approve a visa may override a decision by the Secretary of Homeland Security under subsection (b).”.

(2) AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE.—Section 221(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1201(i)) is amended by striking “subsection, except in the context of a removal proceeding if such revocation provides the sole ground for removal under section 237(a)(1)(B).” and inserting “subsection.”.

(3) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.—Section 237(a)(1)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1227(a)(1)(B)) is amended by striking “under section 221(i)”.

(4) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to visa refusals and revocations occurring before, on, or after such date.

(b) Technical corrections to the Homeland Security Act.—Section 428(a) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 236(a)) is amended—

(1) by striking “subsection” and inserting “section”; and

(2) by striking “consular office” and inserting “consular officer”.

SEC. 3106. Petition and application processing for visas and immigration benefits.

(a) In general.—Chapter 2 of title II of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1181 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 211 the following:

“SEC. 211A. Petition and application processing.

“(a) Signature requirement.—

“(1) IN GENERAL.—No petition or application filed with the Secretary of Homeland Security or with a consular officer relating to the issuance of a visa or to the admission of an alien to the United States as an immigrant or as a nonimmigrant may be approved unless the petition or application is signed by each party required to sign such petition or application.

“(2) APPLICATIONS FOR IMMIGRANT VISAS.—Except as may be otherwise prescribed by regulations, each application for an immigrant visa shall be signed by the applicant in the presence of the consular officer, and verified by the oath of the applicant administered by the consular officer.

“(b) Completion requirement.—No petition or application filed with the Secretary of Homeland Security or with a consular officer relating to the issuance of a visa or to the admission of an alien to the United States as an immigrant or as a nonimmigrant may be approved unless each applicable portion of the petition or application has been completed.

“(c) Translation requirement.—No document submitted in support of a petition or application for a nonimmigrant or immigrant visa may be accepted by a consular officer if such document contains information in a foreign language, unless such document is accompanied by a full English translation, which the translator has certified as complete and accurate, and by the translator’s certification that he or she is competent to translate from the foreign language into English.

“(d) Requests for additional information.—In the case that the Secretary of Homeland Security or a consular officer requests any additional information relating to a petition or application filed with the Secretary or consular officer relating to the issuance of a visa or to the admission of an alien to the United States as an immigrant or as a nonimmigrant, such petition or application may not be approved unless all of the additional information requested is provided, or is shown to have been previously provided, in complete form and is provided on or before any reasonably established deadline included in the request.”.

(b) Clerical amendment.—The table of contents for the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.) is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 211 the following:



“Sec. 211A. Petition and application processing. ”.

(c) Application.—The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to applications and petitions filed after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 3107. Fraud prevention.

(a) Prospective analytics technology.—

(1) PLAN FOR IMPLEMENTATION.—Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate a plan for the use of advanced analytics software to ensure the proactive detection of fraud in immigration benefits applications and petitions and to ensure that any such applicant or petitioner does not pose a threat to national security.

(2) IMPLEMENTATION OF PLAN.—Not later than 1 year after the date of the submission of the plan under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall begin implementation of the plan.

(b) Benefits fraud assessment.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of Homeland Security, acting through the Fraud Detection and Nationality Security Directorate, shall complete a benefit fraud assessment by fiscal year 2021 on each of the following:

(A) Petitions by VAWA self-petitioners (as such term is defined in section 101(a)(51) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(51)).

(B) Applications or petitions for visas or status under section 101(a)(15)(K) of such Act or under section 201(b)(2) of such Act, in the case of spouses (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(K)).

(C) Applications for visas or status under section 101(a)(27)(J) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(27)(J)).

(D) Applications for visas or status under section 101(a)(15)(U) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(U)).

(E) Petitions for visas or status under section 101(a)(27)(C) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(27)(C)).

(F) Applications for asylum under section 208 of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1158).

(G) Applications for adjustment of status under section 209 of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1159).

(H) Petitions for visas or status under section 201(b) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1151(b)).

(2) REPORTING ON FINDINGS.—Not later than 30 days after the completion of each benefit fraud assessment under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate such assessment and recommendations on how to reduce the occurrence of instances of fraud identified by the assessment.

SEC. 3108. Visa ineligibility for spouses and children of drug traffickers.

Section 202(a)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(2)) is amended—

(1) in subparagraph (C)(ii), by striking “is the spouse, son, or daughter” and inserting “is or has been the spouse, son, or daughter”; and

(2) in subparagraph (H)(ii), by striking “is the spouse, son, or daughter” and inserting “is or has been the spouse, son, or daughter”.

SEC. 3109. DNA testing.

Section 222(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1202(b)) is amended by inserting “Where considered necessary, by the consular officer or immigration official, to establish family relationships, the immigrant shall provide DNA evidence of such a relationship in accordance with procedures established for submitting such evidence. The Secretary and the Secretary of State may, in consultation, issue regulations to require DNA evidence to establish family relationship, from applicants for certain visa classifications.” after “and a certified copy of all other records or documents concerning him or his case which may be required by the consular officer.”.

SEC. 3110. Access to NCIC criminal history database for diplomatic visas.

Subsection (a) of article V of section 217 of the National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Act of 1998 (34 U.S.C. 40316(V)(a)) is amended by inserting “, except for diplomatic visa applications for which only full biographical information is required” before the period at the end.

SEC. 3111. Elimination of signed photograph requirement for visa applications.

Section 221(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1201(b)) is amended by striking the first sentence and insert the following: “Each alien who applies for a visa shall be registered in connection with his or her application and shall furnish copies of his or her photograph for such use as may be required by regulation.”.

SEC. 3112. Additional fraud detection and prevention.

Section 286(v)(2)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1356(v)(2)(A)) is amended—

(1) in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking “at United States embassies and consulates abroad”;

(2) by amending clause (i) to read as follows:

“(i) to increase the number of diplomatic security personnel assigned exclusively or primarily to the function of preventing and detecting visa fraud;”; and

(3) in clause (ii), by striking “, including primarily fraud by applicants for visas described in subparagraph (H)(i), (H)(ii), or (L) of section 101(a)(15)”.

SEC. 1101. Short title.

This title may be cited as the “Legal Workforce Act”.

SEC. 1102. Employment eligibility verification process.

(a) In general.—Section 274A(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1324a(b)) is amended to read as follows:

“(b) Employment eligibility verification process.—

“(1) NEW HIRES, RECRUITMENT, AND REFERRAL.—The requirements referred to in paragraphs (1)(B) and (3) of subsection (a) are, in the case of a person or other entity hiring, recruiting, or referring an individual for employment in the United States, the following:

“(A) ATTESTATION AFTER EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTATION.—

“(i) ATTESTATION.—During the verification period (as defined in subparagraph (E)), the person or entity shall attest, under penalty of perjury and on a form, including electronic and telephonic formats, designated or established by the Secretary by regulation not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of the Legal Workforce Act, that it has verified that the individual is not an unauthorized alien by—

“(I) obtaining from the individual the individual’s social security account number or United States passport number and recording the number on the form (if the individual claims to have been issued such a number), and, if the individual does not attest to United States nationality under subparagraph (B), obtaining such identification or authorization number established by the Department of Homeland Security for the alien as the Secretary of Homeland Security may specify, and recording such number on the form; and

“(II) examining—

“(aa) a document relating to the individual presenting it described in clause (ii); or

“(bb) a document relating to the individual presenting it described in clause (iii) and a document relating to the individual presenting it described in clause (iv).

“(ii) DOCUMENTS EVIDENCING EMPLOYMENT AUTHORIZATION AND ESTABLISHING IDENTITY.—A document described in this subparagraph is an individual’s—

“(I) unexpired United States passport or passport card;

“(II) unexpired permanent resident card that contains a photograph;

“(III) unexpired employment authorization card that contains a photograph;

“(IV) in the case of a nonimmigrant alien authorized to work for a specific employer incident to status, a foreign passport with Form I–94 or Form I–94A, or other documentation as designated by the Secretary specifying the alien’s nonimmigrant status as long as the period of status has not yet expired and the proposed employment is not in conflict with any restrictions or limitations identified in the documentation;

“(V) passport from the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) or the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) with Form I–94 or Form I–94A, or other documentation as designated by the Secretary, indicating nonimmigrant admission under the Compact of Free Association Between the United States and the FSM or RMI; or

“(VI) other document designated by the Secretary of Homeland Security, if the document—

“(aa) contains a photograph of the individual and biometric identification data from the individual and such other personal identifying information relating to the individual as the Secretary of Homeland Security finds, by regulation, sufficient for purposes of this clause;

“(bb) is evidence of authorization of employment in the United States; and

“(cc) contains security features to make it resistant to tampering, counterfeiting, and fraudulent use.

“(iii) DOCUMENTS EVIDENCING EMPLOYMENT AUTHORIZATION.—A document described in this subparagraph is an individual's social security account number card (other than such a card which specifies on the face that the issuance of the card does not authorize employment in the United States).

“(iv) DOCUMENTS ESTABLISHING IDENTITY OF INDIVIDUAL.—A document described in this subparagraph is—

“(I) an individual's unexpired driver’s license or identification card if it was issued by a State or American Samoa and contains a photograph and information such as name, date of birth, gender, height, eye color, and address;

“(II) an individual's unexpired U.S. military identification card;

“(III) an individual's unexpired Native American tribal identification document issued by a tribal entity recognized by the Bureau of Indian Affairs; or

“(IV) in the case of an individual under 18 years of age, a parent or legal guardian’s attestation under penalty of law as to the identity and age of the individual.

“(v) AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT USE OF CERTAIN DOCUMENTS.—If the Secretary of Homeland Security finds, by regulation, that any document described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) as establishing employment authorization or identity does not reliably establish such authorization or identity or is being used fraudulently to an unacceptable degree, the Secretary may prohibit or place conditions on its use for purposes of this paragraph.

“(vi) SIGNATURE.—Such attestation may be manifested by either a handwritten or electronic signature.

“(B) INDIVIDUAL ATTESTATION OF EMPLOYMENT AUTHORIZATION.—During the verification period (as defined in subparagraph (E)), the individual shall attest, under penalty of perjury on the form designated or established for purposes of subparagraph (A), that the individual is a citizen or national of the United States, an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, or an alien who is authorized under this Act or by the Secretary of Homeland Security to be hired, recruited, or referred for such employment. Such attestation may be manifested by either a handwritten or electronic signature. The individual shall also provide that individual’s social security account number or United States passport number (if the individual claims to have been issued such a number), and, if the individual does not attest to United States nationality under this subparagraph, such identification or authorization number established by the Department of Homeland Security for the alien as the Secretary may specify.

“(C) RETENTION OF VERIFICATION FORM AND VERIFICATION.—

“(i) IN GENERAL.—After completion of such form in accordance with subparagraphs (A) and (B), the person or entity shall—

“(I) retain a paper, microfiche, microfilm, or electronic version of the form and make it available for inspection by officers of the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Justice, or the Department of Labor during a period beginning on the date of the recruiting or referral of the individual, or, in the case of the hiring of an individual, the date on which the verification is completed, and ending—

“(aa) in the case of the recruiting or referral of an individual, 3 years after the date of the recruiting or referral; and

“(bb) in the case of the hiring of an individual, the later of 3 years after the date the verification is completed or one year after the date the individual’s employment is terminated; and

“(II) during the verification period (as defined in subparagraph (E)), make an inquiry, as provided in subsection (d), using the verification system to seek verification of the identity and employment eligibility of an individual.

“(ii) CONFIRMATION.—

“(I) CONFIRMATION RECEIVED.—If the person or other entity receives an appropriate confirmation of an individual’s identity and work eligibility under the verification system within the time period specified, the person or entity shall record on the form an appropriate code that is provided under the system and that indicates a final confirmation of such identity and work eligibility of the individual.

“(II) TENTATIVE NONCONFIRMATION RECEIVED.—If the person or other entity receives a tentative nonconfirmation of an individual’s identity or work eligibility under the verification system within the time period specified, the person or entity shall so inform the individual for whom the verification is sought. If the individual does not contest the nonconfirmation within the time period specified, the nonconfirmation shall be considered final. The person or entity shall then record on the form an appropriate code which has been provided under the system to indicate a final nonconfirmation. If the individual does contest the nonconfirmation, the individual shall utilize the process for secondary verification provided under subsection (d). The nonconfirmation will remain tentative until a final confirmation or nonconfirmation is provided by the verification system within the time period specified. In no case shall an employer terminate employment of an individual because of a failure of the individual to have identity and work eligibility confirmed under this section until a nonconfirmation becomes final. Nothing in this clause shall apply to a termination of employment for any reason other than because of such a failure. In no case shall an employer rescind the offer of employment to an individual because of a failure of the individual to have identity and work eligibility confirmed under this subsection until a nonconfirmation becomes final. Nothing in this subclause shall apply to a rescission of the offer of employment for any reason other than because of such a failure.

“(III) FINAL CONFIRMATION OR NONCONFIRMATION RECEIVED.—If a final confirmation or nonconfirmation is provided by the verification system regarding an individual, the person or entity shall record on the form an appropriate code that is provided under the system and that indicates a confirmation or nonconfirmation of identity and work eligibility of the individual.

“(IV) EXTENSION OF TIME.—If the person or other entity in good faith attempts to make an inquiry during the time period specified and the verification system has registered that not all inquiries were received during such time, the person or entity may make an inquiry in the first subsequent working day in which the verification system registers that it has received all inquiries. If the verification system cannot receive inquiries at all times during a day, the person or entity merely has to assert that the entity attempted to make the inquiry on that day for the previous sentence to apply to such an inquiry, and does not have to provide any additional proof concerning such inquiry.

“(V) CONSEQUENCES OF NONCONFIRMATION.—

“(aa) TERMINATION OR NOTIFICATION OF CONTINUED EMPLOYMENT.—If the person or other entity has received a final nonconfirmation regarding an individual, the person or entity may terminate employment of the individual (or decline to recruit or refer the individual). If the person or entity does not terminate employment of the individual or proceeds to recruit or refer the individual, the person or entity shall notify the Secretary of Homeland Security of such fact through the verification system or in such other manner as the Secretary may specify.

“(bb) FAILURE TO NOTIFY.—If the person or entity fails to provide notice with respect to an individual as required under item (aa), the failure is deemed to constitute a violation of subsection (a)(1)(A) with respect to that individual.

“(VI) CONTINUED EMPLOYMENT AFTER FINAL NONCONFIRMATION.—If the person or other entity continues to employ (or to recruit or refer) an individual after receiving final nonconfirmation, a rebuttable presumption is created that the person or entity has violated subsection (a)(1)(A).

“(D) EFFECTIVE DATES OF NEW PROCEDURES.—

“(i) HIRING.—Except as provided in clause (iii), the provisions of this paragraph shall apply to a person or other entity hiring an individual for employment in the United States as follows:

“(I) With respect to employers having 10,000 or more employees in the United States on the date of the enactment of the Legal Workforce Act, on the date that is 6 months after the date of the enactment of such Act.

“(II) With respect to employers having 500 or more employees in the United States, but less than 10,000 employees in the United States, on the date of the enactment of the Legal Workforce Act, on the date that is 12 months after the date of the enactment of such Act.

“(III) With respect to employers having 20 or more employees in the United States, but less than 500 employees in the United States, on the date of the enactment of the Legal Workforce Act, on the date that is 18 months after the date of the enactment of such Act.

“(IV) With respect to employers having 1 or more employees in the United States, but less than 20 employees in the United States, on the date of the enactment of the Legal Workforce Act, on the date that is 24 months after the date of the enactment of such Act.

“(ii) RECRUITING AND REFERRING.—Except as provided in clause (iii), the provisions of this paragraph shall apply to a person or other entity recruiting or referring an individual for employment in the United States on the date that is 12 months after the date of the enactment of the Legal Workforce Act.

“(iii) AGRICULTURAL LABOR OR SERVICES.—With respect to an employee performing agricultural labor or services, this paragraph shall not apply with respect to the verification of the employee until the date that is 18 months after the date of the enactment of the Legal Workforce Act. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term ‘agricultural labor or services’ has the meaning given such term by the Secretary of Agriculture in regulations and includes agricultural labor as defined in section 3121(g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, agriculture as defined in section 3(f) of the Fair Labor S