Congressional Record
Formatting necessary for an accurate reading of this text may be shown by tags (e.g., <DELETED> or <BOLD>) or may be missing from this TXT display. For complete and accurate display of this text, see the PDF.

[Pages S15843-S15888] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] CONSOLIDATED APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2008--Continued Mr. GREGG. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the Senator from Idaho now be recognized for 5 minutes and that at 5:20, it be deemed that all time be yielded back by all sides relative to the motion. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Salazar). Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. GREGG. Mr. President, I note for those people listening, under this agreement, there should be a vote beginning about 5:20 p.m. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, I have no objection. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Idaho. Mr. CRAIG. Mr. President, the Senator from Washington and all of us recognize that this may be the conclusion this evening of this session of Congress, and there may be a lot of issues out there that will be brought to a final vote. I think for all of us, as any session concludes, we have to look at the work product and say that is a job well done or a job not so well done. Frankly, for those of us on the Republican side who stayed together and fought the fight and exchanged our differences with those on the Democratic side, to bring a budget back into constraints that are at or near the President's proposal is without question a victory. Some of us will recognize that and honor that tonight as we conclude this first session of this Congress. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Maine. Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that I be permitted to proceed until the vote occurs, which is 2 minutes from now. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, I rise to discuss the funding for the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program. This program is absolutely vital to the people of my State. This winter we have seen record-high prices for home heating oil. I want to thank the appropriators for including additional funding for the LIHEAP program as part of the omnibus spending bill, but, Mr. President, I was hoping we would proceed to consideration of the amendment offered by the Senator from Vermont, of which I am proud to be a cosponsor, which would have provided 800 million additional dollars for the LIHEAP program. Mr. President, this is a real crisis. I consider the amount of money in this bill to be a significant step forward, but it is not adequate to meet the overwhelming needs for the constituents that live in cold weather States and are struggling and literally choosing between paying their bills, buying food, purchasing prescription drugs, and staying warm. That is a choice that no family in this country should have to make. I am pleased with this downpayment on the LIHEAP program. It is a major step forward that is going to make a significant difference, but, frankly, it is simply not adequate to meet the overwhelming need. Nationwide, over the last 4 years, the number of households receiving LIHEAP assistance increased by 26 percent from 4.6 million to about 5.8 million, but during this same period, Federal funding increased by only 10 percent. The result is that the average grant declined from $349 to $305. In addition, since August, crude oil prices quickly rose from around $60 barrel to nearly $100 per barrel, so a grant buys less fuel today than it would have just 4 months ago. According to the Maine Office of Energy Independence and Security, the average price of heating oil [[Page S15844]] in our State is $3.26 a gallon. That is a record in our State. This large, rapid increase, combined with less LIHEAP funding available per family, imposes hardship on people who use home heating oil to heat their homes. Low-income families and senior citizen living on limited incomes in Maine and many other States face a crisis in staying warm this winter. The Sanders amendment would have provided an additional $800 million as emergency funding for LIHEAP. The term ``emergency,'' could not be more accurate. Our Nation is in a heating emergency this winter. Families are being forced to choose among paying for food, housing, prescription drugs and heat. No family should be forced to suffer through a severe winter without adequate heat. I understand we may consider this proposal again after the holidays. When we reconsider it, I urge all my colleagues to support the Sanders proposal to provide vital home energy assistance for the most vulnerable of our citizens. Cloture Motion The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under the previous order and pursuant to rule XXII, the Chair lays before the Senate the following cloture motion which the clerk will report. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: Cloture Motion We, the undersigned Senators, in accordance with the provisions of rule XXII of the Standing Rules of the Senate, do hereby move to bring to a close debate on the motion to concur in the House amendments to H.R. 2764, State, Foreign Operations Appropriations, 2008. Harry Reid, Jeff Bingaman, Barbara A. Mikulski, Byron L. Dorgan, Daniel K. Inouye, Patrick Leahy, Max Baucus, Mark Pryor, Debbie Stabenow, Kent Conrad, Patty Murray, Bill Nelson, Jack Reed, Ken Salazar, Blanche L. Lincoln, Tom Carper, Herb Kohl, Ben Nelson, Dick Durbin. The PRESIDING OFFICER. By unanimous consent, the mandatory quorum call is waived. The question is, Is it the sense of the Senate that debate on the motion to concur in the House amendments to the Senate amendment to H.R. 2764, the Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, shall be brought to a close? The yeas and nays are mandatory under the rule. The clerk will call the roll. The assistant legislative clerk called the roll. Mr. DURBIN. I announce that the Senator from Delaware (Mr. Biden), the Senator from New York (Mrs. Clinton), the Senator from Connecticut (Mr. Dodd), the Senator from California (Mrs. Feinstein), and the Senator from Illinois (Mr. Obama) are necessarily absent. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Are there any other Senators in the Chamber desiring to vote? The yeas and nays resulted--yeas 44, nays 51, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 436 Leg.] YEAS--44 Akaka Baucus Bingaman Boxer Brown Byrd Cantwell Cardin Carper Casey Conrad Dorgan Durbin Feingold Hagel Harkin Inouye Johnson Kennedy Kerry Klobuchar Kohl Lautenberg Leahy Levin Lieberman Lincoln Menendez Mikulski Murray Nelson (FL) Nelson (NE) Pryor Reed Reid Rockefeller Salazar Sanders Schumer Stabenow Tester Webb Whitehouse Wyden NAYS--51 Alexander Allard Barrasso Bayh Bennett Bond Brownback Bunning Burr Chambliss Coburn Cochran Coleman Collins Corker Cornyn Craig Crapo DeMint Dole Domenici Ensign Enzi Graham Grassley Gregg Hatch Hutchison Inhofe Isakson Kyl Landrieu Lott Lugar Martinez McCain McCaskill McConnell Murkowski Roberts Sessions Shelby Smith Snowe Specter Stevens Sununu Thune Vitter Voinovich Warner NOT VOTING--5 Biden Clinton Dodd Feinstein Obama The PRESIDING OFFICER. On this vote the yeas are 44, the nays are 51. Three-fifths of the Senators duly chosen and sworn not having voted in the affirmative, the motion is rejected. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, I suggest the absence of a quorum. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The Republican leader is recognized. Amendment No. 3874 (Purpose: To make emergency supplemental appropriations for the Department of Defense for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2008) Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, I move to concur in the House amendments with an amendment which I send to the desk on behalf of myself, Senators Lieberman, Inouye, Stevens, Cochran, and Warner. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Kentucky [Mr. McConnell], for himself, Mr. Lieberman, Mr. Inouye, Mr. Stevens, Mr. Cochran, and Mr. Warner moves to concur in the House amendment No. 2 to the Senate amendment to H.R. 2764, with an amendment numbered 3874. (The amendment is printed in today's Record under ``Text of Amendments.'') Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, under the consent agreement, how much time do we have? I will use my leader time. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The agreement contemplates a second-degree amendment, the Feingold amendment, where there will be 1 hour of debate equally divided on that amendment. Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, I will use leader time now. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Republican leader. Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, a lot has changed since last December. At this time last year, America and its allies were desperate for good news out of Iraq. The security situation was dire, and getting worse. An all-out civil war threatened to undermine the heroic work of U.S. forces and frustrate the hopes of millions of Iraqis. Then General Petraeus stepped forward with a bold new plan. We confirmed General Petraeus unanimously for what seemed like one last effort at salvaging the mission. And we sent him the troops and the funds he needed to carry out the job. Since the implementation of the Petraeus plan, the security situation in and around Baghdad has changed dramatically. Attacks on troops are down. Civilian casualties in Baghdad are down 75 percent. Iraqi refugees are streaming back over the borders. Outside the city, the local leaders are forging agreements among themselves and with U.S. forces to ensure even greater security. There is simply no question that on the military and tactical levels the Petraeus plan has been a tremendous success. So as we stand here today, we have new hope that U.S. service men and women are beginning to return home with a sense of achievement. A lot has changed in Iraq, and here in Washington, we should take notice. Before us is an amendment sent to us by the House of Representatives that underfunds our troops and only provides for those fighting in Afghanistan. It leaves the troops in Iraq to fend for themselves. That is unacceptable. What is the difference between funding the troops in Afghanistan and funding the troops in Iraq? They are both our troops. Even those of us who have disagreed on the war have always agreed on at least one thing, and that is the troops in the field will not be left without the resources they need. So the amendment I sent to the desk provides for our men and women in uniform in Iraq and Afghanistan because I believe it is our duty to protect all of those who are putting their lives on the line. It is also important to understand--I hope everybody in the Chamber and anybody listening gets this fundamental point: If this amendment does not pass, the McConnell-Lieberman amendment does not pass in its current form, the underlying bill will not become law. The passage of the McConnell-Lieberman proposal is essential to getting a Presidential signature on the Omnibus appropriations and Iraq funding. The Petraeus plan provides for a gradual reduction of our forces and a [[Page S15845]] transition of the mission. Iraqi security forces will eventually shift from partnering with coalition forces to leading forces on their own. We must not impose an arbitrary timeline for withdrawal or accelerate this timeline at an unrealistic pace. This is a moment of real hope for our Nation and for the people of Iraq. It is a moment of real urgency in the Senate. We need to pass the spending bill with troop funds without any strings and without further delay. At the risk of being redundant, the President has made it absolutely clear that to get a Presidential signature, to wrap up this session, having succeeded in passing all of our appropriations bills, will require the passage of the McConnell-Lieberman amendment. So when we get to that amendment--we will have a couple of votes before then, but when we get to that amendment, it is essential. We want to complete our work in a way that implements the appropriations process as all of us feel it should be implemented on a yearly basis. The success of the McConnell-Lieberman amendment is essential. I yield the floor. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, not counting leader time, what is the provision of time once Senator Feingold has introduced his second- degree amendment? The PRESIDING OFFICER. There will be 1 hour of debate equally divided. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, I see the Senator from Wisconsin. I ask, of the half hour on this side, that 15 minutes be given to the distinguished Senator from Wisconsin, 10 minutes to the senior Senator from West Virginia, 5 minutes to the distinguished senior Senator from Massachusetts, and that the Senator from Vermont who is a cosponsor be allowed to submit a statement as though read for the Record. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Amendment No. 3875 to Amendment No. 3874 Mr. FEINGOLD. Mr. President, I send an amendment to the desk and ask for its immediate consideration. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Wisconsin [Mr. Feingold], for himself, Mr. Reid, Mr. Leahy, Mr. Dodd, Mrs. Boxer, Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Kerry, Mr. Harkin, Mr. Whitehouse, Mr. Wyden, Mr. Durbin, Mr. Schumer, Mr. Obama, Mr. Sanders, Mr. Menendez, Mr. Lautenberg, and Mr. Brown, proposes an amendment numbered 3875 to amendment No. 3874. Mr. FEINGOLD. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To provide for the safe redeployment of United States troops from Iraq) At the appropriate place, insert the following: SEC. __. SAFE REDEPLOYMENT OF UNITED STATES TROOPS FROM IRAQ. (a) Transition of Mission.--The President shall promptly transition the mission of the United States Armed Forces in Iraq to the limited and temporary purposes set forth in subsection (d). (b) Commencement of Safe, Phased Redeployment From Iraq.-- The President shall commence the safe, phased redeployment of members of the United States Armed Forces from Iraq who are not essential to the limited and temporary purposes set forth in subsection (d). Such redeployment shall begin not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall be carried out in a manner that protects the safety and security of United States troops. (c) Use of Funds.--No funds appropriated or otherwise made available under any provision of law may be obligated or expended to continue the deployment in Iraq of members of the United States Armed Forces after the date that is nine months after the date of the enactment of this Act. (d) Except for Limited and Temporary Purposes.--The prohibition under subsection (c) shall not apply to the obligation or expenditure of funds for the following limited and temporary purposes: (1) To conduct targeted operations, limited in duration and scope, against members of al Qaeda and affiliated international terrorist organizations. (2) To provide security for United States Government personnel and infrastructure. (3) To provide training to members of the Iraqi Security Forces who have not been involved in sectarian violence or in attacks upon the United States Armed Forces, provided that such training does not involve members of the United States Armed Forces taking part in combat operations or being embedded with Iraqi forces. (4) To provide training, equipment, or other materiel to members of the United States Armed Forces to ensure, maintain, or improve their safety and security. Mr. FEINGOLD. Mr. President, I rise to offer an amendment with the majority leader, Senator Reid, and Senators Leahy, Dodd, Boxer, Kennedy, Kerry, Harkin, Whitehouse, Wyden, Durbin, Schumer, Obama, Sanders, Menendez, Lautenberg, and Brown to H.R. 2764, the fiscal year 2008 Omnibus appropriations bill. The amendment is one I have offered before. I will not hesitate, if I must, to offer it again and again and again. The 17 cosponsors is the greatest number we have ever had for this amendment. It requires the President to begin safely redeploying U.S. troops from Iraq within 90 days of enactment, and requires redeployment be completed within 9 months. At that point, with the bulk of our troops safely out of Iraq, funding for the war would be ended, with four narrow exceptions: providing security for U.S. Government personnel and infrastructure, training the Iraqi security forces, providing training and equipment to U.S. service men and women to ensure their safety and security, and conducting targeted operations limited in duration and scope against members of al-Qaida and others affiliated with international terrorist organizations. Some of my colleagues complain that we spent too much time debating Iraq this year. They would rather talk about other issues. Well, we have a lot of important priorities, but nothing is more important to me or my constituents than ending this disastrous war. As I do every year, I held a town hall meeting in every county in Wisconsin this year. That is 72 meetings for those of you who are not from the Badger State. I heard a lot from my constituents at the meetings about health care and education. But the No. 1 issue I heard about was foreign affairs, particularly the war in Iraq. But the No. 1 issue I heard about was foreign affairs, particularly the war in Iraq. Let me tell you--they weren't asking why Congress is spending so much time on this issue. They weren't asking us to give the President more time for his so-called surge. Like Americans all across the country, they want an end to this war, and they want to know what is stopping us. The Senate needs to address the concerns and demands of our constituents, who more than a year ago voted for a change in congressional leadership in large measure because of the debacle in Iraq. But we have yet to follow through and end this misguided war, before more Americans are injured and killed. And we are about to adjourn for the year and let the war drag on even longer. We hear a lot from supporters of the President that violence in Iraq is down right now, and therefore we are on the path to victory. That argument would be a lot more convincing if the administration had a viable strategy for success. The surge may buy time, but as long as there is no political solution to Iraq's problems, we are just postponing the inevitable resurgence in violence, and our brave troops will continue bearing the brunt of it. That is not a strategy for success. It is not even a strategy. It is a way of pushing this problem off to the next President and the next Congress, while our troops put their lives on the line, and our constituents foot the bill. Or, I should say, our constituents' children and grandchildren foot the bill, because we can't even be bothered to figure out a way to pay for the war. We are just handing the tab to future generations, sticking them with hundreds of billions of dollars of more deficit spending. I am certainly pleased that violence in Iraq has declined in the last few months. Once again, our troops have showed they excel in any challenge with which they are tasked. This doesn't change the fact, however, that this year was the bloodiest year for Americans since the war began, and there are still a few weeks to go in 2007. Indeed, let us remember that nearly 4,000 Americans have died, and almost 30,000 have been wounded in a war that has no clear strategy and no end in sight. While the President is bringing home a token number of troops, over 160,000 remain as the war drags on into its fifth year. What are we supposed to tell them, and their families, to wait another year until a new administration and new Congress finally listen to the American people and bring this tragedy to a close? [[Page S15846]] Mr. President, Iraq appears to be no closer to legitimate political reconciliation at the national level than it was before the surge began. Equally worrisome is that, as part of the President's plan, we appear to be deepening our dependence upon former insurgents and militia-infiltrated security forces with questionable loyalties. Supporting the sheiks in al Anbar--and elsewhere--may help to reduce violence in the near term, but by supporting both sides of a civil war, we are risking greater violence down the road. Such tactics are likely to undermine the prospects for long-term stability, as they could lead to greater political fragmentation and ultimately jeopardize Iraq's territorial integrity. Again, without legitimate national reconciliation, violence may ebb and flow, but it won't end, and we will be no closer to a settlement, no matter how long we keep a significant military presence in Iraq. That is not the fault of our heroic men and women in uniform. It is the fault of the administration's disastrous policies. There is another dirty secret behind the temporary drop in violence, and it relates to the segregation of Baghdad and the neighborhoods on its outskirts. With so many Iraqis fleeing their homes in search of greater safety and security, large-scale displacement has resulted in very different demographics. Previously mixed neighborhoods have ceased to exist, thereby curtailing one of the chief sources of sectarian violence. This ethnic cleansing is hardly evidence of a successful surge. And it sure isn't a hopeful sign for future peace and stability. When it announced the surge, the administration said its goal was to keep a lid on violence to give time and space for reconciliation in Iraq. Now that we are no closer to reconciliation, the administration is trying, once again, to shift the goalposts. We don't hear as much about reconciliation now, and when we do, it sounds very different from the national reconciliation that was supposedly our goal--instead we hear about ``bottom-up'' reconciliation, whatever that means. All the administration can do is stall for time, just as it did in 2004, just as it did in 2005, and just as it did in 2006. The slogan may be different--``Mission Accomplished,'' ``Stay the Course,'' ``The New Way Forward'' and even ``Return on Success,'' but each time we are told we are on the right road, if we just keep walking a little longer. Until, that is, we reach another dead end, and a new slogan is invented to justify heading in a new, but equally futile direction. As the administration blunders from one mistake to another, brave American troops are being injured and killed in Iraq; our military is being overstretched; countless billions of dollars are being spent; the American people are growing more and more frustrated and outraged; and our national security is being undermined. Instead of focusing on Iraq, we should be focusing on our top national security priority--going after al-Qaida and its affiliates around the globe. This administration has sadly proven that we cannot do both. Al-Qaida is waging a global campaign, from North Africa--where the Algerian Government has blamed an al-Qaida affiliate for two major bombings last week--to the border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan were, while we have been distracted by Iraq, al-Qaida has reconstituted and strengthened itself. There is a price to pay for our neglect, and this administration has failed to acknowledge it. Because of its narrow focus on Iraq, the administration has been so distracted it has not adequately addressed the deteriorating security conditions in Afghanistan, where the resurgent Taliban--the same movement that harbored and supported the terrorist elements that attacked our country on 9/11--are gaining ground. Violence may be down in Iraq, but it is up significantly in Afghanistan. There were 77 suicide attacks in Afghanistan in just the first 6 months of 2007, which is about twice the number for the same period in 2006 and 26 times higher than from January to June 2005. This worrisome escalation of suicide bombings is one of many signs that Afghanistan's already tenuous stability is even shakier. And while earlier this week the Pentagon confirmed that the U.S. military and its NATO partners are reviewing plans for Afghanistan, it is awfully late in the game to try to put that country on a solid path to stabilization and development. Nonetheless, we have to try because we still have an opportunity to finish the job we started 6 years ago in Afghanistan-- eliminating the Taliban and destroying a safe haven for terrorist networks that seek to harm us. This opportunity is critical because until bin Laden and his reconstituted al-Qaida leadership are killed or captured, Afghanistan's future cannot be separated from our own national security. Instead of seeing the big picture--instead of approaching Iraq in the context of a comprehensive and global campaign against a ruthless enemy--this administration persists with its tragic policy and its tragic mistakes. As the President digs in his heels, he is simultaneously deepening instability throughout the Middle East, undermining the international support and cooperation we need to defeat al-Qaida, providing al-Qaida and its allies with a rallying cry and recruiting tool, and increasing our vulnerability. The President's promise to redeploy a few battalions, while leaving 160,000 troops in Iraq, is not nearly enough. That is why, once again, I am offering this amendment with Majority Leader Reid. It is up to us here in Congress to reverse what continues to be an intractable policy. It is our job to listen to the American people, to save American lives, and to protect our Nation's security by redeploying our troops from Iraq, because the President will not. I am not suggesting that we abandon the people of Iraq or that we ignore the political impasse there. We cannot ignore the ongoing humanitarian crisis that has unfolded within Iraq or the one that followed millions of Iraqis as they fled to Jordan and Syria. These issues require the attention and constructive engagement of U.S. policymakers, key regional players, and the international community. They require high-level, consistent, and multilateral engagement and cooperation. But Iraqi reconciliation cannot--and will not--be brought about by a massive American military engagement. By enacting Feingold-Reid, we can finally bring our troops out of Iraq and focus on what should be our top national security priority-- waging a global campaign against al-Qaida and its affiliates. Some of my colleagues will oppose this amendment. That is their right. But I hope none of them will suggest that Feingold-Reid would hurt the troops by denying them equipment or support. There is no truth to that argument--none. Passing this legislation would result in our troops being safely redeployed within 9 months. At that point, with the troops safely out of Iraq, funding for the war would end, with the narrow exceptions I mentioned earlier. That is what Congress did in 1993, when it voted overwhelmingly to bring our military mission in Somalia to an end. That is what Congress must do again to terminate the President's unending mission in Iraq. This amendment is almost identical to the version I offered with Senator Reid and others to the Defense Department authorization bill. And once again, we have specified that nothing in this amendment will prevent U.S. troops from receiving the training or equipment they need ``to ensure, maintain, or improve their safety and security.'' I hope we won't be hearing any more spurious arguments about troops on the battlefield not getting the supplies they need. This war is exhausting our country, overstretching our military, and tarnishing our credibility. Even with the recent decline in violence, the American people know the war is wrong, and they continue to call for its end. I urge my colleagues to vote yes on Feingold-Reid so we can finally heed their call to action. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Menendez). The Senator from West Virginia. Mr. BYRD. Mr. President, I intend to support the amendment being offered by the Senator from Wisconsin. While I fully support the addition of the $31 billion in funding for the war in Afghanistan and for troop protection, I cannot support the President's demands that funding be given to him with no strings attached so that he may keep some 130,000 or more troops in Iraq for a sixth year. Risking the lives of more soldiers to try to win a [[Page S15847]] bad bet on Iraq represents a terrible injustice to our brave fighting men and women. Just a little more time, the President says, just a little more money, and the quagmire that is Iraq will be transformed. The President has made clear that if he has his way, U.S. troops would still be in Iraq decades hence. What a statement by a U.S. President. What a deadly bankrupt legacy to leave. 2007 has already been the most deadly year in Iraq in terms of U.S. deaths since the invasion began, and the year is not yet over. The number of U.S. deaths has reached 3,890, and the number of wounded has surpassed 28,000. The Iraqi Government has not passed any of the legislative benchmarks that would indicate progress toward national reconciliation. The economic rebuilding of Iraq continues to lag, financed by U.S. taxpayer dollars and marked by waste, fraud, and abuse. Oil production is sputtering and shortages of basics such as electricity and water continue unabated, despite the boondoggle that this war has been for private contractors. Evidence of ethnic cleansing is growing, as Sunnis are forced out of Shia areas and vice versa. The Iraqi Army and police forces remain riddled with sectarianism. U.S. forces continue to carry the bulk of the security burden, and while U.S. forces remain in Iraq, there is little incentive for the Iraqis to assume that duty. Some have pointed to recent tactical successes and the reduction of violence in certain areas of Iraq as justification for continuing the occupation of Iraq. But the prowess of our troops was never in question. They have been given a job to do, and they do it with bravery and skill. The important question--the only true measure of our efforts in Iraq--is whether those tactical successes somehow add up to progress toward a lasting political solution. That progress has failed to materialize. It is time for a change in Iraq. It is time to limit the U.S. military mission in Iraq and bring the bulk of our troops home. It is time to seriously engage our allies and the nations of the Middle East on Iraqi security issues. It is time to restore the reputation of the great United States of America by returning to the policies that made the United States an example to inspire the world, a beacon of economic prosperity, a showcase of humanitarian ideals, and benevolent assistance to people in their hour of need. It is time to shed our image as invaders and occupiers of other nations, using mercenary forces to expand our reach. It is time to unequivocally reject the notion that America condones torture. For most of my lifetime--and it has been a long one already--the world looked to the United States first when help was needed. Now, the world wonders which nation America will invade next. How far we have fallen. The administration has used emergency proclamations and stop-loss orders to effect a back-door draft that keeps soldiers in the military, even though their terms of service have been completed. Meanwhile, the needs of our own Nation go wanting, as important equipment that could be used for domestic disasters is shipped off to Iraq, and our National Guardsmen, the first responders in emergencies, sit in the sands--the hot sands--of the Middle East. I urge my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to vote in favor of this amendment and, thus, reaffirm our resolve to alter our disastrous course in Iraq. To vote for this amendment is to vote for our troops and to begin a reasonable new policy for Iraq. To vote for this amendment is to begin to reassert the constitutional role of the Congress as the people's check on the Executive, using the most powerful tool there ever was and ever will be in the congressional arsenal--the power of the purse. To vote for this amendment is to show the American people we are listening to them. Keeping our troops in harm's way in support of a misbegotten war and a failed strategy is not patriotism. We must not roll the dice again, recklessly risking American lives and American treasure. It is time-- time--time--for a change. Mr. President, I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Arizona. Mr. McCAIN. Mr. President, I rise to oppose the pending amendment by the Senator from Wisconsin, my friend. I strongly support the amendment that will be offered by the Republican leader that would deliver vital funding for our troops in Iraq. The underlying House-passed bill is not only irresponsive to the facts on the ground in Iraq, it is simply irresponsible. It fails to provide any funding for our troops fighting in Iraq and actually contains an explicit prohibition against the use of funds for Operation Iraqi Freedom. The authors have compiled a bill of some 1,400 pages and an even larger joint explanatory statement chock-full of unnecessary spending, but they include not a dime for our troops in Iraq. They include not a dime for our troops in Iraq. I would like our friends and colleagues and others to consider that the bill on the floor today contains $1.6 million for animal vaccines in Greenport, NY, but not a penny for our soldiers in Iraq; $477,000 for Barley Health Food Benefits but nothing for the troops in Iraq; $846,000 for the Father's Day Rally Committee of Philadelphia but not a dime for our sons and daughters who are fighting. We are willing to spend $244,000 for bee research in Weslaco, TX, but not a dollar for our fighting men and women in Baghdad, Kirkuk, and Anbar. It is a sad day--it is a sad day, indeed--when in the middle of a war this country must win, the Congress provides more funds for bee research than for the brave Americans risking their lives on our behalf. For Congress to fail to provide the funds needed by our soldiers in the field is inexcusable under any circumstances, but it is especially disappointing right now at the very moment when General David Petraeus and his troops are achieving the kind of progress in Iraq that many dismissed as impossible a few months ago, including suspending disbelief in order to believe the surge was working. One has to suspend disbelief to believe it is not. The bill's proponents seek, I suppose, a precipitous withdrawal of U.S. combat forces from Iraq regardless of conditions on the ground or the views of our commanders in the field. If that sounds familiar, it should. It should sound familiar, my friends. The majority has thus far engaged in no less than 40 legislative attempts to achieve this misguided outcome. The choice today is simple: Do we build upon the clear successes of our current strategy and give General Petraeus and the troops under his command the support they require to complete their mission or do we ignore the realities and legislate a premature end to our efforts in Iraq, accepting thereby all the terrible consequences that will ensue? In case my colleagues missed it, a couple nights ago, there was a piece on the evening news of one of the major networks that pointed out that for the first time in a long time there was 24 hours in Baghdad without a single incident of violence. How you can ignore these facts on the ground is something I do not--will not--comprehend. I had the privilege, along with my colleagues, Senator Lieberman of Connecticut and Senator Graham of South Carolina, of spending Thanksgiving with our troops in Iraq. On that trip, I saw and heard firsthand about the remarkable transformation these brave men and women in uniform have brought about this year. After nearly 4 years of mismanaged war, our military, in cooperation with the Iraqi security forces, has made significant gains under the new American counterinsurgency strategy, the so-called surge. Overall violence in Iraq has fallen to its lowest level since the first year of the invasion. LTG Ray Odierno, the second in command in Iraq, said this week this improvement is due to the increase in American troops and better trained Iraqi forces--due to the increase in American troops and better trained Iraqi forces. Now, you can believe LTG Ray Odierno or you can believe those on the other side of the aisle who want to bring to a halt the success we have achieved. Improvised explosive device blasts, the foremost source of U.S. combat deaths, now occur at a rate lower than at any point since September 2004. This week, MG Joseph Fil, the commander for Baghdad, stated that attacks in Baghdad have fallen nearly 80 percent since November 2006, murders in Baghdad Province are down by some 90 percent over the same period, and vehicle- [[Page S15848]] borne bombs have dropped by 70 percent. So as Ronald Reagan used to say: Facts are stubborn things. Facts are stubborn things. These are the facts--not rhetoric but facts. Major General Fil added that, today, there is no longer any part of Baghdad under al-Qaida control, though the terrorist group is ``still lurking in the shadows.'' I agree. They are on the run, but they are not defeated. They are on the run, but they are not defeated. Last week, the violence in Anbar Province was the lowest ever recorded. The British handed control of southern Basra to the Iraqi Government. And in Diyala, one of most dangerous regions in Iraq, al- Qaida militants tried to retake several villages around the town of Khalis, only to see U.S.-backed local volunteers drive the terrorists away. That is the success of a classic counterinsurgency strategy. Tens of thousands of volunteers have joined ``awakening councils'' that aim to combat al-Qaida, and al-Qaida's No. 2, Ayman al-Zawahiri, has begun warning of ``traitors'' among the insurgents in Iraq. As a result of the hard-won gains our troops have secured, General Petraeus has been able to initiate a drawdown of U.S. forces, a drawdown tied not to an artificial timetable but based on security gains in-country. This drawdown, beginning with the removal without replacement of some 5,000 American troops, has commenced following a dramatic drop in American casualty rates and enhanced security throughout the country. Al-Qaida's leadership knows which side is winning in Iraq. It may not be known in some parts of America and in this body, but al-Qaida knows. Al-Qaida knows who is winning in Iraq. Our soldiers know they have seized the momentum in this fight. Does the majority party understand we are succeeding under the new strategy? The proponents of this bill cannot continue forever to deny or disparage the reality of progress in Iraq or reject its connection to our new counterinsurgency strategy. As General Odierno explained, with the new counterinsurgency operations, ``we have been able to eliminate key safe havens, liberate portions of the population and hamper the enemy's ability to conduct coordinated attacks.'' General Odierno went on to add: ``We have experienced a consistent and steady trend of increased security. . . . and I believe continued aggressive operations by both Iraqi and coalition forces are the most effective way to extend our gains and continue to protect the citizens of Iraq.'' Given these realities, some proponents of precipitous withdrawal from Iraq have shifted their focus. While conceding, finally, that there have been dramatic security gains, they have begun seizing on the lackluster performance of the Iraqi Government to insist that we should abandon the successful strategy and withdraw U.S. forces. This would be a terrible mistake. Of course, there is no question that Iraq's national leaders must do more to promote reconciliation and improve governance and that the reduction in violence has created a window for political and economic progress that Iraqi leaders must seize, but let's not close that window. The likelihood that they make this progress would be vastly decreased--not increased--by a precipitous U.S. withdrawal. Whatever the failings of the imperfect democracy in Baghdad, they do not justify--either in terms of national interests or simple morality--abandoning it to the al-Qaida terrorists and Iranian-backed militias trying to destroy it. None of this is to argue that Iraq has become completely safe or that violence has come down to an acceptable level or that victory lies just around the corner. On the contrary, the road ahead remains as it always has been: long and hard. Violence is still at an unacceptable level in some parts of the country. Unemployment remains high in many areas. The Maliki government remains unwilling to function as it must. No one can guarantee success or be certain about its progress or its prospects. We can, however, be certain about the prospects for defeat if we fail to fund our troops. Make no mistake; despite the progress I have outlined, there is no cause for complacency. Just as we have managed to turn failure into success in 2007, we can likewise turn success back into failure in 2008, if we are not careful. As Major General Fil recently put it, progress toward securing the city remains fragile and there is ``absolutely a risk of going too quickly'' in drawing down troops. ``An immediate pullout too quickly would be a real serious threat to the stability here in Baghdad,'' he said. Al-Qaida is off balance, but they will come back swinging at us if we give them the chance. Imagine for a moment if 1 of those 40 attempts to force a withdrawal from Iraq had been successful earlier this year. Rather than hearing from our commanders and troops in the field about the enormous progress, the decline in violence, the Iraqis seeking to return home, the decrease in al-Qaida influence, we would hear instead a very different story--a darker one--with terrible implications for the people of Iraq, the wider Middle East, and the security of the United States of America. Some of my colleagues would like to believe that should the bill we are currently considering become law, without funding our troops in Iraq, it would mark the end of this long effort. They are wrong. Should the Congress force a precipitous withdrawal from Iraq, it would mark a new beginning, the start of a new, more dangerous effort to contain the forces unleashed by our disengagement. If we leave, we will be back. If we leave, we will be back in Iraq and elsewhere in many more desperate fights to protect our security and at an even greater cost in American lives and treasure. Now is not the time for us to lose our resolve. That is why the Senate must adopt the McConnell amendment. The funding contained in this amendment is not as some have characterized it: ``The President's money.'' It is money for the troops. It is money for the brave Americans who are in harm's way as we speak. This funding is to provide them with the equipment and proper training they require to fulfill their mission; funding to protect our men and women from roadside bombs and other attacks; funding to enable them to bring this war to a successful and honorable end. If the funding is not included, the President will very rightly veto this omnibus measure. I say to my friends on the other side of the aisle that I understand the frustration many feel after nearly 4 years of mismanaged war. I share their frustration and sorrow. But we must remember to whom we owe our allegiance--not to short-term political gain but to the security of America, to those brave men and women who risk all to ensure it, and to the ideals upon which our Nation was founded. That responsibility is our dearest privilege, and to be judged by history to have discharged it honorably will in the end matter so much more to all of us than any fleeting glory of popular acclaim, electoral advantage, or office. Let us not sacrifice the remarkable gains our service men and women have made by engaging in a game of political brinkmanship. There is far, far too much at stake. I urge my colleagues to support the McConnell amendment and to reject this amendment. I urge my colleagues to fund our troops and to support them so that when they do return to us, they return with the honor and success their valiant efforts have earned. They and the American people whom they are entrusted to protect deserve nothing less. Mr. President, I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Who yields time? Mr. ALLARD. Mr. President, I yield myself 7 minutes under the Republican time. I am going to share my concerns about a provision included in the Interior division of the Omnibus appropriations bill. This provision was added on the House Floor and was unfortunately retained by the conference committee. The language of this provision will prohibit BLM from preparing or publishing final regulations for oil shale commercial leasing on public lands. This provision is opposed by the Department of the Interior. I have a letter stating their concerns from Secretary Dirk Kempthorne which I ask unanimous consent be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: [[Page S15849]] The Secretary of the Interior, Washington, DC, December 12, 2007. Hon. Wayne Allard, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Interior, Environment and Related Agencies, Committee on Appropriations, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. Dear Senator Allard: As the House and Senate consider the Fiscal Year 2008 Interior, Environment and Related Agencies Appropriations bill, I would like to voice my concern regarding efforts to prohibit our Department from issuing regulations related to oil shale leasing. Section 606 of the House-passed Interior appropriations bill would prohibit the use of funds to prepare or publish final regulations regarding a commercial leasing program for oil shale resources on public lands. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct) was enacted with broad bipartisan support. The EPAct included substantive and significant authorities for the development of alternative and emerging energy sources. Oil shale is one important potential energy source. The United States holds significant oil shale resources, the largest known concentration of oil shale in the world, and the energy equivalent of 2.6 trillion barrels of oil. Even if only a portion were recoverable, that source could be important in the future as energy demands increase worldwide and the competition for energy resources increases. The Energy Policy Act sets the timeframe for program development, including the completion of final regulations. The Department must be able to prepare final regulations in FY 2008 in order to meet the statutorily-imposed schedule. The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) issued a draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) in August 2007. The final EIS is scheduled for release in May 2008 and the effective date of the final rule is anticipated in November 2008. The final regulations will consider all pertinent components of the final EIS. Throughout this process BLM will seek public input and work closely with the States and other stakeholders to ensure that concerns are adequately addressed. The Department is willing to consider an extended comment period after the publication of the draft regulations in order to assure that all of the stakeholders have adequate time and opportunity to review and comment before publication of the final regulations. The successful development of economically viable and environmentally responsible oil shale extraction technology requires significant capital investments and substantial commitments of time and expertise by those undertaking this important research. Our Nation relies on private investment to develop new energy technologies such as this one. Even though commercial leasing is not anticipated until after 2010, it is vitally important that private investors know what will be expected of them regarding the development of this resource. The regulations that Section 606 would disallow represent the critical ``rules of the road'' upon which private investors will rely in determining whether to make future financial commitments. Accordingly, any delay or failure to publish these regulations in a timely manner is likely to discourage continued private investment in these vital research and development efforts. The Administration opposes the House provision that would prohibit the Department from completing its oil shale regulations. I would urge the Congress to let the administrative process work. It is premature to impose restrictions on the development of oil shale regulations before the public has had an opportunity to provide input. Identical letters are being sent to Congressman Norm Dicks, Chairman, Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies, Committee on Appropriations, House of Representatives; Congressman Todd Tiahrt, Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies, Committee on Appropriations, House of Representatives; and Senator Dianne Feinstein, Chairman, Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies, Committee on Appropriations, United States Senate. Sincerely, Dirk Kempthorne. Mr. ALLARD. In 2005, I worked closely with my colleagues in the House and in the Senate on provisions which were included in section 369 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. These will help lead to commercialization after the research and demonstration projects currently underway have proven themselves. As those of us who have to run a business know, it is a bad practice to pour millions of dollars into research and development projects with no hint of assurance that these projects will lead to commercialization. Understanding the regulatory framework within which development must take place is important to companies making investment decisions. I believe, as I did in 2005, that it is critical to give companies investing tens of millions of dollars into these research projects a proverbial ``light at the end of the tunnel.'' The timeline included in this section of the Energy Policy Act for setting up a regulatory framework for oil shale development required the Department of the Interior to develop a programmatic environmental impact statement for oil shale by February of 2007 and to finalize oil shale regulations by August of 2007. Although these dates have slipped, many who are concerned with decreasing our country's dependence on foreign sources of oil remain interested in seeing this process move forward. A regulatory framework is needed in order to clarify the range of development options. During the last several years, a handful of companies have worked to develop technologies that will allow for economically and environmentally feasible development of this resource. While it may take many years of research to establish whether commercial leasing is viable, it is essential in guiding the scope of study and further analysis, including additional site-specific environmental impact statements that are likely to be needed prior to any commercial-scale development. Some have complained that it is too soon to begin drafting commercialization regulations or that the pace at which the development is moving is too quick. I am not advocating that we move forward inappropriately or in a way that is not sustainable. It should be noted that section 369 of the Energy Policy Act also requires the Department of Interior to host a commercial lease sale in February of 2008, but all who are involved in this process are aware that it is premature to take that step too soon. I have been supportive of moving back the date of the first commercial lease sale. However, this fact does not mean that we should not bring the rest of the process to a grinding halt. We are in the midst of a deliberate and thoughtful process for approaching the research and eventual commercial development of oil shale. The potential of this abundant domestic resource is too important to take lightly. It is estimated that there are potentially over 3 trillion barrels of recoverable oil available from shale. Let me repeat that. There is a potential of over 3 trillion barrels of recoverable oil available from oil shale, at a time when this country is struggling to produce enough oil for this country's consumption. This could be the single largest contributor to weaning us off of imports from other countries, many of which are in political turmoil. Moreover, bringing online another large domestic supply of energy can lower prices for consumers, bring in royalties to States and the Federal Government, and enhance the stability of oil prices in the marketplace. With a cautious but deliberate approach that involves consultation with State and local governments, we have the best opportunity of determining if producing oil from shale is possible. We must give this process an opportunity to work before we cut it off at the knees. The language included in this bill does just that. It is not sound policy for our country. From a process standpoint, we should not be undoing carefully crafted policy choices that were negotiated for months by the authorizing committees of jurisdiction and passed by the Congress on a massive appropriations bill that is being pushed through this Chamber at the eleventh hour. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from New Mexico is recognized. Mr. DOMENICI. Mr. President, I wonder if the Senator from Colorado, before he yields, would engage in a brief dialog with the Senator from New Mexico. I ask unanimous consent for 2 minutes for that purpose. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. ALLARD. Mr. President, I withdraw my request to yield the floor. Mr. DOMENICI. Mr. President, I commend the Senator from Colorado. I understand he is the ranking member on that subcommittee. Mr. ALLARD. Yes. Mr. DOMENICI. The Senator tried his best to inform those working on this that this was not the way to handle one of America's most significant resources that might, indeed, sooner rather than later take the place of the crude oil we import from all over the world. Right now, some of the major companies in America are investing in technology which will completely change the way this asset oil shale will be developed; is that not right? It is going to be in situ instead of the old mining system that would have been so tough environmentally. [[Page S15850]] Mr. ALLARD. Mr. President, this is a new process. I thank the Senator from New Mexico for his question. This process is becoming economically feasible and certainly protects the environment. I know the Senator has been working hard on this particular issue on the committees on which he is a leader, and I appreciate his recognizing the importance of us being less dependent on foreign oil and the importance of this huge reserve that exists in several States throughout the West. This is new technology. It is very promising. It is exciting. The byproduct from this particular process I have been told--and I have seen samples of it--is high-grade jet fuel that needs further refining because of the high sulfur nitrogen content. But it is a remarkable product, and it is done in an environmentally friendly way. Mr. DOMENICI. I thank the Senator. I want to say this is exactly what we should not be doing: putting on a moratorium that stops rulemaking and the ordinary professional evolution of standards by the appropriate Federal agencies to address the utilization of one of America's most profound solutions to our energy crisis. Because the price of oil has gotten so high, it is indeed feasible to develop shale oil in America and substitute it for diesel and crude oil products that are bought from overseas. I know that. I need not ask anybody any questions about that. That is why we put the language in the big energy package, and that is why a candidate running for Senate in the State of Colorado should not pander to those who just want to take out after this product that could indeed be one of America's salvations. The people in the State of Colorado and in America ought to know it. The person who did this, who put the moratorium on wants to be a Senator, I understand. The first thing we ought to find out is does he want America to have a chance to be independent of foreign oil. This is one that might do it. You can imagine that in 15 or 20 years, oil would be produced from this shale, and it can be taken right out of the ground and used, because they boil it in the ground. That is the new technology. I am not very impressed with somebody who comes along on a bill such as this and deals with this kind of resource in a willy-nilly manner, to respond or pander to those who don't want the United States on its own to do anything to develop energy. They might say we could not do it before. Of course not. You could not develop it at $25-a-barrel oil. But you certainly can at $50, and there is no question you can at $80 or $90. That is what America's future is all about. I thank the Senator for his work. I am sorry it didn't work. At least those who put that in know somebody is looking out for them. It won't be there next year. This Senator will see to it that we have a debate and vote on that issue before that happens. I thank the Senator for yielding. Mr. ALLARD. Mr. President, I thank the Senator for his comments on this very important issue. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Massachusetts is recognized. Mr. KENNEDY. How much time remains on this amendment? The PRESIDING OFFICER. The proponents have 6 minutes 41 seconds. The opponents have 5 minutes 20 seconds. Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, I yield myself the 6\1/2\ minutes. I ask if the Chair will let me know when 1 minute remains. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Chair will do so. Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, I support this amendment, and I commend my friend and colleague Senator Feingold. It is wrong, basically and fundamentally, to give another blank check to President Bush for his failed Iraq policy. I support our troops, but I oppose our war. We have heard here in the last few minutes and in the last few hours the rather rosy picture about what is happening over in Iraq. I think everybody in this Chamber salutes the brave men and women for their courage, bravery, and valor over the last 5 years. This war has been going on for 5 years. We do know there has been some progress made in recent times on the military aspect. But as every member of the Armed Services Committee understands, everyone who has had a responsibility in Iraq who appeared before the committee has said there are two dimensions for finally getting peace in Iraq: One is military, and one is political reconciliation. That has not taken place. Day after day after day after day, our men and women are on the streets of Baghdad and around Iraq, and more American servicemen have lost their lives this year than in any other year of the Iraq war, make no mistake about it. As we can see, these brave men and women in Baghdad, and all over, are still being targeted in Iraq. They are basically being held hostage by the Iraqi political establishment. American military personnel, American service men and women are being held hostage by Iraq's political leadership, which refuses to come together and reconcile their differences and form a government. Every day that goes on, the American taxpayers' money is being poured into the sands of Iraq, because Iraqi politicians refuse reconciliation and political judgments in Iraq. That is what is going on over there today. That was going on yesterday, and it has been going on for 5 years. What the other side says is let's give this administration and this President a blank check to continue it. How long do they want it for? When is enough enough? That is what they are asking for. That is what they are asking for. For 5 long years, these brave men and women in the Armed Services have done what they have been asked to do, and the best way you can honor them is to get the policy right, get the policy correct. That is what the Feingold amendment does. How? Very simple. It says: OK, Mr. Iraqi politician, you have had your chance, your day; now you have to take responsibility for your own country. The way you are going to do that is that we are going to start bringing American service men and women home. They have been unwilling to take the political decisions up until now. The other side says pour more money in here and lose more American lives. The Feingold amendment is a changed policy. It says we believe that with the judgment and decision we are going to take to American servicemen, then they will make the judgment and decision that is in the interest of this country. Their way hasn't worked. This way will. Why not give it a try and a chance? What are some of the American military personnel saying over there? BG John Campbell, deputy commanding general of the 1st Cavalry Division in Iraq, spoke bluntly about the faults of Iraq's political leaders. He said: The ministers, they don't get out . . . They don't know what the hell is going on on the ground. This is the brigadier general, the deputy commander, talking about the Iraqi political leaders, and you want to give them a blank check? Well, those of us who support the Feingold amendment say no. Army LTC Mark Fetter put it this way: ``It is very painful, very painful'' to deal with the obstructionism of Iraqi officials. There it is. How much clearer does it have to get? How much more of a blank check do you need? How many more billions of dollars do you have to spend--let alone that we will never recover the 81 brave men and women from Massachusetts who lost their lives. That cannot be recovered. Think of this: For every month that goes on in that battle over in Iraq, we could have 250,000 more schoolteachers who are experts in math and science teaching our young people. For every month that goes on, just think that every child who needs after school help and assistance would be able to receive it in the United States of America. Just think, for every month this goes on, we could provide Head Start for every young person who needs it. Just think of this: If we could have the resources for 2 years, we could rebuild and repair every public school in this country that is in need. Doesn't that matter? Well, it matters to this Senator, and it matters to those who are supporting the Feingold amendment. It is wrong to neglect priorities such as these at home and pour hundreds of billions of dollars into the black hole that the Iraq war has become. It is wrong to give the President another huge blank check for the war in Iraq. Enough is enough. [[Page S15851]] I urge my colleagues to take a strong stand and vote against this gigantic blank check for more war. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, I support the Feingold-Reid-Leahy Amendment because it specifically requires the President to begin the redeployment of American forces in Iraq within 90 days. Within 9 months of enactment, the redeployment would be completed and funding terminated for Iraq operations with narrow exceptions for a limited number of counterterrorism, force protection, and troop training missions. The President's so-called ``surge'' is just another word for escalation. It has failed to set the lasting conditions for peace. Violence, though down, still continues at horrifying rates. The various Iraqi factions have made little progress towards political reconciliation. The deadly rifts in that war-torn country have only grown deeper. The Iraqi government has done little to support the few encouraging trends like the willingness of some Sunni groups to turn against the insurgency. The only thing that is going to force the Iraqis to come to terms-- the only way to get Iraq's neighbors involved in bringing about peace there--is to make clear that our country is not going to be there forever. We cannot afford to spend more of our precious resources and to spill more of the precious blood of our troops if the Iraqis will not take responsibility for their own future. There is a way to begin to right the wrongs of the President's failed policy on Iraq. That better path involves effective diplomacy and a strong signal about our finite military presence in Iraq, not this senseless waste of money and lives. The Feingold-Reid-Leahy Amendment offers the real promise of a long-term positive outcome for our security and the people of Iraq. I urge the amendment's adoption. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Vermont is recognized. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, what is the time remaining? The PRESIDING OFFICER. Seventeen seconds. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that we have 1 minute evenly divided added to the time. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, I came here at the time of the Vietnam war. I remember how people said maybe it should end and maybe we should do something; the Vietnam war has gone on too long. We finally stopped it. I am the only Vermonter ever to vote against the war in Vietnam. I voted against funding for it, and the funding failed in the Senate in April of 1975 by one vote. The war ended. Two years later, it was hard to find anybody who supported the war, even though we paid for it for a long time. We have been in Iraq longer than we were in World War II. It is time to bring our brave men and women home. Let them be with their families and let the Iraqis take care of Iraq. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Who yields time? The Senator from Alabama is recognized. Mr. SESSIONS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that I be recognized for 2 minutes. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator is recognized for 2 minutes. Mr. SESSIONS. Mr. President, we know what the situation is, and we are a great nation. We are not at liberty to flip-flop around every time there is some change afoot in some polling data. We voted this summer 80 to 14 to give General Petraeus a chance. We funded the surge and we funded his new strategy. At the time we did that, things were not going well in Iraq. We had a tough year, there is no doubt about it. In the last few months and in the last few weeks, we have seen dramatic changes under the surge and under the classic counterinsurgency strategy this brilliant general is conducting. So I say let's allow him to conduct this war. Let's allow General Petraeus, a proven leader, to do so. Let's reject the tactical decisions of ``General'' Feingold and ``General'' Kennedy. We have a professional there who is achieving things beyond what I would have thought possible a few months ago, actually. I hoped and believed we were going to see progress, but the extent of it is remarkable. The last thing we need to do is to take action to pull the rug out from under the fabulous men and women who are serving us at great risk this very moment, whose highest and deepest wish is to be successful, to execute the policy we gave them by a three-fourths-plus vote several years ago. I thank the Chair and reserve the remainder of the time. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Who yields time? The Senator from Wisconsin is recognized. Mr. FEINGOLD. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that Senator Clinton be added as a cosponsor of the amendment. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. FEINGOLD. Mr. President, I suggest the absence of a quorum. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll. Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, I urge my colleagues to oppose the Feingold amendment. Simply put, this amendment mandates withdrawal from Iraq within 90 days, notwithstanding the substantial progress that even the harshest critics acknowledge is occurring there. Further, it cuts off funds for those troops in 9 months. We have taken this vote three times already this year. That is three times we voted on this this year. It has failed on a bipartisan basis each time, and with good reason. I urge my colleagues to oppose the Feingold amendment one more time. Mr. REID. Mr. President, in a short time we will move to vote on three amendments to the Omnibus appropriations bill. Each of them takes a different approach to funding the war in Iraq. I will vote for the Feingold/Reid amendment, which I have cosponsored and voted for several times this year. Feingold/Reid is the right approach to begin to responsibly end the war, and I will vote for it again today. The second amendment is Levin/Reed, which I will also vote for. Finally, we will vote on the McConnell amendment, which I will strongly vote against. This amendment simply does more of what congressional Republicans have done since the war began: It rubberstamps President Bush's reckless management of the war that has cost us so dearly in lives, limbs, and treasure. The debate over supplemental war funding is nothing new. Every year, President Bush comes to us demanding more and more funds for Iraq, with absolutely no accountability. This year, he requested a staggering $200 billion for Iraq and Afghanistan. At a time when he and his allies in Congress are telling us we can't invest in medical research, education, infrastructure, or public safety, they want billions and billions more for Iraq. How will our country pay the bill for the Iraq war? A Cost that when all is done will likely exceed $2 trillion? The President has no idea. He has no plan or intention to pay the bill. He is simply sticking it in a drawer like an overdue credit card statement, leaving it to our children and grandchildren to pay for generations to come. That is not just fiscal irresponsibility, it is fiscal madness. But it is par for the course for a President who inherited record budget surpluses from President Clinton and turned them into record deficits. Every year, this war gets more expensive, and the American people deserve to know why. The answer is waste. The answer is fraud. The answer is mismanagement. The answer is incompetence. On President Bush's watch, the companies he chooses to do business with--like Halliburton and Blackwater--have wasted billions and billions of our tax dollars. The President has allowed billions to be spent on buildings that were never built, projects that were never seen through, and contractor military operations that did far more harm than good. That is why he asks for more every year--because he has grossly misspent the funds he has received. [[Page S15852]] This year, we have already passed a $460 billion Defense budget--and this bill includes another $31 billion for Afghanistan and troop protection. Democrats have fully funded the needs of our men and women in uniform and given the President more than enough to conduct the war and begin to bring our troops home. But one thing we can't control is his reckless financial mismanagement. We have held hearings and brought cases of waste and fraud to the light of day. But ultimately, the inability to conduct the war with the billions already allocated is no one's fault but his. The President and his allies here in Congress will doubtlessly push the panic button and say that if we don't approve the funds immediately, our troops will suffer. This argument is untruthful and beyond the pale. Our Secretary of Defense, Robert Gates--a man for whom I have great respect--told Congress that the Army has enough money to get through the end of February and the Marines have enough funds to get through mid-March. If President Bush hadn't wasted untold billions, our troops would be funded for far longer than that. If the President had followed the wishes of the American people by spending the funds we gave him to wind down the war instead of ramp it up, the existing funds would be more than sufficient. But he didn't. He ignored the calls of the American people to responsibly end the war. And he should accept the consequences of his mistakes by finally changing course. But let me be clear: Democrats will never let our troops suffer for the President's misdeeds. Democrats always have and always will support our courageous men and women in uniform who have given so much and received so little in return. It is Democrats who insisted upon a 3.5 percent across-the-board pay increase for everyone in uniform, which the President opposed. It is Democrats who made right the awful conditions at Walter Reed and other veterans' health care facilities that took place on this President's watch. It is Democrats who provided a $3.5 billion increase for veterans' health care after Republicans underfunded it for years. It is Democrats who passed the Wounded Warriors Act to honor our servicemembers and their families. I think we have heard enough of the tired old Bush-Republican scare tactics that Democrats are putting our troops at risk. The facts speak for themselves. We have always stood with our men and women in uniform. We always will. But unlike Republicans, we believe that truly supporting our troops means beginning to bring them home to the hero's welcome they have so bravely earned. My fellow Democrats and I come to the Senate floor more times than I can count to discuss the horrible cost of the Iraq war on our troops, our national security, and our reputation in the world. We have lost nearly 4,000 young Americans. Tens of thousands more have been gravely wounded. As I have said already, hundreds of billions of dollars have been spent--tens of billions have been recklessly wasted--and the total price will climb into the trillions before all is said and done. Our military has been stretched paper thin. Colin Powell has said our Armed Forces are ``about broken.'' Every single one of our available combat units is deployed to either Iraq or Afghanistan, leaving no strategic reserves for other conflicts. And as the situation in Iran, the faltering of democracy in Pakistan, and the escalating violence in Afghanistan show, the world can evolve literally overnight. We must have the flexibility to respond, but right now we do not. Our troops are being forced into repeated deployments, and the length of those deployments has gotten longer. Military families are deeply strained, military mental health is suffering, and the Armed Forces are reporting problems with both recruitment and retention. Just this week, General Casey acknowledged this problem, saying--``We are running the all-volunteer force at a pace that is not sustainable.'' Our National Guard is hamstrung in its efforts to keep us safe at home, because much of their equipment has been shipped to Iraq. Every natural disaster, from fire to flood, reminds us of this growing crisis. Yet for all the cost and all the courage of our troops, this war has made us no safer. Let me remind my colleagues of the most recent National Intelligence Estimate, which found that al-Qaida has regrouped and is now directing operations from Pakistan, stronger than ever. Bin Laden remains free, taunting and threatening us with new videos. Afghanistan--once viewed as a great military success--has spiraled out of control. The opium trade there is at an all-time high, violence is at its highest level since American intervention, and recent reports indicate that the Taliban has vastly stepped up its efforts. It is no wonder that this week has brought new reports that a panicked Bush administration is conducting a top-to-bottom review to stave off all-out chaos in Afghanistan and the backslide of all past gains. I welcome this review. But as long as more than 160,000 troops remain caught in the crossfire of the Iraqi civil war, our ability to address conditions in Afghanistan--and elsewhere--will be constrained. The American people are rightly frustrated that more has not been done to responsibly end the Iraqi war. I share that frustration. But within the confines of a stubborn, obstinate President and a Republican Congress that knows no other way but to carry his water, Democrats have made a difference--and a majority of Senators have consistently voted with us. Before Democrats controlled the Congress, the Bush White House conducted the war with total impunity. No dissent was tolerated. The patriotism of those who raised questions was openly attacked. This year, Democrats have brought the President's recklessness into the harsh light of day. We forced the President to set benchmarks for legislative and political progress and required regular reports on whether those benchmarks were being met. These reports have shown that the surge has failed to reach the objective set forth by the President of political reconciliation. We forced General Petraeus to testify--and he has said repeatedly that the war cannot be won militarily and must be won politically. We brought to light the Blackwater controversy and forced Eric Prince to testify. And we put an end to the duplicitous Republican practice of claiming to support the troops but failing to protect them in the field or provide for them back home. Do I feel that enough has been done? Of course not. Time after time, the Republican minority has had a choice: stand with the President or stand with the American people. Each and every time, they have chosen the President. I urge my colleagues to reject the McConnell amendment. The time for zero accountability is long past. I urge my colleagues to embrace the amendments offered by Senator Feingold and Senator Levin. Let's send our troops and all Americans a holiday gift: a message that the United States Congress is ready to bring this war, now nearly 5 years long, to its responsible end. Mr. FEINGOLD. Mr. President, I ask for the yeas and nays. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a sufficient second? There is a sufficient second. The question is on agreeing to the amendment. The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk called the roll. Mr. DURBIN. I announce that the Senator from Delaware (Mr. Biden), the Senator from New York (Mrs. Clinton), the Senator from Connecticut (Mr. Dodd), the Senator from California (Mrs. Feinstein), and the Senator from Illinois (Mr. Obama) are necessarily absent. [[Page S15853]] The PRESIDING OFFICER. Are there any other Senators in the Chamber desiring to vote? The result was announced--yeas 24, nays 71, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 437 Leg.] YEAS--24 Akaka Boxer Brown Byrd Cantwell Cardin Durbin Feingold Harkin Kennedy Kerry Klobuchar Kohl Lautenberg Leahy Menendez Murray Reid Rockefeller Sanders Schumer Stabenow Whitehouse Wyden NAYS--71 Alexander Allard Barrasso Baucus Bayh Bennett Bingaman Bond Brownback Bunning Burr Carper Casey Chambliss Coburn Cochran Coleman Collins Conrad Corker Cornyn Craig Crapo DeMint Dole Domenici Dorgan Ensign Enzi Graham Grassley Gregg Hagel Hatch Hutchison Inhofe Inouye Isakson Johnson Kyl Landrieu Levin Lieberman Lincoln Lott Lugar Martinez McCain McCaskill McConnell Mikulski Murkowski Nelson (FL) Nelson (NE) Pryor Reed Roberts Salazar Sessions Shelby Smith Snowe Specter Stevens Sununu Tester Thune Vitter Voinovich Warner Webb NOT VOTING--5 Biden Clinton Dodd Feinstein Obama The PRESIDING OFFICER. On this vote, the yeas are 24, the nays are 71. Under the previous order requiring 60 votes for the adoption of this amendment, the amendment is withdrawn. The Senator from Vermont. Mr. LEAHY. Mr. President, what is the parliamentary situation? The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under the previous order, the Senator from Michigan is recognized to offer an amendment. Mr. LEAHY. And, Mr. President, is there a time allotted on the amendment of the Senator from Michigan? The PRESIDING OFFICER. There is 1 hour. Mr. LEAHY. Equally divided in the usual fashion? The PRESIDING OFFICER. Equally divided. Mr. LEAHY. I thank the Chair, and I yield the floor. the PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Michigan. Amendment No. 3876 to Amendment No. 3874 Mr. LEVIN. Mr. President, I send an amendment to the desk on behalf of myself, Senator Reid, Senator Voinovich, Senator Hagel, Senator Snowe, Senator Reed, Senator Smith, and Senator Salazar, and ask for its immediate consideration. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Michigan [Mr. Levin], for himself, Mr. Reid of Nevada, Mr. Voinovich, Mr. Hagel, Ms. Snowe, Mr. Reed of Rhode Island, Mr. Smith, and Mr. Salazar, proposes an amendment numbered 3876 to amendment No. 3874. Mr. LEVIN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that further reading of the amendment be dispensed with. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: (Purpose: To express the sense of Congress on the transition of the missions of United States Forces in Iraq to a more limited set of missions as specified by the President on September 13, 2007) At the appropriate place, insert the following: Sec. . It is the sense of Congress that the missions of the United States Armed Forces in Iraq should be transitioned to the more limited set of missions laid out by the President in his September 13, 2007, address to the Nation, that is, to counterterrorism operations and training, equipping, and supporting Iraqi forces, in addition to the necessary mission of force protection, with the goal of completing that transition by the end of 2008. Mr. LEVIN. Mr. President, our amendment expresses the sense of the Congress that we should have a goal for the removal of most of our forces in a reasonable time mainly as a way of telling the Iraqi leaders they must accept responsibility for their own future. Our amendment expresses the sense of the Congress. It is not legally binding, but it puts us on record, and it sends a message. It says it is the sense of the Congress that: The United States Armed Forces in Iraq should transition to the more limited set of missions laid out by President Bush in his September 13, 2007, address to the Nation-- counterterrorism operations and training, equipping, and supporting Iraqi forces-- And we add-- in addition to the necessary mission of force protection, with the goal of completing that transition by the end of 2008. The primary aim of this amendment is to keep the pressure on the Iraqi politicians to do what only they can do: Work out compromises, as they promised to do long ago--to compromise the differences which divide them so as to ensure the currently relatively calm situation in many parts of Iraq, including Baghdad, remains calm. Our sense of Congress language is aimed at pressuring the Iraqi politicians to seize the window of opportunity, as General Odierno put it, to avoid a return to the violence that characterized the presurge period. The New York Times, in a story on December 5, quoted Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Chalabi as saying about the present situation in Iraq: ``It is more a cease-fire than a peace.'' Well, we need to make it clear to those Iraqi political leaders that a cease-fire is not good enough. They must take the steps to turn that cease-fire into a real peace. From all accounts, the surge has already produced some military progress. The problem is that while the surge has, up to this point, achieved some military progress, it has not accomplished its primary purpose, as announced by President Bush last January. President Bush said the surge's purpose was to give the Iraqi Government ``the breathing space it needs to make progress in other critical areas'' and that ``reducing the violence in Baghdad will help make reconciliation possible.'' The President also said ``America will hold the Iraqi government to the benchmarks that it has announced.'' Well, the administration has not done what it said it would do--hold the Iraqi Government to the benchmarks that it, the Iraqi Government, has announced. Those legislative benchmarks include approving a hydrocarbon law, approving a debaathification law, completing the work of a constitutional review committee, and holding provincial elections. Those commitments, made 1\1/2\ years ago, which were to have been completed by January of 2007, have not yet been kept by the Iraqi political leaders despite the breathing space the surge has provided. Despite the breathing space the brave men and women wearing our uniform have provided the Iraqi leaders, despite the breathing room and the breathing space which young men and women putting their lives in harm's way on behalf of this Nation to give the Iraqis an opportunity to create a nation, they have not used that breathing space. And as a matter of fact, the Iraqi leaders appear to be farther apart today than they were at the start of the surge. The Iraqi political leadership's response to the breathing space provided by the surge has been stunning inaction. The Iraqi Parliament has suspended its session until the New Year, thus ensuring that not 1--not 1--of the 18 legislative benchmarks that they committed to meet will be met this year. The President's statement that he will hold the Iraqi Government to the benchmarks it has announced is hollow rhetoric. To date, there have been no consequences for Iraqis' failures to meet those benchmarks. Whether the Iraqi political leaders decide to take advantage of this window of opportunity is, of course, their decision. The United States cannot make that decision for them. They are a sovereign country and have to decide what is best for themselves. But whether the United States keeps an open-ended commitment or establishes a goal for redeployment of most of our forces is our decision. That is not the Iraqis' decision. They can decide whether to live up to the commitments they made to themselves and to us--solemn commitments, as far as I am concerned, because it involves the lives of American troops. Those solemn commitments have not been kept. We cannot force them to keep them, but we can decide whether we are going to maintain an open-ended commitment of our troops. Mr. President, how much time do we have? [[Page S15854]] The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Brown). The Senator from Michigan has 24 minutes. Mr. LEVIN. I yield myself 3 additional minutes. According to our own State Department, the key threat to our effort in Iraq is the failure of the Iraqi political leaders to reach a political settlement. Listen to what the State Department said in its own weekly status report of November 21, 2007. This is our State Department: Senior military commanders [U.S. commanders] now portray the intransigence of Iraq's Shiite-dominated government as the key threat facing the U.S. effort in Iraq rather than al- Qaida terrorists, Sunni insurgents or Iranian-backed militias. Let me read that once again. This is our State Department saying what is the key threat to our forces in Iraq. What they are saying is that it is not the Iranian-backed militias, it is not the Sunni insurgents, it is not the al-Qaida terrorists; the key threat facing the U.S. effort in Iraq, according to our State Department, is ``the intransigence of Iraq's Shiite-dominated government.'' We have to break that intransigence. How can Congress do it? How do we put pressure on the Iraqi political leaders? At a minimum, by at least expressing our view that U.S. forces in Iraq should transition to a more supporting and a less direct role, with a goal--a goal, just a goal--of completing that transition by the end of 2008. The message the Iraqi political leaders need to hear is that Congress has lost patience with them, as have the American people. By their own Prime Minister's acknowledgment, a political solution is the only way to end the conflict, and ending the conflict is in their own hands. I wish we could legislate a legally binding way forward for U.S. forces in Iraq. We have tried to do that. We have not been able to break the filibuster, to get to 60 votes. But at least expressing the sense of the Congress on this matter is better than silence because silence implies acquiescence in the open-endedness of our presence. It is that open-ended commitment which takes the pressure off the Iraqi political leaders, and Congress needs to act to correct that. Our amendment is a small but important step in that direction. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Who yields time? Mr. STEVENS. Mr. President, I yield myself 5 minutes from the time on this side. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The senior Senator from Alaska is recognized. Mr. STEVENS. Mr. President, I do not support the Levin amendment. I rise in strong support of the amendment offered by our leader, Senator McConnell, and the Senator from Connecticut, Mr. Lieberman. That amendment will provide the Department of Defense and our deployed military personnel the resources they need to continue the mission they have been assigned. It will also eliminate the distinction proposed by the House to fund only those troops that are assigned to Afghanistan. In my view, it is unconscionable for Congress to send the message to our troops that they will only get what they need if they are lucky enough to be assigned to fight the war in Afghanistan. What if they were assigned to Iraq? Should they go without funds? I believe it is our duty as Senators to support the troops in the field and provide them all the resources they need to complete the mission they have been assigned. Unlike us, they do not get to choose which battle they fight. They go where duty calls, without hesitation. Senator Inouye and I were in Iraq during the Thanksgiving recess, and I can tell the Senate that the troops are watching what is going on right here. They will get the message over there, and if the House amendment is approved, it will be a real blow to the morale of our forces. This particularly concerns me, that some of my colleagues would consider cutting off funds in Iraq at a time when we are starting to see real progress and reconciliation. I listened to the comments made by the Senator from Arizona, Mr. McCain. I am really pleased to see his strong approval of the funding of our troops that are deployed in harm's way. In March, Ambassador Crocker and General Petraeus will be testifying before Congress to give us their assessment of the situation in Iraq. We know General Petraeus's plans are working. To withhold funding now would only invite defeat and step back from the progress that has been hard fought and won over the last few months. I have urged Congress for quite some time to approve this funding and allow progress to continue until we hear from our leaders on the ground in Iraq. The funds that are sent--the President sent us the request for these funds 10 months ago. For the past 3 years, the Committee on Appropriations has included bridge funding as part of the annual appropriations bill to cover the cost of war, until a supplemental bill was passed in the following year. This amendment would continue what Congress has done in prior years by providing funds to cover the cost of continued operations, including special pay and subsistence to our troops, fuel, transportation, supplies, and equipment reset and procurement. The amendment is intended to cover half-year costs for keeping troops in the field. It also provides resources to provide critical force protection equipment, including body armor, helmets, armor plate for vehicles, and aircraft survivability equipment. There is also other equipment procurement funding to reset our forces returning from theater. This includes buying down shortfalls for the National Guard and Reserve units. Specifically, the McConnell-Lieberman amendment would provide $1.1 billion military pay and benefits to include support for our wounded warriors and death gratuities; $50.2 billion for operation and maintenance activities to include fuel, spare parts, transportation, and equipment maintenance, including $500 million for the commander's Emergency Response Program, $1.4 billion for body armor and personal protection equipment, and $9 billion for depot maintenance funding to reset equipment and maintain force readiness. This amendment also provides funds to continue our efforts to train and equip the Iraqi and Afghan security forces. That funding is critical so that the elected governments in those countries can effectively provide for their own security and our troops can come home. There is also $4.3 billion for the Joint Improvised Explosive Devise Defeat Fund which will help our troops detect and defeat the No. 1 killer of our troops in Iraq--the IEDs, the improvised explosive devices we have heard so much about. Mr. President, $6.1 billion is included for the procurement of equipment, ammunition, vehicles, missiles and aircraft, including $946 million for Army aircraft, $3.46 billion for Army vehicles and equipment, $703 million for Marine Corps vehicles and equipment, and $266 million for special operations forces equipment. The amendment also includes $1 billion for the Defense Working Capital Fund, which includes $587 million to reset prepositioned stocks stationed around the world, which greatly enhances our Nation's ability to respond to contingencies, and we have forces in 141 different--I ask for 1 more minute. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Alaska. Mr. STEVENS. It also provides $141 million for increased fuel costs, $3.7 billion to continue to enhance our intelligence activities in the theater, $600 million for the Defense Health Program to provide for the care and recovery of our wounded servicemembers, and $193 million for counterdrug activities to curb production of opium in Afghanistan. Without these funds, the Department of Defense would be forced to pay for the cost of war out of the regular DOD moneys we have already appropriated. This cost of this war is approaching $15 billion a month, with the Army spending $4.2 billion of that every month. Without relief, the Army will totally deplete their 2008 operations and maintenance funding by mid-February. I urge the Senate not to take the risk that our troops in the field will not have those resources they need in time to complete the mission they have been assigned. I urge the Senate to support the McConnell- Lieberman amendment. I ask to have a chart showing the $70 billion bridge fund, as I tried to outline, printed in the Record. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: [[Page S15855]] $70 Billion Bridge Fund $1.1 billion for military pays and benefits to include support to wounded warriors, and death gratuities. $50.2 billion for operation and maintenance activities to include fuel, spare parts, transportation, and equipment maintenance in the field and at our national depots. Provides $500 million for the Commander's Emergency Response Program. Provides $1.4 billion for Body Armor and Personal Protection Equipment. Provides $9.0 billion of Depot Maintenance funding to reset equipment and maintain force readiness. Provides for the transfer of $110 million to the Coast Guard for support to GWOT. Provides $300 million for Coalition Support. $2.9 billion to continue our efforts to train and equip the Iraqi and Afghan security forces. $4.3 billion for the Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Fund to help our troops detect and defeat the number one killer of our troops in Iraq. $6.1 billion for procurement of equipment, ammunition, vehicles, missiles, and aircraft. Includes $946 million for Army Aircraft; and $3.46 billion for Army vehicles and equipment. Includes $703 million for Marine Corps vehicles and equipment. Provides $266 million for Special Operations Forces equipment. $1.0 billion for the Defense Working Capital Funds. Includes $587 million to reset Prepositioned Stocks stationed around the world and greatly enhances our nations ability to response to contingencies. Provides $141 million for increased fuel costs. $3.7 billion to continue and enhance our Intelligence activities in theater. $600 million for the Defense Health Program to provide for the care and recovery of our wounded service members. $193 million for Counter-Drug activities. Mr. STEVENS. I also thank my colleagues for their continued support of the troops in the field. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Who yields time? The senior Senator from Virginia is recognized. Mr. WARNER. Mr. President, if I could get the attention of the distinguished chairman, might it be advisable that we rotate sides? I will be happy to follow a colleague on your side for purposes of this debate. Mr. LEVIN. Fine. That is fine with us. I yield 5 minutes to the Senator from Ohio, and we will come back to you. Mr. WARNER. Fine. The Senator from Ohio is in support of the amendment of the Senator from Michigan? Mr. LEVIN. That is correct. Mr. WARNER. Mr. President, I ask that I be recognized following the Senator from Ohio for 5 minutes. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The Senator from Ohio is recognized. Mr. VOINOVICH. Mr. President, I rise today to speak in favor of the Levin amendment on Iraq. As my colleagues know, I have long supported a greater level of oversight in the war in Iraq. Many of us feel we should have done a better job of force oversight at the beginning of the war. I was quite taken with a quote from Condoleezza Rice recently, who said, ``I wish we had known more about Iraq before we went in.'' While in Iraq in August, I witnessed a great deal of progress on the ground. That gave me encouragement. However, I was also convinced that it would not be possible to sustain the current level of troops and funding for Iraq over the long term without damaging our national security and long-term fiscal health. As stated before, I believe we need to implement a plan to reduce our military presence in Iraq and focus the remaining military presence on a more limited role. This is clearly the plan General Petraeus is implementing now, and it is the stated goal of the President, as mentioned in the Levin amendment, supported by Secretary Gates and others who are concerned about our force level, and that we need more troops in Afghanistan. I have been working with Senator Levin for several months now to come up with a piece of legislation that could secure bipartisan support in the Senate and send a message to the President and the world that the Congress intends to exercise oversight to ensure we are making progress toward this goal. I have been careful to avoid supporting any measure that I thought would hurt our troops in any way, tie the hands of our brave commanders in the field, or prevent the President from responding to the situation on the ground. In September, I introduced a bill with Senators Alexander, Coleman, and Dole to strive for a goal to reduce our military presence. We had bipartisan support for that, but Senator Levin and I had a problem with the date. Unfortunately, it fell by the wayside. I support the Levin amendment, and I am a cosponsor to this legislation because I believe it is a very simple piece of legislation that accomplished the goals we all share. It sends the message that we support the President's declared goal of reducing our presence in Iraq over time so we can play a more supportive role, bring our forces home, and reduce the burden on our military. It is a sense of Congress and will not bind the President in any way or tie the commanders' hands in the field. It is supported by the President's own declared goals and that of his commander, General Pe