Congressional Record
Formatting necessary for an accurate reading of this text may be shown by tags (e.g., <DELETED> or <BOLD>) or may be missing from this TXT display. For complete and accurate display of this text, see the PDF.

[Pages S8088-S8142] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] TAX CUTS AND JOBS ACT--CONFERENCE REPORT The PRESIDING OFFICER. The motion to proceed having been agreed to, the Chair lays before the Senate the conference report to accompany H.R. 1, which will be stated by title. The legislative clerk read as follows: The committee of conference on the disagreeing votes of the two Houses on the amendment of the Senate to the bill (H.R. 1), to provide for reconciliation pursuant to titles II and V of the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2018, having met, have agreed that the House recede from its disagreement to the amendment of the Senate and agree to the same with an amendment and the Senate agree to the same, signed by a majority of the conferees on the part of both Houses. Thereupon, the Senate proceeded to consider the conference report. (The conference report is printed in the House proceedings of the Record of December 15, 2017.) The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Wyoming. Mr. ENZI. Mr. President, we stand today on the precipice of the most sweeping change to our Nation's tax system in over 30 years. This is a historic moment, as this distinguished body begins final consideration of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act--tax reform that will help boost America's economy, create more jobs, and leave more money in people's paychecks. The last time we considered tax reform similar to this magnitude was 1986. To help remind us how much our country, its economy, and the people have changed since that time, let's review some of the events of that year. In 1986, the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at 1,895--sure that 20,000 would never be broken, and it wasn't until after the last election. It now stands at over 24,000. A gallon of gas cost just 89 cents. Today it is close to $2.50. We still used land lines to phone our loved ones. Iconic movies such as ``Top Gun'' and ``Aliens'' opened. Americans were watching TV shows like ``Dynasty'' and ``Hill Street Blues.'' The Associated Press chose NBA star Larry Bird as one of the Athletes of the Year. President Ronald Reagan signed into law the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which ushered in deep tax rate cuts for American families and an overhaul of our complicated Tax Code. When he signed the bill, Reagan commented on the length of the journey and noted that some people thought it would never happen. Today, too, some have asserted that tax reform either cannot or should not happen, but as our strongly optimistic President said in 1986--and as I continue to believe--the American people ``haven't made this the freest country and the mightiest economic force on this planet by shrinking from challenges.'' Reagan noted: This country was founded on faith in the individual, not groups or classes, but faith in resources and bounty of each and every separate human soul. Our Founding Fathers designed a Democratic form of government to enlist the individual's energies. For that reason, I want to remind my colleagues about the hard work that brought us here. It is a journey that has been years in the making under the leadership of both sides of the aisle. It is one we started and will finish for the benefit of the American people and the health of the U.S. economy. I am proud of the work of the Finance and Budget Committees, and I have had the honor to play a role with both. The Finance Committee held more than 70 hearings on how the Tax Code can be improved and streamlined to work better for all Americans. Almost 3 years ago, Finance Chairman Hatch and Ranking Member Wyden convened bipartisan tax reform working groups to analyze challenges of our outdated Tax Code and develop policy recommendations for comprehensive tax reform. The conclusions reached by these groups helped identify the issues for reform and shape the contours of the legislation we are considering now. It is worth noting that the entire fiscal year 2018 budget reconciliation process has been open, transparent, and subject to regular order, starting with the passage of the Senate budget resolution. The Senate Budget Committee marked up the bill over 2 days and accepted amendments from both sides of the aisle to make the resolution stronger. In fact, for the first time ever, the minority received a copy of the chairman's budget document 5 days prior to the start of the markup. According to many of my colleagues, it was one of the most transparent budget resolution markups in history. The budget resolution--complete with the document reconciliation instructions--was then debated on the floor. This was an open floor process that allowed every Senator the opportunity to offer and vote on amendments to improve the resolution before its final passage. Last month, the Senate Finance Committee held a 4-day markup before approving tax reform legislation designed to modernize our Tax Code. The markup lasted 23 hours and 34 minutes over the course of those 4 days. Of the more than 350 amendments filed, 69 were considered in committee. Amendments offered by both Democrats and Republicans were adopted. Since then, both Chambers of Congress have passed similar versions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, and over the past 2 weeks, conferees worked tirelessly to resolve and bridge the differences between the two bills and [[Page S8089]] come to an agreement on a final piece of legislation. In this Chamber, the legislation reflects the outstanding work and leadership of Finance Chairman Hatch and Energy Committee Chairman Murkowski in developing legislative recommendations that adhere to the budget resolution's reconciliation instructions, and I thank them for their efforts. I also thank my Senate colleagues who earlier this month supported the Senate passage of the Tax Cuts and Job Act and whose advice and consent during the conference has shaped the final bill. The legislation is truly a reflection of the broad range and consensus of Members who engaged with this process. Throughout my work on this bill, I have carried with me the many lessons I have learned from when I owned and operated a small business or when I worked as an accountant. I have been led by one singular purpose, to help improve the lives of millions of hard-working American families, especially the residents of my own State of Wyoming. I am pleased with the outcome of our work because I believe it includes meaningful changes that will help individuals and families struggling to move up the economic ladder. The tax plan includes reforms that will help grow the economy, that will create more jobs, and that will simplify taxes. It provides American workers and families with an across-the-board tax cut and puts more money in people's pockets. It lets Americans have a greater say as to how to use their hard-earned money. The changes will help small businesses in our communities thrive and encourage the largest multinational companies to remain in the United States, investing profits here instead of overseas--not a bad wish list for Santa. Under the plan, Americans will reap tax savings from reduced tax rates, tax savings from a higher standard deduction, which creates a larger zero tax bracket for low-income individuals and increases many people's tax refunds. It also includes a child tax credit that doubles in size to $2,000 to help struggling families and all this while preserving important deductions for medical expenses, charities, homeowners, and State and local taxes. Our farmers and ranchers will receive stronger protections from the reach of the death tax to help them more easily pass on their businesses to future generations-- eliminating a double taxation. Businesses small and large will benefit from a range of tax breaks, including lower tax rates, expanded opportunities to expense the purchase of capital assets, a new 20-percent deduction for many unincorporated businesses, and international tax reforms to give the U.S.-headquartered global companies a strong competitive footing in the global marketplace. These are changes you can take to the bank. Now it is time for us to act. It is time for us to modernize our outdated Tax Code so our Nation can remain competitive in the 21st century economy. The code, as it now stands, hurts American workers and hampers economic growth. Along with reforms to the code, this bill will also promote economic growth. For too long, some have accepted the presumption of a U.S. economy that will not grow as strongly as it has in the past. As a supporter of this bill, I reject that false narrative. Better tax policy will boost the value of everything we produce, and this will mean more revenue for the Federal Government. I am tired of the accusations that Republican budget hawks--and that definitely includes me--are willing to throw in the towel and accept a $1.5 trillion deficit over the next 10 years. I am still a deficit hawk. Here is why. Claims to the contrary that this bill will go unpaid for are based on an incomplete analysis of the tax bill. We have a Congressional Budget Office tasked with impartially evaluating any legislation we do. Unfortunately, its evaluations are tied to static scoring. That means it is evaluated without considering the underlying economic effects of these changes. Let me repeat that. The Congressional Budget Office is tied to static scoring. That means it is evaluated without considering the underlying economic effects of these changes. The problem really isn't how much revenue we will have under the new bill. I believe it will increase revenue as the tax cut did in the 1980s. The problem is spending. We never make budget cuts. In Washington, a cut in the budget brings screams if an agency or program doesn't get as much as it requested, even if it gets more than it ever had before. That is not a budget cut, but that is how it works in Washington. If we continue this way, we will not ever get our spending in line. For years, I have tried to institute the Penny Plan, where we just cut one penny in real cuts from where we have been. It gets lip service but not votes. It is a lot easier to give away money than it is to take away money, even pennies. So we need a new approach. We need to grow the economy. We need businesses to do well so more tax money will come in. We need individuals to make more so more tax money will come in. That has been done before with tax cuts. Unfortunately, when the tax cuts performed to provide more revenue, we spent twice what we brought in. So here is what I have done as Budget chairman. A good economy brings in more tax money. Our economy has been limping along. Last year, it grew at a mere 1.6 percent GDP--which is private sector growth, not government growth. The norm for the United States is 3.2 percent private sector growth--not like we saw during the past 8 years when this growth remained below 3 percent. In fact, since this President got elected, the growth has been 3.2 percent already. In the fourth quarter of 2017, we may almost hit 4 percent. There is a lot of hope in America. Every tenth-of-a-percent increase in GDP brings in $273 billion in taxes over 10 years. If we could raise that anemic 1.9 percent to a mere 2.4 percent GDP, we can recover the deficit effect of the tax cuts. If we can bring up the productivity in the private sector--the GDP--to its norm of 3.2 percent, we will pay down significant debt over the 10-year window. The Council of Economic Advisers and some 130 economists have agreed with me. They say the balancing point of 2.4 percent is way too low, and 3.2 percent GDP is much more reasonable. Some even predict 4 percent growth to our economy. That is how you can be a deficit hawk and cut taxes. You just have to bet America can do better. Actually, we are just betting that we can be as good as we used to be. Our American spirit should say: ``We can do a lot better than that.'' The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will help our economy expand. It will provide tax relief to hard-working Americans and make changes to our Tax Code that businesses large and small need to boost the economy and create jobs. Ultimately, we know increased revenues alone are not going to solve our long-term budget and debt problems because Washington's real problem isn't revenue; Washington has a spending problem. I urge my colleagues today to finish the task before us. Let's pass this bill to make critical and long overdue changes to our Tax Code that will jump-start our economy. Our country needs it, hard-working American families need it, and they deserve to have the opportunity to make more choices about how their hard-earned money should be used. In closing, I again remind my colleagues of the words of President Reagan: Let's not let this magnificent moment slip away. Tax relief is in sight. Let's make it a reality. . . . We can do it. And if you help, we will do it this year. Thank you, Mr. President. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon. Mr. WYDEN. Thank you, Mr. President. Mr. President and colleagues, today the Republican Party officially turns its back on America's middle class. Our constituents believe Congress must require multinational corporations to pay their fair share, ensure that the middle class has the chance to truly get ahead, and protect Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security. Instead, Republicans are doling out new giveaways to the multinational corporations, raising taxes on the middle class after a brief sugar high, and taking away the Medicare and Social Security guarantees for the future. It takes hard work to muscle a tax plan this unpopular and destructive [[Page S8090]] through the Congress. Writing it is the easy part, especially when you are just checking off the far-right tax policy wish list. Normally, the hard part is sticking to your baseless talking points, ignoring the public outcry, and turning a blind eye to the loads of evidence that your plan is designed to fail. This process has certainly been as far from normal as it can get. The bill comes at an enormous cost and represents a huge missed opportunity. For some perspective, the $1.5 trillion Republicans plan to borrow for their tax bill would fund the Children's Health Insurance Program for 915 years--915 years of a lifeline for families who are walking on an economic tightrope with CHIP. That is what you could get for the $1.5 trillion Republicans are borrowing to pay for their tax bill. Spent on infrastructure, it would build towering, new monuments in the tradition of the Hoover Dam, the Golden Gate Bridge, and the Interstate Highway System. Aimed permanently at helping the middle class, it would give long-struggling Americans a meaningful chance to get ahead. But this isn't real tax reform or a serious solution to the major policy challenges of our time; this is a stimulus plan for shareholder goodies and executive compensation. Today, Republicans are ignoring decades of evidence that trickle-down economics is a fantasy. Republicans have cut taxes bit by bit for multinational corporations and high-flyers, but we have seen wages stay flat. The benefits of those previous tax cuts never trickle down. In this debate, Republicans seized on a talking point about workers getting a $4,000 average raise if the bill becomes law, but that figure is based on a made-up, revenue-neutral plan that was never on paper. It is fake math, plain and simple. I want to issue a warning to the public today. Passing this bill guarantees years and years of instability in our Tax Code and painful, drawn-out battles over tax policy here in the Congress. Because of the pure partisanship and the recklessness of the process that went into drafting this legislation, the bill is already full of mistakes that are going to have drastic, unintended consequences. Down on K Street, they are already working overtime to exploit new special interest loopholes. The giant passthrough tax loophole, which has been widely covered in the business pages, is just the beginning. There are going to be big new incentives for multinational corporations to ship jobs overseas, and with that, more factory towns and mill towns are going to go dark. Fewer Americans will have the kinds of reliable manufacturing jobs that support a family. There are going to be extraordinary new pressures on State and local finances, and that is going to hamper their ability to build new roads and bridges and schools. There are going to be new and annual fights over the stop-and- go tax policies. Around here, they are called tax extenders. And what they do is ensure a lack of the predictability and certainty we need for innovation and growth. All the evidence says that many of the policies in this bill are going to be a nightmare to administer. This means that with this bill, tax cheats get a holiday gift and have the opportunity to create new rip-offs. What this means for the typical family who just wants to file and get a refund on time is that there are going to be more hassles because the government is going to have to devote more time to trying to catch the cheats. The defining economic challenge of our time is guaranteeing that the middle class and those who strive to be middle class have a chance to get ahead. Our country is home to the world's most powerful economic engine, and it generates levels of prosperity that have never been seen before, but working families and the middle class have been on the outside of the winner's circle for generations. The Republican plan isn't an answer to that challenge. In fact, it almost certainly makes the problem worse. At a time when the middle class needs fundamental, permanent reforms to give them a chance to get ahead, the best--the best the Republican plan offers is a sugar high. The fact is, it will not be long before the sugar high wears off and tens of millions of hard-working Americans will find themselves paying higher taxes--higher taxes--as a result of this bill. Corporations, on the other hand, reap the benefits of permanent tax breaks and a loophole-ridden system that, in my view, just begs to be gamed. The trail of broken promises that Republicans have left behind in this process is long and unforgettable. The President said his tax bill would not benefit his family or people like him. That is untrue. The Treasury Secretary said there would be no tax cut for the upper class. He was happy to have that called the Mnuchin rule. That is untrue. Republicans in Congress said the principal feature, the main feature of their plan, would center on a middle-class tax cut. That is untrue. Republicans said their bill would make the system dramatically simpler. That is untrue. Republicans said their bill would allow families to file their taxes on a postcard. That is untrue. Republicans said their plan would pay for itself. That, too, is untrue. Even many of the promises Republican leaders made to their own colleagues have been broken, but there is one that they are not trying to hide. The deficit hawks have flown back to town, and they are already stirring up a battle over entitlement reform, and they are going to look at a variety of health programs and programs that are a lifeline to millions of Americans. Our people are not thrown off by the Washington lingo. They know that when Republicans say they are coming after entitlement reform, they have the knives out for Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security, anti- hunger programs, education funding, and more. Our distinguished colleague from Wyoming, Chairman Enzi, was talking about how dynamic scoring would take care of things and that it was just off base to be concerned about these deficits because dynamic scoring would make everything turn out fine. The reality is that all of the independent analyses have shown that this bill comes up way short in terms of projected revenue. The Tax Foundation, for example--which is not exactly a leftwing operation--says the Republicans were hundreds of billions of dollars short. What the Joint Committee on Taxation said is that the Republican plan was $1 trillion short. Let's put it in context. Remember that Steve Mnuchin said that this plan would not only pay for itself but that it would leave $1 trillion left over. Yet both the Tax Foundation and the Joint Committee on Taxation said that this bill comes light years away from paying for itself. I say to my colleagues, it didn't have to be this way. I see the distinguished chairman of the Finance Committee on the floor. As I have indicated, Democrats believe that the Tax Code is a rotting mess and has to be fixed. For years, there has been bipartisan interest in getting tax reform done right. Seventeen Democratic Senators came together, even in a last-ditch effort to try to bring some bipartisanship into the process, and laid out ideas for some common ground. I commend that group, led by our colleague from West Virginia, Senator Manchin, and our colleague from Virginia, Senator Kaine. I have written two comprehensive, bipartisan tax reform bills, first with Senator Judd Gregg and then with a member of the President's Cabinet, Dan Coats. The majority leader always likes to talk about how nobody on this side is interested in bipartisanship. When Democrats laid out their principles, the first thing we said was how important it ought to be that we focus on bipartisanship. That letter was shared with the Republican leadership. Then you have the group of moderates. Then you have the actual bills that were written. So this idea advanced by the Republican leadership that there was no interest in bipartisanship does not resemble reality. By the way, a lot of Senators here know that we have a pretty current example--the 2015 tax bill. It is kind of a model of what you can do. Both sides had good ideas. Bipartisanship is not about taking each other's dumb ideas; anybody can do that. But in the 2015 bill, my colleagues on this side said that the earned-income tax credit ought to be expanded, and we wanted the child tax credit and the American opportunity tax credit. The Republicans, led by my distinguished colleague, Senator Hatch, had [[Page S8091]] some pretty good ideas too. They wanted to make the research and development credit permanent and the expensing provisions, which are so important for farmers and rural communities, and they had some ideas on business incentives. So we said: We are going to find some common ground here. We are going to take good ideas from both sides. The tragedy of this bill is that Republicans wouldn't build on the good work of the 2015 tax legislation, where good ideas were accepted from both sides. This time around, there was zero outreach from Republicans on this issue. There was not one moment when Republicans actually shared even a piece of paper or a document about ideas that might bring both sides together. In fact, we can go all the way back to November 2016. They were still putting the voting machines back into storage when the first whispers began about tax reform happening through a completely partisan process. Now, in coffee shops across America, most folks are not talking about budget reconciliation. Budget reconciliation is Washington lingo for saying: We aren't going to do this right; we are just going to make it our way, partisan, with no effort to try to bring people together. And after those whispers in November of 2016, within days, Chairman Enzi, the chairman of the Budget Committee, and my good friend, Senator Hatch, the chairman of the Finance Committee, and everybody is on board. Then, the majority leader, in December of 2016, made it official: We weren't going to build on the history of successful tax reform, which required bringing both sides together; the majority leader said that we are going with reconciliation and partisanship. Reconciliation is a full-on rejection of the history of successful tax reform, and it is a full-on rejection of bipartisanship. It is the majority saying to the minority, as was the case: We just don't want your ideas because we don't need your votes. When you look at the way this debate played out, it is obvious that has been exactly the approach my Republican colleagues have taken. The administration's first tax outline, which was shorter than your typical drugstore receipt, didn't contain an ounce of Democratic input. Then, what we had with the Republicans were the closed-door meetings of what they called the Big 6, a Republican-only group who turned their outline into a framework for a bill. The framework they released, which was roughly the same size as your typical drugstore receipt, still reflected no Democratic ideas. Everybody knew that if we did it this kind of way, the public was going to catch on. They were going to see this as a con job and they were going to catch on that this is going to give the middle class the shaft, so they decided that they just have to move at the speed of light. That is what the House did. Here in the Senate, the Republicans dropped their plan late at night, just before the Veterans Day weekend, and the Finance Committee was supposed to start the process of voting on it a few days later. There was a whole new bill introduced in the middle of our markup that turned the tax bill into a healthcare bill--a healthcare bill-- with a fresh attack on the Affordable Care Act. There was another set of last-second changes introduced literally minutes before the final committee votes happened. The bill makes $10 trillion in tax policy changes, and there was never a single hearing on the specifics of the legislation. Let me just repeat that. I want the public to know that. There was never a single hearing--not one--on the specifics of this legislation. We are going to hear on all points a push by my colleagues on the other side to say that there were 70 hearings. Well, sure, there were people who would come in from time to time and talk about issues. There wasn't one hearing--not one--on the specifics of the legislation. On the Senate floor, the Republicans played hide the ball for days until they dropped the final version of their bill late at night on a Friday. Two full days of debate had already passed, and the final bill was a mystery. I stood here hour after hour asking where the bill was--an economy- transforming bill, a tax hike on tens of millions of middle-class Americans. Yet Republicans kept it hidden until the very last second. When it was revealed to the public, we saw my colleague, Senator Durbin from Illinois, holding it up with illegible notes scrawled in margins. It wasn't anywhere near enough time for any Member of this body to read the bill and grasp each of its provisions. Even the conference committee was an exercise in reckless partisanship. News reports said that Republicans had agreed to a final bill, but they were empty-handed at the only official conference meeting. So what was going on at this so-called conference meeting? This was, I guess, a reality show version of a conference committee. The conferees were supposed to ask questions about out-of-date plans from the other body, in the Senate, when the actual, final bill was still locked behind closed doors. The chairman didn't allow any motions or any amendments. Just like every other step in the process, this was a sham debate, and now the bill is a few hours away from passage. I close with this: This bill has the power to reshape the American economy in far-reaching and unforeseen ways. It has the power to send families into economic hardship. It has the power to threaten this country's ability to uphold the special promises of Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security. And this bill was written in the shadows, written in the dark, with billions and billions of dollars' worth of changes tumbling out at the last second, the result of special interest influence and hushed conversations in back rooms. There were no public hearings on the specifics of this legislation, and people wonder why the American people oppose it. Republicans have chosen to ignore them. They have chosen to ignore them. What is happening is un-Democratic. It is wrong. I am here to say that this vote will not be forgotten. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Strange). The Senator from Utah. Mr. HATCH. Mr. President, the Senate will soon vote on the conference report for H.R. 1, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. I have waited a long time to give this final statement in support of tax reform legislation. (Disturbance in the Visitors' Galleries.) The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sergeant at Arms will restore order in the Gallery. The Senator will suspend. Mr. HATCH. Mr. President, this fellow has a very interesting way of trying to get his point of view across. It shouldn't be done here in this august body. Let me just start again. The Senate will soon vote on the conference report for H.R. 1, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. I have waited a long time to be able to give this final statement in support of tax reform legislation. I have been in the Senate for a little while. I have been party to a number of major legislative achievements, like the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act, the creation of the CHIP program, the Child Health Insurance Program, and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, to name just a few. These are landmark bills, and I have had a lot to do with them. The legislation before us is as important and as far-reaching as anything I have been privileged to work on. It is beyond gratifying to see the Senate reach this point, and I look forward to finally seeing real tax legislation signed into law. I apologize for this type of intemperate action and mouthing off inside of this august Chamber. People feel very deeply about these things on both sides of the issues. Passage of this important bill will be historic. It is the combination of years of work by people in both parties, in both Chambers, and on both sides of Pennsylvania Avenue. Many of us in this body have been waiting for years for this opportunity, and millions of Americans outside of this body have been waiting even longer. It is no secret that our Tax Code is broken. Members of both parties have acknowledged this. If you walked across the country and asked Americans of all backgrounds and ideologies, you wouldn't find many who would be willing to defend the status quo. I don't think you would find anybody. [[Page S8092]] There is one apt phrase my good friend Senator Wyden uses to describe our Tax Code. He calls it ``a dying carcass.'' Indeed, our Tax Code is dying and rotting. It has hampered job creation, wage growth, investment in the United States, and it has chased American companies to foreign shores. I don't know how it could be more harmful than it has been. It has also given foreign companies a leg up on U.S. businesses in the global marketplace, leading to a record number of foreign takeovers and inversions. The bill before us will address these problems and help us turn the ship around. Our legislation will reduce the corporate tax rate to 21 percent-- something that is long overdue--the lowest level in the modern history of the United States, placing our country slightly below the average of industrialized countries. These changes will once again give American companies a competitive edge and bring more businesses back home instead of losing them the way we have been. Hundreds of economists have said that our bill will boost economic growth, and numerous companies have indicated that once our bill becomes law, they will invest heavily in expansion and job creation right here in the United States of America. In addition, as the Joint Committee on Taxation has made clear, reducing the corporate tax rate has distributional effects that go beyond the companies themselves, their high-ranking officers, or even their richest shareholders. In fact, JCT--the Joint Committee on Taxation--estimates that workers bear 25 percent of the corporate tax rate and other economists have found that this number can reach as high as 75 percent. This means that no matter how you slice it, Americans will see their wages go up when corporate tax rates go down. Further, over the last few decades, we have seen a massive expansion of pension and retirement assets, much of which are invested in corporate stocks. While many of my colleagues like to decry any business from merely earning a profit, the truth is that the continued rise in corporate profits has significantly expanded the wealth of middle-class workers and taxpayers who have continually set aside funds for the future. A representative from the Tax Policy Center testified before the Finance Committee in the spring of last year. At that hearing he stated that 37 percent of corporate stock ownership was held in retirement plan accounts--37 percent. That was the largest share of overall stock ownership, and that statistic syncs up with the distribution tables put out by the nonpartisan Joint Committee on Taxation. For all of these reasons, lowering the corporate tax rate has been a bipartisan goal for over a decade now. I have said it before: Presidents Clinton and Obama, Senators Wyden and Schumer, and most of the other Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee have at some point in the recent past endorsed a significant reduction in the U.S. corporate tax rate. Our bill will achieve this bipartisan goal and place our country well within the mainstream among our international competitors. This is a good thing--not just for businesses and rich stockholders but for working, middle-class families as well. Let's be clear. This bill's chief focus is about helping the middle class. I know there is a tendency among some in this Chamber to act and speak as though all money in this country inherently belongs to the government. I won't speak for everyone, but those of us who have worked on this bill tend to think differently. Aside from business reforms that will grow our economy, increase wages, and create jobs, our bill will lower individual tax rates across the board, allowing hard-working Americans to keep more of their money. In our bill, we also nearly double the standard deduction for individuals and married couples. This feature will significantly reduce the burden of tax filing for millions of middle-class families and decrease even further the overall tax liability of millions more. For the first time in more than 30 years, nearly every American will get more money back by just filing out an EZ form. This, without a doubt, fulfills our goal of simplifying the Tax Code. For individuals who are concerned about being able to itemize--again, we believe the number of people with this concern will decrease dramatically under our bill--we retain a number of key provisions that benefit many in the middle class. For example, this historic legislation will allow individuals and families to continue to claim deductions for State and local taxes, up to $10,000 a year. It will keep in place, with relatively minor adjustments, the deduction for mortgage interest. And Americans who itemize and want to deduct their charitable deductions will be free to do so. This has made America great, and it has helped us at the same time to be more charitable. We are also expanding the child tax credit with this bill, doubling it from $1,000 to $2,000 per child and making the credit far more refundable than ever before. The adoption credit will stay in place. The deduction for medical expenses will still be available. Credits and assistance for students and their families will be untouched. We have made all of these changes and, when necessary, preserved current law, with an eye toward helping the middle class. I know a number of my colleagues like to argue that this bill will have different results. Let's look at the numbers. Under this bill, a typical family of four, earning the median family income of $73,000, will see their taxes go down by more than half-- about 58 percent. That number means something more than just a simple percentage; it means that an average American family will be able to keep $2,058 more of their own earnings next year. That is a mortgage payment, a downpayment for a car, or several months' worth of groceries. What about a single parent? Under our plan, a single parent with one child, making $41,000, will see their taxes slashed by nearly 73 percent. That is almost a three-quarter reduction in tax liability. That means a savings of more than $1,300 over the course of a year. That could be a month of daycare expenses, multiple car payments, or a family vacation. These are things that matter to American families, and they well should. But our friends on the other side have been so caught up in partisan politics that they decided to ignore the Americans who will benefit from this legislation. I think it started with the election of President Trump and the retention of Senate control by Republicans. Their base protested, occupied, and disrupted the transfer of power from President Obama to President Trump. Here on the Hill, the ``resistance'' was in full effect right off the bat, with a coordinated effort to stall nominations in committee, which included unprecedented boycotts and refusals to meet with nominees. It has only gone downhill from there. While we heard words from our friends on the other side about participating in tax reform, their actions showed otherwise. I don't know how they can stand here and make some of the arguments they do. Unprecedented process demands were made. Resistance was the plan, and that plan was carried out. Now we hear about massive tax cuts for the very rich and huge breaks for corporations, but these claims fall apart when you look at the facts. Again, this isn't unchartered territory for my friends on the other side. Accusing Republicans of hating the poor and loving the rich is one of their go-to moves. I have seen it for over 40 years. Every time you turn around, there is one of their go-to moves, and it has nothing to do with reality. I do think they are getting more desperate and vicious in their attacks because they regret their own decisions to sit out of this endeavor. That is precisely how it happened. Our colleagues were apparently so preoccupied with denying President Trump and congressional Republicans any success, they chose not to engage and instead to sit in the peanut gallery throwing out baseless attacks. As I have said literally dozens of times over the past few years, I wish the Democrats had joined us in this process, put aside their ultimatums and preconditions, and helped to advance policies that they have claimed to support for years now. But we are where we are, and while the bill before us includes a number of ideas and proposals Democrats have supported, we are prepared to pass it without their [[Page S8093]] votes, if that is what it takes. There have been some Democrats who have worked with us, but they have been few and far between. Once again, this is a historic bill. I am proud of the work we have done in the Finance Committee, here on the floor, and in conference to get us to this point. I again invite our friends on the other side to also support the bill. I am proud of our colleagues who have put in so much effort to get us here. I am proud of the staff on Capitol Hill who have labored day and night to assist in this endeavor. As I said, this legislation has been years in the making. I urge all of my colleagues to support the conference report and help us send it to the President's desk. You will not regret it. Those who support this will not regret it. I think we ought to get rid of this hatred for Donald Trump that currently exists in this country and in this body. I think we should give the man a chance. He hasn't even been President for a year yet. Give him a chance. Even though he hasn't been President for a year yet, we have had some amazing changes in this country for the better, and I think we could have many more. What really interests me is that Donald Trump, 6 or 7 years ago, was working with Democrats as well as Republicans. He offered to work with the Democrats on these matters, and they have not taken up the offer. Instead, it is as though they are still bitter because he beat their candidate for President. I would like to have us get over that type of petty politics and see what we can do to work together. Heaven knows, on the Finance Committee, I believe we have good Democrats on that committee, as well as good Republicans, and I think we can work together. I have to say, I don't think we have as well as we should, but I think we can, and I am hopeful that we will. This is an important bill. It is a bill that really does need to pass. It is a bill that will help this country. It is a bill that will help the middle class. In fact, it is going to help everybody, but it will certainly help the middle class most of all. I hope our colleagues put aside their petty politics on both sides and come together to support this bill, which literally can help save this country an awful lot of pain over the next number of years and give the government the kinds of resources that it needs to be able to do what the Federal Government needs to do for its people. I think we can. People in this body know that I have spent years here. I am the most senior Republican. I have been here longer than any other Republican that I know of, and I have the legislative record to back it up--a record that has included working with Democrats almost every step of the way. I am offering to make sure we work together, but I haven't seen it on the other side. Can they get over the bitterness they have? We heard this loudmouth in the Gallery who has no good sense and a total lack of etiquette and a total lack of respect for this government and this Senate. If I were on his side, I would be humiliated because he was just a big loudmouth who didn't mean a doggone thing. Unfortunately, I think there are more people like that who are so bitter that they will raise these types of issues without really trying to work together. I am one who has a reputation for working together. I am chairman of the Finance Committee. I have enjoyed my work with the distinguished Democratic leader on the Finance Committee, Senator Wyden. I care for him. I care for the other Democrats on the committee, as well as all of our Republicans. We work pretty well together. It is getting harder and harder to work together when all we see are screaming and shouting because they can't get their way because they are no longer in the majority. I hope they get over that, and I hope they start working with us. If they will, we can do an awful lot of good things for this country, and we can bring people together across this whole country-- people who right now are divided because they don't know what to do. They see us screaming and shouting around here and a total lack of willingness to get together. I would like to change it. I am open to changing it. This bill that we have is a very, very important bill, and we need to pass it. My friends on the other side need to realize that, and I hope we will get some of them to vote for it. They know it is right. Deep down, they know it is right. It might not be everything they like themselves. It is not everything I myself would like. But it is a doggone good bill, and it is something that could really help this country pull out of the mess that it is in. Mr. President, I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Johnson). The Senator from Georgia. Mr. ISAKSON. Mr. President, am I next? I see the distinguished Senator from Washington on the floor. I ask unanimous consent that after I speak, she be recognized to speak. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. ISAKSON. Mr. President, I would like to take a moment to commend Senator Orrin Hatch. I listened to the debate over this bill not just today but for the better part of 3 years I have been a member of the Finance Committee. I have never heard a more dignified, deliberate, intelligent delivery on any subject than we all just heard from Orrin Hatch on the tax bill. Regardless of your politics, regardless of where you are from, it is good to know that America has dignified statesmen like Orrin Hatch to take the tougher issues, simplify them, get people to join hands, work together, and pass what is right for the American people. I am glad the American people are going to get to see that over the next couple of days. I publicly want to thank Senator Hatch for all he has done and all I know he has done in Washington during the last 3 years. In the 3 years on this committee, I have seen us--Republican and Democratic committee and subcommittee alike--work on every facet of the Tax Code to try to simplify changes down to doable amounts and doable jobs. I have seen everybody have input. I have seen everybody work together. Sure, we have had differences. Senator Hatch has always kept the mainstream there, kept his hand on the tiller, and saw to it that we never lost sight of doing what we need to do, which is to reform our Tax Code. I want to commend Senator Hatch and Senator Enzi, as well, for the work they have done on the Budget Committee to get us to this point and the unsung heroes that all of us know about, our staffs, whom we cannot do without. Jay Khosla and Mark Prater on the Finance Committee have been outstanding and have made this thing work, and I commend them for their work. On my staff, I could not have done what I have done without Amanda Maddox, Trey Kilpatrick, Monica McGuire, and Jay Sulzmann, who have all worked hard to see to it that we made the right decisions for the right reasons for the people of Georgia. I am very proud to be a part of this Senate today and of what is going to prove to be a historic day in the future. There are a lot of naysayers saying that this is not going to work. There are a lot of people who have come up to me today and have asked questions that have bad connotations to them. Yet I want, for just a minute, to talk about what I think this tax bill really means for the American people--for the folks who voted for me to represent them--and for what is going to happen in the years ahead. I had a reporter stop me today while I was coming up to the floor. He asked: Senator Isakson, where are you going to find the $1.478 trillion that you all are costing us by passing this tax cut? I said: First of all, we have not lost the money. Second of all, that is a static score. Third of all, I will be willing to bet you that we will take in a lot more money because of our having a dynamic economy than we will ever lose with a single tax cut. There are some people whose thought process is one of tunnel vision. They can't see outside the blinders. They don't understand that tax policy drives economic decisions. There are companies that in the last few years had been thinking about leaving America because of our tax rate that are now deciding to stay because of the new change. Don't underestimate the power of the territorial tax change that this makes for American business. A lot of CEOs who go to their annual stockholder meetings for C corporations in America have to go with a [[Page S8094]] game plan to raise the return on their stocks in order to have people invest in their companies. Unfortunately, the easiest way to raise the return on their stock today would be for a domestic American company to move their headquarters out of the United States to Ireland or to some other place that had a lower tax rate. If you put more money on the table for the stockholders, it will be bad for the country, bad for your company, and bad for the American people as jobs leave America. Now that we have a territorial system that we are going to, there is an incentive to stay in America if you are located there and to come to America if you are not. We are not going to have any more fast food companies that are buying doughnut makers in Canada and then moving their headquarters to Canada to get a lower tax rate. We are going to have a lot of new companies that will think about becoming doughnut makers and will do it right here in the United States because the new tax system we will have will be fair and equitable for economic development and building growth. On the personal side, you really cannot argue with doubling the standard deduction. You can't argue with doubling of the child tax credit. You can't argue with simplifying the tax process itself and the filing of taxes. You can't argue with lowering rates--having seven different rate categories that are all lowered. You can't really argue with all of that because you know that is better for the American people and their pocketbooks in the short run, but in the long run, it will be better for them and their children and their grandchildren in terms of employment. I have eight grandchildren. My oldest just graduated from college, and the youngest is 9. In the years ahead--and I hope that I will get to see a lot of them--they are going to get jobs, and they are going to work. They are going to raise their families. What we have done today is going to make it easier for them to find employment for their kids, opportunity to develop businesses, and peace of mind because they will live in a country that will be vibrant and true. For those who want to ask what we are going to do about the money that we are giving up, I don't deal with static scoring; I deal with dynamic scoring. When I ran a company for 25 years, I made investments where I knew I had a place to grow. I made business decisions where there was positive growth ahead if I made the right decision. This Tax Code--this change in the Tax Code, this opportunity that we have--does all of those things. Do I know exactly what is going to happen? No, but I am willing to bet--and I have bet my vote already in committee and will later on tonight on the floor of the Senate--on the American people and the American worker and the American entrepreneur. I will bet on their taking advantage of a tax code that is fair to them and that gives them a chance to expand their personal opportunities. I will bet on them that they are willing to move forward with a better tax code for all of the country. I will make my bet on them that they will want to see to it that their children and their grandchildren will have the opportunities that they have had as well. I thank Chairman Hatch for what he has done in the last 3 years to make this opportunity come about. I thank the distinguished Senator from Washington and the Senator from Alabama, whom, unfortunately, we are losing in the next few weeks, for what they have put in this legislation. I thank them for what they have done in their looking out for their people. Did we make any mistakes? Maybe, but you never make mistakes when you are trying to do the right thing. You never make mistakes when you are trying to do a good thing. You never make mistakes when you take a risk because when you take a risk, at the end of that rainbow is a reward. When you take a risk in lowering taxes, the greater reward is more jobs, more opportunity, and a better America for our children and our grandchildren. I thank Senator Hatch for his work and for all that he has done to make America a better country and, in particular, for giving us the chance today to make our tax system fairer for all of the American people. May God bless him. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Washington. Ms. CANTWELL. Mr. President, I come to the floor to speak about this legislation. At the outset, I thank my colleague from Georgia and the Senator from Utah for their work on the affordable housing tax credit. The Senator from Utah said: Let's work together. I stand ready to work with him on affordable housing in the future, and, hopefully, with the Senator from Georgia, we can make progress on what is a crisis in America. I come to speak in opposition to the legislation before us today, the tax reconciliation bill. One of the requirements of the legislation that I most ardently oppose is including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for oil and gas development. Basically, this bill pays for the tax cuts for corporations and millionaires by raising taxes on the middle class, undermining healthcare, and requiring oil drilling in one of our Nation's most iconic national wildlife refuges. Everyone should understand that a vote for this reconciliation bill is a vote that will go to the biological heart of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and require drilling. I believe that opening up the Arctic Refuge to oil drilling is being done as a supposed revenue raiser to offset the soaring costs of this tax bill for corporations and the wealthy, but the process that it went through is a sham. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that drilling for oil in the Arctic Refuge will raise less than $1 billion over 10 years. This doesn't even meet the $1 billion reconciliation instruction, and it certainly doesn't represent a serious offset to the huge deficits in the bill. To put this in perspective, less than seven one-hundredths of 1 percent of the $1.5 trillion increase in the national debt will be from this policy in this legislation. Drilling in the Arctic really has nothing to do with serious budgetary policy, but it has everything to do with evading regular order to pass something that could never pass in the regular order of the legislative process. In addition to drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, this bill would sell 7 million barrels of oil from our Nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserve. A portion of that sale is simply to meet the reconciliation instructions--that is to say, to make this bill work. Yet the sale of oil from our petroleum reserve would also provide a $300 million windfall to four States--Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama. So this bill is selling off oil in order to pay for oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. I do not believe that that makes sense. Under this sham process, the bill will turn one of our Nation's wildest and most pristine areas into an oil field. The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is the largest refuge in our Nation and is one of the crown jewels for us in the United States for wildlife refuges. I believe it is a U.S. Serengeti. We received a letter from Jane Goodall, who basically said: Around the globe so many indigenous people have been harmed in the name of ``progress''--let us not add one more tragedy to the list. We have other sources of energy. I ask unanimous consent that the entire letter we received from the Jane Goodall Institute be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: The Jane Goodall Institute, Vienna, VA, November 14, 2017. Dear United States Senator: It seems that each day brings ever more dire news about what we humans are doing to harm our planet, the animals that share it with us and, by doing so, harming ourselves also. You have an important opportunity to make a difference both now, and for future generations, by voting to oppose oil development in one of the world's most spectacular wilderness areas--the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. This Refuge is a truly wonderful place--nearly 20 million acres of pristine and ecologically significant habitat. There is compelling scientific evidence as to why it is truly important to protect this place. For one thing, it provides key breeding habitat for the millions-upon-millions of birds that migrate there from six of our planet's seven continents. It is also a calving ground for the 200,000-strong Porcupine caribou herd. And it is one of the most important denning habitats on earth for polar bears. Moreover it plays a significant role in helping to protect us from the onslaught of climate change. [[Page S8095]] But the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is more than that. Its very wildness speaks to our deeply rooted spiritual connection to nature, a necessary element of the human psyche. The Gwich'in people understand this and call the area ``The Sacred Place Where Life Begins''. If we violate the Arctic Refuge by extracting the oil beneath the land, this will have devastating impact for the Gwich'in people for they depend upon the caribou herds to sustain their traditional way of life. Around the globe so many indigenous people have been harmed in the name of `progress'--let us not add one more tragedy to the list. We have other sources of energy. And so I beg you: Please use your voice and your vote as a U.S. Senator to protect the Gwich'in people and the American treasure that is the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. America has helped lead the world in the conservation of wildlife and your voice has been so meaningful in this regard, your example so powerful. Please take this opportunity to demonstrate your commitment to the natural world and to future generations and stand with me to protect the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Please vote against oil development in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Sincerely, Jane Goodall, DBE, PhD, Founder--the Jane Goodall Institute, & UN Messenger of Peace. Ms. CANTWELL. Mr. President, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which manages the refuge, describes it as ``the only conservation system unit that protects, in an undisturbed condition, a complete spectrum of the Arctic ecosystems in North America.'' It is home to an incredible diversity of wildlife--47 different species of mammals, including polar bears, grizzly bears, wolves, Dall sheep, moose, musk ox, and caribou. The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge also provides important habitat for over 40 species of fish and more than 200 species of migratory birds. So why would we want to destroy this refuge? It was first established by the Eisenhower administration. Congress later protected this amazing Arctic area and its ecosystem in order to protect the wildlife and protect the habitat because of its incredible diversity. The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is really known as the ``last great wilderness'' in our country, one of the great, last wild places, but this legislation turns that on its head. It would make oil and gas development one of the statutory purposes of the Wildlife Refuge, and under this legislation, this Refuge would become the only Refuge where oil and gas development is required by law. It opens up the entire 1.5 million-acre coastal plain for oil and gas exploration and requires the leasing of at least 800,000 acres. It requires the leasing of areas with the highest oil and gas potential, no matter the consequences for the wildlife or the environment. The bill requires that the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge be managed as a petroleum reserve, which is unprecedented, and it undercuts managing the Refuge for wildlife. The bill includes no clear requirements to comply with environmental laws or to protect wildlife. Its sponsors, however, say that they are not preempting environmental laws and that, in fact, laws like the National Environmental Policy Act will ``fully apply.'' Yet this bill undercuts those assurances of compliance with environmental laws by adding oil development as a purpose of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Adding oil development as a purpose is contrary to the purpose of a wildlife refuge. The purpose of a wildlife refuge is to protect wildlife and to make sure that the managers of wildlife do so in a sound fashion. At every other wildlife refuge in the country, development within the refuge is only permitted to the extent that it is compatible with protecting wildlife. This bill tries to waive one of the most important management protections that applies to every other national wildlife refuge--that development must be compatible with protecting wildlife. They have to do this because they know that oil and gas development in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is not compatible. It is just the opposite. It is important to note also that this bill does not provide any energy security. There is no prohibition in the bill against exporting oil from the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, and in all likelihood, much of the oil will be exported. In addition to opening up the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to development, the bill also requires the sale of 7 million barrels of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to give $300 million, as I mentioned earlier, to several States--Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama. So at the same time as we are being told that we must ruin a national wildlife refuge because we need the oil, we are selling oil out of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. It does not make sense for America. It just doesn't add up. The impact of oil and gas exploration in the wildlife area and the danger to our wildlife cannot be overstated. The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge's coastal plain and nearby waters are designated as critical habitat for polar bears, which are listed as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act. Female polar bears head to the Arctic Refuge's coastal plain so that they can create snow dens, where they give birth to their young. The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge has a higher concentration of polar bear denning habitat than any other area on Alaska's North Slope. The refuge is also the summer calving grounds for the porcupine caribou herd. This herd's range extends into Canada, and we actually have a treaty between both of our countries to protect this herd. The almost 200,000-member herd has an annual migration of hundreds of miles--and in some cases, thousands of miles--wintering in the south of the Refuge. I think that this herd of caribou is so important because scientists say that it has an entirely different kind of migration pattern than other caribou in Alaska, that it has been adept at dealing with the adaptation that comes along with climate change. Why not, instead of ruining their habitat, study and understand this migration that has been studied since the 1950s? It has been part of our national investment in understanding wildlife. It has been supported by both Democratic and Republican administrations, to understand the science and background of this caribou herd. These caribou are an important food source for many Alaska Natives but in particular the Gwich'in people who live south of the Refuge. Wildlife biologists argue that the risk to the caribou herd and to those who rely on them could be quite significant. So why are we doing this? Why are we doing this? The last few years have been a difficult budget situation in Alaska. Relying on oil for 90 percent of the budget, I agree with many others, is unsustainable. Every dollar the price of oil per barrel drops, reduces the State budget by $30 million, or close to 1 percentage point per dollar. The general revenue fund in Alaska dropped over 80 percent after 2012, and that situation caused Alaska's $4 billion deficit projection last year. Difficult choices had to be made about taxes, savings, spending, and what the State government should do. Thankfully, their economy hasn't collapsed, but in the last big oil-driven recession in the 1980s, Alaska's banks failed, housing prices collapsed, and 15 percent of the population left. Why am I bringing this up? Because the good news is today's Alaska economy is more diverse than it was 30 years ago. I know this because I talk to my colleagues and because we are interacting in a lot of ways in the Pacific Northwest. Alaska is well known for its tourism. Two million visitors to Alaska spend $1,000 per person in the State, supporting a $7.3 billion outdoor industry. My colleagues here may not realize what my colleagues from Alaska and Washington know, and that is that the State of Alaska and Washington have a lot of interdependence. A recent study found that 113,000 jobs in Puget Sound are tied to Alaska's economy, and this number has doubled in the last 30 years. What are those jobs? One-quarter of those are in the seafood industry. Almost 1,000 commercial-vessel owning fishermen who work in Alaska's fisheries are part of the trade between us. The Alaska trade accounts for one in five containerized shipments through the Port of Seattle and the Port of Tacoma. Another 14,000 jobs are tied to passenger transportation to Alaska, including 430,000 cruise ship passengers who come through Puget Sound every year. That is just one way of saying the Washington-Alaska economies are tied [[Page S8096]] together, and as a hub for Arctic commerce, I have worked with my colleagues Senator Murkowski and Senator Sullivan on issues such as new Coast Guard Arctic icebreakers that are so needed for the future. I have supported more funding for demonstration programs for renewable energy and microgrids in an effort to help the local economy. I feel the same way about rural broadband across the Nation, and we want to make sure we are deploying and helping with everything we can to bring more connectivity to Alaska, but I really question how opening the Arctic Wildlife Refuge is a solution to these problems. Even under CBO's aggressive view, if leasing occurs in the Refuge, it will be many years before Alaskans see any significant revenue. So my colleagues should be aware that doubling down on oil by sacrificing one of the great wildlife refuges will not, in my opinion, help close Alaska's budget deficit, and it will not help them diversify for the future. This Arctic Wildlife Refuge is too special, too important. It is one of the crown jewels of our National Wildlife Refuge system. We should be preserving it. We should not be destroying it. We should not be turning it into an oilfield. I am reminded that many people over many decades have fought for this great area of our country, to maintain its environmental stewardship, starting with Olaus Murie, who went there and did great explorations and convinced many people here in this Washington that it was something so special and worth preserving. After decades of his scientific exploration in Alaska, Olaus testified in 1959 in support of creating the Arctic Wildlife Refuge. He said: ``We long for something more, something that has a mental, a spiritual impact on us. This idealism, more than anything else, will set us apart as a nation striving for something worthwhile in the universe.'' So what is setting us apart today? Some very short-term gains. In 100 years, when this economic tax bill will long be forgotten, the question will be whether something important in the universe still exists in the Arctic wildlife area. We didn't create the Arctic Coastal Plain, but I can state this: We cannot recreate it. What we are doing today is taking a step toward destroying it. I urge my colleagues to oppose this reconciliation bill. Do not sacrifice the Arctic Wildlife Refuge to oil development. Don't take one of the great, wild, pristine places on this planet and turn it into an oilfield. We can do better as a nation. I know we can do better as a region, and we can do better with a better Arctic strategy for our Nation's future. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Massachusetts. Mr. MARKEY. Mr. President, thank you, and I thank the great Senator from Washington State for her leadership on this incredibly important issue. If this tax bill weren't terrible enough, it goes after one of the most beautiful places on Earth, the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is nothing more than a Big Oil polar payout. This isn't about drilling oil; it is about drilling for votes. This isn't about crude oil; it is the crudest of politics. We now have 41 cosponsors of my legislation with Senator Bennet to permanently protect the Arctic Refuge by designating it as a wilderness. That is enough to sustain a filibuster, and that is precisely why they are circumventing the normal legislative process by including it as a rider on a tax bill. In reality, drilling turns this pristine wilderness into an industrialized wasteland. The Coastal Plain is the biological heart of the Arctic Refuge, and allowing oil and gas drilling would drive a stake right through the heart of it. We are currently sending nearly 1 million barrels a day of American crude oil overseas, but Republicans and the their oil industry allies are saying we need to allow drilling in the wildest place left in America so we can export even more oil to China and other foreign nations. It is an abomination. It is a disgrace. Drilling in a wilderness area in order to send oil to China--it is a disgrace. If the Republicans persist in passing this monstrosity of a tax bill and pass this Big Oil polar payout, they are the ones who are going to be left out in the cold in 2018. If the Republicans want to see what real wilderness looks like, they don't need to travel to the Arctic Refuge, the wilderness is about to come to them. They are about to be sent deep into the political wilderness if they pass this tax scam legislation. If the Republicans are successful in ramming through the Arctic drilling rider in the dead of night, we will never give up. We will keep fighting because the Arctic Refuge should forever be the home for caribou, not crude; bears, not barrels of oil; sandpipers, not pipelines. We will never stop fighting. They may win tonight in the dark of night, but this fight is not over. This is a crime against the environment which is being committed here tonight. We do not have to sacrifice this wilderness. We are exporting oil out of our country--exporting it. We don't have to go here. Export more oil, and that is where it is going? It is just wrong. Just remember that this is all a part of the so-called Republican reconciliation process. Now that we have the final product, that process is being exposed as the giant con game it truly is. The key phrase in reconciliation is ``con.'' It is a con job. The whole thing is nothing more than a masquerade, a Trojan horse in order to get a tax cut for the upper first percentile. It is a con job. The polling in our country says the American people are not buying it. They are seeing right through it--through all the political noise, all of the incredible distractions, all the red herrings. The American public knows this is a tax break for the wealthiest people in our country and not for the middle class. Republicans are not even trying to hide what they are doing anymore. They are moving ahead with reckless speed to pass this disaster of a bill in the middle of the night, so that is why we will all be back here in a few hours, yet again, voting in the dead of night on a 500-page bill that has no hearings, no amendments, no real debate because that is the only way you can get a tax break for the upper first percentile and the wealthiest corporations in the country while trying to market it as a tax break for the middle class, when they know it is not. They know it, by the way. They know what they are doing. It is the height of irony that we will be here tonight ramming through legislation before the Senator-elect from the State of Alabama can be seated. Just 8 years ago, Republicans called on Democrats to stop progress on the Affordable Care Act until Senator Scott Brown was sworn in. They said at the time: Stop progress. Don't do anything. We need to wait for Scott Brown to show up. Back then, Democrats listened to those calls, but when Doug Jones gets elected, it is just put your foot to the accelerator, move as fast as you can, no hearings, no anything, and Alabama will not be represented with their new Senator out here. Back then, Democrats actually listened to those calls, and today our concerns are completely ignored by the Republicans, all so they can continue playing their con game on the American people. The American people are waking up to the fact that they have been sold a bill of goods. They are seeing that this plan is simply a Trojan horse of giveaways to the wealthy corporations and Republican political donors. What are some of those giveaways? Front and center is the massive cut in tax rates for megacorporations. We know this will not create jobs or trickle down to their employees because we have tried it before. In 2004, we gave a massive tax holiday for huge corporations on the money they held overseas, but the 15 companies that benefited the most from those giveaways cut more than 20,000 jobs and decreased their research spending. Mark Twain said: ``History doesn't repeat itself, but it does tend to rhyme.'' This tends to rhyme. The tax cuts in this bill are even more egregious. Corporate tax cuts flow to CEOs and stockholders. Those stockholders are not all American taxpayers. Foreigners hold 35 percent of U.S. corporate stock. That means the Republican tax bill is a giveaway of $48 billion to foreigners in 2019 alone. Think about this. The Republicans can find $48 billion to give away to foreign shareholders but in the same bill raise taxes on millions of middle-class [[Page S8097]] families. By 2027, this bill will raise taxes on over 53 percent of American households. At the same time, a full 83 percent of the tax cuts will flow to the top 1 percent of Americans. So the more the American people see what is in this bill, the more they realize they will have to foot the bill, and the American people are saying ``No way.'' New polls today show that over half of the American public opposes this bill; two-thirds of the people recognize that the bill will benefit the wealthy over the middle class; and, according to the polls, the only thing more unpopular than this tax plan is President Trump himself. But the Republicans will push ahead anyway since this is all part of the bigger con game. When these tax giveaways pass, the deficit will explode by over $2 trillion. Republicans aren't even waiting for those deficits to become reality before using them as an excuse to move to the next phase of the con game. They are already using future deficits to justify a brutal, vicious cut to programs for the poorest, for the sickest, for the neediest people in our country. Earlier this month, Speaker Ryan said, ``We're going to have to get back next year at entitlement reform, which is how you tackle the debt and the deficit.'' We know exactly what Republicans mean when they talk about entitlement reform. They mean taking a machete to the programs that working and middle-class families in America rely upon. Republicans want nothing more than an excuse to slash Medicare and make it harder for Grandma to buy her medicine. They want the ability to gut Medicaid because, in their opinion, healthcare is only a right for the wealthy. They want to cover their historical enmity toward Social Security so that they can steal benefits from every American who has paid into that system, and they are doing this because the modern Republican Party has a sacred obligation to their donors--to the Koch brothers, to the massive corporations that help fund their campaigns. They promised them tax breaks, and it will be average working families who will end up footing the bill. When the bill becomes due, the American people will not forget who sent it to them. Here we are at the end of the year. We have truly important issues to address. We need to fund healthcare for 9 million children, ensure that community health centers can keep the lights on, secure the dreams of 800,000 young Dreamers, and combat the crises that American communities face from opioids and natural disasters. Sadly, we are doing none of those things. Instead, we are looting America's middle class to give away massive amounts of money to the rich, which will then create deficits, which will then have them going after Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security--Grandma and Grandpa, who built this country. That has always been their plan. They have an ancient animosity toward all of these programs, and now they believe they can leave them as debt-soaked relics of what they are today by creating this huge debt in this tax bill and then turning on the very programs for the very people who made this country what it is today. I urge a ``no'' vote on this bill. It will go down in history as one of the worst single pieces of legislation ever to be considered by the U.S. Senate. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from South Dakota. Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, relief for Americans is on the way. This evening, we will vote on the first comprehensive overhaul of our Tax Code since 1986. In 1986, I was a young Senate staffer. I watched as that tax bill passed on the floor of the U.S. Senate. I was a 25-year- old staffer back then. In a couple of weeks, my wife and I will welcome our third grandchild into the world, so it seems only fitting, after 30 years, that we go about the business of reforming the Tax Code because a lot has changed in this country. A lot has changed in this country in the past 30 years, but the one thing that hasn't changed is the Tax Code. Our Tax Code needs to be updated and modernized to reflect the times in which we live. Since President Reagan signed the last overhaul into law, our Tax Code has ballooned into an unwieldy, complex maze that costs American taxpayers an incredible amount of time and money and acts as a drag on economic growth and job creation. I will say that when I was elected to the Senate, I came here, as most of us do, wanting to do big things. We want to do consequential things. We want to do things that will impact the American people in a beneficial and a positive way, and that is certainly the case with tax reform. I sought to get on the Senate Finance Committee for that reason. The Senate Finance Committee has jurisdiction over tax, trade, healthcare, and issues that really impact and affect the American people's everyday lives. In 2011, I had the good fortune of getting on the committee, and ever since that time we have been working aggressively, planning for this very day. The suggestion by our colleagues on the other side that somehow this cropped up all of a sudden, overnight, is absolutely inconsistent with the facts. Since I got on the Finance Committee in 2011, we have had no fewer than 70 hearings on tax reform and tax- related issues. In 2015, the chairman of the committee, Senator Hatch, created five working groups. I was fortunate enough to chair one of those working groups. They were bipartisan, and they were tasked with looking at all aspects of the Tax Code, broken down into five different sections, and making recommendations for tax reform. We went about that in a very diligent way. We spent weeks and months developing ideas, reported those recommendations to the full committee, and those recommendations today serve as the foundation for the legislation we are considering. That was a bipartisan process, and the Democrats participated in that. A lot of the suggestions are bipartisan ideas. The foundation for this legislation frankly, in many respects, originated with those working groups that were worked upon by both Republicans and Democrats. So we stand here today with a piece of legislation that has a lot of bipartisan substance in it, even though the Democrats have refused to participate in the process. We started out with two major goals on tax reform. One was to put more money in the pockets of hard-working Americans and to create a tax code that would foster economic growth and make American companies competitive again in the global marketplace. Those are the two goals. The bill before us today--the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act--succeeds on both fronts. The bill provides immediate, direct relief for hard-working Americans, starting next month. It lowers tax rates for Americans in every income bracket. It nearly doubles the standard deduction, simplifying the code, meaning that fewer people will have to itemize. Across the country, it varies State by State, but, on average, less than one-third of the people across the country itemize today. Well, this will reduce that number even further. Less than 10 percent of the people in this country will have to itemize because of the doubling--or near doubling--of the standard deduction. It doubles the child tax credit and significantly increases the refundable portion of the credit, which will provide important additional help for low-income families, and it maintains the earned-income tax credit. All of this means that American families are going to see a significant drop in their tax bills for next year. Just as a case in point, a family of four with a combined annual income of $73,000 per year will see a tax cut of over $2,000, and that represents a 58- percent reduction over what they are paying today under current law. If you are a single parent with one child and have an income of $41,000, you are going to see a $1,300 reduction in your taxes, which represents a 73-percent reduction over what you are paying today under current law. So the idea, as has been advanced by the other side, that somehow middle-income taxpayers don't benefit from this is absolutely false. It is inaccurate because these are objective facts. A doubling of the standard deduction, a doubling of the child tax credit, and a reduction in rates mean that people in all income groups are going to see significant tax relief. Just to put a fine point on that, this is based on the latest analysis by the Joint Committee on Taxation. They assess and look at how these proposals will translate in terms of income groups and who gets impacted by that. [[Page S8098]] I want to point out that if you look at income by level here-- different groups and their incomes--as you can see, every income group receives a significant tax cut. In fact, lower income Americans receive the largest tax cuts, and that, again, is according to the Joint Committee on Taxation. The point made earlier by my colleague from the other side was that somehow this was going to be a huge tax shift in terms of who is going to pay taxes after all this is said and done. Well, if you look at the tax burden--and by that I mean who pays taxes in this country, the share of taxes currently borne by each different income category--as you see from this chart, which is broken down by quadrant, 25 percent of the filers are in this category, 25 percent in this category, and 25 percent with $50,000 to $100,000 in income, and then the final quadrant of 25 percent is those making $100,000 and above. Well, if you look at those in the lower income categories--and this is according to the Joint Committee on Taxation--their share of the tax burden relative to what it is today is actually the same or lower. So those in lower income categories, those making $20,000 to $50,000 a year--and that represents about 25 percent of filers today-- pay 4.3 percent of total taxes in this country. After implementation of the bill, they will pay 4.1 percent of total taxes in this country. Their overall tax burden will have decreased after passage of this legislation. If you take the next category, from $50,000 to $100,000, they pay today, under current law, 16.9 percent of the total tax burden in this country. After this legislation has passed, they will be paying 16.9 percent of the total tax burden in this country. What about those making $100,000 a year and more, which represents about 25 percent of all filers? Well, according to the Joint Committee on Taxation, on which these distribution tables are based, those in that income category who are paying today 78.7 percent of all the taxes in this country--after this is passed, they will pay 79.1 percent. So their overall tax burden actually goes up after this legislation is passed and enacted into law. Interestingly enough, this is the most recent analysis by the Joint Committee on Taxation. This is the distribution table that they just put out. The category that has the biggest increase in terms of overall tax burden is those making a million dollars a year and more. Today they pay 19.3 percent of all the tax burden, all the tax liability in this country. After this is all said and done, they will pay 19.8 percent. So their taxes--those with a million and more--are going up under this legislation. So this idea--they keep saying it on the other side, but just because they keep saying it doesn't make it true. The facts tell a completely different story. These are the facts. Again, I have come back to the point I made earlier; that is, let's put it into language that people in this country understand. When they do their taxes, they are going to see a doubling of the standard deduction and they are going to see a doubling of the child tax credit. If you are a family with kids in this country, that means that for every child you have, instead of getting a $1,000 child tax credit, you will get a $2,000 child tax credit. Couple that with the lower rates--and the marginal rates are going to be a 10- percent rate, a 12-percent rate--and where those kick in at different brackets, you are going to see a significant reduction in taxes across all income groups. That is just the reality. I think it is important that we at least, as we are talking about this subject, talk about it in terms of the facts. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act also preserves elements of the current Tax Code that have been working for Americans. Under this bill, homeowners and those aspiring to own a home will still be able to deduct their mortgage interest if they itemize on their taxes. Individuals who donate to charities, to churches, and educational institutions will still be able to claim those contributions as an itemized deduction. Working Americans will retain all the current options for saving for retirement, from individual retirement accounts to the various types of employer-provided retirement plans, like 401(k)s. This bill also provides families with permanent relief from ObamaCare's burdensome individual mandate, which is a tax on lower income Americans. Under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, Americans will no longer be required to buy health insurance that they don't want and can't afford or face significant financial penalties, which today disproportionately fall on those who make less than $50,000 a year. This bill also restores the deduction for major medical expenses to where it was before ObamaCare. For this year and next, Americans facing the burden of significant medical expenses will once again be able to deduct any expenses that exceed 7.5 percent of their adjusted gross income. I hope that eventually we will be able to make that change permanent. That is not all this is going to do. This is not just going to help Americans now; it is going to help them for the long term. It is going to give them access to the kinds of jobs, wages, and opportunities that will set them up for a secure future. How does it go about doing that? By rebuilding our broken Tax Code into a modern tax system designed for a 21st-century economy. In order for individual Americans to thrive, American businesses need to thrive. Thriving businesses expand. They hire new workers. They can afford to offer those workers higher wages. But our current Tax Code has not been helping businesses thrive. On the contrary, it has been strangling businesses large and small with high tax rates and provisions that discourage growth and drive those good-paying jobs overseas. Plus, our outdated tax structure has left American businesses at a competitive disadvantage in the global economy. This legislation changes all of that. This bill lowers tax rates across the board for small and medium-size businesses, farms, and ranches. It provides a 20-percent deduction on passthrough income, reducing the top effective tax rate on this income to no more than 29.6 percent. It permits businesses with gross receipts of up to $25 million to use the cash method of accounting and to expense their inventory costs. It allows businesses to expense new investments in machinery, equipment, and building improvements. And it expands the amount of startup and organizational expenses that new businesses can write off up front, freeing up cash flow to get the business up and running. Accelerating businesses' ability to recover the money they invested in things like property, equipment, and inventory will encourage new business growth and help existing businesses--including farms and ranches--expand their operations, create new jobs, and grow the economy. The bill also helps family-owned businesses, farms, and ranches by providing substantial relief from the death tax. I would have preferred to eliminate what I think is a confiscatory tax once and for all. But in this legislation, we double the current exemption to over $11 million, and by doing that, this bill will take a vast majority of family-owned businesses, farms, and ranches out of the tax's crosshairs. Too many of these businesses have wasted tens of thousands of dollars a year on costly estate planning simply to avoid the death tax and preserve that family business for another generation. That is money that these individuals would rather be investing in their businesses and their workers. This legislation allows these businesses to save critical capital for their businesses instead of forcing them to spend it to protect themselves from the heavy hand of the government. In addition to improving the playing field for small businesses, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will boost our economy by lowering the tax rate for larger businesses. Right now, America's global businesses pay the highest corporate tax rate in the industrialized world. By reducing the corporate tax rate to 21 percent, this bill will allow American businesses to compete and win in the global economy. Just as important, this bill brings the U.S. international tax system into the 21st century by replacing our outdated worldwide tax system with a territorial tax system so that American businesses are not operating at a disadvantage next to their foreign competitors. We haven't talked a lot about this, but one of the most important reforms in this bill is the changes we make to [[Page S8099]] the international tax system. This bill also eliminates the incentives in our current Tax Code that encouraged companies to shift jobs, profits, and manufacturing plants overseas. This bill makes it easier for American businesses to bring home foreign earnings to invest in growing jobs and paychecks in our local communities here in America. Lowering the corporate tax rate and transitioning to a territorial tax system will boost wages, jobs, and opportunities for American workers employed by our Nation's global companies. It will also increase wages, jobs, and opportunities for workers at the countless small and medium-sized businesses throughout our country that make up the supply chain for America's global companies. That is a resounding win for American workers and businesses and for our economy overall. As I said earlier, this bill is the product of literally years of work by Members of both parties. I am excited to be here as we get an opportunity to take this bill across the finish line later today. Mr. President, I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Montana. Mr. DAINES. Mr. President, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will keep over $700 million per year in Montanans' pockets. That is not a number that I calculated; that came right from the Montana Department of Revenue. And that is just for the individuals in Montana. That $700 million will be moved from Washington, DC, back to the people of Montana. I can tell you something: Hard-working Montanans could use a pay raise. In fact, in Montana, we have some of the lowest per capita wages in the Nation. Contrast that with what is going on in Washington, DC. In fact, if you Google ``wealthiest counties in the U.S.A.''--I challenge you to do that. Take your smartphone and Google ``wealthiest counties in the U.S.A.'' and look at what you find. The top three wealthiest counties in America are suburbs of Washington, DC. In fact, 6 out of 10 of those counties are counties adjacent to Washington, DC. Montanans don't need to send an additional $700 million of their money back to Washington, DC. In fact, according to the Montana Department of Revenue, nearly 99 percent of Montanans will see a tax cut under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. On average, Montanans will keep approximately $1,600 of their hard-earned money each year. Moreover, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act repeals once and for all ObamaCare's poverty tax--the so-called individual mandate. This tax has systematically penalized the low-income for not being able to afford health insurance. Frankly, repealing this tax is one of the most compassionate things we could do as part of this legislation. Adding insult to injury, when you peel back what is going on with this poverty tax, 42 percent of those paying that poverty tax, that ObamaCare mandate tax, make less than $25,000 a year. In fact, 82 percent of the penalty payers paying this tax make less than $50,000 a year. Repealing this tax is the right thing to do. At the end of the day, the question here is pretty simple: Who deserves more money? Who deserves more control? Is it right here in Washington, DC, or is it the American people? Is it the people of Montana? I think the answer to that question is pretty easy. I believe Montanans do. So I will be voting for hard-working Montana families so they can keep more of their own money. As we debate what we should do with the cash here in Washington, DC, whose money is it anyway? It came from the people of this country. It came from the people of Montana. I will be voting for Montana Main Street businesses, for the hard-working middle class of Montana so we can grow wages--some of the lowest in the Nation--and grow jobs. I will be voting to return some of Montanans' hard-earned money back to the people who sent it here in the first place. Mr. President, I yield back my time. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Vermont. Mr. SANDERS. Mr. President, a few moments ago, my friend from South Dakota was speaking about the bill. He made one statement that I do agree with, and that is, just because you say something over and over again does not make it true. Unfortunately, much of what he said is just not accurate. The truth is that what we are seeing today, in an unprecedented way, is the looting of the Federal Treasury. Today marks a great victory for the very wealthy campaign contributors who have contributed hundreds of millions of dollars over the years to the Republican Party. These billionaires will see a huge tax break for themselves at the same time as the deficit of this country is driven up by about $1.5 trillion. Today is also a victory for the largest, the most profitable corporations in America, companies such as Apple, Microsoft, Pfizer, and General Electric, which, despite recordbreaking profits, will now see hundreds of billions of dollars in tax breaks. At a time of massive income and wealth inequality, where the people on top are becoming wealthier while the middle class shrinks and 40 million live in poverty, this legislation--according to the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center--will provide 83 percent of the benefits to the top 1 percent, while increasing taxes on 92 million middle-class households by the end of the decade. Let me repeat that. By the end of the decade, this legislation will provide 83 percent of the benefits to the top 1 percent and, incredibly, 60 percent of the benefits to the top one- tenth of 1 percent, while, at the end of the decade, 92 million middle- class households will be paying more in taxes. Does anybody really believe that when we have such a massive gap in income and wealth inequality, we should be giving 60 percent of the benefits in this bill to the top one-tenth of 1 percent? It says a lot about the priorities of the Republican Party when the tax breaks for corporations in this bill are permanent, while the tax breaks for working families expire at the end of 8 years. Furthermore, I hope that every American is listening to what Speaker of the House Paul Ryan is saying, and other Republicans, when they talk about how they are going to offset the $1.5 trillion in deficits they just created by giving massive tax breaks to the wealthy and large corporations. What Ryan is saying and many other Republicans are saying is that they are going to come back and offset that $1.5 trillion in deficits by cutting Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. And if I am wrong on that assertion, I would hope that some of my Republican colleagues would come down to the floor and say that I am wrong, but I do not suspect that will be the case. During his campaign for the White House, Donald Trump said over and over again to the American people, quote after quote, day after day, that he would not cut Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Well, I say to the President: For once in your life, keep the promises that you made, and tell the Republican leadership now that you will veto any legislation that cuts Social Security, Medicare, or Medicaid. I suspect we will not be seeing a tweet from the President on that issue. Moving toward passing this very unfair piece of legislation, the Republican leadership--which controls the House and the Senate--will move soon to shut down the Congress and head home for a holiday break. After massive tax breaks for the rich and large corporations, they believe their work is done, and they are ready to head home. Well, I respectfully disagree. Maybe, just maybe, before Congress adjourns for the holidays, we should start paying attention to the needs of the working families of this country, to the middle class of this country, and not just the billionaire class. We need to address the crisis that faces some 800,000 young people who are currently in the DACA Program. Without the legal protections afforded by the DACA Program, these young people today are living in constant fear and anxiety that they may lose their legal status and, in fact, be deported from the only country they have ever known. Imagine somebody who is 20 or 25 years of age, has lived in the United States virtually his or her entire life, went to school here, now has a job, now is in college, now is in the military, and because of Trump's disastrous attack on DACA, repealing DACA, 800,000 young people are worried about whether they are going to be able to even stay in this country. [[Page S8100]] The American people are very clear about how they feel about this issue. I believe just today there was a Quinnipiac poll that appeared on this very issue, and this was the question: Which comes closest to your view about undocumented immigrants who were brought to the U.S. as children? A) They should be allowed to stay in the United States and to eventually apply for U.S. citizenship. B) They should be allowed to remain in the United States, but not be allowed to apply for U.S. citizenship. C) They should be required to leave the U.S. That was the question asked of the American people. Here is the answer. Seventy-seven percent of the American people--77 percent--say that these young people should be allowed to stay in the United States and move toward citizenship. Seven percent say they that should stay in the United States but not gain citizenship. Twelve percent say that they should be forced to leave the United States. Republicans, by overwhelming numbers, say that these young people, these Dreamers who have spent their entire lives in this country, who know no other