Congressional Record
Formatting necessary for an accurate reading of this text may be shown by tags (e.g., <DELETED> or <BOLD>) or may be missing from this TXT display. For complete and accurate display of this text, see the PDF.

[Pages H7387-H7402] From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov] {time} 0915 CRIMINAL ALIEN GANG MEMBER REMOVAL ACT Mr. LABRADOR. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to House Resolution 513, I call up the bill (H.R. 3697) to amend the Immigration and Nationality Act with respect to aliens associated with criminal gangs, and for other purposes, and ask for its immediate consideration. The Clerk read the title of the bill. The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. Duncan of Tennessee). Pursuant to House Resolution 513, the amendment printed in House Report 115-307 is adopted, and the bill, as amended, is considered read. The text of the bill, as amended, is as follows: H.R. 3697 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. This Act may be cited as the ``Criminal Alien Gang Member Removal Act''. SEC. 2. GROUNDS OF INADMISSIBILITY AND DEPORTABILITY FOR ALIEN GANG MEMBERS. (a) Definition of Gang Member.--Section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(53) The term `criminal gang' means an ongoing group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons that has as one of its primary purposes the commission of 1 or more of the following criminal offenses and the members of which engage, or have engaged within the past 5 years, in a continuing series of such offenses, or that has been designated as a criminal gang by the Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Attorney General, as meeting these criteria. The offenses described, whether in violation of Federal or State law or foreign law and regardless of whether the offenses occurred before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, are the following: ``(A) A `felony drug offense' (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802)). ``(B) An offense under section 274 (relating to bringing in and harboring certain aliens), section 277 (relating to aiding or assisting certain aliens to enter the United States), or section 278 (relating to importation of alien for immoral purpose). ``(C) A crime of violence (as defined in section 16 of title 18, United States Code). ``(D) A crime involving obstruction of justice, tampering with or retaliating against a witness, victim, or informant, or burglary. ``(E) Any conduct punishable under sections 1028 and 1029 of title 18, United States Code (relating to fraud and related activity in connection with identification documents or access devices), sections 1581 through 1594 of such title (relating to peonage, slavery, and trafficking in persons), section 1951 of such title (relating to interference with commerce by threats or violence), section 1952 of such title (relating to interstate and foreign travel or transportation in aid of racketeering enterprises), section 1956 of such title (relating to the laundering of monetary instruments), section 1957 of such title (relating to engaging in monetary transactions in property derived from specified unlawful activity), or sections 2312 through 2315 of such title (relating to interstate transportation of stolen motor vehicles or stolen property). ``(F) A conspiracy to commit an offense described in subparagraphs (A) through (E).''. (b) Inadmissibility.--Section 212(a)(2) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(J) Aliens associated with criminal gangs.--Any alien is inadmissible who a consular officer, the Secretary of Homeland Security, or the Attorney General knows or has reason to believe-- ``(i) to be or to have been a member of a criminal gang (as defined in section 101(a)(53)); or ``(ii) to have participated in the activities of a criminal gang (as defined in section 101(a)(53)), knowing or having reason to know that such activities will promote, further, aid, or support the illegal activity of the criminal gang.''. (c) Deportability.--Section 237(a)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1227(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(G) Aliens associated with criminal gangs.--Any alien is deportable who-- ``(i) is or has been a member of a criminal gang (as defined in section 101(a)(53)); or ``(ii) has participated in the activities of a criminal gang (as so defined), knowing or having reason to know that such activities will promote, further, aid, or support the illegal activity of the criminal gang.''. (d) Designation.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 2 of title II of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182) is amended by inserting after section 219 the following: ``designation of criminal gang ``Sec. 220. (a) Designation.-- ``(1) In General.--The Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Attorney General, may designate a group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons as a criminal gang if the Secretary finds that their conduct is described in section 101(a)(53). ``(2) Procedure.-- ``(A) Notification.--Seven days before making a designation under this subsection, the Secretary shall, by classified communication, notify the Speaker and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, the President pro tempore, Majority Leader, and Minority Leader of the Senate, and the members of the relevant committees of the House of Representatives and the Senate, in writing, of the intent to designate a group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons under this subsection and the factual basis therefor. ``(B) Publication in the federal register.--The Secretary shall publish the designation in the Federal Register seven days after providing the notification under subparagraph (A). ``(3) Record.-- ``(A) In general.--In making a designation under this subsection, the Secretary shall create an administrative record. ``(B) Classified information.--The Secretary may consider classified information in making a designation under this subsection. Classified information shall not be subject to disclosure for such time as it remains classified, except that such information may be disclosed to a court ex parte and in camera for purposes of judicial review under subsection (c). ``(4) Period of Designation.-- ``(A) In general.--A designation under this subsection shall be effective for all purposes until revoked under paragraph (5) or (6) or set aside pursuant to subsection (c). ``(B) Review of designation upon petition.-- ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall review the designation of a criminal gang under the procedures set forth in clauses (iii) and (iv) if the designated group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons files a petition for revocation within the petition period described in clause (ii). ``(ii) Petition period.--For purposes of clause (i)-- ``(I) if the designated group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons has not previously filed a petition for revocation under this subparagraph, the petition period begins 2 years after the date on which the designation was made; or ``(II) if the designated group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons has previously filed a petition for revocation under this subparagraph, the petition period begins 2 years after the date of the determination made under clause (iv) on that petition. [[Page H7388]] ``(iii) Procedures.--Any group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons that submits a petition for revocation under this subparagraph of its designation as a criminal gang must provide evidence in that petition that it is not described in section 101(a)(53). ``(iv) Determination.-- ``(I) In general.--Not later than 180 days after receiving a petition for revocation submitted under this subparagraph, the Secretary shall make a determination as to such revocation. ``(II) Classified information.--The Secretary may consider classified information in making a determination in response to a petition for revocation. Classified information shall not be subject to disclosure for such time as it remains classified, except that such information may be disclosed to a court ex parte and in camera for purposes of judicial review under subsection (c). ``(III) Publication of determination.--A determination made by the Secretary under this clause shall be published in the Federal Register. ``(IV) Procedures.--Any revocation by the Secretary shall be made in accordance with paragraph (6). ``(C) Other review of designation.-- ``(i) In general.--If in a 5-year period no review has taken place under subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall review the designation of the criminal gang in order to determine whether such designation should be revoked pursuant to paragraph (6). ``(ii) Procedures.--If a review does not take place pursuant to subparagraph (B) in response to a petition for revocation that is filed in accordance with that subparagraph, then the review shall be conducted pursuant to procedures established by the Secretary. The results of such review and the applicable procedures shall not be reviewable in any court. ``(iii) Publication of results of review.--The Secretary shall publish any determination made pursuant to this subparagraph in the Federal Register. ``(5) Revocation by Act of Congress.--The Congress, by an Act of Congress, may block or revoke a designation made under paragraph (1). ``(6) Revocation Based on Change in Circumstances.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may revoke a designation made under paragraph (1) at any time, and shall revoke a designation upon completion of a review conducted pursuant to subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (4) if the Secretary finds that-- ``(i) the group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons that has been designated as a criminal gang is no longer described in section 101(a)(53); or ``(ii) the national security or the law enforcement interests of the United States warrants a revocation. ``(B) Procedure.--The procedural requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3) shall apply to a revocation under this paragraph. Any revocation shall take effect on the date specified in the revocation or upon publication in the Federal Register if no effective date is specified. ``(7) Effect of Revocation.--The revocation of a designation under paragraph (5) or (6) shall not affect any action or proceeding based on conduct committed prior to the effective date of such revocation. ``(8) Use of Designation in Trial or Hearing.--If a designation under this subsection has become effective under paragraph (2) an alien in a removal proceeding shall not be permitted to raise any question concerning the validity of the issuance of such designation as a defense or an objection. ``(b) Amendments to a Designation.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may amend a designation under this subsection if the Secretary finds that the group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons has changed its name, adopted a new alias, dissolved and then reconstituted itself under a different name or names, or merged with another group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons. ``(2) Procedure.--Amendments made to a designation in accordance with paragraph (1) shall be effective upon publication in the Federal Register. Paragraphs (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8) of subsection (a) shall also apply to an amended designation. ``(3) Administrative record.--The administrative record shall be corrected to include the amendments as well as any additional relevant information that supports those amendments. ``(4) Classified information.--The Secretary may consider classified information in amending a designation in accordance with this subsection. Classified information shall not be subject to disclosure for such time as it remains classified, except that such information may be disclosed to a court ex parte and in camera for purposes of judicial review under subsection (c) of this section. ``(c) Judicial Review of Designation.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after publication in the Federal Register of a designation, an amended designation, or a determination in response to a petition for revocation, the designated group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons may seek judicial review in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. ``(2) Basis of review.--Review under this subsection shall be based solely upon the administrative record, except that the Government may submit, for ex parte and in camera review, classified information used in making the designation, amended designation, or determination in response to a petition for revocation. ``(3) Scope of review.--The Court shall hold unlawful and set aside a designation, amended designation, or determination in response to a petition for revocation the court finds to be-- ``(A) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law; ``(B) contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity; ``(C) in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitation, or short of statutory right; ``(D) lacking substantial support in the administrative record taken as a whole or in classified information submitted to the court under paragraph (2); or ``(E) not in accord with the procedures required by law. ``(4) Judicial review invoked.--The pendency of an action for judicial review of a designation, amended designation, or determination in response to a petition for revocation shall not affect the application of this section, unless the court issues a final order setting aside the designation, amended designation, or determination in response to a petition for revocation. ``(d) Definitions.--As used in this section-- ``(1) the term `classified information' has the meaning given that term in section 1(a) of the Classified Information Procedures Act (18 U.S.C. App.); ``(2) the term `national security' means the national defense, foreign relations, or economic interests of the United States; ``(3) the term `relevant committees' means the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and of the House of Representatives; and ``(4) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Attorney General.''. (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents for such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 219 the following: ``Sec. 220. Designation.''. (e) Mandatory Detention of Criminal Gang Members.-- (1) In general.--Section 236(c)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1226(c)(1)) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``or'' at the end; (B) in subparagraph (D), by inserting ``or'' at the end; and (C) by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following: ``(E) is inadmissible under section 212(a)(2)(J) or deportable under section 217(a)(2)(G),''. (2) Annual report.--Not later than March 1 of each year (beginning 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act), the Secretary of Homeland Security, after consultation with the appropriate Federal agencies, shall submit a report to the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and of the Senate on the number of aliens detained under the amendments made by paragraph (1). (f) Asylum Claims Based on Gang Affiliation.-- (1) Inapplicability of restriction on removal to certain countries.--Section 241(b)(3)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1251(b)(3)(B)) is amended, in the matter preceding clause (i), by inserting ``who is described in section 212(a)(2)(J)(i) or section 237(a)(2)(G)(i) or who is'' after ``to an alien''. (2) Ineligibility for asylum.--Section 208(b)(2)(A) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1158(b)(2)(A)) (as amended by section 201 of this Act) is further amended-- (A) in clause (v), by striking ``or'' at the end; (B) by redesignating clause (vi) as clause (vii); and (C) by inserting after clause (v) the following: ``(vi) the alien is described in section 212(a)(2)(J)(i) or section 237(a)(2)(G)(i); or''. (g) Temporary Protected Status.--Section 244 of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1254a) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Attorney General'' each place it appears and inserting ``Secretary of Homeland Security''; (2) in subparagraph (c)(2)(B)-- (A) in clause (i), by striking ``or'' at the end; (B) in clause (ii), by striking the period and inserting ``; or''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(iii) the alien is, or at any time has been, described in section 212(a)(2)(J) or section 237(a)(2)(G).''; and (3) in subsection (d)-- (A) by striking paragraph (3); and (B) in paragraph (4), by adding at the end the following: ``The Secretary of Homeland Security may detain an alien provided temporary protected status under this section whenever appropriate under any other provision of law.''. (h) Special Immigrant Juvenile Visas.--Section 101(a)(27)(J)(iii) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(27)(J)(iii)) is amended-- (1) in subclause (I), by striking ``and''; (2) in subclause (II), by adding ``and'' at the end; and (3) by adding at the end the following: [[Page H7389]] ``(III) no alien who is, or at any time has been, described in section 212(a)(2)(J) or section 237(a)(2)(G) shall be eligible for any immigration benefit under this subparagraph;''. (i) Parole.--An alien described in section 212(a)(2)(J) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as added by subsection (b), shall not be eligible for parole under section 212(d)(5)(A) of such Act unless-- (1) the alien is assisting or has assisted the United States Government in a law enforcement matter, including a criminal investigation; and (2) the alien's presence in the United States is required by the Government with respect to such assistance. (j) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to acts that occur before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act. The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from Idaho (Mr. Labrador) and the gentlewoman from California (Ms. Lofgren) each will control 30 minutes. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Idaho. General Leave Mr. LABRADOR. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days within which to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on H.R. 3697. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Idaho? There was no objection. Mr. LABRADOR. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. I rise today in support of H.R. 3697, the Criminal Alien Gang Member Removal Act. I introduced this bill with Chairman Goodlatte and Representatives Comstock and King for a very simple reason: the United States is facing an ever-growing danger from transnational gangs, and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, better known as ICE, needs more tools to deal with this danger. The Federal Government's most important responsibility is the safety and security of the American people. However, we are not fulfilling that responsibility when we allow gangs to illegally enter our country with the express purpose of victimizing innocent Americans. In communities across our country, transnational gangs are using violence and the threat of violence to create a climate of fear that allows them to operate with near impunity. They regularly target local business owners and law enforcement officials. Innocent bystanders, those unlucky enough to be in the wrong place at the wrong time, are also paying a price. According to ICE, these gangs ``have grown to become a serious threat in American communities across the Nation--not only in cities, but increasingly in suburban and even rural areas. Entire neighborhoods and sometimes whole communities are held hostage by and subjected to their violence.'' Furthermore, ICE has found that, ``membership of these violent transnational gangs is comprised largely of foreign-born nationals.'' The most infamous transnational gang, of course, is MS-13, which entered the U.S. in the 1980s. Today, it has over 10,000 gang members operating inside the United States alone. At every level, our enforcement officials are working to curb this growing threat with large-scale enforcement actions. These include Operation New Dawn, which netted almost 1,100 arrests over a 6-week period. However, we all know that prosecution of criminal gang members is notoriously difficult. This is because victims and witnesses of gang crime are often reluctant to testify because of the quite reasonable fear of retaliation against them or their families, thus many gang members are never convicted of the crimes they have committed. The question is often asked: Why should law-abiding Americans have to wait until an alien gang member has committed a deportable offense? Why not deport the gang member before he has a chance to victimize more innocent people? The answer is that current immigration law contains dangerous loopholes that alien gang members are exploiting. Currently, an alien may not be deported, even if he is known to be a member of a criminal gang or participating in gang activities. ICE must wait for the gang member to be first convicted of a deportable offense. H.R. 3697 changes that. For the first time, ICE will be permitted to place alien gang members into removal proceedings on the grounds of being criminal gang members. Our bill sets out clear specifications for what crimes are considered to be gang related, relying on longstanding Federal criminal law to determine what a gang or group consists of. In addition, our bill permits the Secretary of Homeland Security, using procedures already used by the Secretary of State, to designate a gang as a criminal gang. This would be done in a transparent way through notification to Congress and publication in the Federal Register and with meaningful judicial review. The conclusive decision as to whether to place an alien in removal proceedings would rest with the Department of Homeland Security. When an alien is charged, the charge must be proven by evidence on the record in immigration court. I have heard some uneasiness that ICE will use these provisions to charge any alien they encounter with gang activity. Our bill does not allow that. As a former immigration attorney, I know the importance of due process and know how important it is for illegal immigrants and for Americans and everyone within the jurisdictions of the immigration court to receive due process. I can tell you that our bill is consistent with due process. Under H.R. 3697, ICE has the burden of proof when charging an alien with a deportable offense. While the alien has the burden of proof when they are inadmissible, a denial of gang membership should be sufficient to shift the burden back to the government. The government must convince an immigration judge of its case. Of course, an alien ordered removed as a gang member has every right to appeal that order to the Board of Immigration Appeals and then to the Federal courts. Ultimately, H.R. 3697 is about providing law enforcement with the necessary tools to combat gang activity in every community in our country. This is essential if we, as elected officials, are committed to our responsibility to keep the American people safe and secure. That is the purpose of H.R. 3697. This is the third time this year the House is holding a floor vote on portions of the Davis-Oliver Act, which I introduced back in May, to make our country safer through stronger immigration enforcement. I am proud that the House passed the first two bills that came from Davis-Oliver, Kate's Law and the No Sanctuary for Criminals Act, and I encourage my colleagues to vote for H.R. 3697 as well. We must take action now or watch crime rates rise in our Nation. There is no place in our country for criminal alien gang members, and any legislation which makes it easier to deport them deserves the support of every Member of this body. Mr. Speaker, I urge all of my colleagues to support this legislation, and I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. LOFGREN. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to H.R. 3697. Gang members and serious criminals should not be granted admission to the United States. That is not a controversial position. I think almost every Member of Congress, Democrat or Republican, agrees with that. It is our highest priority to protect the safety of the American people. That is a duty I think we all take seriously, but this bill does something other than that. The title of the bill is the Criminal Alien Gang Member Removal Act, and, as we have seen in the past, there are times when the name of a bill is not always reflected in the actual proposed language of the statute, and that is true in this case. First, section 2(a) of the bill defines criminal gang as ``an ongoing group, club, organization, or association of five or more persons that has as one of its primary purposes the commission of one or more'' of a wide range of offenses. This may seem reasonable until you look at the offenses listed. These offenses could sweep in many people that no reasonable person would think of as a gang member--for example, one of the offenses relates to the harboring of undocumented immigrants. This statute includes people who give shelter to, transport, or provide other kinds of aid to undocumented immigrants. That means that, [[Page H7390]] under this bill, a religious organization that aids undocumented immigrants could be a criminal gang. This isn't just theoretical. During the 1980s, members of the faith community were repeatedly criminally prosecuted for providing transportation to undocumented immigrants. In one case, the FBI even infiltrated a Bible study group to learn about the group's plan to support undocumented immigrants. Under this bill, DHS would have expanded authority to go after all such groups as criminal gangs. In one fell swoop, it could turn nuns into gang members. The bill also refers to felony drug offense, which would include the repeated possession of marijuana. In California, my State, along with several other States, voters decided to decriminalize marijuana--first, for medical uses, then later for broader uses. Under this bill, a group that regularly gets together to use marijuana that is legal under State law would still be committing a felony under Federal law and would be a criminal gang. That could include groups of people who are using marijuana for medicinal purposes to treat epilepsy or cancer who are taking marijuana consistent with State law. Second, the bill authorizes DHS to deny admission or to deport any immigrant, including one who has no criminal history or gang affiliation whatsoever, so long as DHS merely believes the person is associated with such a group. Sections 2(b) and 2(c) of the bill expressly authorize DHS officers and immigration judges to deport an immigrant on nothing more than a reason to believe that the individual has been a member of a gang or has participated in the activities of a gang as defined under these rather broad provisions. There is no need for conviction or even an arrest. All DHS needs is a belief that the individual has assisted any group of five or more people that DHS believes has committed one of these long list of offenses. This belief could be as minimal as the color of a person's shirt, the neighborhood they live in, or the individuals in their family. This is not just unreasonable, it is probably unconstitutional. Chairman Goodlatte had a self-actualizing amendment when the rule was adopted to change the evidentiary standard. I think it recognizes the problem with the bill. The amendment really doesn't cure the problem with the breadth of the criminal gang definition, and it doesn't change the standard that applies to people seeking admission to the country, including those who are seeking to reunite with U.S. citizen spouses, parents, and children. Just this week, I met with actual police officers who asked me to do what I could to defeat this unwise bill. They know, because they are out on the front lines, that gangs are a real problem, and they told me that bills like this, which could turn religious individuals, nuns, cancer victims into targets, is just going to get in their way as police officers. If we want to keep America safe and admit immigrants who do not have a felony record, I would suggest that we consider the bipartisan Dream Act, H.R. 3440. This bill would provide a path to legal permanent residence for 800,000 young people who were raised in America, who consider this to be their home, who represent the very best of our country. Instead of debating whether we should allow ICE officers to target religious workers, we should focus on what really makes this country great. I would like to note that there has been much discussion about the drafting of this bill, and at the Rules Committee just last night, Republicans defended the bill by asserting that the broad provisions would not be abused by ICE officers. Even if they could target the nuns, they wouldn't do that. Even if they could target the cancer victims or the teenagers smoking marijuana after school as gang members, they wouldn't do that. {time} 0930 Now, I am not suggesting that the teenagers smoking marijuana after school is a good thing. But it is not MS-13. And that is what we are trying to make a distinction here between, a gang abatement bill and garden-variety activity that we may not like. One really very good and very thoughtful Member on the other side of the aisle suggested that, if there is a problem with the bill, we will just come back and fix it. Here is why that is a problem: We know that when we draft something in a poor manner, it often goes on to be enforced and we never get around to fixing it. I will give an example. We passed years ago, and I objected at the time--Henry Hyde was chairman of the committee--a provision that barred people from gaining status if they provided material support to terrorists. Well, that sounds like a good idea, but what does it mean? It turns out that material support--which was never qualified to include support given under duress or given in the ordinary course of a commercial activity--has now been used to bar people who are not terrorists, who didn't give material support. I will give you an example. A group of women called the Tortilla Terrorists are women who were threatened with their lives and made tortillas because they were threatened with death by guerrilla actors. Now, they were denied asylum because of the tortillas, hence the name the Tortilla Terrorists. I think most of us would agree that is not terrorism. Yet, we drafted the bill in such a way that the Department felt that they had to enforce it in that way, and we have never gone back to it. So to think that somehow if we write a law poorly, it is going to be fixed in the administration, that is just wrong. We should step back from this. We should work together. This was just introduced last week. Now, I know the SAFE Act had hearings years ago, but I think we would be better off if we sat down together, if we reasoned together, if we worked through the defects in this draft, and came up with a bill that really targeted MS-13 members, something that we could all support and that well-served our country. I will just say that Sister Simone Campbell, one of the leading nuns in America, explained her opposition to this bill. She said: The bill's harboring provisions under INA 274 are so sweeping that religious workers who provide shelter, transportation, or support to undocumented immigrants could be found liable of criminal activity. This statute has been used against religious workers in the past, and the bill tries to make it a weapon for the future. Let's listen to the nuns like we did in school, and step back, redraft this bill, and oppose this poorly crafted measure today. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. LABRADOR. Mr. Speaker, I yield 5 minutes to the gentlewoman from Virginia (Mrs. Comstock), the lead sponsor of this bill. Mrs. COMSTOCK. Mr. Speaker, early this summer, on a Friday night, just about 30 miles from this Capital, I went on a ride-along in my district with our Northern Virginia Regional Gang Task Force. A young boy standing on the sidewalk along Sterling Boulevard in Sterling, Virginia, caught the eye of a veteran member of our task force. The young man on the street looked about 15 or 16 years old, but he was actually a 22-year-old member of the transnational violent street gang known as MS-13. He was covered in MS-13 gang tattoos--on his chest, his back, his feet. It turned out, he had been in jail in El Salvador for murder as a teenager, and he had already been deported from the U.S. twice for engaging in violent crimes here. Three other of the estimated thousands of MS-13 gang members that are just here in our Capital region were also picked up that night. There have been cases in northern Virginia where a suspected member of the MS-13 gang has been deported five times, yet returned again to continue their gang activity. At a town festival in Herndon this year, the gang task force identified--because they go to these events and they see these people-- an estimated 200 to 300 suspected gang members milling about among the families who were getting cotton candy and hot dogs for their kids. They are right there looking to recruit in their own communities. Mr. Speaker, since November 2016, at least eight murders have been committed and tied to MS-13 and other [[Page H7391]] gangs in our area, representing a 166 percent increase over the last year in the northern Virginia region. An MS-13-linked vicious murder occurred in November 2015. Of course, I should acknowledge that they are all vicious when you are talking about MS-13. This happened on an Alexandria playground in the evening just about 8 miles from this Capital, and it resulted in the death of 24-year-old Jose Luis Ferman Perez. He was nearly decapitated in the machete attack. His body was left on the playground and was found by a woman walking her dog the next morning. It could have been one of the kids playing on the playground finding that. The Washington Post has highlighted how the 2014 border surge has contributed to the MS-13 problem, saying: ``The violent street gang is on the rise in the United States, fueled, in part, by the surge in unaccompanied minors.'' A recent Washington Post article documented the case of gang members who videotaped the murder of a 15-year-old girl, Damaris Reyes Rivas, who was savagely beaten by multiple people, and repeatedly stabbed by all of these gang members. The video of this was intended to be sent to MS-13 gang leadership in El Salvador to confirm that this greenlit murder had been carried out. Tragically, MS-13 targets and preys upon their own community, on young people who may not have much of a family structure around them. Sadly, these children and young people were actually fleeing MS-13 in their own countries of El Salvador, Honduras, or Guatemala, only to come here and be targeted. There was one case that, fortunately, the Norther Virginia Regional Gang Task Force was able to intercept, where a brother was trying to enlist his own brother to join the MS-13 gang. And when he refused to, he put a hit out on him. Fortunately, the gang task force was able to stop that. We cannot allow this to stand. Mr. Speaker, the Northern Virginia Regional Gang Task Force is battling this problem in our region, but they still need more resources. In our appropriations process, we have directed more resources for our regional task forces. I have personally talked to Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein, who is very familiar with this MS-13 problem, having been a U.S. attorney in the Maryland region. Our regional task force is comprised of 13 local, State and Federal law enforcement agencies, and the task force has a three-pronged approach: education, intervention and prevention, and enforcement. We need to provide support on all three of these fronts. I witnessed firsthand the exhausting work of the task force; the technology they utilize on the streets that was able to immediately identify just with fingerprints the background of this gang member that they were able to arrest; the detailed knowledge they have of our communities and our neighborhoods; the positive relationships they have with the people in these communities, the very people that are being victimized; and the challenges they face with this problem that has returned to our area. That is why I sponsored H.R. 3697, the Criminal Alien Gang Member Removal Act, with my colleagues, so it will provide additional tools to law enforcement. It will ensure that when ICE positively identifies a known alien gang member, they may act immediately. This legislation identifies gang membership and participation in gang activity as grounds for inadmissibility and removability. We don't have to wait until these brutal killers wield their machetes or leave another body on a children's playground. The SPEAKER pro tempore. The time of the gentlewoman has expired. Mr. LABRADOR. Mr. Speaker, I yield an additional 1 minute to the gentlewoman. Mrs. COMSTOCK. This is a marked improvement over current law where ICE must wait for specific convictions before removal proceedings can commence. The bill preserves, as my colleague has already identified, all the due process and appellate rights afforded to any alien facing deportation. An immigration judge must be convinced that the evidence in the record supports the finding. I encourage support of this legislation today, which will strengthen and enforce our laws against known violent gang members. I also will continue to work with my colleagues on other matters, such as the bill I introduced earlier this summer, to provide additional resources to our regional gang task forces for their education, intervention, and enforcement efforts. Ms. LOFGREN. Mr. Speaker, I yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from New York (Mr. Nadler), my colleague on the Judiciary Committee. Mr. NADLER. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman for yielding. Mr. Speaker, it has been said about this body that if you invent a nice enough title for a bill, it doesn't matter what you write in the bill because all people know is what the title is. This bill is a good example of that. Who is in favor of criminal alien gangs? No one. But this bill has received no committee consideration in which the questions could have been asked and the answers given to make sure that the bill would do what its sponsors say it does. But this legislation wouldn't provide decent protections against gang violence. It would shred due process protections and would allow deportation of innocent immigrants based on the flimsiest of evidence. It would establish a Star Chamber-like process for designating criminal gangs that would provide virtually no opportunity for them to contest such a designation. Once a group is designated as a gang, an immigrant who is determined to be a member of that gang--determined under undefined procedures and standards--would be almost assured of being deported and would be subject to mandatory detention while awaiting removal. The procedures under this bill would be laughable if they did not have such deadly consequences for so many innocent people. Suppose there are some people in my neighborhood that I think are up to no good. Maybe I have good evidence that they are committing crimes, or maybe I just don't like them. Either way, I submit a tip to Homeland Security that the group is engaged in activity that qualifies as a criminal gang under this bill. Then, based on undefined and unknown procedures, the DHS can designate that group as a criminal gang. In doing so, it would amass some sort of administrative record, which is also completely undefined in the bill, but we know it can include secret evidence. No notice would be given to the group that is under review, and no opportunity would be given to present evidence contesting the designation; no exculpatory evidence. After designation, there is a process for judicial review; but unless the group has the habit of scouring the Federal Register, it would have no idea that it has been labeled a gang and that it needs to go to court in 30 days. If, somehow, the group does learn of its designation, it has just 30 days to contest it, and only in a Federal Court of Appeals in Washington, D.C. That review, however, would be based entirely on the administrative record amassed by the government. The group would have no opportunity to submit evidence to rebut the designation, which renders the entire review process meaningless. That is not due process under the Constitution. That is a sort of stacked process you would expect in a banana republic or in Russia. It gets even worse. Under this bill, any alien is deportable if he or she is or has been a member of a designated gang or has participated in the gang's activities, knowing that would further its illegal activity. But who determines that a person is a member of a gang? By what procedure? In what forum or what court? Using what standard? The bill, given the Goodlatte amendment, does not say. A person need not have been convicted or even charged with a crime to be deportable under this bill; and even when they are in removal proceedings, they would not be permitted to challenge the gang designation that landed them in those proceedings. Thus, we will have people deported on the basis of an unfair and secret process, with no notice and no meaningful opportunity to contest the basis for the deportation. That turns due process completely on its head. Keeping out members of MS-13 and other deadly gangs is a worthy goal, [[Page H7392]] but this bill would not do that. It would have disastrous consequences for thousands of people each year who may or may not be members of a gang, who may or may not have any evidence against them, who will inevitably be caught up in its hash and overbroad provisions. Mr. Speaker, just last week, President Trump upended the lives of 800,000 DREAMers who now face the possibility of being dragged away from the only country they know. Our highest priority should be providing these young, undocumented Americans the legal status they need to continue serving our Nation and being productive members of their communities. I notice that the Speaker has said that, while he supports relief for the DREAMers, that the bill has to go through a committee. Why didn't this bill have to go through a committee? Instead, the Republican majority seeks to distract us from the plight of the DREAMers by returning to its mass deportation agenda based on the fear and dehumanization of immigrants. This bill brings shame upon this House and this Nation's tradition of due process and fundamental fairness. Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to reject this unconstitutional and unconscionable legislation. Mr. LABRADOR. Mr. Speaker, I know we spent a lot of time in committee talking about a lot of different issues, but maybe the gentleman forgets that we had 3 whole days of hearings on the Davis-Oliver Act, which this bill was included in, and many arguments were made against the Davis-Oliver Act. Most of the arguments that are being made today were not made against this portion of the act. Mr. Speaker, I yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from New York (Mr. King). {time} 0945 Mr. KING of New York. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman from Idaho for yielding. I certainly commend Mrs. Comstock for the outstanding job she has done on this. I stand here in strong support of this bill. It is absolutely essential that this Congress does everything it can to eradicate and destroy MS-13. It would be shameful not to. MS-13 has turned my district into killing fields. In the last year and a half, 17 innocent young people have been slaughtered with machetes and knives by MS-13. These are all young people, and these are children of legal and illegal immigrants documented and undocumented. It is the immigrant community that is being turned into a chamber of horrors by MS-13. Children are afraid to go to school; their parents are afraid to allow their kids to go out at night. There have been 270 arrests in the last year alone. MS-13 is terrorizing communities in my district within 15 to 20 minutes of my home. I am proud that this bill has been endorsed by the Sergeants Benevolent Association of the NYPD. Also, when I talk about 17 murders, it is exactly 1 year ago this week that two young teenage girls, Nisa Mickens and Kayla Cuevas, both constituents of mine, were found slaughtered, their bodies desecrated, mutilated, and torn apart by MS-13 because they happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time--no gang connections, nothing whatsoever. So this is something which has required extensive coordination between the Suffolk County Police Department, ICE, Homeland Security Investigations, Homeland Security, FBI task forces, and the U.S. Attorney's Office all working around the clock to try to eradicate this evil. But more has to be done, and that is what this bill is about. We cannot allow gang members to be taking advantage of loopholes in the immigration laws. To me, nothing could be more shameful than for us not to do our job. Nothing would be more violative of our role under the Constitution to protect people from all enemies foreign and domestic than for us not to pass legislation such as this. This is absolutely essential. This isn't theoretical, and this is not hypothetical. For those who are concerned about immigrants and those who are concerned about DACA--and I support DACA--and those who are supportive of the helpless in our society, how can you take any action which would prevent us from going after MS-13? MS-13 is a violent and vicious gang, and if we don't stand together as one, if we continue to make hypothetical arguments or a parade of horribles, we are subjecting and putting more young people--innocent young people--documented and undocumented, in the line of fire and putting them into the killing fields. I applaud the President, I applaud the Attorney General, and I also support the Democratic leaders in Suffolk County, all of whom have come together in a bipartisan effort to stamp out MS-13. But we must do more. This bill is a major step in that direction. I am proud to support it. I am proud to stand with Mr. Goodlatte, Mr. Labrador, and Mrs. Comstock in doing this. This is reality. This isn't make-believe. This isn't something we can dream about, something that may go bad. This is going bad day after day after day in my district and districts throughout the country. These are animals. They need to be eradicated from our society, and this bill is a major step in that direction. Mr. Speaker, I stand in strong support of the bill and urge its adoption. Ms. LOFGREN. Mr. Speaker, I would just note that this bill was indeed part of the Davis-Oliver Act which did go through the Judiciary Committee. But that bill was over 200 pages long. It had many problems. It was impossible to address all the problems. We would be there for a month if we had gone through line by line. It was not a good process. If it had been perfect, I would note that Chairman Goodlatte would not have had to have his amendment to remove the reason-to-believe standard that was in the bill that was part of the Davis-Oliver Act. Mr. Speaker, I yield 4 minutes to the gentlewoman from Texas (Ms. Jackson Lee), who is my colleague on the Judiciary Committee. Ms. JACKSON LEE. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman for her leadership. Mr. Speaker, this bill is as much a criminal injustice bill as it is immigration. Serving as the ranking member on the Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations Subcommittee, I am both a believer in the dangers of MS-13 as many of my colleagues are. I offer concern and recognition of their violence. That is why this bill should be defeated because something as crucial as this does not need to be litigated in the courts. You make a bill with such insufferable frailties constitutionally without bipartisanship, without any hearings, and without the ability to set a legal standard of what is the definition or the understanding of a criminal gang. This is done in consultation with the Attorney General, who is an opponent of any form of immigration, legal or undocumented, consulting with the Homeland Security Secretary of which I am a member of that committee, and the dominant factor will be the Attorney General talking to the Homeland Security Secretary about criminal elements. Who do you think will prevail? How many will be swept up in this expansive, nonorganized, nonorderly, and non-due process legislation? The frailties of this bill are the very number, if you will, five. Five persons can be called a criminal gang. Mothers and fathers, listen: innocent behavior of young people tattooed or having friends could be called a criminal gang. Yes, individuals who have status could be deported, an ongoing group, club, organizations, or associations. They have expanded this, maybe high school kids who may gather to smoke marijuana. Maybe this would cover sanctuary sites like churches that aid undocumented immigrants. All we are asking is let us work together to get a bill that fights MS-13, not fights innocent people. The bill defines criminal gang, a group that has been designated as a criminal gang, as I said, by the DHS Secretary in consultation with the Attorney General. It is unwise and irresponsible to not have the kind of organized framework. That happens from not having committee hearings and markups. It happens when you don't engage police officers in a wide breadth from many different aspects. I am disappointed that this bill did not have the opportunity to have the [[Page H7393]] Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations have input, and that would have been done if we had a full hearing or a hearing in the Immigration and Border Security Subcommittee, or a hearing in the Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations Subcommittee, or a hearing in the full committee as I mentioned. It lacks a constitutional construct. It begins to criminalize for associations. We are heading down a terribly unsophisticated road. According to the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention's recent report, nationally, 48,000 juvenile offenders were held in residential facilities. We don't need to add more, but here is the outcome: they are not just held, they are deported. Again, I emphasize to my colleagues that the ages could be very young because there are no firewalls dealing with the ages that might be swept up in this wide sweep of those who deserve to be responded to in a way that is not this bill. This bill pretends to be wrapping up and rounding up bad actors that are undocumented immigrants. That is the big calling card. I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that my colleagues vote against this bill. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record ``Fact check: Immigration doesn't bring crime into U.S.,'' by PBS NewsHour. [From the PBS Newshour, Feb. 3, 2017] Fact Check: Immigration Doesn't Bring Crime Into U.S. Data Say (By The Conversation) Editor's note: In his first week in office, President Donald Trump showed he intends to follow through on his immigration promises. A major focus of his campaign was on removing immigrants who, he said, were increasing crime in American communities. In his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention, Trump named victims who were reportedly killed by undocumented immigrants and said: ``They are being released by the tens of thousands into our communities with no regard for the impact on public safety or resources . . . We are going to build a great border wall to stop illegal immigration, to stop the gangs and the violence, and to stop the drugs from pouring into our communities.'' Now as president, he has signed executive orders that restrict entry of immigrants from seven countries into the U.S. and authorize the construction of a wall along the U.S. border with Mexico. He also signed an order to prioritize the removal of ``criminal aliens'' and withhold federal funding from ``sanctuary cities.'' But, what does research say about how immigration impacts crime in U.S. communities? We turned to our experts for answers. Across 200 metropolitan areas (By Robert Adelman, University at Buffalo, and Lesley Reid, University of Alabama) Research has shown virtually no support for the enduring assumption that increases in immigration are associated with increases in crime. Immigration-crime research over the past 20 years has widely corroborated the conclusions of a number of early 20th-century presidential commissions that found no backing for the immigration-crime connection. Although there are always individual exceptions, the literature demonstrates that immigrants commit fewer crimes, on average, than native- born Americans. Also, large cities with substantial immigrant populations have lower crime rates, on average, than those with minimal immigrant populations. In a paper published this year in the Journal of Ethnicity in Criminal Justice, we, along with our colleagues Gail Markle, Saskia Weiss and Charles Jaret, investigated the immigration-crime relationship. We analyzed census data spanning four decades from 1970 to 2010 for 200 randomly selected metropolitan areas, which include center cities and surrounding suburbs. Examining data over time allowed us to assess whether the relationship between immigration and crime changed with the broader U.S. economy and the origin and number of immigrants. The most striking finding from our research is that for murder, robbery, burglary and larceny, as immigration increased, crime decreased, on average, in American metropolitan areas. The only crime that immigration had no impact on was aggravated assault. These associations are strong and stable evidence that immigration does not cause crime to increase in U.S. metropolitan areas, and may even help reduce it. There are a number of ideas among scholars that explain why more immigration leads to less crime. The most common explanation is that immigration reduces levels of crime by revitalizing urban neighborhoods, creating vibrant communities and generating economic growth. Across 20 years of data (By Charis E. Kubrin, University of California, Irvine, and Graham Ousey, College of William and Mary) For the last decade, we have been studying how immigration to an area impacts crime. Across our studies, one finding remains clear: Cities and neighborhoods with greater concentrations of immigrants have lower rates of crime and violence, all else being equal. Our research also points to the importance of city context for understanding the immigration-crime relationship. In one study, for example, we found that cities with historically high immigration levels are especially likely to enjoy reduced crime rates as a result of their immigrant populations. Findings from our most recent study, forthcoming in the inaugural issue of The Annual Review of Criminology, only strengthen these conclusions. We conducted a meta-analysis, meaning we systematically evaluated available research on the immigration-crime relationship in neighborhoods, cities and metropolitan areas across the U.S. We examined findings from more than 50 studies published between 1994 and 2014, including studies conducted by our copanelists, Adelman and Reid. Our analysis of the literature reveals that immigration has a weak crime-suppressing effect. In other words, more immigration equals less crime. There were some individual studies that found that with an increase in immigration, there was an increase in crime. However, there were 2.5 times as many findings that showed immigration was actually correlated with less crime. And, the most common finding was that immigration had no impact on crime. The upshot? We find no evidence to indicate that immigration leads to more crime and it may, in fact, suppress it. Ms. JACKSON LEE. Mr. Speaker, opposing this, in particular, I would like to add this letter from The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights and a letter from the American Immigration Lawyers Association. The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, Washington, DC, September 13, 2017. Oppose H.R. 3697, the ``Criminal Alien Gang Removal Act'' Dear Representative: On behalf of The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, I am writing to express our opposition to H.R. 3697, which creates new, sweeping grounds for barring entry to or deporting immigrants based on the mere suspicion of gang affiliation. We oppose H.R. 3697 for the following reasons: It would subject people who have never committed a crime to deportation, creating a new definition of ``criminal gang'' that is unworkably vague and could cover a wide range of organizations ranging from churches to fraternities to political groups. It shifts the burden to individuals to prove they did not know they were affiliated with a gang that committed qualifying offenses, even though proving such a negative is often impossible. It would expand the use of mandatory, no-bond detention to people facing removal under the bill, even if they have not been convicted of any criminal offenses. Deportations based on suspected gang membership or affiliation would likely rely on flawed gang databases, which are rife with inconsistent definitions, improper documentation procedures, and inadequate safeguards. Creating a new ground of deportability for suspected gang members is also unnecessary, because the government already has enough tools and resources to deport such individuals. Most states and the federal government also have laws that punish or enhance sentences for individuals suspected of being gang members, recruiting gang members, or committing crimes while in a gang. In addition, DHS has long prioritized its resources to target suspected gang members for deportation. H.R. 3697 will disproportionately harm younger immigrants-- particularly unaccompanied minors, some of whom flee their home countries to escape gang violence, forced drug trafficking, and sexual violence, and who are at high risk of being coerced to participate in criminal activity. It will also indiscriminately bar these immigrants from asylum, withholding of removal, or other forms of humanitarian relief. Only a week after the elimination of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, we are deeply disappointed that Congress's first legislative response is to further erode due process protections for immigrants and put them at an even greater risk of deportation. We urge you to oppose H.R. 3697. Sincerely, Vanita Gupta, President & CEO. ____ American Immigration Lawyers Association. AILA Recommends VOTE NO on H.R. 3697--Revised to Include Goodlatte Amendment, 9/13/2017--``Criminal Alien Gang Member Removal Act'' As the national bar association of over 15,000 immigration lawyers and law professors, AILA recommends that Members of Congress oppose H.R. 3697, the ``Criminal Alien Gang Member Removal Act.'' The bill is scheduled to come before the House Rules Committee on September 12th and to the floor in the days immediately thereafter. [[Page H7394]] While Judiciary Chairman Goodlatte claims that H.R. 3697 is a ``common sense bill to protect our communities,'' in fact the bill will do just the opposite: undermine due process and enable the Trump Administration to deport massive numbers of foreign nationals who pose no threat to our communities or national security. The bill is overbroad and provides government officials with new, expansive powers to detain, deport, and block noncitizens from the United States regardless of whether that individual is suspected of, charged with, or convicted of any specific crime, or whether the individual poses any risk to public safety. The bill does not advance its purported public safety goals, and moreover will place the lives of asylum seekers and other vulnerable individuals at greater risk of harm. At a time when our nation urgently needs Congress to reform our immigration laws, its leadership has chosen instead to scapegoat immigrants and grant far-reaching enforcement powers to the government that will result in abuse and overreach. More than four years have passed since the Senate passed a comprehensive reform bill. During that time, the House has refused, and still refuses, to address the needs of families and businesses waiting in lengthy backlogs for visas and green cards. The House has yet to bring to a vote a bill that provides a solution for Dreamers and other unauthorized persons. American families, businesses and communities need reform that will strengthen America. H.R. 3697 takes our country in the wrong direction and should be rejected. Below is a list of the most harmful provisions in H.R. 3697. H.R. 3697 creates a sweeping, overly-broad definition of ``criminal gang'' in immigration law (Section 2(a)). The bill defines ``criminal gang'' as a group, club or association of five or more people who, within the last five years, had or has as one of its primary purposes the commission of a wide range of conduct including any federally defined felony drug offense, harboring of immigrants (under INA Sec. 274), the use of expired identification documents, or obstruction of justice. The bill's over-inclusive definition imposes criminal liability on non-criminal associations, creating the illusion of a gang where none in fact exists. Under this bill, many groups could qualify as criminal gangs including a church group which elects to offer ``sanctuary'' to an undocumented immigrant or a fraternity whose members use expired identification documents to purchase liquor. This definition of ``criminal gang'' is broader than the existing federal criminal law sentencing enhancement for ``criminal street gang'' in 18 U.S.C Sec. 521(a). The gang definition in H.R. 3697 is also far broader than most state law definitions of criminal gangs. Moreover, INA Sec. 101(53) permits the Secretary of DHS, in consultation with the Attorney General, to use the above criteria to designate a ``criminal gang.'' H.R. 3697 adds inadmissibility and deportability grounds that violate due process (Sections 2(b) and 2(c)). H.R. 3697 enables an immigration official to deny admission to a noncitizen if the official has ``reason to believe'' the person is or has ever been a member of a ``criminal gang'' or participated in activities associated with such group. The ``reason to believe'' standard is a low evidentiary standard and does not require a conviction or even an arrest Under this low standard, the bill will heighten the risk that non-dangerous people will be incorrectly and unfairly classified as gang members. These provisions authorize government officials to target people for their mere association with groups considered to be dangerous rather than for the person's own specific conduct. Authorizing guilt by association has been shown to lead law enforcement to engage in discriminatory enforcement and to depend on unreliable factors as tattoos, style of dress, ethnic background, or neighborhood associations. Under this bill, an immigration official may wrongly label a minor as a gang member for do nothing more than living in a neighborhood with a large number of immigrants and spending time with a suspected gang member or for displaying the flag of his home country. Goodlatte amendment: The original version of H.R. 3697 submitted to Rules Committee would have allowed this low ``reason to believe'' standard to apply not only to admissions but also to deportations of any noncitizen, including lawful permanent residents. An amendment offered by Chairman Goodlatte that is now included in the bill removes ``the reason to believe'' standard with respect to deportation. Even with this change, the bill would authorize immigration officials to deport lawful permanent residents that are associated with a group labeled a ``criminal gang,'' including a group that is wrongfully designated as a gang. As revised by the Goodlatte Amendment, the bill still applies the ``reason to believe'' standard to every individual who is seeking admission--which constitutes the vast majority of those who are targeted for enforcement. H.R. 3697 imposes mandatory detention on anyone, including lawful permanent residents, that an immigration official deems a member of a criminal gang (Sections 2(e) and 2(i)). This provision requires ICE to detain a person regardless of whether that person actually poses a danger to the community Moreover, H.R. 3697 provides no opportunity for the person to appear before a judge to request a custody determination-- also known as a bond hearing. In this regard, the bill completely eliminates an immigration Judge's review of the officer's decision--a critical component of due process that prevents unfair government deprivation of liberty. Any of the people who could be wrongfully labeled as criminal gang members, innocent youth on the street and church members, will be subject to automatic unreviewable detention under this bill. Ensuring that no one is wrongfully detained by the government is a hallmark of American values and the Constitution. This bill tramples upon those principles. H.R. 3697 threatens protection for vulnerable populations (Sections 2(f), 2(g), 2(h)). H.R. 3697 not only gives broad power to immigration officials to designate harmless people as gang members, but it also renders people merely suspected of gang association ineligible for humanitarian protection such as asylum, Temporary Protected Status, and Special Immigrant Juvenile Status. This bill will prevent bona fide refugees from seeking legal protection in the United States, including children fleeing forced gang recruitment and other victims of abuse encountered by gang members in their home country. This bill could be used to deny these children protection and safe haven in the U.S., deporting them back to their persecutors in violation of U.S. and international legal protections. America has always been a beacon of hope for those fleeing persecution and oppression. H.R. 3697 will extinguish that beacon by granting extensive powers to the government to detain and deport people who seek protection. AILA urges Congress not to pass legislation that undermines due process protections and would further advance mass deportations of immigrants and other foreign nationals. Ms. JACKSON LEE. This clearly says this is not a bill against crime, it is a deportation bill. Save our children, Mr. Speaker. Let's do something different and defeat the bill. Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to H.R. 3697, the ``Criminal Alien Gang Member Removal Act of 2017''. This bill amends the INA to now include a definition for criminal street gangs as: An ongoing group, club, organization, or association of 5 or more persons that has as one of its primary purposes the commission of certain listed offenses, including: a felony drug offense, including felony simple possession of marijuana (this would impact high school kids who may gather to smoke marijuana); bringing in and harboring certain aliens under INA 274 (this would cover sanctuary sites like churches that aid undocumented immigrants); identity fraud offenses (including knowingly possessing a false identity document); crimes involving obstruction of justice; and burglary. This bill also defines ``criminal gang'': a group that has been designated as a criminal gang by the DHS Secretary in consultation with the Attorney General. I oppose this unwise and irresponsible legislation because the bill contains several constitutional and procedural defects, and is an unnecessary diversion and distraction from the real issues facing the American people. As Ranking Member of the House Judiciary Crime Subcommittee, I am highly disappointed that this bill was rushed to the floor without any thorough and thoughtful consideration by the Judiciary Committee. In particular, there was no markup or hearing on this legislation that has such wide ranging and profound effect on a mass scale. This bill (1) is constitutionally unsound; (2) has a very low standard of proof; and (3) will result in a sweeping effect among many innocent individuals who have not committed any crime, and thus, raises due process and racial profile concerns. First, this bill lacks a constitutional construct for how Homeland Security is to determine its designation of a ``criminal street gang''. I offered an amendment that would have required a uniform legal standard, which will govern the identification of Criminal Street gang members for purposes of ICE enforcement. According to this bill, `any' immigrant, including minors, such as a 13 or 14 year old juvenile, would be subject to the harsh penalties of detention and deportation. If we begin to criminalize for associations then we are heading down a terribly dark road, particularly with youths. Statistics show that the brain does not fully develop until the age of 25. To punish them for mere association based on unsubstantiated evidence is bad legislation. According to the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention recent report, nationally, 48,043 juvenile offenders were held in residential placement facilities as of October 28, 2015. Due to this bill's vague nature, we would add to that alarming number, and further complicates mass incarceration. Second, the government's mere belief that someone is associated with a criminal gang is sufficient. Given the need for the Department of Homeland Security to come in and deport [[Page H7395]] any individual, the bar must be higher than mere suspicion and/or belief. There must be a clear and convincing standard under these circumstances. This bill would capture individuals, even those with permanent residence status; so long as the government believes the individual is associated with a criminal street gang. Even 13 or 14 year old juveniles that the government may believe are engaging in marijuana use, other drugs, or have association with criminal gangs would be subject to this bill's penalty. Third, this bill have a sweeping effect given its vague definition and overbroad targets for those who may harbor certain aliens and/or associate with criminal gang members. This bill has a discriminatory effect in targeting the immigrant community by criminalizing immigration, and thereby, raises due process and racial profiling concerns. Criminal gangs are very complex and are not exclusive to the immigrant community. The FBI reports some 33,000 violent street gangs, motorcycle gangs, and prison gangs with about 1.4 million members that are criminally active in the U.S. and Puerto Rico today. Many are sophisticated and well organized; all use violence to control neighborhoods and boost their illegal moneymaking activities, which include robbery, drug and gun trafficking, prostitution and human trafficking, and fraud. Strikingly, for this conversation, in these 33,000 street gangs, a significantly larger percentage was non illegal immigrants, unlike the message purported in this bill. Some of those street gangs include: 211 Crew, American Front, Aryan Brotherhood of Texas, Aryan Circle, Aryan Nation, Aryan Republican Army, Born to Kill, Dead Man Incorporated, European Kindred, just to name a few here that are mainly white supremacist gang groups. We could go on, as gangs are found everywhere, in almost every ethnic group. As legislators on the Judiciary Committee, we argue vigorously on behalf of the American people, as is the case in any other Committee; and in doing so, we will sometimes disagree. So to suggest that we would not have been able to debate the merits of this bill, so instead bypass the regular process is disheartening. Are we passionate about the issues that impact our legislative process, governance, and the American people? Yes we are! And we will continue to probe vigorously, as a legislative body having jurisdiction, notwithstanding the subject matter. We will not stay quiet as to not offend a few when so many issues with catastrophic consequences may result if we don't speak up. So Mr. Speaker, I make no apologies for doing my job and questioning where necessary on behalf of the American people. We should be having vigorous debate on matters such as jobs, schools, health care, victims of Charlottesville, victims of climate change, building bridges, healing broken communities, and bringing this country together for ``all'' the American people, we are instead debating a damaged bill in order to advance the President's campaign promise on mass deportation, thus, distracting us from the people's business. My amendments attempted to fix some of the glaring defects in this bill. In its current form, it is bad for our country and does not keep our communities safe, but instead does the opposite. For all the reasons stated above, I oppose this bill. Mr. LABRADOR. Mr. Speaker, I agree. We should save our children. We need to start deporting some criminal gang members. Mr. Speaker, I yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Goodlatte), who is the chairman of the full committee. Mr. GOODLATTE. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman from Idaho and the chair of our subcommittee for yielding. Mr. Speaker, I rise today in strong support of H.R. 3697, the Criminal Alien Gang Member Removal Act. Transnational criminal gangs have declared war on the United States. Their tactics of intimidation and unspeakable mutilation and killing have permeated most every part of our country, including multiple instances in my own district. Most recently in Bedford County, Virginia, a young man was killed by alien members of MS-13. The Department of Homeland Security reports an ever-growing number of criminal aliens joining international gangs, such as MS-13, which alone has over 10,000 members within our borders. Whether these criminals came to this country illegally as unaccompanied minors, adults, or have valid visas or even green cards, it is time to send the message that this behavior will simply not be tolerated. Yet current immigration law includes no provision allowing for the removal of criminal gang members based on their membership in dangerous gangs or participation in gang activities. The result is unconscionable. ICE must sit on the sidelines and wait for known gang members to be arrested and convicted of specific offenses before removal proceedings may commence. Of course, with many victims and witnesses too petrified of retaliation against them and their families to cooperate with police, many gang members are never convicted of their crimes. This legislation provides a crucial tool so that ICE can seek to remove alien gang members before they are able to extort businesses and murder innocent Americans. In addition, this bill allows the Secretary of Homeland Security to designate organizations as criminal gangs utilizing the same transparent procedures used by the Secretary of State to designate foreign terrorist organizations. Finally, the bill ensures that criminal alien gang members cannot receive asylum and be released back onto our streets able to resume their criminal activities while being eligible for a vast array of Federal benefits. Eradicating the death grip that transnational criminal alien gangs hold over many of our communities, especially immigrant communities, is an important piece of immigration reform. I am pleased that this bill, which stems from legislation that the House has approved in the past and which has been approved by the Judiciary Committee in multiple Congresses, is being considered today. Now, I want to address the allegation that this bill targets priests, nuns, and garage band members. It is preposterous. This bill deliberately includes the longstanding Federal criminal offenses for alien smuggling as predicates for criminal gang activity. Coyotes and other criminal gangs make billions of dollars and put countless lives at risk through their alien smuggling activities. As former U.S. Attorney David Iglesias, who emigrated to the United States from Latin America as a child, stated: ``Smuggling aliens across our borders is a dangerous business. All too often, people entrust their lives to smugglers, only to die in the broiling desert, or suffocate in the back of locked, airless trucks while the smugglers profit.'' ``These smuggling rings, which facilitate illegal entry into the United States and mercilessly exploit human beings for money, are a danger to immigrants and a threat to our national security. . . .'' The Democrats are engaging in a huge amount of obfuscation. In the past, House Democrats claimed the House passed legislation that would have strengthened Federal alien smuggling laws, would have had the effect of putting priests and nuns at risk of prosecution. The Democrats' clear implication was that these problems didn't exist under then-current law which remains current law. Let me quote. Democrat members of the House Judiciary Committee, including John Conyers, Jerry Nadler, Zoe Lofgren, and Sheila Jackson Lee, they stated that the bill then under consideration goes far beyond increasing penalties for alien smuggling and jeopardizes the well-being of millions of Americans, neighbors, family members, faith institutions, and others who live and work with undocumented immigrants. Former Speaker Pelosi, the current minority leader, stated: ``Under the guise of an expansive definition of smuggling,''--the bill--``it could make criminals out of Catholic priests and nuns, ministers, rabbis, and social service workers who provide assistance and acts of charity to those in need.'' The Democrats can't have it both ways. They can't argue one day that we can't change current law because that would result in putting priests and nuns at risk and argue the next day that, without any evidence, current law already puts them at risk. To add to the hypocrisy, the House Democrats supported an amendment which passed by voice vote. The SPEAKER pro tempore. The time of the gentleman has expired. Mr. LABRADOR. Mr. Speaker, I yield the gentleman from Virginia an additional 2 minutes. [[Page H7396]] Mr. GOODLATTE. So to add to the controversy, the House Democrats supported an amendment which passed by voice vote to add human smuggling to the list of predicate acts under the Federal money laundering statute. {time} 1000 The Department of Justice and Immigration and Customs Enforcement simply do not target clergy and others who do not make distinctions based on immigration status when serving those in spiritual or material need. The use of such laws against religious organizations and other humanitarian groups has been practically nonexistent. Of course, as in the sanctuary movement in the 1980s, when religious organizations engage in the smuggling of illegal aliens into the United States, they would be subject to prosecution, just as anyone else would be. This bill is based upon the same precedent that has been passed through this House by voice vote dealing with human smuggling. It is time to apply the same standard to alien gang members who are perpetrating violence not just on people traveling to the United States, as in the case of human smuggling, but on the citizens of virtually every State in the Union. The murders that have been outlined by Mr. King of New York, Mrs. Comstock of Virginia, Mr. Labrador of Idaho, and others are taking place all across the country because we simply are not removing from this country as expeditiously as possible members of gangs like MS-13. It is time to get about doing that, and this bill does that. I want to commend Representative Barbara Comstock; Representative Peter King; and the chairman of our Immigration and Border Security Subcommittee, Representative Raul Labrador, for their work on this important bill. Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 3697. Ms. LOFGREN. Madam Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. Madam Speaker, I include in the Record an analysis entitled: ``Harboring: Overview of the Law,'' prepared by the Catholic Legal Immigration Network, Inc. [From the Catholic Legal Immigration Network, Inc.] Harboring: Overview of the Law The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) prohibits individuals from concealing, shielding, or harboring unauthorized individuals who come into and remain in the United States. Under the law it is a criminal offense punishable by a fine or imprisonment for any person who: knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact than an alien has come to, entered, or remains in the United States in violation of law, conceals, harbors, or shields from detection, or attempts to conceal, harbor, or shield from detection, such alien in any place, including any building or any means of transportation. INA Sec. 274(a)(1)(A)(iii), 8 U.S.C. 1324(a)(1)(A)(iii) [hereinafter the ``harboring provision'' or ``Section 1324 (a)'']. The Harboring Prohibition Applies to Everyone The harboring prohibition is not restricted to those individuals who are in the business of smuggling undocumented immigrants into the United States or who employ undocumented immigrants in sweatshop-like conditions. As interpreted by the courts, harboring can apply to any person who knowingly harbors an undocumented immigrant. See, e.g., United States v. Shum, 496 F.3d 390 (5th Cir. 2007); United States v. Zheng, 306 F.3d 1080, 1085 (11th Cir. 2002), cert denied, 538 U.S. 925 (2003); United States v. Kim, 193 F.3d 567, 573-74 (2d Cir. 1999); United States v. Rubio-Gonzalez, 674 F.2d 1067, 1073 (5th Cir. 1982); United States v. Cantu, 557 F.2d 1173, 1180 (5th Cir. 1977), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 1063 (1978). What Are the Elements of Harboring? To establish a violation of the harboring provision, the government must prove the following in most jurisdictions ``(1) the alien entered or remained in the United States in violation of the law, (2) the defendant concealed, harbored, or sheltered the alien in the United States, (3) the defendant knew or recklessly disregarded that the alien entered or remained in the United States in violation of the law, and (4) the defendant's conduct tended to substantially facilitate the alien remaining in the United States illegally.'' Shum, 496 F.3d at 391-392 (quoting United States v. De Jesus-Batres, 410 F 3d 154, 160 (5th Cir. 2005), cert denied, 546 U.S. 1097 (2006)). The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit has rejected the fourth element asserting that the phrase ``conduct tending substantially to facilitate'' is a judicial addition to the statute that is unnecessary for a conviction because the statute requires no specific degree of assistance. United States v. Xiang Hui Ye, 588 F.3d 411, 415-416 (7th Cir. 2009). What Actions Constitute Harboring? Although Congress passed legislation to prohibit and punish the ``harboring'' of undocumented individuals, it never defined the term. The work of defining what constitutes ``harboring'' has been left to the courts. As shown below, the federal courts have not settled on one uniform definition, but rather many of the circuit courts have adopted their own definition of ``harboring.'' Harboring is conduct that substantially facilitates an immigrant's remaining in the U.S. illegally and that prevents the authorities from detecting the individual's unlawful presence (U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit) Harboring includes affirmative conduct such as providing shelter, transportation, direction about how to obtain false documentation, or warnings about impending investigations that facilitates a person's continuing illegal presence in the United States. (U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit) Harboring is conduct tending to substantially facilitate an immigrant's remaining in the U.S. illegally (U.S. Courts of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit) Harboring is conduct that clandestinely shelters, succors, and protects improperly admitted immigrants. (U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit) Harboring is conduct that provides or offers a known undocumented individual a secure haven, a refuge, a place to stay in which authorities are unlikely to be seeking him. (U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit) Harboring is conduct that affords shelter to undocumented individuals. (U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit) Explanation of Harboring Through Case Law U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit In the influential case, United States v. Lopez, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit went through the legislative history of the harboring provision and stated that the term harbor ``was intended to encompass conduct tending substantially to facilitate an alien's `remaining in the United States illegally,' provided that the person charged has knowledge of the immigrant's unlawful status.'' 521 F.2d 437, 441 (2d Cir 1975), cert. denied, 423 U.S. 995 (1975). In this case, Mr. Lopez owned at least six homes in Nassau County, New York, where he operated safe havens for undocumented individuals. Mr. Lopez knew that the people staying in his homes were undocumented. Each person paid Mr. Lopez $15 per week to live in his houses. In many cases, people received the address for a particular house before they left their home countries, and, upon crossing the border illegally, they proceeded directly to the house. Mr. Lopez also helped these individuals obtain jobs by completing work applications and transporting them to and from work. He arranged sham marriages for many so that they could appear to be in the U.S. in lawful status. With a warrant, immigration authorities searched six of Lopez's homes and found twenty- seven undocumented individuals. He was charged with harboring illegal immigrants. Mr. Lopez argued that the mere providing of shelter to undocumented immigrants does not constitute harboring. Id. at 439. He argued that to constitute harboring the conduct must be part of the process of smuggling immigrants into the U.S. or facilitating the immigrants' illegal entry into the U.S. Id. The circuit court noted that he essentially argued that to constitute harboring the sheltering would have to be provided either clandestinely or for the purposes of sheltering the immigrants from the authorities. Id. The Second Circuit rejected these arguments. It held that the statute criminalizes conduct that tends substantially to facilitate an alien's remaining in the United States illegally. Id. at 441. The circuit court found that Mr. Lopez's conduct did just that. It pointed out that Mr. Lopez had a large number of undocumented immigrants living at his houses; they obtained the addresses and, upon entering the U.S., proceeded to those houses; Mr. Lopez provided transportation for them to and from work; and, he helped arrange sham marriages. Id. The Second Circuit did not require that Mr. Lopez provide the shelter clandestinely nor that he shield the illegal immigrants from detection by immigration authorities Id. The case of United States v. Kim also is instructive on the meaning of harboring. 193 F.3d 567 (2d Cu 1999). It states that harboring within the meaning of Section 1324(a) ``encompasses conduct tending substantially to facilitate an alien's remaining in the U.S. illegally and to prevent government authorities from detecting [the immigrant's] unlawful presence.'' Id. at 574. In this case, Mr. Myung Ho Kim owned and operated a garment-manufacturing business called ``Sewing Masters'' in New York City. He employed a number of undocumented workers, including Nancy Fanfar. During the course of her employment, Mr. Kim instructed Ms. Fanfar to bring in new papers with a different name that would indicate that she had work authorization. He instructed Ms. Fanfar to change her name and remain in his employ a second time, even while he was being investigated by immigration authorities. According to the circuit court, Mr. Kim's actions constituted harboring, for they were designed to help Ms. Fanfar remain in his employ and to prevent her continued presence from being detected by the authorities. Thus, his conduct substantially facilitated her ability to remain in the U.S. illegally in prohibition of the harboring provision. Id. at 574-575. [[Page H7397]] U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit The Third Circuit also has considered what conduct constitutes ``shielding,'' ``harboring,'' and ``concealing'' within the meaning of Section 1324(a). Like the Second Circuit, it determined that these terms encompass conduct ``tending to substantially facilitate an alien's remaining in the U.S. illegally'' and [that] prevent[s] government authorities from detecting the alien's unlawful presence. ``U.S. v. Ozcelik, 527 F.3d 88, 100 (3d Cir. 2008); see also Delno-Mocci v. Connolly Props, 672 F.3d 241, 246 (3d Cir. 2012), U.S. v. Cuevas-Reyes, 572 F.3d 119, 122 (3d Cir. 2009); U.S. v. Silveus, 542 F.3d 993, 1003 (3d Cir. 2008). In United States v. Ozcelik, the defendant knew that the individual remained in the U.S. illegally and advised him to ``lay low'' and ``stay away'' from the address he had on file with the government. 527 F.3d at 100. However, Mr. Ozcelik did not actively attempt to intervene or delay an impending immigration investigation and the Third Circuit held that advising an individual without legal status to stay out of trouble and to keep a low profile does not tend substantially to facilitate their remaining in the country. Id. at 100-01. The circuit court reasserted that shielding or harboring a person without status ordinarily includes affirmative conduct such as providing shelter, transportation, direction about how to obtain false documentation, or warnings about impending investigations that facilitates a person's continuing illegal presence in the United States. See Id. at 99. In United States v. Silveus, the Third Circuit held that cohabitation, along with reasonable control of premises during an immigration agent's inquiry regarding the whereabouts of the suspected undocumented individual, does not constitute harboring without sufficient evidence that a defendant's conduct substantially facilitated the individual's remaining in the U.S. illegally and prevented authorities from detecting his/her unlawful presence. 542 F.3d at 1002-04. In this case, the agent never saw the suspected undocumented individual, but only heard the apartment door slam, heard some bushes break, and as he approached, saw the defendant shut her front door. Id. at 1002. The defendant spoke to the agent through her window and when asked if anybody had run out of her apartment, she said ``I don't know.'' Id. at 1003. The circuit court determined that the act of shutting a door as an agent rounded the corner and her subsequent reply to the agent's question did not establish ``harboring'' under Section 1324(a) because it only led to speculation as to the suspect's presence. Id. at 1004. In United States v. Cuevas-Reyes, the Third Circuit reaffirmed that shielding an undocumented person includes affirmative conduct (such as providing shelter, transportation, direction about how to obtain false documents, or warnings about impending investigations) that facilitates the person's continuing illegal presence in the U.S. 572 F.3d at 122. The circuit court held that the defendant's actions (taking undocumented people from the U.S. to the Dominican Republic in his private plane) were undertaken for the purpose of removing them from the U.S., not helping them remain in the U.S. Id. It noted that the goal of Section 1324 is to prevent undocumented individuals from entering or remaining illegally in the U.S. by punishing those that shield or harbor. Id. It asserted that punishing a defendant for helping individuals without legal status leave the U.S. would be contrary to that goal. Id. More recently, the Third Circuit reiterated that ``harboring'' requires some act that obstructs the government's ability to discover the undocumented person and that it is highly unlikely that landlords renting apartments to people lacking lawful status could, without more, satisfy the court's definition of harboring. Delrio-Mocci, 672 F.3d at 246 (citing Lozano v. City of Hazleton, 620 F.3d 170, 223 (3d Cir 2010)). The circuit court reiterated that ``[r]enting an apartment in the normal course of business is not in and of itself conduct that prevents the government from detecting an alien's presence.'' Id. U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit The Fifth Circuit's definition of harboring is broader than the Second and Third Circuits. It rejects the notion that to be convicted of harboring a defendant's conduct must be part of a smuggling operation or involve actions that hide immigrants from law enforcement authorities. See De Jesus- Batres, 410 F.3d at 162 (specific intent is not an element of the offense of harboring). An early Fifth Circuit decision, U.S. v. Cantu, 557 F.2d 1173 (5th Cir. 1977), remains informative. In Cantu, immigration agents visited the restaurant owned by Mr. Cantu because they received information that he was employing undocumented workers. The agents wanted to question the employees. Mr. Cantu refused admission to his restaurant until they could provide a warrant. While the immigration authorities waited outside for the warrant, Mr. Cantu made arrangements with at least two of his patrons to drive some of his undocumented employees into town. Mr. Cantu also arranged for his employees to sit in the restaurant and then leave the restaurant like customers. As the employees left the restaurant, the immigration agents approached them and questioned them about their immigration status. The agents determined their illegal status and arrested them. Mr. Cantu argued that, because he did not instruct his employees to ``hide,'' and because the employees left the restaurant in full view of the officers, he could not be charged with shielding immigrants from detection. He also argued that his actions were not connected to any smuggling activity. The Fifth Circuit, relying on the Second Circuit's Lopez decision, rejected these arguments, and determined that Mr. Cantu's actions--instructing the employees to act like customers so they could evade arrest--tended to facilitate the immigrants remaining in the U.S. illegally. Id. at 1180. In another Fifth Circuit case, United States v. Varkonyi, 645 F.2d 453 (5th Cir. 1981), the court cited to Lopez to assert that the harboring statute prohibits ``any conduct which tends to substantially facilitate an alien's remaining in the U.S. illegally.'' Id. at 459. Mr. Varkonyi provided a group of undocumented immigrants with steady employment at his scrap metal yard six days a week as well as lodging at his warehouse. On previous occasions, he had instructed and aided the men in avoiding detection and apprehension. On the day of their detention, Mr. Varkonyi interfered with Customs and Border Protection agents' actions by forcibly denying them entry to his property through physical force. Here, the circuit court found that Mr. Varkonyi's conduct went well beyond mere employment and thus constituted harboring. Id. at 459. In this case, the court pointed out that Mr. Varkonyi knew of the immigrants' undocumented status, he had instructed the immigrants on avoiding detection on a prior occasion; he was providing the immigrants with employment and lodging, he interfered with immigration agents to protect the immigrants from apprehension; and he was partly responsible for the escape of one of the immigrants from custody. Id. Given these facts, the circuit court found that Mr. Varkonyi's conduct, both before and after the detention of the immigrants, was calculated to facilitate the immigrants remaining in the U.S. unlawfully. Id. at 460. In 2007, the Fifth Circuit ruled in another employment harboring case that ``substantially facilitate'' means to make an individual's illegal presence in the United States substantially ``easier or less difficult.'' United States v. Shum, 496 F.3d 390, 392 (5th Cir. 2007) (citations and quotation marks omitted). The court noted that Section 1324(a) was enacted to deter employers from hiring unauthorized individuals and it refused to adopt a narrow definition of ``substantially facilitate'' that undermines Congress's purpose. Id. In this case, Mr. Shum was vice-president of an office- cleaning company and he employed janitors without legal status. According to witnesses, he provided false identifications to the workers to facilitate background checks so that the workers could clean government office buildings. Ms. LOFGREN. In this legal analysis by the Catholic Legal Immigration Network, Inc., it does point out that religious persons have been prosecuted and convicted for providing sanctuary. Opinions may differ on whether that is a good idea or bad idea, but to say that that is an MS-13 activity, I think we would all agree that is just crazy. That is what this bill would do. Madam Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the gentlewoman from Florida (Mrs. Demings), a freshman Member of the House whom we are so fortunate to have. Just last year, as the chief of police, she was on the front line in the fight against gangs. Mrs. DEMINGS. Madam Speaker, I spent 27 years as a law enforcement officer. I had the honor of working my way up through the ranks to become the chief of police. I co-chaired an antigang task force for the State of Florida. As chief, I launched an all-out war against violent crime. Through the hard work of a lot of good men and women, we were able to reduce violent crime by 40 percent. Do I take gang activity very seriously? You better believe I do. I have the record to prove that. The spirit of H.R. 3697, with this broad, new definition of what constitutes a gang, has nothing, based on my experience on the ground, to do with curtailing gang activity. As a former law enforcement officer who has been there on the front lines, there is no way I would vote for this law. This law targets a group of people based on their status and does not target criminal activity. That is what law enforcement officers do. We all take gang activity seriously. I heard the question earlier: Who would favor gangs? Who really would favor gangs? I invite my colleagues on the other side to join me in continuing our aggressive efforts to target criminal behavior, because that is really what we want to stop--criminal behavior--and not profile or target people. That is just not who we are. Mr. LABRADOR. Madam Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Ms. LOFGREN. Madam Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. [[Page H7398]] Madam Speaker, I just want to make a couple of closing comments on this bill. I think it is a given that every Member of this body wants to do something about gangs. I have gangs in my district. I think I heard Mr. King speak so passionately about the problem in his district. It is a pervasive problem. The concern is that this bill goes far beyond targeting those gangs. That is why we, with great reluctance, have to say we can't do this. We can't do this. If we wanted to target just the gangs, we wouldn't have included language that would allow charging people who are not gang members as gang members. We wouldn't have included provi