Steve Irwin's 14-year-old daughter Bindi in bizarre spat with Hillary Clinton over article about overpopulation
Teenage daughter of crocodile hunter Steve Irwin in bizarre spat with Hillary Clinton - over her essay about world's population

Teenager furious that essay for Clinton's e-journal was reworked by editors

She wrote to organisation asking: 'What happened to freedom of speech?'



Also unhappy about 'treatment she received from U.S. State Department'

They are the most unlikely contestants in a verbal battle over conservation – a 14-year-old schoolgirl and arguably the world's most powerful woman, Hillary Clinton.

Bindi Irwin happens to be the daughter of the late Crocodile Hunter Steve Irwin and the teenager is now snapping at the heels of the U.S. Secretary of State after an essay she wrote for Mrs Clinton's e-journal was savaged by the editors.

Although it is unlikely that Mrs Clinton had a hand in drastically editing Bindi's 1,000 word essay on conservation, the Australian teenager is furious about the re-worked presentation and has refused to allow it to go into print.

Going head to head: The daughter of 'Crocodile Hunter' Steve Irwin, Bindi, pictured (left) at her father's memorial in 2006, has taken issue with Hillary Clinton (right) after an essay the teenager submitted to the Secretary of State's e-journal was savaged by its editors



What she wrote, she said, was her opinion about the way a growing world population was the greatest danger to conservation 'and I don't want that edited out.'

But Mrs Clinton's editors were sticking to their guns – and Bindi was last night sticking to hers.

With her father – who died when he was stabbed in the heart by a stingray in September 2006 – once being one of the most well-known faces on American TV with his crocodile hunting series, it might have been thought that whatever Bindi wrote would be welcomed.

Her essay was scheduled to be published in the December issue of Mrs Clinton's e-journal titled Go Wild Coming Together for Conservation as part of the Secretary of State's endangered species initiative.

After Bindi submitted her carefully-prepared work to the US, it was returned to her for her final approval – with large amounts edited out.



Defending her daughter: Bindi's mother, Terri (left), pictured with husband Steve before his death in 2006, said her daughter was less than impressed with the treatment she had received from the U.S. State Department She had angled her essay on the problems the world faces with a growing population, comparing it to throwing a party and having too many guests turn up for everyone to be fed. 'How is it possible that our fragile planet can sustain these masses of people?' she wrote. Bindi's mother, Mrs Terri Irwin, widow of the crocodile hunter, told Sydney's Daily Telegraph that her daughter was less than impressed with the treatment she had received from the US State Department. 'It's interesting that she was asked to write an essay about the environment and included the consideration of population (growth) and they returned her essay edited and complete edited that out.' Larger than life: Mr Irwin, who was known for his bravery in the face of crocodiles, died in 2006 after being pierced in the chest by a stingray barb Mrs Irwin, who is American by birth, said Bindi wrote to Hillary Clinton's organisation later asking 'What happened to freedom of speech? This is my opinion and I don't want that edited out.'

Bindi, who, like her father before her, has soared to popularity in the US with her own TV show based on conservation, refused to allow the edited essay to go into print.

Aware that she might have raised the eyebrows of Mrs Clinton herself with her refusal to allow her essay to be published, Bindi is holding her ground.

'She just wanted her whole essay to be printed rather than just a snippet of it,' said a spokesman for the Australia Zoo in Queensland, where Bindi lives.

Mrs Irwin said that population growth was an unpopular topic – 'I just think it's fascinating that when Bindi does an interview and talks about population, more than 50 per cent of the time it's edited out.'