Irving, Las Colinas lauded by Gov. Greg Abbott as Texas wins award for business
AUSTIN -- Irving and Las Colinas are examples of Texas' economic buoyancy and diversity, Gov. Greg Abbott said Monday as he accepted for the state another Governor's Cup award from Site Selection magazine.

"You need to know this, Irving-Las Colinas has more Fortune 500 companies than any other city in the United States," Abbott said at a news conference in Austin.

Abbott also included Irving as he ticked off five economic development projects announced last year that he said show "we continue to work to diversify our economy."

He mentioned December's announcement by McKesson Corp., the nation's largest pharmaceutical distributor, that it would relocate its headquarters from San Francisco to Irving in April.

Officials have said the relocation will bring additional jobs in human resources, finance and accounting and corporate strategy to Irving, but did not specify a number.

Calling McKesson's move a gain "in the medical field," Abbott noted that the company ranks sixth on the Fortune 500 list, behind Walmart, Exxon Mobil, Berkshire Hathaway, Apple and United HealthGroup. In 2017, it had $208 billion in revenue.

Abbott also mentioned companies that are building new Texas facilities in oil and gas, steel, technology and business-services products.

As he spoke at the Governor's Mansion, economic development and chamber of commerce officials from Irving, Las Colinas, Dallas, Arlington, Fort Worth and other parts of Texas stood behind him.

For the seventh consecutive year, Site Selection gave Texas the award for having the most "qualified projects" in economic development in the previous calendar year of any state.

A qualified project has at least $1 million of investment, creates 20 or more new jobs and/or creates 20,000 or more square feet of new space, explained Mark Arend, editor in chief of Site Selection.

In 2018, Texas had 21.2 qualified projects per million people. That was slightly above the south central region's average of 20.4 projects per million of population.

For the third consecutive year, Nebraska had the most projects per capita -- in 2018, 61.2 per million people.