Big night for 'Texas Ted' Cruz as Trump leads Houston rally, hits Beto O'Rourke as 'stone cold phony'
Updated at 8:20 p.m.: Revised to include Trump's remarks.

HOUSTON -- President Donald Trump and other friends of Sen. Ted Cruz turned Rep. Beto O'Rourke into a piñata Monday night, revving Texas Republicans to form a firewall for the national party -- and block Democrats from transforming Texas into a political extension of California.

"Ted's opponent in this race is a stone-cold phony named Robert Francis O'Rourke, sometimes referred to as Beto. And he pretends to be a moderate, but he's actually a radical open borders left-winger," Trump said. "O'Rourke voted against your tax cuts and he went against oil workers. ... O'Rourke supports a socialist takeover of health care. You're going to triple your taxes and it won't be enough."



Trump marveled at O'Rourke's "F" rating from the National Rifle Association. "An F means he wants to take away your guns," he said at a noisy, rollicking rally in downtown Houston, with supporters waving red "Make America Proud Again" signs, many in red "Make America Great Again" caps. "If Ted doesn't win, your Second Amendment's going to be in trouble."



Over the course of a 76-minute stem-winder on the same day early voting began in Texas, Trump drew cheers for demands for a border wall, boos at mentions of O'Rourke and of the "caravan" of Central American migrants marching through Mexico toward the United States.

He hit O'Rourke for objecting to deportations. "He says they're people. They're people. They carve you up, but they're people" Trump said.

The crowd chanted "CNN sucks!" at the president's mention of the "fake news." "Don't worry, I don't like 'em either," Trump responded.

Trump event

It was a somewhat more caustic message than Cruz usually takes, but no surprise for anyone who invites Trump to stump at his side. This was in every way a Trump event, not a Cruz event. Hardly any Cruz signs were visible. It was all "Veterans for Trump" and "Women for Trump" and "Keep America Great."

Cruz aides got a limited supply of VIP passes. But this was far bigger than any crowd Cruz has drawn, and he made the most of the spotlight.

"Do we give in to mobs?" Cruz demanded, before launching into an indictment of his challenger. "On the Second Amendment, I'm for it. Beto's against it. ... If you want a big government, gun-grabbing liberal, well, the Democrats have given you one."

"We need to build the wall!" Cruz declared, setting off chants of "Build the wall!" from thousands of supporters, many waving red preprinted placards that read "Finish the wall."

Some die-hard fans of the president camped overnight to ensure a seat. For those unable to get inside the Toyota Center, the Trump campaign threw a tailgate party outside. The arena seats 18,000. Many hundreds of seats were empty, including all of the boxes on both tiers of the mezzanine.



"This is some record crowd," Trump insisted. "It's true what they say. Everything in Texas is just bigger."

He called Cruz a "really good friend of mine."

"At the beginning it was a lovefest," he recalled of the 2016 campaign. Then, he said, "it got nasty. And then it ended. ... Nobody has helped me more, with your tax cuts. ... He defended your jobs. He defended your borders. ... He defends your families. He defends your faith, and we are defending together, with a lot of other great Republicans, your freedom."

Cruz spoke for 20 minutes and dispelled any shred of doubt about his fealty to Trump, declaring: "I look forward to campaigning alongside him in 2020 for his re-election as president of the United States."