Could trio of Utah companies become the next Snapchat?
SALT LAKE CITY — Not since 2009 have the words "Utah" and "tech IPO" been uttered in the same sentence. At least not in reference to an actual stock sale.

That, however, may be about to change.

Last week, a public stock offering from Snapchat made instant billionaires of its founders and instant millionaires of early investors and employees on the way to amassing $3.4 billion in new capital.

Could a Utah company be next?

Since Snap Inc.'s debut, stock pickers, tech prognosticators and advanced industry pundits have been busy assembling lists of their picks of the next big technology IPO, and a trio of Utah companies are figuring largely in virtually everyone's estimation, with a fourth not far behind.

Qualtrics, Pluralsight and InsideSales are not only among the favorites to make the next big public offering splash, they are also members of the unique "unicorn"(companies with valuations over $1 billion) club, which currently includes 226 private companies worldwide, according to a list compiled by CrunchBase, the investor data tool managed by tech news website TechCrunch.

While some of the other identified prospects for next tech IPO of 2017 may be more well-known to the general public — Dropbox, Blue Apron and Spotify among them — Utah's homegrown contenders are heavy-hitters in their own right.

Provo's InsideSales (sales software) has earned some $250 million in private investment and is valued at $1.5 billion; Qualtrics, also in Provo (research software), $220 million in investments, $1.15 billion valuation; and Farmington's Pluralsight (professional training software), $163 million in investments, $1.14 billion valuation.

Another Utah tech leader on the list, Domo (business software), has amassed $580 million in funding and is valued at $2 billion. Domo, headquartered in American Fork, has also been a part of near-future IPO conversations and has a veteran Utah entrepreneur, Josh James, at the helm.

While identifying the next big IPO may fall into the same realm as reading tea leaves, the significance for Utah, should it be a local company, is likely far more predictable.

"Any of our big 'unicorn' tech companies going public will have a tremendous benefit and impact on Utah," said Justin Bott, marketing director for Grow Utah, a nonprofit, privately funded organization that aids entrepreneurs and startups. "It would be a catalyst for so many things and draw further attention, and especially investor attention, to all that's happening in Utah."

Bott said any Snap-like IPO launching from a local firm would also serve to invigorate an already vibrant startup scene in Utah.

"I think a big public offering would be seen by those who are in early-stage startups in our area as an absolute boost," said Bott. "These innovators are already a pretty inspired group, but seeing one of our big companies go IPO will make them think, 'Yeah, we can do that, too.'"

Bott thinks Utah is "long overdue" for a tech IPO and recalled the last one that earned widespread attention was Ancestry.com's public offering in 2009. He also thinks that the state is well-positioned to release the floodgates on a bevy of new, unicorn-level companies in the coming years.

"We've got an amazing tech ecosystem here, and these big companies that are close to IPO-ing are a product of this environment," said Bott. "We're going to see more of these rising stars and successes for our big companies will lead to successes for the smaller companies coming up behind them."

The decision to take a private company public is frought with both functional challenges and big decisions about what kind of company you want to be. Founders need to consider that, while sometimes generating game-changing new funding resources, it also compels new levels of accountability, transparency and power-sharing.

And, from the market's perspective, being big enough to become a publicly traded company is not what it used to be.

"Not that long ago, you could be a $300 million company, and you were ready for an IPO," said Dr. Robert Dubil, a professor of finance at the University of Utah's David Eccles School of Business. "New secondary markets for these companies, mostly private equity shops, can keep them in private hands much longer."

"This has helped lead us to where we are now fewer, and much bigger IPOs."

In most cases, once a company becomes public, stockholders and a representative board of directors get a say in decision-making, which can be at odds with a founder's vision of the future. Stockholders, of course, are interested in one thing — a return on their investment. And that, Dubil said, is in no way a guarantee, no matter how large a company you are.

"Investors are looking for that 'pop,'" Dubil said. "For Snap, the insiders bought at $17 then it went up to $24. But that really doesn't happen very often maybe 1 in 20 IPOs."

"If you bought at $24, however, like most people did, profitability is an unknown future possibility, if it happens at all."

Estimating where an initial stock offering for Utah's Qualtrics, Pluralsight or InsideSales might fall is an unknown quantity, and will likely remain that way well down the road to an IPO offering. And, while all three companies declined to comment on IPO-related issues for this story, new capital needs, expansion plans and how much power the founders are willing to relinquish will all be factors for them in making that decision.