Peter Wang Obituary
Not sure how to go about this, but I just wanted to say the name Peter Wang will forever live in my mind as one of my utmost heroes. Rest In Paradise.

Sending our deepest sympathy to your family during this sad time for your loss of Peter. Each day may God give you the comfort and help needed as you try to cope with such a great loss. He will be dearly missed.

To the Wang family, my deepest condolences. The story of your son hit home with me. My mother's maiden name was Wang. Like your son, I am also a first generation immigrant and also aspired to join the military. I was able to be honored to serve in the USAF as a missile officer. I only wished that your son was able to have had the opportunity to have done the same. By every indication, he would have been an outstanding officer. He was diligent and caring of others. He put others before himself. Those are two qualities that are indicative of a good officer. As an Air Force veteran and a fellow Chinese American, I salute your son. I pray that you will all find solace in the years to come. Although Peter's time on this earth was brief, he made an impact. RIP Peter.

Our deepest condolences on your family's profound loss. Young Peter went out of his way to help his fellow students. God in heaven will not forget his selfless actions. John 5: 28,29 tells of a bright future on the horizon for our lost loved ones. All the best to your dear family.

As a Viet Nam veteran, I am so proud to claim your fallen son as a brother. His acts of heroism are an inspiration to all. I know you miss him terribly and I will continue to pray for your family. Lloyd Montgomery Naples, Florida

To the Wang Family: Please accept our sincere condolences of your dear son Peter. Know that world wide there are many who are with you in thought and prayers for continued strength from God above. As I learned about the heroic efforts of Peter to save classmates and teachers just brought tears to my eyes. Peter's heroism is truly an act of admiration especially at such a young age. May you find comfort in knowing that young Peter is in Gods memory awaiting the day he is called back to life on an earthly paradise. We all look forward to this day. John 5:28, 29 Revelation 21:3,4

I'm sorry for your loss. Please accept my condolences. hope you are comforted by this few words. you will be able to see Peter Wang again.(ACt 24:15) I will keep the whole family in my prayers.

Mr. & Mrs. Wang, your son saved other children, from what I hear. He was a brave young man and I wish you all comfort. I am praying for each and every one of you. What a tremendous loss.

Please accept my condolence, for the loss of you son. May the God of all "comfort you in all you trials", making your grief bearable, and letting know that other share in your pain and can sympathize with you.

LOAD MORE

You were too young to have to be in a position to be a hero. You saved everyone but yourself I would only hope to be half the person you are. For Mr and Mrs. Wang, wow you raised the most amazing son and thanks to him more parents can see their kids come home. I'm so sorry about your loss I can only imagine what you're feeling but thank you for your god sent son. You both raised an angel thank you thank you thank you.

Peter, your dedication and . commitment to your duty will be cherished by those who knew and loved you. My condolences are with the family at this most difficult time.

Dear Wong family, We are so sad to hear about this terrible tragedy. No one has love greater than this, that someone should surrender his life in behalf of his friends. We look forward to the time when the world we be at peace Nick and Judy Arcuri

I STAND FOR ENTIRE ASIAN COMMUNITY , ASIAN COUNTRY FOR PETER PARENTS OF HAVING RAISED SUCH A BRAVE , CHARACTER , COURAGE , DIGNITY ,SELFLESS CHILD HIS NAME WILL BE ETCHED IN ALL OF OUR ASAIN HEART. PETER PROTECT HE'S FRIENDS AND CLASSMATES * I WANT ALL THE PEOPLES OUT THERE TO SEEE NO RACES PROBLEM PETER WANG ATKE ACTION INSPIRED EACH OF US TO BE KINDER * HOPE PETER BY CHANGING THE WORLD NEXT GENERATION NO MATTER WHAT YOUR RACES HE WILL SEL SACRIFICE INSPIRATION AMERICAN HERO YOUR LEGACY WILL LAST FOR NEXT....NEXT GENERATION TO COME..... !SO MANY OF US ASIAN COMMUNITY APPRECIATE THE SACRIFICE YOU MADE.MY FATHER IN-LAW WAS CAPTAIN VETERAN VIETNAM WAR HE SAVE AND BRINGS 450 LIVES IN THE UNITED STATE TO FIND JOBS.CAN REACH ME AT : COLDWELL BANKER REAL ESTATE ALSO I AM THE FOUNDER CHINESE SCHOOL AT WILTON CT : JOSEPH HAN @ 203-906-3977

Dear, Mr. and Mrs Wong, When you lose someone you love, you gain an angel you know. We would like to express our sincere condolences to you and your family.

I am so sorry for your loss. I pray for you to have peace and fond memories of this wonderful young man

Mr & Mrs Wang, thank you for raising a son who was one of the bravest people that this country could ever know. At the tender age of 15, he had already understood what being a "man" meant. He had learned the discipline of mind, fortitude of spirit and clear direction of leadership. You had raised a son that no longer belonged to you but rather belonged to all of us, a grateful nation, who sincerely thanks you. Your son was a true Sheepdog who protected the weak. We thank you for training such courage into one so young. We mourn your loss and our own Sincerely, Denise (Savannah, GA)

Dear Wang family, I am deeply saddened to hear about the loss of your amazing boy. His memory will definitely stay with you and your family forever. May you find true comfort from God at this time. He will make you strong (1 Peter 5:10).

LOAD MORE

Sorry for the tragic loss of this fine young man. I noticed that he was born exactly 2 days before my daughter. I am from the state where the Sandy Hook Tragedy took place over 5 years ago.

Peter, You were an incredibly brave and courageous young man. I believe you would have been a Fine Military Officer and a true defender of America. May God Bless you and your Family.

"I will guard everything within the limits of my post and quit my post only when properly relieved." You are relieved cadet, lay now and rest. -US Army Vet

I'm an old retired army officer. I served in special forces in Vietnam 50 years ago. I grieve for Peter as I continue to grieve for my comrades who were killed in action there. His ultimate sacrifice, had it occured in combat, would have merited the award of the Congressional Medal of Honor. I will keep him in my thoughts and prayers for as long as I live.

In the darkest of times, this young man chose to help others. Rest in Peace, Peter. Condolences to all his family and friends

What an amazing young man. What a tragic loss for his family and our country. Peter Wang will never be forgotten. He is the best in all of us. May God bless and comfort his family.

My deepest and heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Peter. Words can not express my sorrow over this tragic loss. In reading the expressions of his classmates he was kind...one to be admired because of putting others ahead of himself. It is my prayer that the God of all comfort will bring you peace and in time may the fondest memories of Peter bring joy back to your broken hearts.

My heart was broken when I heard about the tragedy. Peter Wang displayed a beauitful quality of putting others above himself. If everyone followed his example in thinking of others first we would not experience such lost. Soon we will not have to live in fear Micah 4:3&4. Your family is in our thoughts❤.

LOAD MORE

We said Kaddish for you at The Shul of New York. You left this life a hero. Your classmates survived because of your actions. How selfless and brave you were. Blessings on your journey to the afterlife.

I pray for your family to have peace. We will continue to honor you and speak of your courageous act and humanity.

Please except my condolences. I can not find the words to express my sorrow. Your son is truly a HERO. May this beautiful ANGEL rest in peace. May you some day find comfort in the memories you have of this truly amazing young man. My thoughts and prayers are with you.

Mr. Wang, Thank you for your sacrifice. You inspire me to be a better person. To your family and friends, Take comfort in your memories of Peter. I am so sorry this happened, to everyone who lost loved ones. God bless Peter and comfort his family!

My condolences to the Wang Family, although I know that they are mere words. Actions to stop this from happening again, to make sure that fine young men like Peter and fine young women don't die needlessly, will speak louder than any words.

Peter, you are such an amazing person and so selfless. You will be remembered forever. You are an American hero. God Bless you and your family. You are a reminder that there are still good people in this world.

LOAD MORE

Although I never had the pleasure to meet this young man, I can say with all confidence that we can all learn a lot from his bravery, self sacrifice, and love for his fellow man. God willing I will never be put in the situation he was in, but if I am, I hope I can be as brave as he was. John 15:13 says, Greater love has no one than this, to lay down one's life for his friends and Peter exhibited this to the fullest. If there is a test in life, Peter Wang passed with flying colors. God bless you and your family Peter.

To all who loved this courageous hero, Peter's courage in the face of danger and his selfless act of heroism offers us hope and inspiration in this difficult time. I am thankful the military community has stepped up to honor Peter. There are no adequate words to express condolences, but please know my military family is praying for you!

Thinking of Peters family and indeed all the families who are bereaved and suffering. Bless you all from UK ❤❤ Have chosen Florida as my state as unable to leave message otherwise x

To the entire Wang Family, I am sending my prayers to all of you. What a brave son you raised! My heart aches for you and all the other families who lost their loved ones. God Bless you.

Rest in peace dear brother. All I will say is I will try to follow your example and put others before me. You will not be forgotten.

Sorry to hear about the tragic news. If fate has it that he be gone on that day, what a valorous way it is to exchange his life for the lives of countless others. His parents should be proud of having raised such a brave and selfless child. His name and bravery will be be etched in all of our hearts. Love, Ji Wei

I am crying for a child I never met. He was obviously an amazing young man. I cannot even begin to imagine your grief. May you find comfort in the arms of your loved ones. I'm just so sorry. Words are inadequate.

Dear Peter, On behalf of the West Point Society of Phoenix, we honor your memory and the courageous life that you lived. Our hearts are with you. Duty - Honor - Country

LOAD MORE

Please accept sincerest condolences from my family to yours. Peter was a young man brave beyond his years - may his memory will give you strength.

Please accept sincerest condolences from my family to yours. Peter was clearly an exceptional young man, brave beyond his years may his memory give you strength.

You are an outstanding young man. My prayers and best thoughts to your family. We are very proud of you Peter!

Here from the UK, and a former military serviceman, I was deeply touched by what I have read of the brave Mr Wang. I am deeply saddened that Peter's life and aspiration was so cut short in such a dreadful and cruel way. I very much hope that Peter's dear family are able to take some solace in the noble way that he stood in the line of danger. Thus, Peter at such a young age is huge an example to all of us. I salute him for his courage, dignity and honour. What a great guy, what a marvellous character. 'He is a better man than I'. My sincerest condolences to the Wang family, their friends and all of those people who were made to suffer that day. God bless you all.

As the father of 9 and 11 year old boys who are the light of my life, I cannot imagine your emotions right now. May you all one day be able to take comfort and solace in a son and brother who is the embodiment of the word Hero. I will make sure my sons read Peter's story which I know will inspire them to do good in this world. Prayers from Oregon

Salute to Peter! A pure beautiful youth, a brave courageous soul, a loving Chinese son, an inspirational American hero. Your lagacy will last for generations. May you rest in peace, may your family feel the love and support from all of us.

What a brave young man. The pictures of Peter and his family show how much he was loved. My heart breaks for all of you. Sending love and hugs from Ohio.

LOAD MORE

My heart aches for you. I know you are devasted. Such a senseless act my prays are wth you to get thru this somehow. VS Philadelphia PA

Peter, your heroic actions will never be forgotten ... a line from country singer Lee Greenwood's song... And I'm proud to be an American, where at least I know I'm free. And I won't forget the men who died, who gave that right to me

Extending deepest sympathy, for you in your loss. And hoping, too, that comfort and peace may come to you. With love from the United Kingdom

We are a military family and have children in JROTC as well. Your son is a testament to all that is good and demonstrated that in his actions. May you be comforted during this extremely difficult time knowing that so many are praying for your family. Your son is a hero. God bless you all and RIP young man.

One day the smile will come before the tear - Joe Biden Those we truly love, never really leave us. May your sons beautiful soul shine on forever through the people he touched.

America holds Peter in her heart. His beautiful soul, sweet spirit, and heroic action will not be forgotten. Today, and for many days, our hearts are broken. But we Americans will not be broken and we will work to ensure Peter's life had meaning for us all. Courage for the deed; grace for the doing. Thank you Peter, for your courage and your grace.

Mr And Mrs Wang, The story of your son has resonated loudly across the world and to my family here in California. There are no words that Will bring you comfort at this time, but know your son has touched us by his story! I'm heartbroken you have to deal with this at this time. Time will ease the pain. I pray this nightmare will end soon.

LOAD MORE

I am truly sorry that your family has togo through this. Tears are flowing. Love to you all on this day and every day moving forward. May you find peace.

Peter, you died too young but you inspired your entire generation as well as many of us who are much older. Your example of sacrifice in the service of others will last far beyond next week or next month or next year. You were and remain a very, very special young man. Rest in peace.

Thank you for sharing your beautiful son with this world. Long may his legacy last. I would've been honored to serve with him.

A young hero, gone way too soon. You are a testament to all that is good in the world. RIP. Wishing for strength and peace for the family and friends you left behind. So terribly sorry for your loss.

God bless this wonderful young man. My heart goes out to you and your family. May his memory give you comfort, and someday make you smile.

LOAD MORE

Julie here from Michigan......you will never be forgotten. May you rest in peace and may your family feel all the love and warmth protecting them.

Greater Love has no man than one who gives his life for his friends Blessings of comfort and peace to your grieving family. Forever remembered.

To Peter's family and friends: No words could replace the loss of such a brave and honorable young man. His courage and patriotism are a shining example. May he rest peacefully and may you find comfort in the support of millions across the globe. Peace be with you.

Thank you for your service. May God hold you in the palm of his hand. Sleep in peace for you are a true hero and an inspiration to all.

So young to have been so brave. Few honored heros have given more for his friends and country.

LOAD MORE

It breaks my heart that Peter's life was cut short so tragically, he would certainly made his way to the United States Military Academy West Point or become a celebrated Chef in the family-owned restaurant... but his dreams were shattered into pieces. I wish his parents heal the wounds, I wish his young brothers continue to dream and never lose their faith in humanity. Peter will be remembered as a Hero, RIP!

Our hearts break for this extraordinary young man and his family. May his actions inspire each of us to be kinder, braver and to do whatever we can to make sure this ever happens again.

Peter, While I never met you I want you and your family to know my prayers are with you all. What you did was heroic and you were a guardian angel for those you protected that day. You are a true American hero, rest easy.

You will not be forgotten. We will remember your life and your final act of heroism to protect your peers. May they go on to honor you by changing the world.

LOAD MORE

Fair Winds and Following Seas to you Cadet Wang. You went above and beyond, brought great credit upon yourself, your family, and the uniform you proudly wore. I can honestly say, I would have been glad to have served with you. You have earned your place in Odin's Hall Valhalla. Paul Martinson US Navy, Veteran

Peter Wang exemplifies what is right and honorable about this country. May his family find peace during this time in knowing that so many of us appreciate the sacrifice they made. Thank you for sharing him with all of us.

Sending your brave family endless hugs and prayers as they begin life without you but always with you in their hearts . You are an American hero and your family is a Gold Star Family to us here at the Homefront Hugs Foundation . We are inspired by your selfless courage and love of your family and friends . Please know you will never be forgotten and we will be here for your family too along with so many others .

You went above and beyond proudly exemplifying what the service is about. Yours was a life cut too short but bravely and courageously everything that America is about. A life of service to others.

To the family of peter, may your brave son rest in peace and being a member of the 2000 members of the navy radio amateur radio club we offer you our sincerest condolences and are petitioning the government for a full military funeral May you rest in Peace Peter.. warren c boles usmc vietnam veteran

Thank you Cadet Wang for your bravery - you went above and beyond the call of duty, with a wisdom beyond your years, praying for your Mother, Father, brothers, family and friends - with love from the Nagorka family, Stephen J. Nagorka, US Navy retired, Jo Nagorka and our son Sam Nagorka, officer candidate USAF

LOAD MORE

Peter, I am going to miss you! I will never forget the times we spent as kids having fun at PenTab's aftercare. R.I.P my friend!

~ There is no greater love than to lay down one's life for one's friends.~ John 15:13 "It is foolish and wrong to mourn the men who died. Rather we should thank God that such men lived." - George S. Patton

To the Wang family, words cannot express the pain we feel at the loss of your dear Peter. We will never forget him. He is a Hero! Praying for you all......

Please accept my deepest sympathy and condolences for the loss of your son. May the future find a path to healing and comfort in this time of tragedy.

John 15:13 Greater love has no one than this, that one lay down his life for his friends. Our deepest condolences to the Wang family in the loss of your brave son Peter.

My condolences to Peter's family, life is so precious and there are probably never the right words to be said. Not long after my brother was killed in 1973 I read this and means so much to me today. "I wish you enough sun to keep you bright , I wish you enough rain to appreciate the sun more I wish you enough happiness to keep your spirit alive I wish you enough pain so that the smallest joys in life appear much bigger I wish you enough gain to satisfy your wanting I wish you enough loss to appreciate all you possess I wish you enough hellos to get you through the last good-bye." Author Unknown

My heartfelt condolences to the family of this brave, young man. He has left this earth way too early, but his sacrifice will never be forgotten.

Peter's bravery is humbling. The Veteran community stands in awe of him. He gave all that he could so that others might live. This Veteran salutes him, as do so very many others.

LOAD MORE

The love and support and admiration of many people is being expressed on a Facebook page this evening for Peter. Peter and his heroism shall be long-remembered as his friends and fellow students honor him with their patriotism and activism. I shall remember you and your family and Peter's friends in my prayers for years to come. May the beautiful memories of his time with you bring you some degree of comfort in the days and months and years ahead.

To the family of Mr. Peter Wang My deepest condolences to you. A brave and selfless young man. His sacrifice and courage will never be forgotten From a Grateful American

Our sympathy to you, may God give you strength in this time. Our family grieves with you for your beautiful child.

Dear Peter, As a retired USAF Vet, I stand and salute you. A brave young man taken before his time. As a father, my heart goes out for you Kong and Hui. May God Bless you both during the difficult time. Sent with honor and respect. Roland Jenkins, USAF (Ret) and Tae Jenkins

Hero has many definitions. None greater than one who sacrifice his own life so that others can live. My deepest sympathies and condolences to the Wang family.

Peter is the epitome of a Hero, and what our military does. His sacrifice came much to early. My deepest sympathy to all that loved him. Semper Fi Little Brother

LOAD MORE

Daniel Lee Dear Peter, you are such an honorable young man. Thank you for all that you have done. May we all honor you....

Eric Hofhine Hero's are among us every day of our lives. And there are rare occasions where they are revealed at our greatest moment of struggle. As a member of a Gold Star Military family, I know the sacrifice made by heroes and the pride mixed with pain that that the families are left with. I think Abraham Lincoln expressed it most sincerely in his letter to Mrs. Bixby. Lincoln wrote:



"I feel how weak and fruitless must be any word of mine which should attempt to beguile you from the grief of a loss so overwhelming. But I cannot refrain from tendering you the consolation that may be found in the thanks of the Republic they died to save.



I pray that our Heavenly Father may assuage the anguish of your bereavement, and leave you only the cherished memory of the loved and lost, and the solemn pride that must be yours to have laid so costly a sacrifice upon the altar of freedom."



The loss of Peter heartbreaking. I like to take comfort in the lovely thought that such a selfless compassionate person was in the world even if only for a short time. My thoughts and prayers are with your family.

Madison McCarthy Peter was an amazing person that I've heard from the shooting on Wednesday. Now Peter Wang is in heaven enjoying his breakfast with God. Wang family, I'll be thinking of you always.

S.A. Singer My deep condolences on your loss. What a truly courageous and good young man. His Spirit will fly now.

Lisa Evans Peter,

I only know of you through this tragedy. My heart goes out to you, your family, and your friends. May you rest Peacefully at God's side now, and may your families & friends receive the Blessing of peace and strength to get through this, the most difficult time in their lives right now, knowing that in the days and weeks ahead, although much too difficult to see now, the pain will always be there, but life will get a little bit easier for them, with support, and most of all, with love. I'm so sorry this had to happen to all of you. These are my own personal thoughts and words from my heart, and I will be placing my words on each of the pages of the 17 lives that were lost.

Rest Peacefully, Peter.

Respectfully, Lisa Evans

Cindy Myers Your son was so brave and strong, he is now serving in God's army of angels, surrounded by God's immense love. My thoughts and prayers are with you and your family. With my deepest condolences, Cindy - Austin, Texas

Brian My heartfelt sympathies to to peter's family and may god hold peter in his arms forever.

Peter and his bravery are a testament to his character. He would have been a great addition to the Army. He was already living the Army values even at his young age. His actions in extreme danger and self sacrafice have brought honor to his family and the uniform he wore. I have no doubt that he is guarding the pearly gates in heaven at this very moment. Rest easy little brother. Till Valhalla.







Sergeant Kevin L. Long

United States Army

3d Infantry Regiment (The Old Guard)

Regimental Headquarters Company

Scott Chamberland Please accept my Deepest Sympathies