12th district candidates offer sharp contrasts on taxes, guns
In the 12th Congressional District race, the Republican candidate agrees that he is a "Trump guy" and declines to name any disagreements with the president, while the Democrat struggles to name one of the president’s domestic policies that he supports.

As they work to get voters engaged in an unusual August special election, Republican state Sen. Troy Balderson and Democratic Franklin County Recorder Danny O’Connor are offering very different views on President Donald Trump and some of his policies, including immigration, taxes and guns. The two met separately Monday with Dispatch reporters and editors.

The gun issue, O’Connor said, “cries out for common sense.” He noted his roots growing up in rural western Ohio, where there was hunting and shooting cans on Friday nights.

“None of that is done with assault rifles,” said O’Connor, who now lives in Clintonville. “'Red flag' laws, why don’t we have them? If someone who commits domestic violence wants a gun, they should be denied. Why don’t we have a ban on people on the no-fly list from owning firearms?”

Red flag laws, including one proposed in the Ohio legislature, would allow guns to be temporarily taken from a person until a court decides whether he is a danger to himself or others. Balderson, of Zanesville, opposes the proposal.

“I would not take anybody’s guns,” he said, including those who, after obtaining a gun, are found to have a mental health issue. “If they’re licensed and lawfully allowed to have a gun, we can’t go confiscate it.”

Balderson said he supports better mental-health screening. “We have tabooed mental health now for too long. When are we going to start addressing it?”

As for the Republican-approved tax cuts, Balderson said the impact has been "huge.” He said a constituent who owns several pharmacies is saving $70,000 and using it to raise employees’ pay from $9 to $14 per hour.

“You can do tax cuts and still balance the budget. We’ve done that in the state of Ohio.”

The federal deficit, $585 billion in President Barack Obama’s final year, is set to surpass $800 billion this year and $1.3 trillion in 2022, according to the Congressional Budget Office.

Balderson is confident that Trump is making moves to help the economy. “Why would you want to change something where it would bring the economy back down?"

O’Connor said the overall tax cut package was bad, except for cuts aimed at the middle class. The Tax Policy Center says two-thirds of the tax cut is going to the top 1 percent of earners.

“I’d love to see the math on how much of that is spent on buybacks of shares, as opposed to giving folks raises,” he said. “This was a tax cut that permanently gave away money to corporations.” The tax cuts for individuals are temporary.

On immigration, both Balderson and O’Connor support finding a pathway to citizenship for “dreamers” who, as children, were brought to this country illegally years ago by their parents.

“We just had the opportunity to pass two pieces of immigration legislation and we couldn’t get it done. Seriously?” Balderson said. “These things must be done. We continue to procrastinate and put it off, and it’s only going to continue to get worse and more divided.”

Balderson said he will advocate for building a wall at the Mexican border — a wall Trump repeatedly said Mexico would pay for, but he now wants Congress to approve $25 billion for construction. “We need border security in this country,” Balderson said, referencing human and drug trafficking.

O’Connor opposes spending to build the wall. “I’d much rather rebuild roads and bridges here in Ohio than a wall along the Texas border.”

O’Connor said he would not eliminate U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, as some on the left have proposed, though he would favor a review of its mission.

“What we have right now at the border with the separation of children from their families is abhorrent,” he said. “If we make sure our immigration debate is focused on safety and not on penalizing folks who aren’t committing crimes and are contributing economically, that’s the right way to do things.”

Balderson said he would start by better enforcing current immigration laws.

“There is so much bureaucracy right now. It should not take four years for someone to get into this country legally,” he said.

jsiegel@dispatch.com

@phrontpage