Gina Rose Montalto Obituary
I'm sorry for your loss. Please accept my condolences, hope you are comforted by this few words. you will be able to see Gina again.(ACt 24:15) I will keep the whole family in my prayers.

Dear Tony, Candy, and your entire family....There are no words to say how deeply saddened I was to hear of the tragic loss of Gina. The world has lost a beautiful spirit. My heart is so heavy while I can only imagine the depth of your pain..know that your are in my daily thoughts and prayers. Love and sympathy , Lori LaCapra

I am so sorry for the loss of your beautiful daughter Gina. Know that your family has touched the hearts of many. Sending you much love. The Davies Family

My sympathy Tony to you and your family, life is too fragile, should never happen to any family, wishing you the best!

May God bless you and your family in this time of sorrow. We may work for different airline but in this industry we are all family. Sending you tons of LUV

My deepest condolences for the loss of your beautiful daughter Gina. When you take to the skies again she will be an angel flying right beside you, always. May she spread her wings wide and soar amongst the heavens. Thinking of you all. Prayers and LUV.

We are so sorry to hear of the loss of your daughter Gina Rose. Its so tragic, such a pretty, talented girl with so much life to live. We will keep your whole family in our prayers during this difficult time y'all are going through. May God bless you all! All our Love, Doug & Teresa. I am your cousin Nina's brother in law Doug Nyberg. Eric's oldest brother

My deepest condolences on the loss of your daughter. No words can convey the tragedy that your family has to face. Will pray for you and yours that no family will suffer the loss due to the nature of this tragedy. God Be with you

LOAD MORE

Gina, although youre now in heaven, I feel you still with me. We bleed, we bleed with you. Together, well change this universe.

Dear Montalto Family and friends, I am lost for words. I am so sorry for your loss of Gina. Know that you will always have my deepest sympathies and prayers. May the grace and goodness of God bless and provide healing and comfort to all of you during this time of sorrow. Fly high Gina in the skies, you are an angel of God. Kim Moredich ORD UAL FA

While I feel horrible for all of the victims, there's a special place in my heart for this beautiful young lady and Alex Schachter, the trombone player. Band geeks (including drill team & color guard) are a family and it doesn't matter where you marched. It's a bond you never lose, no matter how old you grow. Sending her family my deepest condolences from a former USC Trojan Marching Band member.

My deepest sympathy to you and your family through this very difficult time. May peace rest upon you and all those who knew her. God bless

Sending you all the hugs and luv . Your angel has her own set of wings now .Kniw she will be with you still . Your guardian angel Wish you guys or any parent didnt have to go through this. Sending LUV your way

My heart aches for your loss..please know my thoughts and prayers are with you, and your family during this most difficult time.

LOAD MORE

Your daughter was so beautiful and obviously very talented and giving. Loved how she was so well rounded. May she rest in peace. These kids will always be remembered for their precious lives they led. Gina ' s smile showed a confident child.

My deepest sympathy to you and your family through this very difficult time. May peace rest upon you and all those who knew her. God bless

My heart goes out to your family because of the senseless way that your life was taken. As a mother of twin daughters who are my world i can't imagine the loss. I pray for God's love to comfort your Mother and Father. Rest in peace beautiful girl. United Airlines Flight Attendant Las Vegas Based

Today I join the march that took place from FSU to the Capitol in Tallahassee. When I got there, a young men gave me the photo of your beautiful daughter to hold in the Rally. With tears in my eyes I hold her picture very proud and very high for everyone to see, the names and the faces of the victims. Although I never met her in person, now I have her picture and she is part of my life. Hugs and prayers for your family. My deepest condolences to your family.

Our thoughts and prayers are with you and your family.. may god give you the strength in this time of need.. may Gina live in our hearts forever, such a beautiful girl.

LOAD MORE

I am so sorry to hear about the loss of your beautiful daughter. I am a Southwest Flight Attendant and we are all members of the Airline Family that grieve your loss.

I love you and miss you so much. Your always on my mind and always will be. Its gonna be hard without you, you were the best friend anyone could ask for❤

SO VERY SORRY FOR YOUR LOSS! I PRAY GOD WILL GIVE YOU AND YOUR FAMILY COMFORT AT THIS TIME! I AM VERY SADDENED AND WILL KEEP YOU IN PRAYER!

Beautiful girl you will be missed by all who knew and loved you. When I see your pictures I see a bright light that shines through your beautiful eyes. I am so sorry you were taken so young. Rest In Peace child.

We can only imagine your heartache and pain. Our thoughts and deepest sympathy for the loss of your beautiful Angel. Your United family stands beside you, always.... Kelli and Bart.

May God give you the strength to endure this horrible loss. Today at work we had a memorial for the 17 victims. Their names were printed on pieces of paper and at the end, people were asked to take a name and I got Gina's. My promise to Gina is to pray for her soul and to do as much as I can to participate in activities to bring changes to our broken system to keep children safe in our schools. Sandra Porta-Merida

My heartfelt condolences go out to you for the tragic loss of your beautiful daughter, Gina. It is my prayer that the God of all comfort bring you the peace that you so need now and in the future as well. ~Patricia

LOAD MORE

There are no words to comfort you for your lose. I'm sorry for all your going through. Her life was cut short but knowing her last breath on earth was her first breath in heaven is the only comforting thing I share with you right now. My heartfelt condolences.

We are truly sorry and sad for the loss of your beautiful angel. As a mom myself my heart aches for you all. Please accept love sent from all of us. Scott Mcgahee - DL Isabela Mcgahee - WN Gabi and Sophia.

I am so sorry for your loss of your beautiful angel, my heart hurts for your family, I pray the lord gives you peace someday and surrounds all of you now . I am so so sorry. Isabel michelena Miami

Please know so many are thinking of Gina and your entire family at this sad time. As a Southwest Flight attendant and learning of Gina's parents profession in the airline industry can't help but think she will be the angel soaring with them at all times. Hugs to you all.

I would like to extend my condolences to your family. My Southwest Airline family shared your guestbook, and from my heart to yours, I pray for your comfort and strength at this delicate time.

LOAD MORE

Our heartfelt sympathy to your family from your American Airlines family around the world. We wish you peace, comfort and serenity in the days to come. (Purser/AA/CLT)

My deepest condolences. My heart hurts for you and your loved ones. May you find comfort in the memories and strength from the love and prayers surrounding you. Much love from a sister flight attendant @ Southwest Airlines.

I work for Southwest. We have never met but I want you to know that your family is in my prayers. I can't imagine the pain you are enduring. Gina was a wonderful young lady who left this world too early. She is in the arms of our Lord and at peace. I am so very sad and sorry this tragedy has happened. Many condolences

With a very heavy heart I would like to send my condolences. May the memories of this beautiful girl help you through. My thoughts and prayers are with you always. Heaven has a beautiful angel.

LOAD MORE

I can't even imagine what you are living through, God Bless you and your family! I am so very sorry for your loss. Kristen Salas Southwest Airlines Flight Attendant

I am so very sorry about the loss of your beautiful daughter. Please know that there are so many people who are thinking if you and lifting you up. Now Gina had her wings .. she will make a very special angel.. My sympathy to all of Ginas family and friends from a Southwest Flight Attendant..!

LOAD MORE

My deepest condolences to you and your family during this tragic time. My heart hurts so deeply for you. Please know that I hold you in my thoughts and prayers and will continue to lift you up to our Heavenly Father. May you find comfort and peace in HIS presence and remember to lean into HIM for all things. Much love from a fellow Inflight sister @ Southwest Airlines ❤

LOAD MORE

Prayers for your Family during this tragic loss. May the Lord above bring some comfort & peace to you all during this time. Sending love & prayers from Texas.

My most sincere condolences to you and your family. My heart aches for your loss. May God be your strength during this difficult time. Southwest FA

I am so beyond sorry for your loss. A beautiful soul taken way too young. My thoughts and prayers are with you and your family. May her legacy live on! Luv, Danielle Southwest FA

LOAD MORE

Tony, Jennifer and Anthony, I dont pray often enough so tonight and every night going forward I will light a candle and pray that you are blessed with comfort and love. Your community and friends will be here for you day in and day out going forward. I know Ginas friends will do all they can to make her proud and make our schools safe for others. May she rest in peace and watch over you and your family.

Seeing your lovely daughter reminds me of my precious nieces, close to that age. My heart is heavy knowing your loss is immeasurable! May God hold you in His hands, and surround you with His love. As a fellow flight crew member, in that fraternity, we all hurt together for you!

LOAD MORE

such a beautiful young lady gone too soon. May you rest peacefully and look over your family as they will desperately miss you.

Our family is still in shock, as were sure you are! We cant even begin to know what you are going through. Just know that we are praying for you, and the others! My husband and I both fly for SWA. Our deepest sympathies!!!

Jennifer and family, I am so sorry for your loss. Words cannot express how sad I feel for you. I will keep you and Gina in my thoughts.

As a Mom, teacher, and fellow HML 87 alumni my heart breaks for you. May you and your family find peace one day and may your beautiful daughters spirit live on forever. Her memory will touch the lives of young people all over the world.

I am so sorry for your loss. Children are truly a gift from God. May the God of all comfort heal your heart now and forever in the future. L. Johnson

Godspeed young lady. I cannot imagine what your family is going though but You all are in my thoughts and prayers. From this airline family to yours.... God Bless

LOAD MORE

I have no words to ease your pain, but you are not alone. I am so very sorry this happened. ❤

My deepest sympathy on the loss of your precious Gina. May God wrap his arms around you during this difficult journey. Will continue to pray for your family.

I am so sorry for your loss. There are no words that I can possibly say that could make this pain you have be less. But know that we are aviation family and my thoughts and prayers are with you at this time. All my LUV., Paulette D, Southwest FA

I'm so sorry to hear this. I will be praying for you all. I Just can't imagine what you are going through.

I am without words... I do not know what to say... I am just so so sorry for the loss of your beautiful daughter. May you somehow find peace knowing that your angel on Earth is now in Heaven...

LOAD MORE

Words cannot express the sorrow and pain I feel for the loss of your beautiful baby girl, Gina Rose. Although I never met or knew Gina Rose Ive cried and ached for you and her loss as if she was my daughter. May the Lord continue to keep her and your family in his Grace. My heart and prayers go out to you at this most difficult time.

Jen, I pray God provides you and your family peace and comfort during this difficult time and thereafter. "The ones that love us never really leave us, you can always find them in your heart" Harry Potter ~ POA Rest In Peace sweet girl

The loss of a child in any way is the absolute worst thing that can happen. I know I lost my dear son at age 13. If I was in the area I would show up in my uniform and bring you both a nice journal and a new pen. Writing in the journals saved my sanity. The young students at the school are not going to let this be forgotten. Their is an FB site called Loss of a Child if you need somewhere to spill. It is closed and no one will ever not listen no matter what you say. I am so sorry words cannot express. Heather Devitte-Mckee retired F/A

There are no words to help you through this unimaginable loss of your beautiful Gina but I am praying for you and your family to find the comfort and strength. My deepest condolences.

Im so sorry for your loss. As a parent I cannot begin to imagine the pain you feel. I pray that the love and support you receive from those grieving for you takes some of the pain from your heart. Your family is my thoughts and prayers

LOAD MORE

Jennifer. My heart aches for you. There are no words to express gow deeply sad I am for you. Please know that you are in all of our prayers. Although i dont know Gina Rose, i am truly aching for you. May the angels protect her. May you find peace somehow in all of this. Thinking of you. Be well. Hugs Raisa Sires

There are no more words that can be said to show the sorrow in my heart for you all. May the outpouring of love and support that were in attendance at Gina's viewing, mass and similar gatherings over the last few days, show you what no words could ever express. I wept for you during it all, but mostly I wept with you... and when my tears eventually dry, I know yours will continue to fall, promise me when that happens, you will reach out so I can wept with you again and again for as long as necessary. My sympathy, love and support, Christy Valdes (HML friend for life)

From our airline family to yours...deepest sympathies for the loss of your beautiful daughter. May she Rest In Peace, you are all in our thoughts and prayers. SWA F/A

From a SWA Flight Attendant.... my heart aches for you having lost this beautiful daughter Gina... but ....she will be your Newest Angel to fly higher than Mom and Dad. Heartfelt sympathies.

Jennifer, I am so sorry. May your little girl Gina Rose RIP with our heavenly father. You and your family are in my thoughts, prayers and action.May GOD give you comfort and peace during this very difficult time. With love, hugs n kisses my dear childhood friend.

My hearts breaks for you and your family. I can only imagine the pain you are feeling and I want you to know that you are in our thoughts and prayers. Heaven has one more angel. God bless you. SWA/FA

LOAD MORE

I am so saddened by your tragic loss. Gina is a beautiful girl who is now your special angel watching over you. May your precious memories help you through this difficult time. Your airline family will never forget Gina. Sending LUV and prayers your way.

I will keep your entire family in my prayers. God has called an Angel home to watch over you all from heaven. I am truly sorry for your loss. :-(

I cant even imagine what you and your family are going through! Im just hear to say that your daughter had such a beautiful smile and she will always be smiling upon you and your family forever. Take comfort in knowing she will always be a part of you!

LOAD MORE

Im terribly sorry for the loss of your beautiful daughter! May the love of family and friends help give you the strength needed to endure this tragic time. Luv, Your Southwest Family. ❤

Showing Ginas family love and support. Sending my condolences for your loss and wanting to know that youre in my heart and on my mind. Although Ive never met you, we are all a part of a family of n the airline industry and wanted you to know you have support from all over the country. Sending much love! Dawn meadows PHX flight attendant Southwest Airlines.

There are no words that one could say that will make the pain go away but My family is ...Sending LOVE and Prayers your way. Please know that you are not alone and that we will Never Forget your beautiful daughter. Praying you are Dancing with JESUS Gina Rose.

On behalf of a Southwest Airlines Flight Attendant, lifting your entire family and community in prayer. Your aviation family hold you tightly in our arms. You are LUVed. Sorry for the loss of your beautiful daughter.

My deepest sympathies to your family for the loss of your beloved child. May fond memories of times shared together sustain you and give you comfort in your sorrow. We can't know why the lily has so brief a time to bloom in the warmth of sunlight's kiss upon its face before it folds into its fragrance and bids the world good night to rest its beauty in a gentler place. But we can know that nothing that is loved is ever lost and no one who has touched a heart can really pass away because some beauty lingers on in each memory of which they've been a part. Maureen O'Connell American Airlines (Retired)

LOAD MORE

This is going to be the hardest day of your lives,. No parent should ever have to lay their child to rest. My heart is heavy over your loss. May your sweet angel Gina rest in peace, and may her bright, beautiful smile shine down on you from the heavens. All my love and prayers to your family!

My sincere condolences to the Montalto family in the loss of your beautiful daughter, Gina. I am a mother of four and can only imagine your heartbreaking sadness. Please know that you are in my prayers and I pray that Gods glorious healing will cover you with comfort, calm, peace, and understanding - in time. We mortals will never truly understand violence and death . . . but, somehow, someway, God gives us the strength to move on, to always remember with LOVE, and to honor our loved one. May God Bless You!! (Tony, I am a friend of the Carter family; I was one of Brians teachers at Glades Day School; and my husband, Frank, and Wayne Carter were longtime friends. I met you at Rhonda and Brians wedding.)

My heart breaks for you and your family! Our deepest condolences and may her light always shine bright through all the wonderful memories and everyone she touched with her loving spirit! God be with you and your family to give you comfort and strength!

Montalto Family, I wish there was something that could be said to lessen your pain and fill the holes in your souls from this unbelievable tragedy. Some say that our time here on Earth is when we are sleeping and when we pass on is when we truly awaken. Know that the darkness of loss never goes away, but I promise you, it does change over time. God is holding Gina now, but I believe he has room to hold everyone that loves her, too.

Words can not express how deeply sorry I am for your loss. My thoughts and prayers are with you. Heaven was given a very special gift, a beautiful angel watching over us all. Kathy Piper Southwest Airlines Flight Attendant

Sending prayers up for your entire family. I am a SWA flight attendant (23 yrs) and my father is a retired A/A pilot (33 yrs). Airline families are a different breed...... we love you and will pray for you daily! ❤❤

LOAD MORE

Oh my dearest Jennifer, may you find God's protective arms around you and your family and may Gina Rose soar with the angels. May you feel her in the breeze ans hear her with the rustling of leaves. May you know that she will be forever with you. With love, maria milian.

Tony, I am so sorry for your lost, you and your family are in my prayers, and Rest in Peace Gina, i saw the site you started for Gina on donating, and i have sent towards that in Gina name. God Bless you and your family. Connie Mastroianni, Florida

Words cannot adequately express our sympathy. We have been in constant prayer for your entire family and know that your precious angel is in the arms of our Heavenly Father. Love and Blessings to all of you.

When I first saw your sweet girls picture my first response was that she reminded me of my daughter. My heart is very heavy over your loss and the loss of all the others. I have never met you or your family but your loss has brought me to tears. My heart and prayers are with you and your family. Crystal Baxter (EWR Based) Continental/United International Flight Attendant

I worked with Gina's grandmother Barbara and wanted to extend my sympathies to the family. Please take comfort in knowing they are together in Heaven and smiling down on us.

LOAD MORE

I am so sorry for your loss. I competed against Stoneman Douglas winterguard when I was in high school, and every member I saw or met at a competition radiated passion, determination, and strength. Gina must have been a wonderful, awe-inspiring young adult. My heart is with you all during this time.

Tony, I'm sorry I couldn't be there for you and your family to show my deepest sympathy for you, your family and for Gina. I want you to know that you are all in our hearts and mind no matter where in the world we may be. Heart felt condolences from the Fratello Family...

LOAD MORE

We are so sorry for your loss. We are heartbroken. Gina was a beautiful, kind and wonderful girl. We will miss her very much. May God help your family get through this most difficult time. Your family is in our thoughts and prayers. The Denver family, Marina, John, Brianna & Juliette

There are no words to express the sorrow and I hope you can somehow find peace with friends and family surrounding you. So very sorry for the loss of your baby girl

My heart breaks for you and for all who are mourning the loss of Gina. My whole community and I are thinking of you all and praying for you. We are sending you so much love and many condolences. May sweet Gina rest in perfect comfort and peace with Him forever.

It is with deepest sympathy that I express these feelings.Nothing words can say could make up for the passing of one so precious to you. It may bring you some comfort and relief to know that sympathetic thoughts are with in your grief. May the God's of all comfort bring you comfort. strengthen you at this difficult time.

Jennifer, Tony and Anthony, Our heart felt condolences for the passing of your beautiful angel Gina. Take comfort in knowing that she is now looking over you with her beautiful engaging smile. She will never be forgotten. May you find your strength through the love of family and friends to carry you through this difficult time. Our thoughts and prayers are with you and your family.

I didn't know Gina, nor do I live by parkland Florida. I live in Tampa. Gina was supposed to be at my winter guard competition in Tampa this passed weekend. I am deeply sorry from the bottom of my heart about Gina. Us colorguard family stick together. I didn't know her but she will always be part of my family. Gina's life will be remembered, always and forever.

There are truly no words that would be right at this moment. May God bless you and your family in this time of sorrow. Beautiful angel, Gina Rose, may you RIP.

LOAD MORE

We are so sorry for your loss. Gina sounds like a beautiful girl inside and out. We will continue to send prayers and thoughts to your family. The Adams Family

To Gina's Family, I only know Gina from the tragedy which took her from your loving arms. When I first saw Gina's photo she touched my heart in a way I couldn't explain, and she continues to do so. I'll admit I was a little embarrassed that a child I never met could move me in such a way, but after reading your memorial to your daughter it's clear her infectious spirit transcends both space and time. May you all find peace and comfort in your memories and the knowledge that Gina is now in God's loving arms.

Our hearts are broken for you. My family and the family of Mary Help of Christians pray for some peace and consolation for your family.

It's hard to articulate my sadness for you and your family. I look at beautiful Gina's pics and immediately think back to you in high school, Jennifer. She was quite obviously as beautiful on the inside as the outside after reading all about her. I know nothing can ease the pain of such a situation but wanted to convey how much so many truly care. Much love to you at such a difficult time.

LOAD MORE

No words can describe the pain and unimaginable loss.. so very sorry for the incredible loss of your beautiful daughter....she will always remembered and All will be on my prayers..

I am so sorry for the loss of your beautiful daughter. I also lost a beautiful 15 year old daughter 10 years ago. It's truly unimaginable and life will never be the same. Such a senseless tragedy. Have hope things will be easier eventually-never the same and never easy. My heart goes out to you as you begin this horrible journey of grief. I will keep you in my thoughts and prayers.

We want to express our deepest condolences for your family.... always praying for you .... so sorry for your loss...Gina will be always in our hearts

Jennifer, Tony & Anthony we are so sorry for your tragic loss. We hope your faith, family, friends & our prayers for you eventually help to minimize the pain. Grace & I have both loss close members of our families and you never forget or completely fill the whole in your life. Gina's scholarship is a great memorial to your beautiful angel. RIP with the Lord.

I know I don't know you but I am terribly sorry for your lose! Absolutely NO one deserves to die that way, especially that young. But I can assure you she is in a better place. I am praying for you and your family. Again I am so sorry. Its going to be a long road but I'm not going to lie its going to be very heard, but every day will get a little better. you and your family will always be in my prayers. God Bless you.

LOAD MORE

I didnt know her or her family, but I mourn along with your loved ones for your loss. You will always be remembered.

I would like to extend me sincere condolences to the entire family.Extremely saddened by the loss of your precious loved on. Praying and Loving you all from a distance. Deborah Sanders/Jacksonville Florida

Jennifer, I am so sorry for the loss of your beautiful daughter. My thoughts and prayers are with you and your family. May she rest in peace.

Jennifer, I can not imagine your pain. I pray to God you and your family find the strength to celebrate your angels life. May God bless you and your family. Danny Pozo HML 88

My God continue to keep you in his hands during this most difficult time Your angel has a very special place in heaven watching down on you So very sorry this happened.

Jennifer iam so sorry for your lost with deepest sympathy sending my condolences and have you in my constant prayers for the lord to help and guide you through theses troubling and trying times all the Valbuena's send there love to you and your family we have known one another since childhood sending you a big hug love u gordav

LOAD MORE

May God bless you and your family in this time of sorrow. Our thoughts and prayers are with you! An angel taken too soon!!!

I've cried every day since the 14th for the Montalto family. I was in highschool with Gina's mother, I have daughters this age, and I wish I could do more to help. I live in Virginia now, and I want you to know that the high school students here... thousands of miles away... feel the heartache too. I am so very sorry for the loss of this beautiful Gina.

I am very sorry for your loss. God took back his angel too soon. I am with you and your family in prayer. God bless!

I've been taking time to read about those whose lives were cut short. I just wanted to say Gina appeared to be an amazing young lady. What an impact she made in her 14 years. I can't even begin to imagine your pain. Be strong.

Keeping you and your family in my prayers,May God Bless you all today and always, God took your angel too soon, your angel will be watching over you all. Sending lots of love and hugs.

Sweet Jennifer I remember your infectious smile from high school and I know youre beautiful Gina got her smile from you! I also remember how your smile lit up the field on game night when the majorettes performed, just like I know Gina must have in color guard . There are no words. Just know that so many of us have you and your family on our minds and prayers non stop. There is not an hour that goes by that Im not thinking about you and your family. My daughters are Ginas age too and Ive shown them her picture and read about her beautiful soul to them. Heaven now holds her heart and know that your angel girl will always be watching over her family. I pray that God keeps your family wrapped in a blanket comfort and warmth.

LOAD MORE

May god comfort your family thru this very difficult and heartbreaking time!! She was taken from her family way too soon and she had so much to offer.

I cant seem to find the right words to say. I am so sorry that you are going through this difficult time. May you find peace soon and find solace in the good memories that you have that will carry you through. Please know that even though no one can understand the pain you are experiencing, we are all here for you, praying for you and hopefully bring change in the name of your daughter.

Words can merely express the pain and unexplainable grief we feel for the loss of this family. Life has altered your life forever and ONLY God can put his hand in your hearts and help you cope with this enormous pain and suffering. Time will heal this pain and allow you to continue moving forward as hard as it seems now. We will continue praying for this family.

I am so sorry about Gina. As a mom and a fellow HML grad (class of 86), my heart goes out to you. I wish I could wash away your pain! You are in my prayers!

Keeping your family close in my heart as you deal with this overwhelming loss. I watched your daughter Gina grow up through photos and know the pain is unimaginable. May you find solace and comfort in one another and know you are surrounded by a community of love. Love, the mobayed family

May God bless you and your family in this time of sorrow. Heaven has gotten another Angel... You are in our hearts always

Jennifer I will never forget how your smile would light up everybody's day back in High School. I know it's very hard for you to smile nowadays but have faith in God. He will walk you through the pain. With time, your frown will turn into a smile again when you cherish the wonderful memories you had with your daughter. She's an angel now. She's not amongst us. If you ever want to talk to her, close your eyes and you will feel her in your heart.

LOAD MORE

Armando Sotero Gina Rose,



Your time on earth was spent with the people who cared about you the most. Your name and legacy will forever be enshrined in their hearts and souls. You have left a fingerprint in our society and your family. May the peace of God comfort your family & friends during this transition and may your physical void be replaced with the memories, values, and laughter you left behind.



Its not goodbye but rather we shall see you soon.



#RIP Gina Rose



The Sotero Family.

Daissys Estrada My most heart felt and deepest condolences. I will keep all of you in my thoughts and prayers and may God give you the strength to live life as best as possible. Gina will never be forgotten and will always be in our hearts. She's a beautiful angel doing what she loves in heaven. May Gina Rest in Peace ❤❤❤

Phil and Susan Pellerito We are part of your United Family working in ORD as Load Planners. We lived and raised our family in So.Florida! This has truly hit home for us our Son Graduated Stoneman Douglas. Sadly we personally did not know Gina nor you her family, however we do have mutual friends. Words cannot express the sadness we feel for your loss. We are heartbroken Gina was a beautiful young lady! May she rest in peace. God Bless Gina and all that knew her.

Idalia Aparicio Sentimos mucho su pérdida, nos ponemos en su lugar de padres y sabemos que el amor por Gina es muy grande.

sin embargo la Biblia promete que pronto el sufrimiento acabará como lo confirma Apocalipsis 21: 4 "Dios limpiara toda lagrima de sus ojor y la muerte no será más ni existirá ya más lameno ni clamor ni dolor las cosas anteriores han pasado."

Melinda Gambino I was Gina's Confirmation teacher.



Gina had such a PURE sweetness about her! It's true she lit up the room with her presence. I can not begin to imagine the pain your loss of a child. I will keep you in my prayers.



There are so many parallels here with our blessed Mother Mary...Gina's parents are suffering the way Mary did when her son was crucified and Gina said YES to the God at Confirmation and our blessed Mother said YES to God as well. Gina was a pure soul, sweet, young and innocent just like our blessed Mother. We will greive the loss of sweet Gina as our blessed mother did as Jesus suffered for all of us.



I was blessed to share Gina's faith formation with her...not sure if she shared with you, but she received a blessing with a relic of the true cross from my guest speaker, Sr Philip Marie Burle, around the feast of st. Nicholas in class. I was able to witness her begin class as a rose bud and by the time she received Confirmation she was a beautiful rose in full bloom! The only solace i can find in this horrific nightmare is i KNOW Gina is with God because of her YES to Him!



I will perpetually keep Gina's light alive as i help others along their faith formation journey and share her sweet spirit and how she said YES, not knowing she'd be taken home to God so soon. We shall all be united again with our Heavenly family someday and Gina will be there to greet us with her BEAUTIFUL smile. Thank you for sharing Gina with us and giving us the blessing of her kind, caring and compassionate spirit.



Melinda Gambino

Susan Havelka May your precious soul be at peace with our God. My sympathy to the family and friends of Gina.

Tammy Blalock I am so sorry for the loss of your loved one, so young, not to have gotten to experience what life would have brought them. Their right to grow up, graduate, college, marriage, children, just to be able to live, taken in a selfish act of violence. It's a horrible tragedy. Just please keep in your hearts, where your loved one is now, there is no anger, violence, just love and peace. You will see them again, they will always be with you. Prayers for all of the Families, that have been dealt this selfish injustice.

Muray Familly May the love of friends and family carry you through your grief.

Blah Moo Hi there even tho I don't know you I wish your the best and I will pray for u family to to have the strength and find peace during such difficult time. RIP MY FRI God BLESSING YOU