Immigration
DONALD J. TRUMP’S VISION

Prioritize the jobs, wages and security of the American people.

Establish new immigration controls to boost wages and to ensure that open jobs are offered to American workers first.

Protect the economic well-being of the lawful immigrants already living here by curbing uncontrolled foreign worker admissions Select immigrants based on their likelihood of success in the U.S. and their ability to be financially self-sufficient. Vet applicants to ensure they support America’s values, institutions and people, and temporarily suspend immigration from regions that export terrorism and where safe vetting cannot presently be ensured. Enforce the immigration laws of the United States and restore the Constitutional rule of law upon which America’s prosperity and security depend.



Donald J. Trump’s 10 Point Plan to Put America First

1. Begin working on an impenetrable physical wall on the southern border, on day one. Mexico will pay for the wall.

2. End catch-and-release. Under a Trump administration, anyone who illegally crosses the border will be detained until they are removed out of our country.

3. Move criminal aliens out day one, in joint operations with local, state, and federal law enforcement. We will terminate the Obama administration’s deadly, non-enforcement policies that allow thousands of criminal aliens to freely roam our streets.

4. End sanctuary cities.

5. Immediately terminate President Obama’s two illegal executive amnesties. All immigration laws will be enforced - we will triple the number of ICE agents. Anyone who enters the U.S. illegally is subject to deportation. That is what it means to have laws and to have a country.

6. Suspend the issuance of visas to any place where adequate screening cannot occur, until proven and effective vetting mechanisms can be put into place.

7. Ensure that other countries take their people back when we order them deported.

8. Ensure that a biometric entry-exit visa tracking system is fully implemented at all land, air, and sea ports.

9. Turn off the jobs and benefits magnet. Many immigrants come to the U.S. illegally in search of jobs, even though federal law prohibits the employment of illegal immigrants.

10. Reform legal immigration to serve the best interests of America and its workers, keeping immigration levels within historic norms.

Read More on Donald J. Trump’s 10 Point Plan to Put America First, here.

Read Mr. Trump's Remarks in Phoenix, Arizona, in Mexico City, and at the Remembrance Project Luncheon.