​Donald J. Trump Announces Key Appointments
- July 01, 2016 -

​Donald J. Trump Announces Key Appointments

(New York, NY) July 1, 2016 – Today, Donald J. Trump announced that he has hired Kellyanne Conway, veteran pollster and strategist, to join his senior campaign team. In addition, Karen Giorno has joined the national campaign team as a senior political advisor.

Kellyanne Conway is Founder and President of the polling company, inc. & WomanTrend, and has more than two decades of survey research experience for political, non-profit and commercial clients.

Kellyanne will serve as senior advisor to the campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, and a member of the national polling team being led by Tony Fabrizio.

Kellyanne Conway has worked with dozens of House and Senate candidates. Most recently, Kellyanne was President of Keep the Promise I, a PAC in support of Sen. Ted Cruz’s presidential campaign. She is widely regarded as an expert on female consumers and female voters.

Mr. Trump stated, “Kellyanne is a tremendous asset to our rapidly-expanding campaign team. She is a data and messaging expert and terrific on TV. It is great to have her on board.”

Karen Giorno has expanded her role on the Trump Campaign and will serve on the national team as a Senior Advisor, and Florida Chief Strategist. She was hired in October to lead Florida, as the State Director, and was promoted to Southeast Regional Political Director, overseeing 11 states, after winning the Florida primary on March 15th.

Her national role will include developing and executing the general election strategy for Florida, and working with the national political director. Karen is a Political and External Affairs consultant with 25 years experience in political communications, public relations & Issue Advocacy, organizational management, and presidential advance operations.

On Karen’s advancement, Mr. Trump said, “Karen is a valuable asset to my team and a consummate professional. She has done a tremendous job for me in Florida in the primary, which I won in a landslide, and I am certain we will win Florida again in the general election.”