Hillary Attacks Credibility Of 12-Year-Old Rape Victim, Laughs
- October 09, 2016 -

Hillary Attacks Credibility Of 12-Year-Old Rape Victim, Laughs

Hillary Clinton Denigrated A 12-Year-Old Victim As “Emotionally Unstable” To Get A Rapist Off And Laughed About How We Was Guilty

In The 1980s Clinton Laughed When She Told An Interviewer How She Was Able To Get A Man Accused Of Raping A 12-Year-Old Girl Off Because Of A Faulty Polygraph Test And Botched Evidence. “Newly discovered audio recordings of Hillary Clinton from the early 1980s include the former first lady’s frank and detailed assessment of the most significant criminal case of her legal career: defending a man accused of raping a 12-year-old girl. In 1975, the same year she married Bill, Hillary Clinton agreed to serve as the court-appointed attorney for Thomas Alfred Taylor, a 41-year-old accused of raping the child after luring her into a car. … The interviews, archived at the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville, were intended for an Esquire magazine profile that was never published, and offer a rare personal glimpse of the couple during a pivotal moment in their political careers. … “It was a fascinating case, it was a very interesting case,” Clinton says in the recording. ‘This guy was accused of raping a 12-year-old. Course he claimed that he didn’t, and all this stuff’. Describing the events almost a decade after they had occurred, Clinton’s struck a casual and complacent attitude toward her client and the trial for rape of a minor. ‘I had him take a polygraph, which he passed – which forever destroyed my faith in polygraphs,’ she added with a laugh. Clinton can also be heard laughing at several points when discussing the crime lab’s accidental destruction of DNA evidence that tied Taylor to the crime.” (Alana Goodman, “The Hillary Tapes,” Washington Free Beacon, 6/15/14)

Clinton’s Legal Strategy In The Case Was To Attack The Credibility Of The 12-Year-Old Accuser, Calling Her “Emotionally Unstable” And A Saying She Had A “Tendency To Seek Out Older Men And Engage In Fantasizing.” “A lengthy yet largely overlooked 2008 Newsday story focused on Clinton’s legal strategy of attacking the credibility of the 12-year-old victim. … In a July 28, 1975, court affidavit, Clinton wrote that she had been informed the young girl was ‘emotionally unstable’ and had a ‘tendency to seek out older men and engage in fantasizing.’” (Alana Goodman, “The Hillary Tapes,” Washington Free Beacon, 6/15/14)

The 12-Year-Old Victim, Kathy Shelton, “Says She Cannot Forgive Hillary Clinton For Defending Her Rapist In Court 40 Years Ago.” “A child rape victim says she cannot forgive Hillary Clinton for defending her rapist in court 40 years ago, saying the Democratic presidential candidate attacked her credibility despite knowing that her assailant was guilty – and later laughed about it in a taped interview. Kathy Shelton was just 12 years old when a 41-year-old drifter raped her on the side of a desolate Arkansas road in 1975.” (Alana Goodman, “Child Rape Victim Comes Forward For The First Time In 40 Years To Call Hillary Clinton A 'Liar' Who Defended Her Rapist By Smearing Her, Blocking Evidence And Callously Laughing That She Knew He Was Guilty,” The Daily Mail, 8/9/16)

Clinton Suggested She Knew Her Client Was Innocent And Used A Legal Technicality To Plead Her Client Down To A Lesser Charge. “The recordings, which date from 1983-1987 and have never before been reported, include Clinton’s suggestion that she knew Taylor was guilty at the time. She says she used a legal technicality to plead her client, who faced 30 years to life in prison, down to a lesser charge.” (Alana Goodman, “The Hillary Tapes,” Washington Free Beacon, 6/15/14)