Everything You’ll Need to Know about Vaccines
Introduction

I have to first of all say that every organization involved with Vaccines from the manufacturers to the promotional machinery and the the regulatory agency as well as medical research journals all ensure vaccines are shown in a good light. Playing down negative adverse effects caused by vaccines reported in the VAERS database system, and reassuring people that the number of case reports showing up in Post marketing surveillance is a small minority compared to the huge reduction of infections that the vaccine has achieved. While local physicians are going about their everyday business administering vaccines because they are told to do so, some mothers who have a child that experiences a serious adverse effect asks the question “ How do you know that these vaccines are safe ?, to which the reply from the GP is “ Because the sales representative from the Pharmaceutical company said it was”. That means if the GP is advised by the Pharmaceutical rep that a shot of strychnine before bedtime helps you sleep they would do it.. and sleep they would..forever.





With this enormous effort in marketing vaccines and the money spent sponsoring large cohort studies showing that vaccines are always safe and effective, never expressing anything negative, and in some countries enforcing mandatory vaccine schedules wouldn’t any normal sensible person become a little suspicious and ask themselves..ARE THEY TRYING TO HIDE SOMETHING ??. It took the medical mafia 12 years to remove the evidence in Wakefield and Walker smith’s study analysis of 12 children with serious intestinal abnormalities that their parents confirmed had developed after receiving the MMR vaccine. The British media found a scapegoat using British journalist Brian Deer to uncover a potential conflict of interest to ‘blow the smoke away ‘ from the findings of the study. At the time autism was on the rise without explanation 6.2/10,000 births in 1990 to 42.5/10,000 births in 2001..for the most part the vaccine marketing machine ignored any correlation or causality toward their glorious vaccines. Why was Merck allowed to manufacture a Vaccine that included a benign children’s disease when the CDC confirmed there was no need to protect against Mumps, but the MMR vaccine was allowed anyway to be included in CDC’s vaccine schedule.

Infant Mortality Rate





Why is it that the US that spends more on healthcare than any other nation on the planet and out of 34 developed nations they have the highest Infant Mortality rate (IMR) to the extent that the CDC once stated:

“The relative position of the United States in comparison to countries with the lowest infant mortality rates appears to be worsening.”





Sudden Infant death (SID)

In 2009 5 of the 34 nations with the best IMR’s require only 12 vaccine doses for infants < a year old compared to 26 doses in the US, but their IMR is half that of the US. Torch in 1986 summarized case reports where 150 died post DPT vaccination (reported by 37 different authors in 12 countries where 50% of mortality occurred within 24 hours, 75% within 72 hours and 90% within 1 week following DPT administration, and for Torch to state:

“That DPT may be a generally unrecognized major cause of sudden infant and early childhood death, and that the risks of immunization may outweigh its potential benefits. A need for re-evaluation and possible modification of current vaccination procedures is indicated by this study”

Introduction of vaccines when various viral infections had almost disappeared.

From the graph below we can see that vaccines were introduced when epidemic diseases had almost disappeared:





The Merck Vaccine Lawsuit





We are now aware that Merck ‘spiked’ their MMR vaccine with rabbit anti-bodies to maintain the licensure requirement of 95% efficacy for years until in Aug 2010 two former Merck virologists filed a ‘Qui Tam’ whistleblower lawsuit against the pharmaceutical company Merck & Co alleging that efficacy tests for the MMR vaccine were ‘fudged’. This is yet another event where you need to be vigilant when evaluating vaccine safety and efficacy, because if these vaccine manufacturers are prepared to fraudulently tamper with their vaccines,what else are they capable of, and what else in the vaccine is questionable.

Vaccine Conclusions





Measles, Mumps, Rubella (MMR combined vaccine)





In the first 2 articles we discussed the plight of Andrew Wakefield that discovered an association with the MMR and the 12 children between the ages of 3-10 who were referred to the paediatric gastroenterology unit of the paediatric bowel unit of the Royal Free hospital in Hampstead North London between July 1996 and Feb 1997 with a history of normal development but were then given the MMR vaccination and things changed for the worst. After examination of the children Wakefield and his team found a loss of acquired skills (language), diarrhoea and abdominal pain, intestinal abnormalities including Lymphoid nodular hyperplasia (small nodules in the gastrointestinal tract), and aphthoid ulceration (ulcerated nodules in the colon associated with Crohn’s colitis). Behavioural disorders (autism) found in 9 of the children. Disintegrative psychosis (referred to as Heller’s syndrome or Childhood disintegrative psychosis (CDD), a rare condition where delays in development or even reversal in language , social function and motor skills are witnessed) in 1 of the children and in 2, possible postviral or vaccinal encephalitis (brain neurological damage ).

Further studies have shown that unvaccinated children naturally infected with measles and mumps have a protective effect from strokes in later life ( this study involved partly from a lifestyle questionnaire using some 43,698 men and 60,147 women 40-79 years of age and their childhood history of infections. The outbreak of measles in New York 2011 demonstrated that fully vaccinated people can still spread measles to other fully vaccinated people dispelling the myth that it’s only un-vaccinated people who spread disease. A study made in 2002 J.Biomed Science Singh & Lin found brain autoimmunity and autism with the MMR Vaccine. Deisher & Doan in their study in 2014 and published in J.Public Health Epidemiology which was a large cohort study using all children born after 1969 in the US, Western Australia,UK and Denmark linking the MMR vaccine, specifically the human fetal cell ingredient showed a link to autism with MMR and other vaccines. Other studies ( Rosenlund & Bergstrom et al Allergic disease and atopic sensitization in children in relation to measles vaccination and measles infection published in Pediatrics March 2009) show that un-vaccinated children who get infected with measles are less likely to develop allergies compared to vaccinated children

Pneumococcal Varicella (chickenpox)Vaccines









In our article on the Pneumococcal vaccine we discussed chickenpox and the fact that its is a benign childhood disease that really does not need a vaccine, although the virus, once infected in childhood can stay dormant in the body for years until it can reactivate itself given the right circumstances in adulthood as Herpes Zoster (Shingles) which can be more serious. Studies into the vaccine showed that the vaccine reduced the number of chickenpox infections but increased the number of herpes Zoster incidences. A study by Goldman called the Antelope Valley Active Surveillance Project (AV-VASP) uncovered these increasing Shingles cases which was denied as inconclusive by the project organizers the CDC and the LA Department of health services Antelope Valley. When Goldman left the project and informed that he intended to publish his findings the LA department of Health threatened legal action..now if it was that bad why would they stoop to such levels as to threaten someone just protect the vaccines ‘Good name’..another black mark against vaccines since anybody remotely associated with them will go to any lengths to not tarnish their use. A study conducted by Pesonen & Andsberg in 2007 demonstrated a protective effect from Angina Pectoris and Heart attack when unvaccinated children were infected with chickenpox.

Rotavirus





We spoke about Intussusception(IS) in a previous article which is a common bowel obstruction in infants (4-10 months) a `Telescoping` effect ( where one piece slides into another when collapsing a telescope) which causes one section of the intestine to slide inside another section because one section of the bowel becomes unfolded within a more distal segment. According to the New England journal of Medicine editorial the vaccine each year prevents 53,000 hospitalizations, 170,000 ER visits and the prevention of some 14 deaths/year. Intussusception cases between 1st July 2007 and 31st December 2008 in 4 Australian states found infants 1 to <3 months of age evidence of excess intussusception cases 1-7 and 1-21 days following dose 1 of the Rotavirus ( RotaTeq and Rotarix ). A Post‐marketing monitoring of intussusception after rotavirus vaccination in Japan showed statistically significant excess of IS cases observed within 7 days post‐dose 1, but not post‐dose 2. According to the published study these results are consistent with previous observations in large post‐marketing safety studies in other world regions. Finally, a Post-marketing safety surveillance conducted in Korea (2008–2013) following the introduction of the rotavirus vaccine, RIX4414 (Rotarix) involving some 3100 infants concluded that results indicate that both formulations of RIX4414 had no prominent safety concerns and were well-tolerated in Korean infants. This is probably the least risky vaccine compared to other vaccines studied except for the risk of intussusception ( a condition that some unvaccinated infants can get) from the first dose.

DTaP Diphtheria, Tetanus, Pertussis





Coulter and Fisher in 1985 reported 6 children that were statistically categorized under the SID (Sudden Infant death)s umbrella, five of which died within 48 hours of receiving the DPT shot. Torch in 1986 summarized case reports where 150 died post DPT vaccination as mentioned in the section on SID above. It is reported that in the US approximately 55 cases of SIDS/year are to be expected within 24 hours of receipt of the DPT vaccine as published by Stetler et al in 1985. Torch also reported in 1982 70 of 200 (35%) infant mortality cases that were clustered cases of SIDS within the first 2-3 weeks of receiving the DPT vaccine. Baraff and colleagues in 1983 interviewed 145 of 382 parents (38%) who were SID infantile victims during a 20 month period where 53 cases had received the DPT vaccine prior to death, 11% within 1 day of death, 32% within 1 week of death and 51% within 4 weeks of death.

The CDC through their VAERS (Vaccine adverse effect reporting system) for the period 1978-1990 80 million doses of DPT were administered and 350 case reports were received , 332 (94.9%) occurred in infants who had received at least one DPT shot. Analyzing the data 350 cases from 80 million DPT shots in 12 years may not seem a lot, but most people during that time were unaware of VAERS so the number is probably much higher. There are many more SIDs/Vaccine associations such as 222 deaths in Norway reported as SID cases from 1975-1982 (Solberg 1985), and of these cases 53 deaths occurred within 4 weeks of receiving the DPT shot. Finally the largest study is the NICHD SIDs Cooperative epidemiological study ( Hoffman et al 1987) where all SID cases were identified in 6 US states where there were 350,000 live births over a 15 month period in 1978/79. There were 716 SID cases reported, 40% of which had received a DPT shot. Torch from his study concluded that :

“that DPT may be a generally unrecognized major cause of sudden infant and early childhood death, and that the risks of immunization may outweigh its potential benefits. A need for re-evaluation and possible modification of current vaccination procedures is indicated by this study”

The current vaccine, vaccinates against Pertussis or whooping cough but there is another viral strain floating around called Parapetussis which the current vaccine does not protect against, but despite the vaccine, people can still be infected as shown from a 2013 study published in Pediatrics Tartof SY, Lewis M et al Waning immunity to Pertussis following 5 doses of DtaP. Furthermore a study from 2014 published in Epidemiology Infection by Mooi FR, Van der Mass show that pertussis has persisted and resurged in the face of vaccination. A study from Cherry JD called ‘Why do Pertussis vaccine fail?’ published in Pediatrics May 2012 states that the vaccine has resulted in genetic changes in pertussis toxin, Petactin and Fimbriae (virulence factors) in circulating B.Pertussis strains. Lavine Broutin et al shows in his study Imperfect vaccine induced immunity and whooping cough transmission to infants( pub Vaccine 2010) that the DtaP vaccine which is supposed to protect children from B.Pertussis actually increases their risk. At least 3 studies ( Zhang,Weyrich et al in Emerg Infect 2012, Pittet,Emonet et al in Lancet Infect 2014, and Kemiya,Otsuka et al in Emerg Infect dis 2012) show that people who are vaccinated against Pertussis triggers widespread infections from Bordetella.Holmesli pathogen which the vaccine is not designed to prevent.

DIPTHERIA PERTUSSIS TETANUS

Australia 8 20,037 7

India 3,380 37,274 3,781

Indonesia 342 826 522

Madagascar 2,865 321 136

Thailand 16 84 61

US 0 20,769 0

Canada 1 3,896 5

UK 1 7.085 4

Ironically the Pertussis vaccination schedule is the same in the US as in Australia and both countries are chalking up 20,000 or so cases in 2016 and in 1980 the US had 1730 cases and Australia had 124 cases. So what is happening ??. These figures confirm the study outcome that the vaccine provides imperfect immunity causing outbreaks of whooping cough in highly vaccinated populations ( Study Pathogen adaptation under imperfect vaccination: implications for Pertussis Van Boven,Mooi FR at al published 2005 in Proc Biol Sci)

Hepatitis B





As I stated before in a previous article in my opinion it is totally inappropriate to subject a newborn within hours of his first day of life to a vaccination to protect against a pathogen that can only infect via a blood transfusion/Intravenous drug use, sexual contact. tattooing, acupuncture using infected needles or transmission from the mother. So obviously transmission from the mother is the only possible way the infant can be infected with Hepatitis B ( breast feeding does not transmit the infection). To be make sure, screen the mother and verify she is not HbsAG ( Hepatitis B e Antigen- 20% chance of infecting the newborn) or HbeAG ( 90% chance of infecting the newborn) positive. This could be done, but it isn’t, because it’s easier to jab the child and put she/he at risk. Wiki states : Of those infected between the age of one to six, 70% will clear the infection, and Acute hepatitis B infection does not usually require treatment and most adults clear the infection spontaneously.

A study conducted by Geier DA, Geier MR called A Case control study of serious autoimmune adverse events following Hepatitis B Immunization published in Autoimmunity 2005 showed that Hepatitis B vaccinated adults were 5 times more likely to develop Multiple sclerosis. Dominique Le Houezec’s study Evolution of multiple sclerosis in France since the beginning of Hepatitis B vaccination published in Immunol Res 2014 uncovered Multiple sclerosis incidence increased 65% in the years following the national campaign to increase vaccination (20 million children, pupils in the first year of secondary school vaccinated in 4 years from 1994 to 1997). The number of MS was in the region of 2,500 cases until 1993 and then after this figure had increased to 4500 in 2003 and remains the same. Hernan & Jick et al and their study Recombinant Hepatitis B Vaccine and the risk of developing Multiple sclerosis: A prospective study published in Neurology Sep 2004 also suggests that patients with MS were 3 times more likely to have received the Hepatitis B vaccine. When Souayah & Nasar et al analyzed the VAERS database they concluded that the Guillain-Barre syndrome ( a serious autoimmune disorder affecting muscle and the peripheral nervous potentially causing paralysis and death) occurs after Hepatitis B or Influenza vaccination.

Haemophilus Influenzae Type B (Hib)





Haemophilus Influenzae or Bacillus influenzae a pathogenic bacteria can exist and proliferate anaerobically or aerobically. Although it is pathogenic, it is opportunistic,so it lays dormant until reduced immune function occurs and then it strikes, causing potentially bacteremia (bacteria in the blood), pneumonia, epiglottis ( inflammation of the epiglottis or the flap at the end of the tongue that avoids food entering the trachea or windpipe) and meningitis. Although the vaccine is able to control encapsulated type B, the vaccine has no effect on encapsulated types A,C,D,E,F nor un-encapsulated types (NTHi). The study Haemophilus Influenzae serotype an invasive disease Alaska USA 1983-2011 Emerg Infect Dis CDC 2013 Bruce, Zulz ET AL shows that mass vaccination against HIB (type B) causes an increase in Type A (Hia). Another study performed in Brazil by Ribeiro and Reis and published in 2003, and in Ontario Canada by Adam and Richardson in 2010 came to the same conclusions.

Classen JB & Classen DC’s study Clustering of cases of insulin dependent diabetes occurring 3 years after receipt of the HIB vaccine immunization support causal relationship between immunization and insulin dependent diabetes published in autoimmunity July 2002 examined >240,000 children ages 7-10 concluded that most of the diabetes in the 38-46 months cluster occurred after receiving the Hib vaccine. Wahlberg & Fredriksson in 2003 concluded similar findings. Classen went on to conduct more studies concerning the type 1 diabetes association and in one study he said most vaccines have this potential, caused by immune system overload. This study was conducted in 2008 entitled Type 1 diabetes versus type 2 diabetes.metabolic syndrome,opposite extremes of an immune spectrum disorder induced by vaccines published in Open endocrinology J 2008.

Pneumococcal Vaccine PCV13





Bacteria Streptococcus Pneumoniae. A nasty pathogen that causes Pneumonia of course and many other infections such as bronchitis,rhinitis (stuffy nose),otitis media (inflammation of the middle ear), conjunctivitis (inflammation of the outermost part of the eye),meningitis (inflammation of the protective lining around the brain and spinal cord), sepsis (serious infection of tissues and organs), osteomyelitis (infection of the bone), septic arthritis (infection of the joints), endocarditis (infection of the endocardium which is the lining of the heart chambers and valves), peritonitis, pericarditis (inflammation of the peritoneum which is the membrane that lines the inner abdominal wall), cellulitis (Bacterial skin infection), and brain abscess (inflammation emanating from an ear infection or dental abscess or sinuses).

This bacteria has 90 strains in its arsenal, and in 2000 the Vaccine PCV7 targeted 7 of the 90 strains, and then in 2010 a 13 strain vaccine version was introduced, the PCV13.The problem as you can gather already is that the vaccine while protecting some individuals, increases the number of cases caused by other strains. This bacteria possesses an intelligence by replacing targeted strains by the vaccine with others that the vaccine has no protection for. Streptococcus Pneumoniae is part of the normal pharyngeal (throat) flora in healthy children and adults. Colonization of this particular bacteria is acquired around 6 months of age, and declines to 25% in teenagers and 2-9% for adults unless they have a high exposure to children. Several studies confirm this strain replacement strategy of this bacteria including Flasche & Edmunds published in Proc Biol Sci 2013, Tina Tan published in Clin Microbiol 2012, and Wroe & Lee Pediatrics Infect Dis 2012.

HPV ( Human Papillomavirus (HPV Vaccine)





If we then consider the HPV vaccine, trade names Gardasil and Cervarix we then have to ask the question is this vaccine really necessary given the following quotes:

“Most genital infections are asymptomatic and resolve spontaneously, but the virus can persist and cause precancerous lesions that can become malignant over the subsequent 20-30 years.“ (Nature Biotechnology, 2007)

“So how should a parent, physician, politician, or anyone else decide whether it is a good thing to give young girls a vaccine that partly prevents infection caused by a sexually transmitted disease (HPV infection), an infection that in a few cases will cause cancer 20 to 40 years from now? (JAMA, 2009 )…and:

….that Malignant cervical cancer takes decades to develop and yet the longest Gardasil trial was only 4 years which means that Gardasil was never shown to prevent cervical cancer.

Diane Harper MD Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology who conducted the Phase 2 and 3 trials for Gardasil claims that:

“70% of all HPV infections resolve themselves without treatment within a year. Within two years, the number climbs to 90%. Of the remaining 10% of HPV infections, only half will develop into cervical cancer.”

Charlotte Haug MD from a JAMA editorial stated that:

“The virus does not appear to be very harmful because almost all HPV infections are cleared by the immune system. In a few women, the HPV infection persists, and some women may develop precancerous cervical lesions and eventually cancer. It is currently impossible to predict in which women this will occur and why. Likewise, it is impossible to predict exactly what effect vaccination of young girls and women will have on the incidence of cervical cancer 20 to 40 years from now.”

Lucija Tomljenovic also states:

Since 2006 when it was first approved, Gardasil has been associated with 20, 915 adverse reactions in the US alone. These included 89 deaths, over 1000 cases that required emergency hospitalization, and 382 abnormal pap tests 47-49. Could the vaccine exacerbate the very disease it is claimed to prevent?

SYSTEMIC AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS

Number receiving shot Type of vaccine Autoimmune Disorders Number 13,234 Gardasil 9 2.4% 321 7,378 Gardasil 3.3% 240

In addition to the serious adverse events, you now have an additional 2,400 people who may be left with systemic autoimmune disorders. Now look at the statistics for pregnant women who agreed to receive this vaccine and as a consequence lost their child in some cases:

OUTCOME WHEN INJECTED WITHIN 30 DAYS OF PREGNANCY ONSET

Number of pregnancies Type of vaccine % abortion/stillborn Lost Babies 62 Gardasil 9 27.4% 17 55 Gardasil 12.7% 7

OUTCOME WHEN INJECTED MORE THAN 30 DAYS BEFORE PREGNANCY ONSET

Number of pregnancies Type of vaccine % abortion/stillborn Lost Babies 960 Gardasil 9 10.9% 105 933 Gardasil 14.6% 136

Table taken by the courtesy of SaneVax.org

As a result of routine surveillance of suspected adverse reaction reports questions have been raised on a possible association with these vaccines and 2 syndromes CRPS (Complex regional pain syndrome) and POTS (Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome). Reports of these associations have emanated from Australia,Germany,Japan, Denmark and the US. Since these conditions occur in unvaccinated people it is important to determine if the frequency of CRPS and/or POTS is higher in vaccinees than what has been reported in the absence of vaccines, and to determine any causal association of these 2 syndromes with the HPV vaccines. The current Global figures are 530,000 new cases/ann with 275,000 deaths/ann are attributed to HPV.

Cursory notes : MMR, DPT, Hepatitis B Vaccines

Buckley JD & Buckley CM et al conducted a study that was published in 1994 called Epidemiological characteristics of childhood acute lymphocytic leukemia. Analysis by Immunophenotype. The Children’s cancer group and concluded that any one of vaccines MMR,DPT, or Hepatitis B increase the risk of childhood leukemia. Even in 1965 Innis MD published a study in the Lancet called Immunization and childhood leukemia concluded the same for the DPT vaccine.

Cursory notes : Natural infection protective effects toward cancer

Natural measles infections can reverse cancer (Donnelly,Errington-Mais et al Measles virus causes immunogenic cell death in human melanoma Gene Ther Jan 2013), and measles, mumps,and chickenpox viruses possess properties to destroy cancer cells as shown from the study Oncolytic activities of approved mumps and measles vaccines for therapy of ovarian cancer published in Cancer Gene Ther 2005 by Myers & Greiner.

Aluminum in Vaccines





Aluminium is used as an adjuvant to stimulate the immune system , but aluminium is also highly poisonous in the body especially intravenously injected where some will be absorbed A single injection of aluminum, approximately 59% of the dose will be excreted in the urine during the first 5 days. At the end of 5 days, approximately 27% of the dose will be retained in the body where it will remain for many years unless chelated away from the body. Some estimates calculate a half-life of about 50 years. The following vaccines contain an amount of Aluminium:

Hib 0.225 mg

Hep B 0.25mg

DTaP 0.17 – 0.625mg

Pneumococcus 0.125mg

Hep A 0.25mg

HPV 0.225mg (Gardasil 9 has almost twice this amount)

Aluminium in vaccines can cause auto-immune and neurological damage as shown by the study Aluminium in the central nervous system : Toxicity in humans and animals, vaccine adjuvants and auto-immunity by Shaw & Tomljenovic published in Immunol res 2013. A study by Gherardi & Authier Macrophagic myofasciitis: Characterization and Pathophysiology published in Lupus 2012 documenting chronic fatigue, sleep disorder, multiple sclerosis like demyelinating disorder memory problems, and Macrophagic myofasciitis (a rare muscle disease), and many other studies. Aluminium is toxic in the body no matter how small the amount especially intravenously administered.

The Heritage of Vaccines





Pasteur & Koch





Pasteur and Koch regarded as the two greatest figures of medical microbiology in establishing the theory of disease..The Germ theory. Both were unaware how important microbes and bacteria play a critical role in human health. Can You imagine a scientist informing these 2 gentlemen that the human race cannot survive without our internal microbial neighbors. So today we see the ignorant remnants of their postulates both trying to defeat microorganisms instead of harnessing their benefits, instead of trying to destroy them, but to try and live in synergism and allow the human Immune system to destroy the bad neighbors as do every human being that exists. Like Pasteur in his day who developed a chicken cholera,anthrax and rabies vaccine vaccines, and Koch, Pasteur’s arch enemy, who developed a drug called Tuberculin after identifying Tubercle bacillus the pathogenic bacteria that causes Tuberculosis which proved to be ineffective. However Koch still managed to score the Nobel prize in Physiology of medicine in 1905.

The Starting Age of Modern Ignorance

A William Henry Welch a physician,pathologist and Bacteriologist and set the world ablaze with Koch’s bacteriology transforming medicine with ‘the secrets of nature’ ( oh yeah, so where did drugs play a part in the secrets of nature ??) inside the newly formed Johns Hopkins University. He then became the first scientific director of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research and as they say..the rest is history. Although Pasteur, recognized as a great contributor to the germ theory, what we have to thank for him since 1920 is the ignorant idea of pasteurization..the predecessor of antibiotics..destroy everything, beneficial and commensurate bacteria together.

Nothing is Above the Law of Nature





So now you know where vaccines get their heritage from..and maybe when the scientific community catch up on the marvels of the microbiome they might decide to abolish pasteurization…but I doubt it, when conventional medicine decide to give up on trying to destroy anything and everything that in their minds cause disease, instead of concentrating on restoring the body to health and establishing what really cause disease and do the most obvious thing..PREVENT IT, healthcare as we know it will collapse. We advance our scientific knowledge into how the human body works and many great scientists have dedicated their lives in doing so but they all seem to miss the plot. Don’t misunderstand me if not for their great work we would not have the wealth of physiological, biological knowledge and functional understanding of the body we have today. If they all appreciated what the body really requires, they would not need to dig into the mist and chase the mystery of human disease (which after all are symptoms or adaptation signals) and spend years and decades figuring out what gene does what and if we silenced this gene and blocked that enzyme then the body will work as we want it to without expressing disease. Furthermore, if we protect the body from all these nasty viruses and pathogenic bacteria and teach the immune system how to react to fight them then we would have continuous health. Can you see this (r)evolving picture, conventional medicine have learned nothing of what matters; they are always trying to second guess the body and interfere with NATURE..NATURE is the true protectorate..has been and always will be..THAT IS THE LAW OF LIFE.

Autoimmune Catastrophe





The evidence gathered from so many studies, some of these vaccines are ‘screwing’ with immune system function, rendering it into organized chaos, so it is unable to appropriately function which is why it is attacking the host tissues and organs and creating blood brain barrier breaches allowing toxins to infiltrate the brain. The following is a quote from the Geier DA, Geier MR called A Case control study of serious autoimmune adverse events following Hepatitis B Immunization published in Autoimmunity 2005

“The temporal relationship (criterion 4) clearly exists here. The annual incidence of MS recorded by the French insurance was stable about 5.5/105 until 1995. It rose sharply in 1996 to stabilize around 8/105 from 1998. But this sharp increase (65 %) closely follows a major peak in the number of vaccines sold between 1995 and 1997 in France “

Sandbanking





My final word on vaccines is that this is another man made mechanism to try and change what is and what has always existed way before humans populated the earth, I of course speak of microbial organisms. Modern medicine’s purpose, as I have alluded on several occasions is to destroy all bacteria and ‘sandbank’ the immune system with vaccines. The approach that Homeopathy and alternative medicine take is to ‘sandbank’ the individual so he or she is in a position to deal with any opportunistic pathogen through the strength of the Immune system as nature intended. Nature has the answer to all situations, when a newborn comes into the world, and within its first year of life, it’s nature’s intent, for its mother to protect the child during this period by breastfeeding and mother’s milk contains all the necessary immune cells and antibodies to fend of any invader. Since the defensive forces of the immune system reside in the gut it is critical that the infant’s gut is healthy allowing the immune system to get to work when required. As you have read previously many expected infections like measles, chickenpox, mumps are critical for the infant to experience in order to protect him/her from other diseases in later life.

Only the Strongest Survive





You have also read that once you interfere with this process such as vaccine intervention the balance of natural processes is upset, putting the young child at risk of further more serious infections and even death. As in the words of Dr Natasha Campbell Mcbride that I quoted when we first set out discussing the issue of vaccines, ‘before vaccinations, mothers would typically lose one or several children to childhood infections like measles etc, which is synonymous to animal ‘litters’ where some puppy’s or kittens perish because they are simply too weak. The law of nature dictates that only the strongest shall populate the planet and attempting to save the weak in some cases with vaccine intervention is defying nature’s laws and creating misery for those that need to care for damaged infants and the infants themselves, especially if they are left with a permanent disability like paralysis, autism, diabetes type 1 etc.”

Before you decide on vaccination just think about nature and the risks involved with trying to change the natural order of things. We want to survive and so do bacteria and viruses.





It started off as rioting. But right from the beginning you knew this was different, because it was happening in small villages, market towns… and then it wasn’t on TV anymore. It was on the street outside. It was coming through your windows. It was a virus, an infection. You didn’t need a doctor to tell you that. It was the blood, or something in the blood. By the time they tried to evacuate the cities, it was already too late. The infection was everywhere. The army blockades were overrun, and that’s when the exodus started. The day before the TV and radio stopped broadcasting, there were reports of infection in Paris and New York. You didn’t hear anything more after that…”

Quote: 28 days later

References/Acknowledgments:

Haemophilus Influenza, Pasteur, Koch, Macrophagic myofascitis Wikipedia The Toxicity of Aluminum Jared Skowan 2014 Millers Review Critical vaccine studies Neil Miller 2016 Movie Quotes 28 days later Wikiquote

Author: Eric Malouin