Obama makes stops at two Bay Area fundraisers
SAN FRANCISCO — President Barack Obama zigzagged through San Francisco Friday, headlining two Democratic fundraisers and urging his well-heeled supporters to guard against complacency as his time in the White House draws to a close.

He cast the November election as a watershed mark for the country, warning that the actions of Senate Republicans in refusing to consider his Supreme Court nominee in an election year risked undermining the pillars of the nation’s democracy.

“That means there is an awful lot at stake in this election,” the president said. “I want to make sure that everybody here feels the same urgency I do.”

Obama spoke to about 100 guests in the atrium of Ann and Gordon Getty’s palatial mansion in San Francisco’s Pacific Heights neighborhood. He was introduced by House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, who organized the $33,400-per-couple soiree. Some of the guests included Reps. Anna Eshoo, Barbara Lee, Jared Huffman and former Rep. George Miller.

In his first comments since the Democratic primary race between Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders took a nasty turn this week, Obama said that while “two fine Democrats” had different points of emphasis, they held much common ground.

“But they both believe that climate change is real and we should do something about it,” the president said to cheers. “They both believe that we should invest in early childhood education. They both believe we should raise the minimum wage.”

Obama contrasted his party’s candidates with Republican front-runners Donald Trump and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, who he said did the country a favor by “lifting the veneer” on the true face of their party.

“This notion that Donald Trump and Ted Cruz are outliers and that the Republican establishment is embarrassed by them: Why?” he asked. “They’re saying the same thing that members of the Freedom Caucus in the House have been saying for years.

“In fact, that’s where Trump got it,” the president said.

The Republican National Committee released a statement Friday about the presidential election.

“Whether it’s the presidency or Congress, voters have made it clear they want to take the country in a different direction from the failed policies of President Obama and his fellow Democrats,” said spokesman Ninio Fetalvo.

Earlier, the president spent an hour at the San Francisco home of Susan Sandler and Steve Philips in the Potrero Hill neighborhood where about 25 people contributed up to $33,400 to attend the Democratic National Committee fundraiser.

Dozens of people lingered outside the light blue Victorian home and cheered when the president exited. “It’s great on one hand and incredibly inconvenient on the other hand,” said Bob Chamberlain, whose street was lined with SUVs, vans, police cars and fire engines.

Chamberlain and his 6-year-old son, Brynner, caught a quick glimpse of the president as he walked into the fundraiser, but were milling about outside during the fundraiser hoping to get a better look as he departed. “It was pretty quick,” Chamberlain said. “Maybe this time we can see his face and not just the back of his head.”

At San Francisco International Airport, the crowd was bused out to the airfield more than half an hour before Air Force One touched down, so the 70 or so people waiting passed the time by snapping photos in front of the empty runway.

The president’s slightly early arrival caught some by surprise, but as Air Force One touched down and taxied down the runway, the crowd grew more attentive. The foggy mountains behind the runway provided a stunning backdrop.

The crowd cheered as Obama finally appeared in the front doorway of Air Force One and descended the staircase with Malia. He disappeared from view for a few minutes as Malia was whisked into a waiting car. Then, he strode toward the crowd pressed against the chain link fence, amid cheers and shouts.

Obama shook hands with the people in the first row to enthusiastic applause and cheering. The throng of people leaning over the fence and holding up cellphones to snap photos was so thick that reporters couldn’t see Obama doting on a baby, but the oohs and ahhs from the crowd told the story. Other children also attended the event, including a pair of twin boys wearing matching red shirts and suits. Rashad Berkeley said he was able to attend the event because his cousin is in the Air Force. He came with his wife Michelle and Nicole Berger.

“He’s an awesome president,” said Michelle Berkeley, when asked what the best part of meeting Obama was. She and Berger scored handshakes from the president, she added excitedly.

Rashad Berkeley, though excited to meet Obama, was also impressed by the level of preparation that went into a seemingly simple event — officials moving on and off the airfield to ensure the perfect setup for the president’s arrival.

The president will spend Friday night in San Francisco before returning to Washington, D.C., Saturday afternoon.

This is Obama’s second Bay Area fundraising swing this year. His visit caps off a three-day trip, which began Thursday when the president visited the University of Chicago Law School to make the case for why Republicans should hold a hearing on his Supreme Court nominee, Merrick Garland. From Chicago, the president flew to Los Angeles Thursday evening for two fundraisers, including a star-studded gala in Santa Monica, whose attendees included Gwyneth Paltrow, Julia Roberts and Julia Louis-Dreyfus.

Follow Laurel Hamers at Twitter.com/Arboreal_Laurel. Follow Matthew Artz at Twitter.com/Matt_Artz.