The effects of NAFTA on US trade, jobs, and investment, 1993–2013 : Review of Keynesian Economics
Book review: Anthony P. Thirlwall, <i>Economic Growth in an Open Developing Economy: The Role of Structure and Demand</i> (Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA 2013) 200 pp.

Book review: Eckhard Hein, <i>The Macroeconomics of Finance-Dominated Capitalism – and its Crisis</i> (Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA 2012) 232 pp.

The rate of profit and balance-of-payments-constrained economic growth: the dynamic model for a small and open economy

Unit labor costs in the eurozone: the competitiveness debate again

Paul Krugman’s ‘liquidity trap’ and other misadventures with Keynes

Garegnani’s ‘theoretical enterprise’ and the theory of distribution

Economic growth: trade, public finance, and the paradox of thrift

The Mexican and US economies in the NAFTA era

The effects of NAFTA on US trade, jobs, and investment, 1993–2013

Were the original Canada–US Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA) and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) significant policy turning points? Understanding the evolution of macroeconomic policy from the pre- to the post-NAFTA era in North America

You do not have access to this content

Between 1993 and 2013, the US trade deficit with Mexico and Canada increased from $17.0 to $177.2 billion, displacing 851 700 US jobs. All of the net jobs displaced were due to growing trade deficits with Mexico. The number of US jobs displaced by trade deficits with Canada declined slightly between 1993 and 2013. Prominent economists and US government officials predicted that the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) would lead to growing trade surpluses with Mexico and that hundreds of thousands of jobs would be gained. The evidence shows that the predicted surpluses in the wake of NAFTA's enactment in 1994 did not materialize. Growing trade deficits and job displacement, especially between the United States and Mexico, were the result of a surge in outsourcing of production by US and other foreign investors. The rise in outsourcing was fueled, in turn, by a surge in foreign direct investment into Mexico, which increased by more than 150 percent in the post-NAFTA period.

You are not authenticated to view the full text of this chapter or article.

Elgaronline requires a subscription or purchase to access the full text of books or journals. Please login through your library system or with your personal username and password on the homepage.

Non-subscribers can freely search the site, view abstracts/ extracts and download selected front matter and introductory chapters for personal use.

Your library may not have purchased all subject areas. If you are authenticated and think you should have access to this title, please contact your librarian.

Further information

or login to access all content.