Univision News Transcript: Interview with Senator...
Program: Al Punto with Jorge Ramos

Content: Interview with Senator Marco Rubio

Air Date: Sunday, June 9, 2013

Key

MES: María Elena Salinas

MR: Senator Marco Rubio

MES: Good morning, Senator, and thanks for being with us.

MR: Good morning, María, thank you.

MES: Senator, last week there was a lot of optimism that the Senate had the votes needed to approve immigration reform. Today there are questions as to whether the 60 votes that are needed are there. What happened? Are they there or not?

MR: Well, they are not there today, but I think they will be. That is, the vast majority of my colleagues, for example, many colleagues who just four or five years ago were not in favor of granting legal status to the people who were here illegally, who were not in favor of creating a path to citizenship, today are open to it. They’re simply asking that we make sure that the border is secure and that another wave of illegal migration doesn’t take place in the future. And so I believe that we can achieve measures and earn our colleagues’ trust. We’ll have a lot more than 60 votes, but we’re going to have to work at it.

MES: Of course. You said last week that you’d be willing to vote against the legislation that you helped write unless the Senate accepts certain amendments, as you are saying now, that strengthen border security even more. Would you be willing to throw everything overboard?

MR: No. I am 100 percent committed to the immigration issue, immigration reform. Quite the opposite, I will continue to work to make sure that it doesn’t come to that. My point is that if we don’t have those—if we cannot secure the border, if we cannot take the necessary steps to earn our colleagues’ trust, this will never become law. We’re wasting our time. But I don’t think it will come to that. I simply think that if we can arrive at a reasonable measure— of course, it has to be something reasonable—to secure the border and prevent any sort of wave of illegal immigration in the future, that we’re going to have more than enough votes to be able to accomplish it.

MES: Of course.

MR: If we don’t do it, I don’t think we’ll have it [the votes]. But I think that we’ll do it.

MES: Let’s try to understand how to accomplish that. At this time, the border is more secure than ever. There are 21,000 border agents, a 651-mile wall, more than 300 watchtowers. And the bill that you helped to write has even more funds for border security. So, what are the measures that you consider key for the Senate to approve the reform? What else do the Republicans want?

MR: Well, the problem—, not just Republicans. There are four, five Democrats who are also asking for it in the Senate. And the point is the following: What they want are details on exactly where those resources are going to be used because, yes, there are sectors of the border that are much more secure, but there are others that aren’t. For example, the area of Tucson, Arizona. So what they’re asking is that it not be left to the discretion of the Administration or agencies, but that the law specifically says where and how those resources will be used so that there is no waste and that the—the errors of the past are not repeated.

MES: And that can be done. Can you look for some type of …

MR: Yes.

MES: … phrase that can describe it in that way? Because we have to come up with something. At this point it’s the …

MR: Yes, of course. Yes—

MES: … Obama Administration, but in 12, 13 years when they’re eligible for legalization, many of those immigrants, we don’t know who will be in the White House.

MR: Well, we’ll be clear. Nobody is talking here about preventing legalization. Legalization will take place. That is, the following things will come next. First comes legalization, then comes this border security measure and then comes the permanent residency process. What we are talking about here is the permanent residency system. Regarding legalization, a vast majority of my colleagues have already accepted that: that it must take place and that it must start at the same time we start with what has to do with security. That is not conditional. Legalization is not conditional. Now, and I repeat, we can do it, and that is the point, we must specifically spell out where will the additional towers go, where will the additional wall go, where will the additional fence go, where will the additional sensors be; to provide specifics about where and how the available funds will be used.

MES: I would imagine that you are under a lot of pressure, Senator, because many see you as the Republican Party’s savior. On Wednesday, you met with a group of approximately 100 Republican senators and members of Congress. What is your take on that meeting? And are you accomplishing your goal of persuading your fellow Republicans?

MR: Well, some good news. The good news is that the vast majority of Republicans, not just in Congress but in the country, are willing to support legalization. They are willing to pass immigration reform that, at the end of the day, leads to permanent residency and after that, to citizenship, provided that security measures are taken so that this will never happen again in the future. I think that is a lot of progress. Just five, six years ago, many of these same Congress members or Senators were opposed to any kind of measure. And I think that is significant progress, and that has changed the climate—and the issue—here a lot.

MES: Well, something that causes concern in the House of Representatives is that Congressman Raúl Labrador left the Gang of Eight in the Lower House this week too, since the Republicans are insisting that people who achieve legal status must not have access to medical insurance through Obamacare until they become citizens. Is this a bad sign, or is it just a stumbling block on the path to what is hoped for from reform in the House?

MR: Well, let’s be clear. The Senate bill is a bipartisan project in the Senate; it says clearly that people who have violated the country’s immigration law are going to be legalized, they’re going to be able to work, they’re going to be able to travel, they’re going to be here legally, but they’re not going to receive Obamacare during that provisional period of the first ten years. So I don’t think that should be an issue. As far as Congressman Labrador, he has worked very hard on this issue. They had an agreement among the eight of them there in the House, but then one of the Congress members backtracked at the end of the day, and unfortunately the effort has stalled. But I think it is important to have a strong vote in the Senate, because if we have a strong vote of 70 or more in the Senate, I think that—that will help create the conditions so that it can be passed in the House as well.

MES: People are talking about the possibility that the House of Representatives might approve aspects of the reform separately, what they call “piecemeal” in English. Couldn’t that virtually destroy the possibility of comprehensive reform?

MR: Well, I think that the “approach” should be comprehensive, right? The way in which it’s done. If they want to do it in five different stages, but it has to be—they all have to pass, because they are all interrelated. They’re related to each other. That is, for example, for us to simply secure the border isn’t going to prevent illegal immigration in the future. There is also a need for a guest worker program so that people can come legally to work in the agriculture industry, etc. So we have to do it in a comprehensive way. If they want to do it through five different bills while they all pass, I think that could happen. In the Senate, we’re not going to do it that way. In the Senate, we’re going to do it with a bill combining all those issues in one bill.

MES: I want to ask you, Senator, about something else that made news this week, but it’s a different issue. It was reported that the National Security Agency has been collecting data about telephone calls from millions of American customers of Verizon, both in the United States and abroad. This seems like a violation of privacy, but what I’m asking you is whether this is something that should worry us, as American citizens, or is it part of the new post-9/11 reality?

MR: Both. It should worry us and it is also a part of the reality of the post-9/11 world. As far as the first part, I want to say to you that that initial report wasn’t 100 percent correct. That is, it didn’t paint a full picture of the panorama of what was going on with that program. This is a program that has to come before Congress every time for approval, in a classified manner, obviously, in a secret manner. But it gets approved in a bipartisan way, and there is a panel of members in Congress who are always reviewing it to ensure that there is no abuse. On the other hand, I understand that it is very unsettling to know that the government is monitoring calls; not calls, it’s not calls, but data about the call: the time of day, length of the call, etc. But at the end of the day, I can tell you that it’s a very hard thing to measure, to balance. On the one hand, the security of the country, and the reality is that there are elements right now who are, unfortunately, planning to attack our interests, and balancing that with the right to privacy that we all have. That is a very difficult balance.

MES: Senator Rubio, thanks for your time this morning.

MR: Thank you very much, María.