Comparative Constitutions Project
Books

The Endurance of National Constitutions (2009)

By: Zachary Elkins, Tom Ginsburg, and James Melton

Summary

Awards

Honorable Mention, William H. Riker Book Award (2011) — Political Economy Section of the American Political Science Association

Best Book Award (2010) — Comparative Democratization Section of the American Political Science Association



Reviews

Articles

2014

Zachary Elkins and Tom Ginsburg. 2014.“Stjórnarskrárgerd á Tímum Gagnæis: Ísland í Samanburdi Vid Önnur Lönd.” In Ísland í hruni og endurreisn 57-74 (Jón Ólafsson, ed.). [Icelandic]



Zachary Elkins, Tom Ginsburg, James Melton, Daniel Miranker, Robert Shaffer, and Juan F. Sequeda. 2014. “Constitute: The World’s Constitutions to Read, Search and Compare.” Web Semantics.



James Melton and Tom Ginsburg. 2014. “Does De Jure Judicial Independence Really Matter? A Reevaluation of Explanations for Judicial Independence.” Journal of Law and Courts.



2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

Elkins, Zachary, and John Sides. 2007. “Can Institutions Build Unity in Multiethnic States?” American Political Science Review.



2006

Ginsburg, Tom. 2006. “Locking in Democracy: Constitutions, Commitment and International Law.” New York University Journal of International Law and Politics.



Reports and Other Publications

Constitutions are supposed to provide an enduring structure for politics. Yet only half live more than nineteen years. Why is it that some constitutions endure while others do not? In The Endurance of National Constitutions, Zachary Elkins, Tom Ginsburg, and James Melton examine the causes of constitutional endurance from an institutional perspective. Supported by an original set of cross-national historical data, theirs is the first comprehensive study of constitutional mortality. They show that whereas constitutions are imperiled by social and political crises, certain aspects of a constitution’s design can lower the risk of death substantially. Thus, to the extent that endurance is desirable – a question that the authors also subject to scrutiny – the decisions of founders take on added importance.