FBI — Terrorism Definition
Info Terrorism Definition Definition of terrorism, definition of terrorism FBI, domestic terrorism, define terrorism, domestic terrorism definition, terrorism defined, FBI definition of domestic terrorism, definition terrorism, what is the definition of terrorism, definition of domestic terrorism, define domestic terrorism, the definition of terrorism, FBI’s definition of terrorism, “terrorism”, FBI domestic terrorism definition, U.S. definition of terrorism, “domestic terrorism” definition, FBI defines terrorism Definitions of Terrorism in the U.S. Code 18 U.S.C. § 2331 defines "international terrorism" and "domestic terrorism" for purposes of Chapter 113B of the Code, entitled "Terrorism”: "International terrorism" means activities with the following three characteristics: Involve violent acts or acts dangerous to human life that violate federal or state law;

Appear to be intended (i) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population; (ii) to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or (iii) to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping; and

Occur primarily outside the territorial jurisdiction of the U.S., or transcend national boundaries in terms of the means by which they are accomplished, the persons they appear intended to intimidate or coerce, or the locale in which their perpetrators operate or seek asylum.* "Domestic terrorism" means activities with the following three characteristics: Involve acts dangerous to human life that violate federal or state law;

Appear intended (i) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population; (ii) to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or (iii) to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination. or kidnapping; and

Occur primarily within the territorial jurisdiction of the U.S. 18 U.S.C. § 2332b defines the term "federal crime of terrorism" as an offense that: Is calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion, or to retaliate against government conduct; and

Is a violation of one of several listed statutes, including § 930(c) (relating to killing or attempted killing during an attack on a federal facility with a dangerous weapon); and § 1114 (relating to killing or attempted killing of officers and employees of the U.S.). * FISA defines "international terrorism" in a nearly identical way, replacing "primarily" outside the U.S. with "totally" outside the U.S. 50 U.S.C. § 1801(c).