FBI Announces Executive Appointments — FBI
Director James B. Comey announced today the following leadership appointments:

Kevin Perkins, Special Agent in Charge, FBI Baltimore Division

After three years of dedicated service as the associate deputy director, Kevin Perkins will become the special agent in charge of the Baltimore Division and succeed Stephen Vogt, who is retiring following a 25-year career with the FBI.

Mr. Perkins entered on duty as a special agent in January 1986. He previously served in the Kansas City, Philadelphia, and Baltimore Divisions in a variety of investigative and leadership positions. Mr. Perkins previously served as the special agent in charge in Baltimore from January 2004 to February 2006.

Mr. Perkins’ executive leadership positions included serving as assistant director for the Criminal Investigative Division, the Inspection Division, and the Finance Division, where he also served as chief financial officer of the FBI.

As associate deputy director, Mr. Perkins is responsible for all aspects of the FBI’s budget, human resources, information systems, and administrative functions.

He is a certified public accountant and a member of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.

Andrew McCabe, Associate Deputy Director, FBI Headquarters

Since September 2014, Mr. McCabe has served as assistant director in charge of the Washington Field Office. He began his career as a special agent with the FBI in 1996 and first reported to the New York Division, where he investigated a variety of organized crime matters. In 2003, he became the supervisory special agent of the Eurasian Organized Crime Task Force, a joint operation with the New York City Police Department.

In 2006, Mr. McCabe shifted his focus to counterterrorism matters when he was promoted to FBI Headquarters as the unit chief responsible for extraterritorial investigations of Sunni extremist targets. He later served as the assistant section chief of International Terrorism Operations Section I (ITOS-I), where he was responsible for the FBI’s counterterrorism investigations in the continental United States.

In 2008, Mr. McCabe was promoted to assistant special agent in charge of the Washington Field Office’s Counterterrorism Division, where he managed several programs, including the division’s National Capital Response Squad, Rapid Deployment Team, Domestic Terrorism Squad, Cyber-CT Targeting Squad, and the Extraterritorial Investigations Squads. He received the FBI Director’s Award for his work on the 56th presidential inauguration.

In September 2009, Mr. McCabe was selected to serve as the first director of the High-Value Interrogation Group. In May 2011, he returned to the Counterterrorism Division at FBI Headquarters as deputy assistant director to oversee the international and terrorism investigation program and was promoted to assistant director for the Counterterrorism Division in May 2012. In October 2013, Mr. McCabe was appointed executive assistant director for the FBI’s National Security Branch, overseeing all counterterrorism, counterintelligence, and weapons of mass destruction investigations and operations.

Before entering the FBI, Mr. McCabe worked as a lawyer in private practice. He received a Bachelor of Arts degree from Duke University in 1990 and Juris Doctor from Washington University School of Law in 1993. In 2010, Mr. McCabe was certified by the Director of National Intelligence as a senior intelligence officer.

Paul M. Abbate, Assistant Director in Charge, FBI Washington Field Office

Since October 2013, Mr. Abbate has served as special agent in charge of the Detroit Division. He began his FBI career as a special agent in March 1996 and was assigned to the New York Field Office, where he worked in the Criminal Division and served as a member of the SWAT team.

In December 2003, Mr. Abbate transferred to the Counterterrorism Division, Iraq Unit as supervisory special agent, overseeing FBI counterterrorism operations and personnel deployments in Iraq.

In October 2005, Mr. Abbate deployed to Iraq, serving as senior FBI liaison officer to the U.S. Department of Defense and leading a group of FBI personnel conducting counterterrorism investigations in theater.

From February 2006 to December 2009, Mr. Abbate served as supervisory special agent within the Newark Division Joint Terrorism Task Force.

In February 2008, Mr. Abbate deployed to Afghanistan and served as the FBI deputy on-scene commander, leading FBI counterterrorism operations and personnel in theater.

In December 2009, Mr. Abbate returned to the Counterterrorism Division, serving as assistant section chief of ITOS I, where he provided national-level oversight of all U.S.-based international terrorism investigations.

In July 2010, Mr. Abbate reported to the Los Angeles Field Office and served as an assistant special agent in charge for counterterrorism matters, overseeing a branch of the Los Angeles Joint Terrorism Task Force.

In August 2011, Mr. Abbate became section chief of the ITOS II, Counterterrorism Division, where he provided oversight of all FBI international terrorism investigations and extraterritorial operations outside of the U.S.

Mr. Abbate was appointed special agent in charge of the Washington Field Office, Counterterrorism Division, in October 2012. During this time, Mr. Abbate served temporary duty as the on-scene commander in Libya.