Federal Grand Jury Indicts Rahatul Khan and Michael Wolfe for Allegedly Attempting to Provide Material Support to Terrorists
A federal grand jury in the Western District of Texas returned separate indictments Wednesday charging Rahatul Khan and Michael Wolfe with attempting to provide material support to terrorists announced Robert Pitman, United States Attorney for the Western District of Texas, Christopher Combs, Federal Bureau of Investigation Special Agent in Charge of the San Antonio Division, and John Carlin, Assistant Attorney General for National Security.

Khan (a.k.a. “Rahat Khan,” “AuthenticTauheed19,” and “AT19”), age 23 of Round Rock, Texas, is charged with conspiring to provide material support to terrorists in violation of Title 18 USC Section 2339A. From March 2011 to January 2012, Khan allegedly conspired with others to recruit persons to travel overseas to support terrorist activities, including committing violent jihad.

Wolfe (a.k.a. “Faruq”), age 23 of Austin, Texas, is charged with attempting to provide material support to terrorists. Wolfe allegedly planned to travel to the Middle East to provide his services to radical groups engaged in armed conflict in Syria.

A detention hearing for Defendant Khan, originally scheduled for today, has been reset to June 30 at 2:30 p.m., before U.S. Magistrate Judge Mark Lane in Austin. Defendant Wolfe waived hearing on the Government’s motion to detain him and will remain in custody. Both defendants have waived formal arraignment and have entered not guilty pleas to the charges against them. Khan and Wolfe face up to 15 years in federal prison and a maximum $250,000 fine upon conviction.

Both indictments resulted from a Central Texas Joint Terrorism Task Force investigation conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation together with the Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, United States Army Intelligence, Austin Police Department, Round Rock Police Department, Killeen Police Department, University of Texas Police Department, Travis County Sheriff’s Office, Texas Department of Public Safety, Office of the Texas Attorney General, and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission.

Assistant United States Attorneys Gregg N. Sofer and Michael Galdo, together with the Department of Justice’s National Security Division Counterterrorism section trial attorneys Josh Parecki and Michael Dittoe, are prosecuting this case on behalf of the government.

It is important to note that an indictment is merely a charge and should not be considered as evidence of guilt. The defendants are innocent unless proven guilty in a court of law.