SPREAD THIS: Obama Makes Huge Move to BAN Social Security Recipients From Owning Guns
Advertisement - story continues below

You’ve got to hand it to President Barack Obama. During the course of his presidency, his effort to deprive Americans of their constitutional right to bear arms has been relentless.

Now the Los Angeles Times has reported that Obama wants to keep Social Security recipients from owning guns. Specifically, those who have their monthly disability checks handled by others would be unable to purchase firearms, just like drug addicts, felons and illegal aliens.

People who are “unable to manage their affairs” are those who have been defined by the government to have “marked subnormal intelligence, or mental illness, incompetency, condition or disease.” Consequently, the expanded gun ban could affect about 4.2 million individuals receiving Social Security checks.

Advertisement - story continues below

Opponents of this latest plan believe that expanding gun control by preventing people from owning firearms based on financial competence doesn’t make sense (H/T Fox News). This means, if you are not good in math or have trouble balancing your checkbook, well, then … no gun for you.

Yet Dr. Marc Rosen, a Yale psychiatrist said, “Someone can be incapable of managing their funds but not be dangerous, violent or unsafe. They are very different determinations.”

Rosen is also fearful that some veterans may avoid seeking help for mental health problems if they know they may have to give up their guns.

Advertisement - story continues below

This new proposal, if implemented, would especially affect veterans such as Steven Overman, 30, a Marine who was diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder and compromised memory and cognitive ability. The Veterans administration classified Overman 100 percent disabled. Overman let his wife handle his Social Security income. Overman would not be able to own a gun. Nevertheless, Overman can still operate firearms competently for target shooting and hunting in rural Wisconsin.

“I didn’t know the VA could take away your guns,” he said.

The Obama administration’s lack of transparency regarding this proposal has been par for the course. The National Rife Association (NRA) wasn’t initially aware of the plan. Once the NRA caught wind of this proposal, their chief lobbyist, Chris W. Cox, said, “If the Obama administration attempts to deny millions of law-abiding citizens their constitutional rights by executive fiat, the NRA stands ready to pursue all available avenues to stop them in their tracks.”

It’s hard to determine which part of this plan is scarier — the continued effort by the Obama administration to ban gun ownership or to expand its definition of mentally incompetent people and what they are prohibited from doing.

Advertisement - story continues below

Ari Ne’eman, a member of the National Council on Disability, said the independent federal agency would oppose any policy that used assignment of a representative payee as a basis to take any fundamental right from people with disabilities (H/T Los Angeles Times).

Once again, little by little, our freedoms are being slowly eroded by the Obama administration.

If you think President Obama is again infringing on the rights of not only gun owners but also senior citizens, please share this article with others on Facebook and Twitter.