Joint fundraising by political party committees
Joint fundraising is fundraising conducted jointly by a political committee and one or more other political committees or unregistered organizations. The rules described apply to political committees and unregistered organizations engaged in joint fundraising. The participants in joint fundraising activity may include:

Party committees ;



; Party organizations not registered as political committees;



not registered as political committees; Federal and nonfederal candidate committees;



Nonparty political committees (e.g., federal nonconnected PACs ); and



); and Unregistered nonparty organizations (e.g., nonfederal PACs).



Overview of rules

All participants in a joint fundraising effort, including unregistered organizations, must:

Create or select a political committee to act as the fundraising representative;



to act as the fundraising representative; Agree to a formula for allocating proceeds and expenses;



Enter into a written agreement naming the fundraising representative and stating the allocation formula;



and stating the allocation formula; Establish a separate account for joint fundraising receipts and disbursements ;



and ; Notify the public of the allocation formula and certain other information when soliciting contributions ;



; Screen contributions to make sure they comply with the limits and prohibitions of the Federal Election Campaign Act (the Act) ; and



; and Report allocated proceeds and expenses (applies to political committees only).



The committee named as the fundraising representative has additional responsibilities, as explained.

Restrictions

Participation in a joint fundraiser does not exempt any participants from any restrictions on their ability to raise funds outside the limits and prohibitions of federal law.

Soft money ban

National party committees may not participate in any joint fundraiser where nonfederal or Levin funds are raised.

Federal candidate fundraising

Federal candidates may not raise funds outside the limits and prohibitions of the Act. This ban limits their ability to participate in joint fundraisers with organizations that can raise nonfederal funds.

Levin fundraising

State and local party committees may not raise Levin funds through joint fundraising activity with any other state or local party committee. This prohibition applies to committees in different states as well. However, state and local party committees may jointly raise funds which are not used for federal election activity (FEA).

Fundraising representative

Joint fundraising participants must either establish a new political committee (using a Statement of Organization, FEC Form 1) or select a participating political committee to act as the fundraising representative. This committee is responsible for: collecting and depositing joint fundraising contributions; paying expenses; allocating proceeds and expenses to each participant; keeping records; and reporting overall joint fundraising activity. Any federal candidate participating in the fundraiser must designate the fundraising representative as an authorized candidate committee (using a Statement of Candidacy, FEC Form 2).

New committee

If a new committee is established, it collects all the contributions. Note that a new committee may not itself be a participant in any other joint fundraising effort, though it may conduct more than one event or activity on behalf of the participants.

Participating committee

If a participating committee acts as a fundraising representative, the other participants may also collect contributions, but they must forward them to the fundraising representative as required.

Commercial firm

Although participants may hire a commercial fundraising firm or other type of agent to assist the joint fundraiser, they are still required to establish or select a fundraising representative.

Written agreement

Before conducting a joint fundraiser, all participants must enter into a written agreement that identifies the fundraising representative and states the allocation formula—the percentages or amounts used to allocate joint fundraising proceeds and expenses among participants. The fundraising representative must retain a copy of the written agreement for three years and make it available to the FEC upon request.

Establishing the account

Joint fundraising participants must establish a separate account for the receipt and disbursement of all joint fundraising proceeds. Each participating political committee must amend its Statement of Organization (FEC Form 1) to show the account as an additional depository.

Depositing contributions

The fundraising representative must deposit contributions into the account within 10 days after receiving them. Only contributions permissible under the Act may be deposited in the joint fundraising account. If any participant is an unregistered organization which may, under state law, accept prohibited contributions, the participants may either establish a second account for such contributions or forward them directly to the participants that may accept them.

Statement of Organization (FEC Form 1)

Joint fundraising representatives

If the joint fundraising committee is a new committee, it must file a Statement of Organization (FEC Form 1). If, on the other hand, the representative is an existing committee, it must amend its Statement of Organization. In either instance, the Statement of Organization must:

Identify the committee as the joint fundraising representative (check box 5(f));



List the names and addresses of all federal committees participating in the joint fundraising effort in box 6; and



Name the depository institution being used by the joint fundraising committee. In the case of a representative which is an existing committee, the depository is named only if it is different from the depository named on the committee’s current Statement of Organization.



Other joint fundraising participants

Committees (other than the joint fundraising representative) that are participating in the joint fundraising effort must amend their Statements of Organization (FEC Form 1). On the form the committees must: