Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 2017
We also finalize adjustments to our programs and rules, as we do each year, so that our rules and policies reflect the latest market developments. We finalize the following changes and clarifications to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and Affordable Care Act health insurance reform requirements. We revise the definitions of small employer and large employer to bring them into conformance with the Protecting Affordable Coverage for Employees Act ( Pub. L. 114-60 ). We also finalize provisions to ensure that a network plan in the small group market with a limited service area can be appropriately rated for sale based on geography. Lastly, we finalize some of the proposed provisions regarding the application of the actuarial value (AV) and single risk pool provisions to student health insurance coverage.

For consumers purchasing coverage through the Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP), we finalize a new “vertical choice” model for Federally-facilitated SHOPs for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2017, under which employers would be able to offer qualified employees a choice of all plans across all available actuarial value levels of coverage from a single issuer. States with a Federally-facilitated Small Business Health Options Program (FF-SHOP) will have the opportunity to recommend that vertical choice not be implemented in their State, and SBEs relying on the FF-SHOP eligibility and enrollment platform will be able to choose not to have vertical choice implemented in their State.

We finalize several improvements that seek to ensure consumers have access to affordable, high-quality health care coverage. We are amending requirements for QHPs, including essential community providers (ECPs) and meaningful difference requirements. This rule also contains technical amendments to QHP issuer oversight provisions. This rule includes amendments to further strengthen the patient safety requirements for QHP issuers offering coverage through Exchanges.

In addition to provisions aimed at stabilizing premiums, we are finalizing several provisions related to cost sharing. First, we are finalizing the premium adjustment percentage for 2017, which is used to set the rate of increase for several parameters detailed in the Affordable Care Act, including the maximum annual limitation on cost sharing for 2017. We are also finalizing the maximum annual limitations on cost sharing for the 2017 benefit year for cost-sharing reduction plan variations. We also finalize standards for stand-alone dental plans (SADPs) related to the annual limitation on cost sharing, and standards related to third party payments for premiums and cost sharing made on behalf of enrollees by Federal, State, and local governments; Ryan White HIV/AIDS programs; and Indian tribes, tribal organizations, or urban Indian organizations.

We are finalizing our proposals for the risk adjustment program—in particular, we are finalizing our introduction of preventive services into the methodology, and our calculation of model coefficients based on the 2012, 2013, and 2014 MarketScan claims data. This final rule also amends the risk corridors provisions related to the reporting of allowable costs.

We summarize input we have received on whether special enrollment periods are being appropriately provided, and discuss our plans to conduct an assessment of special enrollment periods granted to consumers through the FFEs. We are also codifying a number of Exchange policies relating to exemptions in order to provide certainty and transparency around these policies for all stakeholders.

This rule also establishes dates for the individual market annual open enrollment period for future benefit years. For 2017 and 2018, we will maintain the same open enrollment period we adopted for 2016—that is, November 1 of the year preceding the benefit year through January 31 of the benefit year, and for 2019 and later benefit years, we are establishing an open enrollment period of November 1 through December 15 of the year preceding the benefit year. The rule also finalizes two narrow changes to the Exchange re-enrollment hierarchy, prioritizing re-enrollment into silver plans, and providing Exchanges with the flexibility to re-enroll consumers into plans of other Exchange issuers if the consumer is enrolled in a plan from an issuer that does not have another plan available for re-enrollment through the Exchange.

We also seek to improve consumers' ability to make choices regarding health insurance coverage by ensuring they receive high-quality assistance in their interactions with the Exchange. For example, this final rule amends program requirements for Navigators, certain non-Navigator assistance personnel, and certified application counselors. These amendments will require FFE Navigators to assist consumers with certain post-enrollment and other issues beginning in 2018, require all Navigators to provide targeted assistance to underserved or vulnerable populations, and require Navigators and non-Navigator assistance personnel to complete training prior to conducting outreach and education activities. We are also amending our rules regarding the giving of gifts by Navigators, certain non-Navigator assistance personnel, and certified application counselors. In addition, we are finalizing our proposal that certified application counselor designated organizations will be required to submit data and information related to the organization's certified application counselors, upon the request of the Exchanges in which they operate.

We discuss the authority for FFEs to continue to select QHPs based on meeting the interests of qualified individuals and qualified employers. We will use this authority to strengthen oversight as needed in the short term.

We are also finalizing policies relating to network adequacy for QHPs on the FFEs. We proposed, but are not finalizing, a minimum quantitative network adequacy threshold for each State. As States continue their work to implement the National Association of Insurance Commissioners' (NAIC's) Health Benefit Plan Network Access and Adequacy Model Act (NAIC Network Adequacy Model Act), we will continue to use the same quantitative time-distance standards in our review of plans for QHP certification on the FFEs, which we will detail in the annual Letter to Issuers, which we are issuing in final form concurrently with this final rule. We are finalizing our proposed policy regarding standardized categorization of network breadth for QHPs on the FFEs on HealthCare.gov. We are also finalizing two provisions to address provider transitions in the FFE and a standard for all QHPs governing cost sharing that would apply in certain circumstances when an enrollee receives essential health benefit (EHB) provided by an out-of-network ancillary provider at an in-network setting.

Our intent in offering standardized options is to simplify the consumer shopping experience and to allow consumers to more easily compare plans across issuers in the individual market FFEs. We are finalizing a standardized option with a specified cost-sharing structure at each of the bronze, silver (with cost-sharing reduction (CSR) plan variations), and gold metal levels. This policy does not restrict issuers' ability to offer non-standardized options. We anticipate differentially displaying these standardized options to allow consumers to compare plans based on differences in price and quality rather than cost-sharing structures.

We are also finalizing a number of amendments that will improve the stability of the Exchanges and support consumers' ability to make informed choices when purchasing health insurance. These include the introduction of “standardized options” in the individual market FFEs. Additional amendments will increase the accessibility of high-quality health insurance and improve competition, transparency, and affordability.

In this rule, we seek to improve States' ability to operate efficient Exchanges by leveraging the economies of scale available through the Federal eligibility and enrollment platform and information technology infrastructure. We are finalizing a codification of a new Exchange model—the State-based Exchange using the Federal platform (SBE-FP). This Exchange model will enable State-based Exchanges (SBEs) to execute certain processes using the Federal eligibility enrollment infrastructure. The SBE-FP will be required to enter into a Federal platform agreement with HHS that will define a set of mutual obligations, including the set of Federal services upon which the SBE-FP agrees to rely. Under this Exchange model, certain requirements that were previously only applicable to QHPs offered on a Federally-facilitated Exchange (FFE) and their downstream and delegated entities will apply to QHPs offered on an SBE-FP and their downstream and delegated entities. For 2017, we are finalizing a mechanism through which SBE-FPs will offset some of the Federal costs of providing this infrastructure. In addition, we are finalizing rules requiring agents and brokers facilitating enrollments through SBE-FPs to comply with the FFE registration and training requirements.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ( Pub. L. 111-148 ) and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 ( Pub. L. 111-152 ), as amended (the Affordable Care Act) enacted a set of reforms that are making high-quality health insurance coverage and care more affordable and accessible to millions of Americans. These reforms include the creation of competitive marketplaces called Affordable Insurance Exchanges, or “Exchanges” (in this final rule, we also call an Exchange a Health Insurance Marketplace SM , [1] or Marketplace SM ) through which qualified individuals and qualified employers can purchase health insurance coverage. In addition, many individuals who enroll in qualified health plans (QHPs) through individual market Exchanges are eligible to receive a premium tax credit to make health insurance more affordable, and reductions in cost-sharing payments to reduce out-of-pocket expenses for health care services. These Affordable Care Act reforms also include the premium stabilization programs (risk adjustment, reinsurance and risk corridors) and rules that mitigate the potential impact of adverse selection and stabilize the price of health insurance in the individual and small group markets. In previous rulemaking, we have outlined the major provisions and parameters related to many Affordable Care Act programs.

The regulations in part 156 establish parameters related to cost sharing, including the premium adjustment percentage, the maximum annual limitation on cost sharing, and the reductions in the maximum annual limitation for cost-sharing plan variations for 2017. We amend the timeframe to request reconsideration under the administrative appeals process applicable to the premium stabilization programs. Amendments to part 156 also include provisions related to EHB prescription drug rules. We amend network adequacy requirements (including application of out-of-network costs to the annual limitation on cost sharing for EHBs covered under QHPs in the small group and individual markets), and essential community provider requirements. We establish standardized options for cost-sharing structures, indexing for the stand-alone dental plan annual limitation on cost sharing, changes to our process for updating the AV Calculator for QHPs, meaningful difference standards for QHPs, and minor changes to QHP issuer oversight standards. We also amend provisions related to the third-party premium payments from certain entities and the next phase of implementation for patient safety standards for issuers of QHPs offered on Exchanges.

The regulations in part 155 include clarifications related to the functions of an Exchange, and establish the individual market open enrollment period for the 2017 and 2018 benefit years. Certain proposals in part 155 are related to the eligibility and verification processes related to eligibility for insurance affordability programs. We also amend and clarify rules related to enrollment of qualified individuals into QHPs. We describe changes to the process of submitting certain exemption applications and options for State Exchanges to handle exemptions. The finalized regulations also provide for a Federal platform agreement through which a State Exchange may agree to rely on the FFE for certain functions as an SBE-FP. We also finalize various proposals related to the SHOPs. We amend the standards applicable to the consumer assistance functions performed by Navigators, non-Navigator assistance personnel, and certified application counselors. We also discuss our approach to QHP certification, and modify standards for FFE-registered agents and brokers and requirements for HHS-approved vendors of FFE training. Part 155 also includes clarification to the policy regarding additional State-required benefits.

The regulations in part 154 outline certain modifications to enhance the transparency and effectiveness of the rate review program. We require the submission of a Unified Rate Review Template from all issuers offering single risk pool coverage in the individual and small group market, including coverage with rate decreases or unchanged rates, as well as rates for new plans. We also announce our intention to disclose all proposed rate increases for single risk pool coverage at a uniform time on the CMS Web site, including rates with increases of less than 10 percent. Finally, we reiterate the process for establishing the uniform timeline that proposed rate increases subject to review and all final rate increases (including those not subject to review) for single risk pool coverage must be posted at a uniform time by States with Effective Rate Review Programs.

The regulations in part 153 codify how HHS will evaluate the risk adjustment and reinsurance data submitted to an issuer's dedicated distributed data environment. This rule also includes the risk adjustment user fee for 2017 and outlines certain modifications to the HHS risk adjustment methodology. This rule clarifies reporting requirements for the risk adjustment, reinsurance, and risk corridors programs.

The regulations in part 147 clarify the definition of principal business address, and establish the appropriate rating area under specific circumstances, for purposes of geographic rating. They also address the treatment of student health insurance coverage with regard to the AV and single risk pool requirements.

HHS consulted stakeholders on the policies related to the operation of Exchanges, including the SHOP and the premium stabilization programs. We have held a number of listening sessions with consumers, providers, employers, health plans, the actuarial community, and State representatives to gather public input. We consulted with stakeholders through regular meetings with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, regular contact with States through the Exchange Establishment grant and Exchange Blueprint approval processes, and meetings with Tribal leaders and representatives, health insurance issuers, trade groups, consumer advocates, employers, and other interested parties. We considered all public input we received as we developed the policies in this final rule.

We published a request for comment on section 2718 of the PHS Act in the April 14, 2010 Federal Register ( 75 FR 19297 ), and published an interim final rule with a 60-day comment period relating to the MLR program on December 1, 2010 ( 75 FR 74863 ). A final rule with a 30-day comment period was published in the December 7, 2011 Federal Register ( 76 FR 76573 ). An interim final rule with a 60-day comment period was published in the December 7, 2011 Federal Register ( 76 FR 76595 ). A final rule was published in the Federal Register on May 16, 2012 ( 77 FR 28790 ).

A proposed rule to establish the rate review program was published in the December 23, 2010 Federal Register ( 75 FR 81003 ). A final rule with comment period implementing the rate review program was published in the May 23, 2011 Federal Register ( 76 FR 29963 ) (Rate Review Rule). The provisions of the Rate Review Rule were amended in final rules published in the September 6, 2011 Federal Register ( 76 FR 54969 ), the February 27, 2013 Federal Register ( 78 FR 13405 ), the May 27, 2014 Federal Register ( 79 FR 30339 ), and the February 27, 2015 Federal Register ( 80 FR 10749 ).

A proposed rule relating to Exchanges and Insurance Market Standards for 2015 and Beyond was published in the March 21, 2014 Federal Register ( 79 FR 15808 ) (2015 Market Standards Proposed Rule). A final rule implementing the Exchange and Insurance Market Standards for 2015 and Beyond was published in the May 27, 2014 Federal Register ( 79 FR 30239 ) (2015 Market Standards Rule).

On December 16, 2011, HHS released a bulletin [5] (the EHB Bulletin) that outlined an intended regulatory approach for defining EHB, including a benchmark-based framework. HHS also published a bulletin that outlined its intended regulatory approach to calculations of AV on February 24, 2012. [6] A proposed rule relating to EHBs and AVs was published in the November 26, 2012 Federal Register ( 77 FR 70643 ). We established requirements relating to EHBs and AVs in the Standards Related to Essential Health Benefits, Actuarial Value, and Accreditation Final Rule, which was published in the February 25, 2013 Federal Register ( 78 FR 12833 ) (EHB Rule).

In a final rule published in the July 17, 2013 Federal Register ( 78 FR 42823 ), we established standards for Navigators and non-Navigator assistance personnel in FFEs and for non-Navigator assistance personnel funded through an Exchange establishment grant. This final rule also established a certified application counselor program for Exchanges and set standards for that program.

We established standards for SHOP in the 2014 Payment Notice. We also set forth standards related to Exchange user fees in the 2014 Payment Notice. We established an adjustment to the FFE user fee in the Coverage of Certain Preventive Services Under the Affordable Care Act final rule, published in the July 2, 2013 Federal Register ( 78 FR 39869 ) (Preventive Services Rule).

We published a request for comment relating to Exchanges in the August 3, 2010 Federal Register ( 75 FR 45584 ). We issued initial guidance to States on Exchanges on November 18, 2010. We proposed a rule in the July 15, 2011 Federal Register ( 76 FR 41865 ) to implement components of the Exchanges, and a rule in the August 17, 2011 Federal Register ( 76 FR 51201 ) regarding Exchange functions in the individual market, eligibility determinations, and Exchange standards for employers. A final rule implementing components of the Exchanges and setting forth standards for eligibility for Exchanges was published in the March 27, 2012 Federal Register ( 77 FR 18309 ) (Exchange Establishment Rule).

In the June 19, 2013 Federal Register ( 78 FR 37031 ), we published a proposed rule that proposed certain program integrity standards related to Exchanges and the premium stabilization programs (proposed Program Integrity Rule). The provisions of that proposed rule were finalized in two rules, the “first Program Integrity Rule” published in the August 30, 2013 Federal Register ( 78 FR 54069 ) and the “second Program Integrity Rule” published in the October 30, 2013 Federal Register ( 78 FR 65045 ).

In the November 26, 2014 Federal Register ( 79 FR 70673 ), we published a proposed rule outlining the benefit and payment parameters for the 2016 benefit year to expand the provisions related to the premium stabilization programs, setting forth certain oversight provisions and establishing the payment parameters in those programs (proposed 2016 Payment Notice). We published the 2016 Payment Notice final rule in the February 27, 2015 Federal Register ( 80 FR 10749 ).

In the December 2, 2013 Federal Register ( 78 FR 72321 ), we published a proposed rule outlining the benefit and payment parameters for the 2015 benefit year to expand the provisions related to the premium stabilization programs, setting forth certain oversight provisions and establishing the payment parameters in those programs (proposed 2015 Payment Notice). We published the 2015 Payment Notice final rule in the March 11, 2014 Federal Register ( 79 FR 13743 ).

In the July 15, 2011 Federal Register ( 76 FR 41929 ), we published a proposed rule outlining the framework for the premium stabilization programs. We implemented the premium stabilization programs in a final rule, published in the March 23, 2012 Federal Register ( 77 FR 17219 ) (Premium Stabilization Rule). In the December 7, 2012 Federal Register ( 77 FR 73117 ), we published a proposed rule outlining the benefit and payment parameters for the 2014 benefit year to expand the provisions related to the premium stabilization programs and set forth payment parameters in those programs (proposed 2014 Payment Notice). We published the 2014 Payment Notice final rule in the March 11, 2013 Federal Register ( 78 FR 15409 ).

The Protecting Affordable Coverage for Employees Act amended section 1304(b) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and section 2791(e) of the PHS Act to amend the definition of small employer in these statutes to mean, in connection with a group health plan with respect to a calendar year and a plan year, an employer who employed an average of at least 1 but not more than 50 employees on business days during the preceding calendar year and who employs at least 1 employee on the first day of the plan year. It also amended these statutes to make conforming changes to the definition of large employer, and to provide that a State may treat as a small employer, with respect to a calendar year and a plan year, an employer who employed an average of at least 1 but not more than 100 employees on business days during the preceding calendar year and who employs at least 1 employee on the first day of the plan year.

Section 5000A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the Code), as added by section 1501(b) of the Affordable Care Act, requires all non-exempt individuals to maintain minimum essential coverage for each month or make the individual shared responsibility payment. Section 5000A(f) of the Code defines minimum essential coverage as any of the following: (1) Coverage under a specified government sponsored program; (2) coverage under an eligible employer-sponsored plan; (3) coverage under a health plan offered in the individual market within a State; and (4) coverage under a grandfathered health plan. Section 5000A(f)(1)(E) of the Code authorizes the Secretary of HHS, in coordination with the Secretary of the Treasury, to designate other health benefits coverage as minimum essential coverage.

Section 1341 of the Affordable Care Act requires the establishment of a transitional reinsurance program in each State to help pay the cost of treating high-cost enrollees in the individual market in benefit years 2014 through 2016. Section 1342 of the Affordable Care Act directs the Secretary to establish a temporary risk corridors program that reduces the impact of inaccurate rate setting from 2014 through 2016. Section 1343 of the Affordable Care Act establishes a permanent risk adjustment program to provide payments to health insurance issuers that attract higher-risk populations, such as those with chronic conditions, funded by payments from those that attract lower-risk populations, thereby reducing incentives for issuers to avoid higher-risk enrollees.

Section 1321(d) of the Affordable Care Act provides that nothing in title I of the Affordable Care Act should be construed to preempt any State law that does not prevent the application of title I of the Affordable Care Act. Section 1311(k) of the Affordable Care Act specifies that Exchanges may not establish rules that conflict with or prevent the application of regulations issued by the Secretary.

Section 1321(c)(2) of the Affordable Care Act authorizes the Secretary to enforce the Exchange standards using civil money penalties (CMPs) on the same basis as detailed in section 2723(b) of the PHS Act. Section 2723(b) of the PHS Act authorizes the Secretary to impose CMPs as a means of enforcing the individual and group market reforms contained in Part A of title XXVII of the PHS Act when a State fails to substantially enforce these provisions.

When operating an FFE under section 1321(c)(1) of the Affordable Care Act, HHS has the authority under sections 1321(c)(1) and 1311(d)(5)(A) of the Affordable Care Act to collect and spend user fees. In addition, 31 U.S.C. 9701 permits a Federal agency to establish a charge for a service provided by the agency. Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-25 Revised establishes Federal policy regarding user fees and specifies that a user charge will be assessed against each identifiable recipient for special benefits derived from Federal activities beyond those received by the general public.

Sections 1313 and 1321 of the Affordable Care Act provide the Secretary with the authority to oversee the financial integrity of State Exchanges, their compliance with HHS standards, and the efficient and non-discriminatory administration of State Exchange activities. Section 1321 of the Affordable Care Act provides for State flexibility in the operation and enforcement of Exchanges and related requirements.

Section 1321(a) of the Affordable Care Act provides broad authority for the Secretary to establish standards and regulations to implement the statutory requirements related to Exchanges, QHPs and other components of title I of the Affordable Care Act. Section 1321(a)(1) directs the Secretary to issue regulations that set standards for meeting the requirements of title I of the Affordable Care Act with respect to, among other things, the establishment and operation of Exchanges.

Section 1312(a)(2) of the Affordable Care Act provides that in a SHOP, a qualified employer may select any level of coverage under section 1302(d) of the Affordable Care Act to be made available to employees through the SHOP, and that employees may then, in turn, choose plans within the level selected by the qualified employer.

Section 1311(h)(1) of the Affordable Care Act specifies that a QHP may contract with health care providers and hospitals with more than 50 beds only if they meet certain patient safety standards, including use of a patient safety evaluation system, a comprehensive hospital discharge program, and implementation of health care quality improvement activities. Section 1311(h)(2) of the Affordable Care Act also provides the Secretary flexibility to establish reasonable exceptions to these patient safety requirements and section 1311(h)(3) of the Affordable Care Act allows the Secretary flexibility to issue regulations to modify the number of beds described in section 1311(h)(1)(A) of the Affordable Care Act.

Section 1311(b)(1)(B) of the Affordable Care Act directs that the Small Business Health Options Program assist qualified small employers in facilitating the enrollment of their employees in qualified health plans offered in the small group market. Sections 1312(f)(1) and (2) of the Affordable Care Act define qualified individuals and qualified employers. Under section 1312(f)(2)(B) of the Affordable Care Act, beginning in 2017, States will have the option to allow issuers to offer QHPs in the large group market through an Exchange. [4]

Section 1302(d) of the Affordable Care Act describes the various levels of coverage based on actuarial value. Consistent with section 1302(d)(2)(A) of the Affordable Care Act, actuarial value is calculated based on the provision of EHB to a standard population. Section 1302(d)(3) of the Affordable Care Act directs the Secretary to develop guidelines that allow for de minimis variation in AV calculations.

Section 1301(a)(1)(B) of the Affordable Care Act directs all issuers of QHPs to cover the EHB package described in section 1302(a) of the Affordable Care Act, including coverage of the services described in section 1302(b) of the Affordable Care Act, to adhere to the cost-sharing limits described in section 1302(c) of the Affordable Care Act, and to meet the AV levels established in section 1302(d) of the Affordable Care Act. Section 2707(a) of the PHS Act, which is effective for plan or policy years beginning on or after January 1, 2014, extends the coverage of the EHB package to non-grandfathered individual and small group coverage, irrespective of whether such coverage is offered through an Exchange. In addition, section 2707(b) of the PHS Act directs non-grandfathered group health plans to ensure that cost sharing under the plan does not exceed the limitations described in sections 1302(c)(1) and (2) of the Affordable Care Act.

Section 1302 of the Affordable Care Act provides for the establishment of an EHB package that includes coverage of EHB (as defined by the Secretary), cost-sharing limits, and actuarial value requirements. The law directs that EHBs be equal in scope to the benefits covered by a typical employer plan, and that they cover at least the following 10 general categories: Ambulatory patient services; emergency services; hospitalization; maternity and newborn care; mental health and substance use disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; prescription drugs; rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; laboratory services; preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and pediatric services, including oral and vision care.

Section 1252 of the Affordable Care Act provides that any standard or requirement adopted by a State under title I of the Affordable Care Act, or any amendment made by title I of the Affordable Care Act, is to be applied uniformly to all health plans in each insurance market to which the standard and requirement apply.

Section 2794 of the PHS Act, as added by the Affordable Care Act, directs the Secretary of HHS (the Secretary), in conjunction with the States, to establish a process for the annual review of unreasonable increases in premiums for health insurance coverage. [3] The law also requires health insurance issuers to submit to the Secretary and the applicable State justifications for unreasonable premium increases prior to the implementation of the increases. Section 2794(b)(2) of the PHS Act further directs the Secretary, in conjunction with the States, to monitor premium increases of health insurance coverage offered through an Exchange and outside of an Exchange beginning with plan years starting in 2014.

Section 2718 of the PHS Act, as added by the Affordable Care Act, generally requires health insurance issuers to submit an annual medical loss ratio (MLR) report to HHS, and provide rebates to enrollees if the issuers do not achieve specified MLR thresholds.

Section 2703 of the PHS Act, as added by the Affordable Care Act, and sections 2712 and 2741 of the PHS Act, as added by HIPAA and codified prior to the enactment of the Affordable Care Act, require health insurance issuers that offer health insurance coverage in the group or individual market to renew or continue in force such coverage at the option of the plan sponsor or individual unless an exception applies.

Section 2702 of the PHS Act, as added by the Affordable Care Act, requires health insurance issuers that offer health insurance coverage in the group or individual market in a State to offer coverage to and accept every employer and individual in the State that applies for such coverage unless an exception applies. [2]

Section 2701 of the PHS Act operates in coordination with section 1312(c) of the Affordable Care Act. Section 1312(c) of the Affordable Care Act generally requires a health insurance issuer to consider all enrollees in all health plans (except for grandfathered health plans) offered by such issuer to be members of a single risk pool for each of its individual and small group markets. States have the option to merge the individual market and small group market risk pools under section 1312(c)(3) of the Affordable Care Act.

Section 2701 of the PHS Act, as added by the Affordable Care Act, restricts the variation in premium rates charged by a health insurance issuer for non-grandfathered health insurance coverage in the individual or small group market to certain specified factors. The factors are: Family size, rating area, age, and tobacco use.

Subtitles A and C of title I of the Affordable Care Act reorganized, amended, and added to the provisions of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (PHS Act) relating to group health plans and health insurance issuers in the group and individual markets.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ( Pub. L. 111-148 ) was enacted on March 23, 2010. The Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 ( Pub. L. 111-152 ), which amended and revised several provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, was enacted on March 30, 2010. In this final rule, we refer to the two statutes collectively as the Affordable Care Act.

In the December 2, 2015 Federal Register (80 FR 75487), we published the “Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 2017” proposed rule. We received 524 comments, including 112 substantially similar letters regarding our solicitation for comment on whether the substance use disorder requirement in essential health benefits needs additional clarification regarding medication-assisted treatment for opioid addiction. Comments were received from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, State departments of insurance, State Exchanges, a member of Congress, health insurance issuers, providers, consumer groups, labor entities, industry groups, patient safety groups, national interest groups, and other stakeholders. The comments ranged from general support of or opposition to the proposed provisions to specific questions or comments regarding proposed changes. We received a number of comments and suggestions that were outside the scope of the proposed rule that will not be addressed in this final rule.

In this final rule, we provide a summary of each proposed provision, a summary of those public comments received that directly related to proposals, our responses to them, and a description of the provisions we are finalizing.

Comment: We received a number of comments stating that the comment period was unreasonably short, making it difficult for stakeholders to provide in-depth analysis and input. Commenters urged HHS to provide a comment period of 60 days from the date of publication in the Federal Register for this and future HHS Notices of Benefit and Payment Parameters.

Response: The timeline for publication of this final rule accommodates issuer filing deadlines for the 2017 benefit year. A 60-day comment period would have delayed the publication of this final rule, and created significant challenges for States, Exchanges, issuers, and other entities in meeting deadlines related to implementing these rules.

Comment: We received a number of comments disapproving of the wide array of topics covered in the rule.

Response: Many of the programs covered by this final rule are closely linked. To simplify the regulatory process, facilitate public comment, and provide the information needed to meet statutory deadlines, we have elected to propose and finalize these regulatory provisions in one rule, as we have in years past.

Comment: A number of comments, many focused primarily on proposals related to network adequacy, urged HHS to allow States to continue their oversight of their insurance markets and defer to the NAIC for the development of important industry-wide, State-based standards.

Response: We aim to establish Federal oversight standards that complement State standards while meeting Federal obligations, including for qualified health plans on Federally-facilitated Exchanges. We will continue to coordinate closely with State authorities to address compliance issues, eliminate duplicative requirements or review, and to reduce the burden on stakeholders.

Comment: Several comments emphasized the importance of ensuring coverage is affordable to consumers, or expressed concern that coverage purchased through the Exchanges is not affordable.

Response: We appreciate the importance of ensuring coverage purchased through the Exchanges is affordable to consumers, and believe affordability is critical to the success of the Exchanges.

A. Part 144—Requirements Relating to Health Insurance Coverage

1. Definitions (§ 144.103)

Section 144.103 sets forth definitions of terms that are used throughout parts 146 through 150. In the proposed rule, we discussed the definition of “plan year” and proposed revisions to the definitions of small employer and large employer that would be consistent with recent legislation. We also proposed a technical correction in the definition of excepted benefits to cross reference the group market provisions in § 146.145(b) rather than § 146.145(c). We are finalizing these provisions as proposed.

a. Plan Year

In the preamble to the proposed rule (80 FR at 79495), we explained that we interpret the definition of plan year in § 144.103 with respect to both grandfathered and non-grandfathered group health plans to mean a period that is no longer than 12 months.

Comment: One commenter requested clarification that a plan year may be shorter than 12 months under certain circumstances.

Response: A plan year may be shorter than 12 months under certain circumstances, but a plan year may not be longer than 12 months.

b. Large Employer and Small Employer

We proposed to revise the regulatory definitions of large employer and small employer in §§ 144.103 and 155.20 consistent with section 1304(b) of the Affordable Care Act and section 2791(e) of the PHS Act, as amended by the Protecting Affordable Coverage for Employees Act. We also proposed to codify statutory language providing that in the case of an employer that was not in existence throughout the preceding calendar year, the determination of whether the employer is a large employer or a small employer is based on the average number of employees that it is reasonably expected the employer will employ on business days in the current calendar year. We are finalizing these revisions as proposed.

Comment: Several commenters supported our proposed definitions of large employer and small employer, including the codification related to employers that were not in existence throughout the preceding calendar year.

Response: We are finalizing the revisions to the definitions of large employer and small employer in §§ 144.103 and 155.20 as proposed. [7]

B. Part 146—Requirements for the Group Health Insurance Market

1. Guaranteed Availability of Coverage for Employers in the Small Group Market (§ 146.150)

For a discussion of the proposed amendment to § 146.150, please see the preamble to § 147.104.

C. Part 147—Health Insurance Reform Requirements for the Group and Individual Health Insurance Markets

1. Fair Health Insurance Premiums (§ 147.102)

a. Principal Business Address

Under section 2701 of the PHS Act and regulations at § 147.102, the rating area for a small group plan is based on the group policyholder's principal business address. We proposed to amend § 147.102(a)(1)(ii) to provide that if the employer has registered an in-State principal business address with the State, that location is the principal business address. We noted that an in-State address registered solely for purposes of service of process would not be considered the employer's principal business address, unless it is a substantial worksite for the employer's business. If an in-State principal business address is not registered with the State or is only registered for purposes of service of process and is not a substantial worksite, we proposed that the employer would designate as its principal business address the business address within the State where the greatest number of employees work in the applicable State.

When a network plan offered in a State has a limited service area, we noted that this policy could result in an issuer having to make a plan available under the guaranteed availability rules to an employer—because the employer has an employee who lives, works, or resides in the service area—but not be able to apply a geographic rating factor under the current rule—because the issuer might not have established rates applicable to the location of the employer's principal business address outside the plan's service area.

We proposed to amend § 147.102 to provide for an additional principal business address to be identified within a plan's service area in these circumstances so that the plan can be appropriately rated for sale to the employer. In such instances, the additional principal business address would be the business address within the plan's service area where the greatest number of employees work as of the beginning of the plan year, or, if there is no such business address, an address within the service area selected by the employer that reasonably reflects where the greatest number of employees live or reside as of the beginning of the plan year.

As stated in the preamble to the proposed rule, SHOPs, including the FF-SHOPs, may use the address that was used to establish a qualified employer's eligibility for participation in the SHOP to determine the applicable geographic rating area when calculating premiums for participating employers. The intent of these proposals was to establish a uniform set of rules that can be applied as simply as possible, while allowing plans to be properly rated.

We are finalizing the provisions proposed in § 147.102 of the proposed rule without substantive modification. However, we are finalizing the regulatory text in a way that does not refer to a location where employees live or reside as a principal business address, as we believe doing so in the proposed regulatory text was confusing, and we are making additional minor edits for clarity. These are not substantive modifications, as the proposed rule and this final rule apply the same test to determine the policyholder's rating area with respect to a network plan in such a situation.

Comment: Several commenters supported our proposed definition of principal business address, and our approach for allowing an employer to identify an additional principal business address within the service area of a network plan. Two commenters suggested HHS should not modify the standards for geographic rating, suggesting that the proposed rule provides opportunities and incentives for small employers to select an address based upon factors other than the true business location of the employer. These commenters did not provide an alternative approach to allow plans to be rated in this circumstance.

Response: We have revised the proposed rule text such that it no longer refers to an employer selecting a location where employees live or reside as a principal business address. The rule instead provides that if an employer does not have a business location in the issuer's service area, but has employees who live or reside within the service area, the geographic rating area for purposes of the network plan is the rating area where the greatest number of employees within the plan's service area live or reside as of the beginning of the plan year. We believe these standards for identifying an applicable rating area within the issuer's service area will ensure that a network plan can be appropriately rated for sale to the employer consistent with guaranteed availability requirements.

Comment: One commenter suggested we define “substantial worksite” to determine when a business address registered solely for purposes of service of process would be considered the employer's principal business address for rating purposes.

Response: The final rule does not provide a specific definition of substantial worksite. We believe the term is sufficiently clear and will not cause confusion. Nevertheless, we will monitor the implementation of this policy in considering whether it is appropriate to clarify what constitutes a substantial worksite in the future.

Comment: One commenter requested that the FF-SHOP verify that an address entered by an employer is the official principal place of business. We also received a comment requesting that we modify the FF-SHOP application process to allow more than one account per State and thus, allow for more than one rating area for an employer.

Response: Under § 155.710(b)(3), one criterion for being a qualified employer eligible to purchase coverage through a SHOP is that the employer has its principal business address in the Exchange service area and offers coverage to all its full-time employees through that SHOP, or offers coverage to each eligible employee through the SHOP serving that employee's primary worksite. If we receive a report that incorrect or inaccurate information has been provided on an FF-SHOP application, we may investigate and take corrective action as needed. Further, as stated in the preamble to the proposed rule, due to operational limitations, the SHOPs, including the FF-SHOPs, may not be able to accommodate multiple principal business addresses within a State for premium calculation purposes. As a result, due to current operational limitations, when a single employer application is completed in a State with an FF-SHOP, plan availability and premium calculations will be based on the principal business address entered on the FF-SHOP employer application.

Comment: One commenter asked for clarification on the interaction between § 155.710(b)(3) (governing eligibility standards for SHOP) and § 147.102(a)(1)(ii) (governing geographic rating).

Response: If SHOPs, including the FF-SHOPs, have operational limitations that do not permit them to fully implement the policy described above, they may use the address that was used to establish a qualified employer's eligibility for participation in the SHOP to determine which plans are available to the employer, as well as the applicable geographic rating area when calculating premiums for participating employers.

b. Other Issues Related to Rating Areas

In the preamble to the proposed rule, we noted that we have observed wide variations in the size of rating areas in the various States. We identified a concern that this variation could lead to smaller rating areas with a high concentration of higher-risk groups, which potentially compromises the risk-spreading objective that the single risk pool requirement is intended to achieve. At the same time, States are the primary regulators of health insurance, and we believe it is important to recognize the unique needs of each State. We also recognize the consumer disruption that could result from changes to rating areas. Therefore, we sought comment on whether we should seek more uniformity in the size of rating areas or establish a minimum size for rating areas, and if so, how that should be achieved, consistent with the principle of flexibility for States.

We also recognized the inconsistency that can occur between an issuer's rating area and the service area of some of its network-based plans. We indicated that it could be beneficial for the rating area and the service area to generally be consistent and sought comment on whether and how to achieve this objective.

Comment: One commenter supported rating areas of a minimum size as a way to spread risk, and two others suggested applying a minimum number of residents per rating area or a minimum number that is no less than a specified percentage of residents in the non-metropolitan statistical areas of a State. Many commenters, however, stated their opposition to any further Federal regulation defining rating areas, stating that the States are best equipped to determine how rating areas are established. One commenter stated that our example that each rating area be a contiguous area would adversely affect service area strategies that identify non-contiguous areas with similar pricing and network dynamics that may warrant placing them in the same service area. One commenter stated that limiting the number of rating areas to the number of metropolitan statistical areas plus one would be arbitrary. One commenter stated that basing rating areas on the relative population of each area would require frequent changes in rating areas due to population shifts.

Many commenters also opposed aligning rating areas with service areas. One stated that such an alignment could cause issuers to leave an entire geographic area rather than attempt to establish contracts with providers in other parts of a rating area, due to additional costs associated with establishing a broader network. One commenter observed that rating areas are based on geographic differences in cost of care, while service areas are constructed to ensure that a network plan has providers that can serve enrollees in specific geographic locations. One commenter observed that aligning rating areas with service areas could result in a significant increase in the number of plans submitted for approval and rate review and Health Insurance Oversight System (HIOS) plan IDs.

Response: We are not making changes to these regulations in this final rule, and will consider these comments as we continue to study these issues.

c. Child Age Rating

Section 147.102(e) provides for a uniform age curve in each State. When a State does not specify an age curve, a Federal default uniform age curve will apply. We stated in the proposed rule that we are investigating the child age rating factor in the Federal uniform age curve, and seek to determine whether the default factor is appropriate, or fails to adequately differentiate the health risk of children of different ages. We sought comment and data on the most appropriate child age curve, and the policy reasons underlying any recommendation.

Comment: One commenter did not support a varying child age curve, believing that in the individual market, children may need more care at certain ages, so a fixed age rating factor that applies to all children should continue to apply. With regard to the current fixed factor, several commenters stated that the current default factor of 0.635 for children under age 21 may be set too low.

Several commenters supported a varying child age curve, and set forth specific age gradations. Two commenters stated that the child age curve should be increased by a set amount for plans with embedded pediatric dental benefits. One commenter stated that we should consider using data consistent with data used to calibrate risk adjustment to determine child age factors, while one commenter stated that the age calibration for children must be adjusted in the uniform age curve.

Response: We recognize that the child age band and factor may need to be updated to better reflect the health risk of children and intend to address child age rating in future rulemaking or guidance.

2. Guaranteed Availability of Coverage (§ 147.104)

a. Product Discontinuance and Market Withdrawal Exceptions to Guaranteed Availability

In the proposed rule, we expressed concern about whether it would be in consumers' or issuers' interest to require guaranteed availability of a product while the issuer is in the process of winding down operations with respect to that product or all its products in a market. Therefore, we proposed to codify an exception to the guaranteed availability requirements under § 147.104 when the exception to guaranteed renewability of coverage related to discontinuing a product or all coverage in the market applies. Specifically, we proposed that an issuer may deny coverage to new individuals or employers during the applicable 90-day or 180-day notice period when the issuer is discontinuing a product or exiting the market. We proposed that an issuer must apply the denial uniformly to all employers or individuals in the large group, small group, or individual market, as applicable, in the State consistent with applicable State law, and without regard to the claims experience or any health-status related factor relating to those individuals or employers and their employees (or their respective dependents). We proposed that this exception not relieve issuers of their obligations to existing policyholders, such as their obligation to enroll dependents under an applicable special enrollment period. We proposed parallel provisions under § 146.150 addressing guaranteed availability of coverage for employers in the small group market under the HIPAA rules.

We are not finalizing the provisions proposed in §§ 147.104 and 146.150 of the proposed rule. As noted in the proposed rule, the product discontinuance exception to the guaranteed renewability requirement in § 147.106(c) requires an issuer to provide notice in writing, in the form and manner specified by the Secretary, to each plan sponsor or individual, as applicable, (and to all participants and beneficiaries covered under such coverage) of the discontinuation at least 90 calendar days before the date the coverage will be discontinued. The market withdrawal exception to the guaranteed renewability requirement in § 147.106(d) requires an issuer to provide notice in writing to the applicable State authority and to each plan sponsor or individual, as applicable (and to all participants and beneficiaries covered under the coverage) of the discontinuation at least 180 calendar days prior to the date the coverage will be discontinued. We therefore proposed to interpret the interaction between the guaranteed availability and these guaranteed renewability provisions to permit an issuer to deny enrollments during the applicable product discontinuance or market withdrawal notice period. However, with regard to situations where an issuer decides to discontinue a product, we are concerned that the proposed policy could have an impact on the issuer's risk pool and rating for its other products. While a market withdrawal does not have the same impact since all of the issuer's products in a market are being discontinued, we believe this interpretation of the interaction between the laws to provide for an exception to the guaranteed availability requirements would have to be applied consistently in both a product discontinuance and market withdrawal situation. Therefore, going forward, we will not interpret these statutes to recognize an exception to the guaranteed availability requirement in either scenario, and the issuer must continue to offer coverage to and accept every employer or individual in the State that applies for coverage under a product until such time that the product is discontinued.

Consistent with previous guidance, with regard to individuals who enroll in a product after the specified deadline for providing the applicable product discontinuance or market withdrawal notice and before the particular product or products are discontinued, HHS will consider an issuer to satisfy the requirement to provide notice if the issuer provides prominent and effective notice at the time of application or enrollment that the product will be discontinued, in any form and manner permitted by applicable law and regulations. [8]

b. Minimum Participation and Contribution Rules

In the proposed rule, we expressed concern that the use of minimum group participation and employer contribution rules to deny coverage in the small group market could result in some applicable large employers, as defined in section 4980H of the Code, not reasonably being able to offer coverage to their full-time employees (and their dependents) and therefore potentially being liable for an employer shared responsibility payment under section 4980H of the Code, particularly in States that elect to expand the small group market to include employers with up to 100 employees.

In recognition of this dynamic, we noted that a State electing to expand its small group market to include employers with up to 100 employees may opt, under its own authority, to prohibit an issuer from restricting the availability of small group coverage based on employer contribution or group participation rules. Alternatively, in cases where a State expands the definition of a small employer to include employers with up to 100 employees, we could amend the guaranteed availability regulations, with respect to small employers with 51-100 employees or with respect to all small employers altogether, to achieve this objective. We sought comment on such an approach.

Comment: Several commenters stated that we should retain the ability of issuers to limit, to November 15 to December 15 of each year, when issuers must sell a policy to a small employer that fails to meet the issuer's group participation or contribution rules. Some commenters stated that issuers should retain this ability even with respect to groups of 51-100 employees, as doing otherwise would have an adverse impact on risk pools. One commenter stated that if we eliminate the ability of issuers to apply minimum contribution and participation rules, we should at least exempt issuers from having to offer and renew coverage to employers that selectively offer insured and self-funded coverage simultaneously to separate classes of employees. Such employers, the commenter stated, leave issuers with the highest-risk individuals. One commenter stated that we should amend the guaranteed availability requirements so that any employer, regardless of size, that can document that it is subject to Code section 4980H, must be sold a policy anytime during the year. The commenter stated that we should consider this approach for the entire small group market as well.

Response: This final rule does not make any changes to the guaranteed availability requirements as they apply in connection with minimum participation or contribution rules. We note that States have flexibility to further restrict the use of minimum employer contribution or group participation rules as appropriate.

3. Guaranteed Renewability of Coverage (§ 147.106)

Title XXVII of the PHS Act includes several exceptions to its guaranteed renewability provisions, including when a group health plan sponsor has violated a material plan provision relating to employer contribution or group participation rules, provided applicable State law allows an exception to guaranteed renewability under such circumstances; and for coverage made available in the individual market, or small or large group market only through one or more bona fide associations, if the individual's or employer's membership in the association ceases. Although the Affordable Care Act removed from Title XXVII these exceptions as they applied to guaranteed availability, it did not do so with respect to guaranteed renewability. Therefore, as we pointed out in the preamble to the proposed rule, a large employer whose coverage is non-renewed for one of these reasons, and a small employer whose coverage is non-renewed due to membership ceasing in an association, could be seen to have a right to immediately purchase that same coverage (if available in the market) from that same issuer in accordance with guaranteed availability. In the preamble to the proposed rule, we suggested that this renders effectively meaningless these two exceptions to guaranteed renewability in these contexts, and we proposed to amend § 147.106 to remove these guaranteed renewability exceptions.

For the reasons discussed in greater detail below, the final rule does not remove the guaranteed renewability exceptions related to failure to satisfy minimum employer contribution or group participation rules, or loss of association membership, because we have determined upon further consideration these exceptions can affect the insurance plan choices available to consumers and employers.

Comment: Two commenters suggested we should not remove the guaranteed renewability exceptions when a small employer's membership in an association ceases. The commenters stated that typically a blanket master policy is issued to the association and it would not be appropriate for small employers who leave the association to continue to receive coverage through the same policy.

Response: Based on the comments received and after further review and consideration of the statutory provisions, we have concluded that the guaranteed availability requirements do not render effectively meaningless the guaranteed renewability exceptions for loss of association membership or failure to meet group participation or contribution rules. For example, an employer with association coverage leaving the association mid-year and losing coverage may be subject to a different premium rate under a new policy based on a quarterly rate update in the small group market or a new experience rate in the large group market. Further, we recognize that association members who cease membership in an association and lose coverage may have their deductible and maximum out of pocket limit reset under a new policy. The same logic applies with respect to employers whose coverage is terminated mid-year for failure to meet an issuer's participation or contribution rules. And, small employers whose coverage is terminated for failure to meet minimum participation or contribution rules might not be able to purchase new coverage until the next annual enrollment period from November 15 to December 15. For these reasons, we believe these exceptions to guaranteed renewability continue to have relevance, and we are not finalizing our proposal to remove them from the regulations.

4. Student Health Insurance Coverage (§ 147.145)

a. Index Rate Setting Methodology for Student Health Insurance Coverage

Under § 147.145, student health insurance coverage is a type of individual health insurance coverage that, subject to certain limited exceptions, must comply with the PHS Act requirements that apply to individual health insurance coverage. However, section 1560(c) of the Affordable Care Act provides that nothing in title I of the Affordable Care Act (or an amendment made by title I) is to be construed to prohibit an institution of higher education from offering a student health insurance plan to the extent that the requirement is otherwise permitted under applicable Federal, State, or local law. HHS has exercised its authority under section 1560(c) of the Affordable Care Act to modify some of its rules as applied to student health insurance coverage, including those related to the guaranteed availability, guaranteed renewability, and single risk pool requirements.

As we stated in the preamble to the proposed rules, our intent in exempting student health insurance coverage from the single risk pool requirement was to provide that student health insurance issuers need not include their student health insurance coverage in their overall individual market (or merged market) risk pool, and also need not have one single risk pool composed of their total statewide book of student health insurance business. Rather, we intended that issuers could establish risk pools for students and their dependents separate from the issuer's individual market or merged market risk pool, including by establishing separate risk pools for different institutions of higher education, or multiple risk pools within a single institution. However, as explained in the preamble to the proposed rule, we have learned that student health insurance issuers may be using certain rating factors that lead to rates that might not be actuarially justified.

As stated in the preamble to the proposed rule, we do not intend to disrupt rate setting for student health insurance, but we do seek to ensure that rates are based on actuarially justified factors. To clarify our intent, we proposed, for policy years beginning on or after January 1, 2017, that student health insurance coverage be subject to the index rate setting methodology of the single risk pool provision in the regulation at § 156.80(d). However, student health insurance issuers still would be permitted to establish separate risk pools from their individual market single risk pool (or merged market risk pool, where applicable) for student health insurance coverage, including by establishing separate risk pools for different institutions of higher education, or multiple risk pools within a single institution, provided they are based on a bona fide school-related classification (for example, graduate students and undergraduate students) and not a health status-related factor as described in § 146.121. Consistent with our single risk pool policy, the index rates for these risk pools would be based upon actuarially justified estimates of claims. We proposed that permissible plan-level adjustments to these index rates would be limited to those permitted under our rules. This approach would continue to allow rates for student health insurance coverage to reflect the unique characteristics of the student population at the particular institution, while more clearly delineating our intent with regard to the treatment of student health insurance coverage. We sought comment on any potential operational challenges associated with this proposal, including potential challenges related to filing rates for student health insurance coverage and how this policy might be adjusted to address those challenges.

We finalize in this rule our proposal that student health insurance issuers may establish one or more risk pools per institution of higher education, provided that the risk pools are based on a bona fide school-related classification and not based on a health factor as described in § 146.121. In response to comments, we are not finalizing our proposal that student health insurance coverage must comply with the single risk pool index rate setting methodology. However, we are requiring that student health insurance rates reflect the claims experience of individuals who comprise the risk pool and any adjustments to rates within a risk pool must be based on actuarially justified factors. We are also removing outdated provisions in § 147.145(b)(2) and (d) providing that student health insurance issuers may impose annual dollar limits for policy years beginning before January 1, 2014. Those provisions, by their own terms, no longer apply, as student health insurance issuers are subject to the provisions in § 147.126 that prohibit annual dollar limits on EHB for policy years beginning on or after January 1, 2014. Accordingly, we are finalizing the AV provision proposed in paragraph (b)(4) at paragraph (b)(2), and deleting outdated paragraphs (d) and (e).

Comment: While one commenter supported the proposal to subject student health insurance issuers to the index rate setting methodology, several commenters were opposed to the proposal, citing concerns about additional administrative and regulatory burdens on both issuers and State regulators, as well as concerns about limiting consumer choice and flexibility and undermining the role of institutions of higher education in arranging for coverage that best meets the needs of their student populations.

Response: After carefully considering these comments, we have determined not to apply the single risk pool index rate setting methodology to student health insurance coverage. While we continue to have concerns that student health insurance issuers may be setting rates that are not based upon actuarially justified estimates of claims, we are also mindful of the concerns about potential administrative burden. The single risk pool rate setting methodology is one means of ensuring rates are actuarially justified. Therefore, while student issuers will not be required to use that particular methodology to establish rates, the final rule requires that rates for student health insurance coverage reflect the claims experience of individuals who comprise the risk pool and any adjustments to rates within a risk pool must be actuarially justified. We intend to monitor whether factors are being used to develop rates for student health insurance coverage that are not actuarially justified, such as adjusting rates based upon the length of time the coverage has been underwritten by the issuer.

Comment: Several commenters supported our proposal to permit issuers to establish one or more risk pools per institution of higher education, provided the risk pools are based on a bona fide school-related classification and not a health factor as described in § 146.121. Two commenters urged us not to permit multiple risk pools within a single institution of higher education, expressing concern that subgroups could be discriminatory in nature. One commenter requested clarification that issuers may create risk pools comprised of more than one college or university.

Response: The final rule provides that student risk pools must be based on a bona fide school-related classification and not a health factor as defined in § 146.121. The risk pools may include enrollees at one or multiple institutions of higher educations in the State or nationally, or certain subgroups within a single institution of higher education, provided that the risk pools are based on a bona fide classification and not discriminatory based on health status. We believe these standards balance issuer flexibility with appropriate safeguards against potentially discriminatory risk pooling practices. We note that nothing prevents a State from requiring broader risk pooling with respect to student health insurance coverage than provided for in this final rule (for example, requiring each student health insurance issuer to establish one risk pool comprised of its entire student health insurance book of business).

Comment: Some commenters requested clarification that issuers may establish separate risk pools for students and dependents. Other commenters suggested that issuers should be permitted to apply actuarially justified rating factors to distinguish between students and their dependents who are on the same plan or cross-subsidize between students and dependents in order to keep premiums for dependent coverage affordable.

Response: Under this final rule, an issuer may create separate risk pools for students and dependents. Dependent rates may vary from those for students as long as dependents constitute a separate risk pool and are enrolled in separate coverage from students. However, consistent with the rating rules under section 2701 of the PHS Act, if students and dependents are enrolled in the same coverage, then rates may not vary based on student or dependent status, but may vary based on age and family size. Nothing in this final rule prevents an issuer from including students and dependents in the same risk pool.

b. Actuarial Value Requirements for Student Health Insurance Plans

As stated in the preamble to the proposed rule, many colleges and universities have reported to us that they offer student health insurance plans that are rich in benefits (for example, providing an actuarial value of 96 percent) and that they are reluctant to reduce the level of benefits to meet an actuarial value metal level. We stated that because enrollees in student health insurance plans are not typically selecting among such plans, there is less need for standardization of actuarial levels in this part of the individual market. Therefore, we proposed to add an exemption to the requirements for student health insurance coverage in § 147.145, under which, for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2017, student health insurance coverage would be exempt from the actuarial value “metal level” requirements under section 1302(d) of the Affordable Care Act, as implemented in §§ 156.135 and 156.140, but would be required to provide an actuarial value of at least 60 percent. To determine a plan's actuarial value for purposes of the application of the 60 percent actuarial value requirement to student health insurance coverage, we proposed to require student health insurance coverage issuers to obtain certification by an actuary that the plan provides an actuarial value of at least 60 percent. This determination would be required to be made by a member of the American Academy of Actuaries, based on analysis in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles and methodologies. We sought comment on this proposal, including whether to continue to require student health insurance issuers to determine the actuarial value of their coverages by using the actuarial value calculator, as currently required, instead of through actuarial certification.

We are finalizing our proposal to require student health insurance coverage to meet a minimum 60 percent actuarial value, as opposed to meeting any specific metal level. We are not finalizing our proposal that actuarial value would be determined by certification of an actuary but rather require that it be determined using the actuarial value calculator, as is the case for other individual market and small group market coverage. Requiring the actuarial value of student health insurance coverage to be calculated using the same methodology as those other types of coverage will allow students and their dependents to better compare the generosity of student health insurance with other available coverage options, such as coverage under a parent's plan or coverage through the Exchange. We also specify that this provision will apply for “policy years” beginning on or after July 1, 2016 as opposed to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2017. The reference to “policy years” is the more appropriate term with regard to student health insurance coverage, a type of individual market coverage. We recognize that student health plans typically operate on a policy year that is not the calendar year, and therefore we have modified the provision to take effect beginning with coverage for the upcoming academic year as was our intent in the proposed rule.

Comment: Several commenters supported our proposal to require student health insurance plans to meet at least 60 percent actuarial value, instead of meeting any specific metal level. However, several commenters stated that student health insurance plans should be required to meet metal levels, for purposes of transparency and comparability with other plans.

Response: Although we are finalizing the 60 percent actuarial value proposal, we agree that it is important for enrollees and potential enrollees in student health insurance plans to be able to compare such plans with others for which they may be eligible, such as their parents' plan or an individual market non-student plan. In the proposed rule, we had solicited comments on whether to require student health insurance issuers to specify, in their summary of benefits and coverage (SBC) documents, enrollment materials, marketing materials, or other materials, the actuarial value of the coverage, the next lowest metal level the coverage would otherwise satisfy, based on its actuarial value, or any other data that would give enrollees and prospective enrollees information about the actuarial value of the coverage. Several commenters supported this general approach. One opposed it, arguing that the actuarial value for student health insurance coverage is an unreliable indicator of the true value of the plan. However, we believe that disclosing the actuarial value of the coverage, and the next lowest metal level the coverage would otherwise satisfy, based on its actuarial value, would be a helpful tool. Therefore, we are finalizing a requirement that student health insurance issuers must disclose, in any plan materials summarizing the terms of the coverage, the actuarial value of the coverage and the metal level (or next lowest metal level) the coverage would satisfy. This requirement will not apply to the SBC, unless and until such information is incorporated into the SBC template and instructions.

Comment: One commenter recommended removing the 92 percent actuarial value cap on platinum level student plans instead of eliminating the metal level requirements altogether.

Response: We believe that the same reasons to give platinum plans flexibility with respect to actuarial value also apply to other metal level plans. Therefore, we are providing flexibility in this final rule for student health insurance plans to provide any AV at or above 60 percent.

D. Part 153—Standards Related to Reinsurance, Risk Corridors, and Risk Adjustment Under the Affordable Care Act

In the proposed rule, we proposed a number of modifications to the risk adjustment, reinsurance, and risk corridors programs.

Comment: One commenter asked that HHS present all regulatory information related to the premium stabilization programs in a clear, transparent, reliable and timely manner. Another commenter asked that the risk adjustment and reinsurance data collection requirements be limited to data currently held by plans in order to not increase the administrative burden on providers.

Response: HHS is committed to providing regulations and guidance in a clear and timely manner, and seeks to minimize the administrative burden of our data collection.

1. Sequestration

In accordance with the OMB Report to Congress on the Joint Committee Reductions for Fiscal Year 2016, [9] both the transitional reinsurance program and permanent risk adjustment program are subject to the fiscal year 2016 sequestration. The Federal government's 2016 fiscal year began on October 1, 2015. The reinsurance program will be sequestered at a rate of 6.8 percent for payments made from fiscal year 2016 resources (that is, funds collected during the 2016 fiscal year). To meet the sequestration requirement for the risk adjustment program for fiscal year 2016, HHS will sequester risk adjustment payments made using fiscal year 2016 resources in all States where HHS operates risk adjustment at a sequestration rate of 7.0 percent. HHS estimates that increasing the sequestration rate for all risk adjustment payments made in fiscal year 2016 to all issuers in the States where HHS operates risk adjustment by 0.2 percent will permit HHS to meet the required national risk adjustment program sequestration percentage of 6.8 percent noted in the OMB Report to Congress.

HHS, in coordination with OMB, has determined that, under section 256(k)(6) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (the BBEDCA), as amended, and the underlying authority for these programs, the funds that are sequestered in fiscal year 2016 from the reinsurance and risk adjustment programs will become available for payment to issuers in fiscal year 2017 without further Congressional action. If the Congress does not enact deficit reduction provisions that replace the Joint Committee reductions, these programs will be sequestered in future fiscal years, and any sequestered funding will become available in the fiscal year following the one in which it was sequestered.

Comment: One commenter stated that risk adjustment payments should not be subject to sequestration because the risk adjustment program is budget neutral and the Federal government is simply transferring funds among issuers.

Response: The BBEDCA requires all non-exempt budgetary resources be sequestered in amounts sufficient to achieve the savings targets established in the Budget Control Act of 2011. Risk adjustment payments are subject to sequestration as they are budgetary resources provided for by Federal law, and the risk adjustment program is not specifically exempted under section 255 of the BBEDCA. Therefore, as clarified in the OMB Report to Congress on the Joint Committee Reductions for Fiscal Year 2016, the risk adjustment program is subject to sequestration. Under section 256(k)(6) of the BBEDCA and the underlying authority for these programs, funds that are sequestered in fiscal year 2016 from the reinsurance and risk adjustment programs will become available for payment to issuers in fiscal year 2017 without further Congressional action.

2. Provisions and Parameters for the Permanent Risk Adjustment Program

In subparts D and G of 45 CFR part 153, we established standards for the administration of the risk adjustment program. The risk adjustment program is a permanent program created by section 1343 of the Affordable Care Act that transfers funds from lower risk, non-grandfathered plans to higher risk, non-grandfathered plans in the individual and small group markets, inside and outside the Exchanges. In accordance with § 153.310(a), a State that is approved or conditionally approved by the Secretary to operate an Exchange may establish a risk adjustment program, or have HHS do so on its behalf.

On January 8, 2016, we announced that HHS will hold a public conference to discuss potential improvements to the HHS risk adjustment methodology for the 2018 benefit year and beyond. The conference will take place on March 31, 2016, in the Grand Auditorium at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in Baltimore, Maryland. [10] Prior to the conference, we intend to issue a White Paper that will be open for public comment. The conference and White Paper will focus on what we have learned from the 2014 benefit year of the risk adjustment program, and specific areas of potential refinements to the methodology, including prescription drug model exploration, accounting for partial year enrollment, future recalibrations using risk adjustment data, and discussion of the risk adjustment transfer formula. Registration for the conference opened on January 25, 2016, and is available at https://www.regtap.info/ until March 23, 2016, for onsite attendance registration, and March 28, 2016, for remote attendance registration. Stakeholders who are unable to attend the conference in person may live stream the conference and provide feedback via the webinar. Additional information can be found at https://www.regtap.info/RAonsite.php.

a. Overview of the HHS Risk Adjustment Model (§ 153.320)

The HHS risk adjustment model predicts plan liability for an average enrollee based on that person's age, sex, and diagnoses (risk factors), producing a risk score. The HHS risk adjustment methodology utilizes separate models for adults, children, and infants to account for cost differences in each of these age groups. In each of the adult and child models, the relative costs assigned to an individual's age, sex, and diagnoses are added together to produce a risk score. Infant risk scores are determined by inclusion in one of 25 mutually exclusive groups, based on the infant's maturity and the severity of its diagnoses. If applicable, the risk score is multiplied by a cost-sharing reduction adjustment.

The enrollment-weighted average risk score of all enrollees in a particular risk adjustment-covered plan, or the plan liability risk score, within a geographic rating area is one of the inputs into the risk adjustment payment transfer formula, which determines the payment or charge that an issuer will receive or be required to pay for that plan. Thus, the HHS risk adjustment model predicts average group costs to account for risk across plans, which, as we stated in the 2014 Payment Notice, accords with the Actuarial Standards Board's Actuarial Standards of Practice for risk classification.

We received several general comments regarding the HHS risk adjustment methodology.

Comment: Many commenters reiterated their support for the HHS risk adjustment methodology. Some commenters requested a cap on risk adjustment transfers. Some commenters also suggested that, under our methodology, low-cost and low-risk-score issuers subsidize higher cost issuers, and that the model has adverse effects on limited network plans and new, small, and fast-growing plans. Commenters requested exempting new, small, and fast-growing plans from risk adjustment for the first 3 to 5 plan years, in recognition of the difficulty they are having in obtaining complete hierarchical condition categories (HCC) diagnostic classifications for their enrollees. Commenters also suggested gradually phasing in new issuers to risk adjustment or instituting a credibility threshold for participation. One commenter requested that issuers with fewer than 5,000 enrollees or less than 5 percent market share be exempt from risk adjustment. Two commenters requested that HHS set a cap on risk adjustment transfers based on MLR when the amount of the transfer causes the issuer's MLR to hit 90 percent. Specifically, the commenters requested excluding issuers with an MLR of 90 percent or greater, and capping an issuer's risk adjustment payment once it causes the issuer's MLR to rise to 90 percent.

Response: We agree that the risk adjustment program is intended to work with the fair rating rules under the Affordable Care Act to reimburse issuers who take on riskier enrollees, not to prevent issuers, including small and fast-growing issuers, from participating in the individual and small group markets. In this final rule, we are finalizing more accurate model coefficients for 2017 benefit year risk adjustment. We will discuss in the upcoming White Paper potential future improvements to the HHS risk adjustment methodology that we believe will continue to improve the accuracy of the model and benefit all consumers and issuers in these markets by helping ensure fair rating practices across those risk pools because issuers will have the expectation of accurate risk adjustment payments. Any changes we make to the HHS risk adjustment methodology would be implemented through rulemaking as necessary.

Comment: One commenter requested that HHS verify that plans that are subject to risk adjustment data validation (RADV) are correctly implementing the definition of small group, suggesting that eligibility can be verified with an employer's wage and tax statements.

Response: We will consider ways to enhance the RADV audits in operationally feasible ways without infringing on the States' primary regulatory and oversight authority over health insurance issuers.

Comment: One commenter recommended that HHS advance its schedule for publishing the proposed Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters to early fall, and requested that HHS provide a 60-day comment period to allow for more detailed and substantive comments on major proposed changes to the risk adjustment model.

Response: We are exploring our flexibility in moving the Payment Notice schedule to an earlier timeframe.

b. Proposed Updates to the Risk Adjustment Model (§ 153.320)

In the proposed rule, we proposed to continue to use the same risk adjustment methodology finalized in the 2014 Payment Notice. We proposed to make certain updates to the risk adjustment model to incorporate preventive services into our simulation of plan liability, and to reflect more current data. The proposed data updates are similar to the ones we effectuated for 2016 risk adjustment in the 2016 Payment Notice. We proposed to recalculate the weights assigned to the various hierarchical condition categories and demographic factors in our risk adjustment models using the most recent data available. As we previously described, in the adult and child models, enrollee health risks are estimated using the HHS risk adjustment model, which assigns a set of additive factors that reflect the relative costs attributable to demographics and diagnoses. Risk adjustment factors are developed using claims data and reflect the costs of a given disease relative to average spending. The longer the lag in data used to develop the risk factors, the greater the potential that the costs of treating one disease versus another have changed in a manner not fully reflected in the risk factors.

To provide risk adjustment factors that best reflect more recent treatment patterns and costs, we proposed to recalibrate the HHS risk adjustment models for 2017 by using more recent claims data to develop updated risk factors. The risk factors published in the proposed 2017 Payment Notice were developed using the Truven Health Analytics 2012 and 2013 MarketScan® Commercial Claims and Encounters database (MarketScan); we proposed to update the risk factors in the HHS risk adjustment model using 2012, 2013, and 2014 MarketScan data in the final 2017 Payment Notice when 2014 MarketScan became available. In using 2012, 2013, and 2014 MarketScan data, we blend, or average, the resulting coefficients from the separately solved models from each dataset. We do not weight one year more heavily than the others.

We stated that we believe we can more accurately account for high-cost conditions with new treatments that are not reflected in our model due to lags in the data available to us for recalibration. We believe that stability across our models is important, but sought comment and data that may inform better methods of accurately compensating for new treatments for high cost conditions. For example, we sought comment on whether there are ways to model the severity of these conditions in a manner that will more fully capture the highest cost enrollees.

Comment: One commenter requested that HHS incorporate 2014 and 2015 data for the individual and small group populations subject to risk adjustment, giving issuers notice of this incorporation no later than December 2016, so that they can determine and file plan year 2018 rates with each State.

Response: Under our current distributed data collection approach, we do not have access to enrollee-level data, which is necessary for risk adjustment recalibration. However, we intend to discuss incorporating enrollee-level data in future recalibrations in the upcoming White Paper, which will be published for public comment.

Comment: Commenters stated that risk adjustment coefficients are too low for enrollees without HCCs and too high for those with one or more HCCs. One commenter recommended that the adult and child models be calculated regionally or specifically for each State. One commenter encouraged HHS to include socioeconomic status and oral health services in the model, especially the child model.

Response: We have attempted to address the range between enrollees without HCCs and those with HCCs by finalizing the incorporation of preventive services into our simulation of plan liability. While overall this is not a very large effect, it does have a noticeable effect on certain demographic subgroups, resulting in more accurate payments for enrollees without HCCs. As for calculating the adult and child models regionally or by State, we believe that the use of the geographic cost factor (GCF) in the payment transfer formula should reflect prevailing utilization and expenditure patterns in the geographic location of the plan's enrollees. We intend to explore whether accounting for socioeconomic status is feasible in the risk adjustment model in the future.

Comment: All commenters on this section of the proposed rule supported HHS's efforts to make the risk adjustment models more accurate by addressing the lag in available health claims data. Many commenters also supported various approaches in more accurately addressing high-cost conditions, which are particularly susceptible to the lag in health claims costs because of the rapidly rising costs of certain specialty drugs. One commenter opposed the use of 2014 data unless the updated model is provided in time to be used for 2017 rate filings. Conversely, another commenter recommended HHS use 2013, 2014, and 2015 MarketScan data for 2017 risk adjustment, and 2014, 2015, and 2016 MarketScan data for 2018 risk adjustment, stating that HHS should finalize the process and methodology in each year's Payment Notice and release the updated factors later. A commenter acknowledged that the incorporation of new 2014 data in the calibration of the risk weights helps address new high-cost treatments, but that under the current model, the benefits of the modification are limited because the use of 3-year averaging means it will take 3 years for the risk weights to fully reflect changes in treatment patterns. Commenters recommended that HHS consider whether individual market data might show different relative weights for certain high-cost conditions than the population currently used for the risk adjustment calibration. Commenters also recommended that HHS evaluate the increase in costs for chronic conditions (specifically Hepatitis C, for which expensive prescription drug therapies have become recently available) year over year and trend or adjust the aggregated claims data or model to reflect the changes—this would allow HHS to respond to changes in treatment practices without relying on additional external data. One commenter recommended that more weight and credibility should be given to the most recent data to best capture emerging trends in treatments, drug therapies, and costs.

Response: We agree with commenters that there may be more precise ways to trend expenditures to accommodate the data lag and more accurately reflect the introduction of new treatments, including prescription drug therapies, for high cost conditions. Based on commenters' feedback on the need to better model the risk of high-cost conditions and rapidly changing health care costs, we re-examined the underlying trend factor we used to trend medical and prescription drug expenditures in the MarketScan data, because those expenditures account for a large portion of the recent changes in costs to treat high-cost conditions. Because we were using the same trend for both sets of expenditures, we looked at historical MarketScan drug data, subdivided by traditional (including branded and generic) drugs, specialty drugs, and medical and surgical expenditures, and found varying growth rates. In order to address commenters' feedback, we consulted with actuaries and industry reports to derive a specialty drug trend rate and traditional drug trend rate through 2017. We believe that using these more granular trend rates better reflect the growth in specialty drug expenditures and drugs generally as compared to medical and surgical expenditures. Further, we believe that more accurately trending drug expenditures through 2017 will more accurately compensate issuers providing new treatments associated with specific HCCs by providing a more finely tuned estimate of the relative costs of various conditions under the HHS risk adjustment methodology. We have incorporated different trend factors for (i) traditional drugs, (ii) specialty drugs, and (iii) medical and surgical expenditures, and are finalizing this approach for 2017 risk adjustment. This approach is reflected in the finalized coefficients in this final rule.

We proposed to incorporate preventive services into our simulation of plan liability in the recalibration of the risk adjustment models for 2017. We identified preventive services for the 2012, 2013, and 2014 MarketScan samples using procedure and diagnosis codes, prescription drug therapeutic classes, and enrollee age and sex. We relied on lists of preventive services from several major issuers, the preventive services used for the AV Calculator, and Medicare's preventive services benefit to operationalize preventive services definitions for incorporation in the risk adjustment models. We then adjusted plan liability by adding 100 percent of preventive services covered charges to simulate plan liability for all metal levels. We also applied standard benefit cost sharing rules by metal level to covered charges for non-preventive services. Total adjusted simulated plan liability is the sum of preventive services covered charges, and non-preventive services simulated plan liability.

We re-estimated the risk adjustment models by metal level, predicting plan liability adjusted to account for preventive services without cost sharing. We compared the model coefficients predicting original (that is, non-adjusted for preventive services) and adjusted simulated plan liability. Adjusting for preventive services increases age-sex coefficients relative to HCC coefficients, especially in the lower metal tiers (bronze and silver), and in age/sex ranges with high preventive services expenditures (for example, young adult females). The implication of the changes to the model coefficients is that the risk scores of healthy enrollees (whose risk scores are based solely on model age-sex coefficients) will likely rise relative to the risk scores of the less healthy (whose risk scores include one or more HCC coefficients in addition to an age-sex coefficient), especially in bronze and silver plans. As a result of the risk score changes for individuals, we expect that the incorporation of preventive services will increase the risk scores of bronze and silver plans with healthier enrollees relative to other plans' risk scores when preventive services are taken into account. This incorporation of preventive services will more accurately compensate risk adjustment covered plans with enrollees who use preventive services.

Comment: Most commenters supported the incorporation of preventive services into our simulation of plan liability in the risk adjustment model. Two commenters expressed concern that this change would unintentionally create an incentive for issuers to attract and retain healthier individuals rather than higher risk individuals, while another commenter supported including preventive services, but suggested that the approach proposed by HHS appears to compensate all plans, regardless of whether their members receive preventive services, thereby creating a “free rider” problem. One commenter noted that while the incorporation of preventive services does increase demographic factors for catastrophic plans and for females within bronze plans, the impact of this change is relatively small and does not resolve concerns about unbalanced incentives to attract enrollees with HCC diagnoses.

Response: Section 2713 of the PHS Act, as added by the Affordable Care Act requires that individual and small group non-grandfathered plans (among others) provide coverage for a range of preventive services and may not impose cost sharing on patients receiving these services. We believe it is essential that we are consistent with the goals of the Affordable Care Act and provide compensation to issuers who are required to provide these services without cost sharing. As such, we also believe that accurately accounting for services provided by issuers to healthier enrollees is a fair adjustment to real, baseline costs paid by these issuers. As for concerns about a “free rider” problem, all risk adjustment covered plans are required to provide zero cost sharing preventive services. Even if different enrollees use preventive services to different extents, by incorporating zero cost sharing preventive services in the calculation of plan liability when calibrating the models' coefficients, we will increase the accuracy of the model overall, accounting for any differential use of preventive services at the plan level. We believe that this increased accuracy for demographic factors coupled with our adjustments to medical and prescription drug expenditures will promote increased accuracy for all enrollees, with and without HCCs. We are finalizing the incorporation of preventiv