EXPOSED: George Soros Funded Over 50 'March for Women's Rights' Partner Groups ⋆ Pamela Adams ⋆ The US Constitution ⋆ Constitution.com
As usual, the liberal media and Democrat pundits are mischaracterizing the past weekend’s march as grassroots. Listening to them, people would believe that the participants were sincere, spontaneous and concerned citizens. While some were genuine, most were paid minions.

Renowned author, Asra Q Nomani, felt something was not right about the March for Women’s Rights. Co-founder of the women’s organization, Muslims for Peace, Nomani has an invested interest in women’s rights. She champions peace and tolerance among the Muslim community, openly rejecting Islamic terrorism.

Following her gut, Nomani decided to follow the money. She spent the weekend reviewing piles of documents regarding George Soros. Her findings are amazing.

Nomani researched and discovered George Soros funded over 50 organizations partnering and participating in the March for Women’s Rights. Part of that funding went straight into the protesters pockets. They weren’t there for rights. They were there for riches.

Nomani reported her findings exposing the truth in the New York Times.

“By my draft research, which I’m opening up for crowd-sourcing on GoogleDocs, Soros has funded, or has close relationships with, at least 56 of the march’s “partners,” including “key partners” Planned Parenthood, which opposes Trump’s anti-abortion policy, and the National Resource Defense Council, which opposes Trump’s environmental policies. The other Soros ties with “Women’s March” organizations include the partisan MoveOn.org (which was fiercely pro-Clinton), the National Action Network (which has a former executive director lauded by Obama senior advisor Valerie Jarrett as “a leader of tomorrow” as a march co-chair and another official as “the head of logistics”). Other Soros grantees who are “partners” in the march are the American Civil Liberties Union, Center for Constitutional Rights, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. March organizers and the organizations identified here haven’t yet returned queries for comment. On the issues I care about as a Muslim, the “Women’s March,” unfortunately, has taken a stand on the side of partisan politics that has obfuscated the issues of Islamic extremism over the eight years of the Obama administration. “Women’s March” partners include the Council on American-Islamic Relations, which has not only deflected on issues of Islamic extremism post-9/11, but opposes Muslim reforms that would allow women to be prayer leaders and pray in the front of mosques, without wearing headscarves as symbols of chastity. Partners also include the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), which wrongly designated Maajid Nawaz, a Muslim reformer, an “anti-Muslim extremist” in a biased report released before the election. The SPLC confirmed to me that Soros funded its “anti-Muslim extremists” report targeting Nawaz. (Ironically, CAIR also opposes abortions, but its leader still has a key speaking role.) Another Soros grantee and march “partner” is the Arab-American Association of New York, whose executive director, Linda Sarsour, is a march co-chair. When I co-wrote a piece, arguing that Muslim women don’t have to wear headscarves as a symbol of “modesty,” she attacked the coauthor and me as ‘fringe.’”

Linda Sarsour was one of the March’s four organizers. She advocates Sharia Law, which rejects abortion. Yet, she is more comfortable standing with the terrorist group, Hamas, than marching with Pro-Life organizations. Appointed Obama’s “Champion of Change” in 2012, Sarsour also attended the recent Democrat National Convention as a delegate. Yet the liberal media and pundits promote the march as “nonpartisan.”

This is not a grassroots movement in any sense of the word. It is a well organized, well paid media show run by the ultimate puppet master. And the insanity is just beginning. For all their talk about unity, their actions speak louder than words. As much as we want to mock them and dismiss them, we have to be the adults. These spoiled, uneducated, manipulated children need to be taken by the hand before they take America completely off the deep end.

But that’s just my 2 cents.