DeSantis hits Gillum for lowballing Florida’s economy
Republican nominee for Governor Ron DeSantis accused his Democratic opponent Sunday of purposely talking down Florida’s economy for political gain.

DeSantis went on the attack after Tallahassee Mayor Andrew Gillum appeared on CBS Miami’s Facing South Florida program and claimed the state’s economy is doing well only because people are working multiple jobs.

When program host Jim DeFede asked Gillum if he gave Governor Scott credit for Florida’s economy, Gillum said he “gave him credit for an economy that is largely propped up on low wage work.”

DeSantis called Gillum’s claim a “flat-out lie.”

“Once again, Andrew Gillum doesn’t understand basic economics. His plan to raise taxes by over a billion dollars would be a disaster for Florida families,” said DeSantis. “Our economy is helping Floridians. We’re outpacing the nation in job creation, wages are up, and our unemployment is at a low 3.7 percent. Andrew Gillum wants to erase all of that success and take us backwards. I want to build on this momentum, move our state forward, and put more money back into the pockets of every Floridian.”

Gillum’s claim is similar to a statement made by New York socialist Congressional candidate Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez where she said “everyone has two jobs.” Independent fact-checker Politifact rated her statement a “pants on fire.” According to the

Bureau of Labor Statistics, which tracks people with multiple jobs, a small percentage of Americans have more than one job. More than 148 million Americans have a single job, while 6 to 7 million Americans have multiple employment. There’s no indication that Florida is any different than the national trends.

According to the latest figures released by the state, Florida’s unemployment rate is at a twelve year low and the state is one of the nation’s leaders in job creation. Florida relies on tourism to drive it’s economy and service jobs lead that sector. Those jobs are good enough to give Florida the 17th largest economy in the world, ranking ahead of Indonesia.