Child Care Is Biggest Expense For A Growing Number of Families
More working families than ever are spending more of their income on child care than any other household expense.

For many parents the cost is greater than housing, transportation or utilities. In some places its even more expensive than college. And with rising child care costs the number of parents paying more for care than anything else is going up, according to the newly released Child Care in America: 2015 State Fact Sheets from Child Care Aware of America.

"We are in a child care crisis," says Michelle McCready, deputy director of policy Child Care Aware of America. "Child care costs are on the rise for American families and parents are spending the majority of their family budget on it."

Every week in the United States, child care providers care for nearly 11 million children younger than 5 whose parents are working. As defined by the report, child care is any licensed child care-program. That can include anything from a traditional day care center to small in-home care as well as some child-care centers that have Head Start or are combined with Pre-K.

Married couples who both work will spend up to 15 percent of their income on child care, nationally. But finding and paying for affordable and quality care is particularly hard on single women. For single mothers, because of pay disparities between men and women and their sole breadwinner status, the portion of their budget that goes to child care can climb as high as 65% nationally.

McCready says child care takes such a large chunk of family's budgets because parents are paying as they go. While child care costs as much as public college in 31 states families have not saved up for child care like they may for college.

"One challenge is that there are a lot of systems in place for saving for college and parents have an 18-year runway to save up," she said highlighting 529 savings plans, college funds and other savings vehicles. "But early child care is such sticker shock right away when you have a baby and you're trying to go back to work and make it work. There are so many options and and it is so expensive."

The importance of quality safe child care is well documented. The report says, "the science is clear: there are long-term positive outcomes for children who begin learning from birth ... the child care setting is an opportunity to learn and set healthy habits for life."