Can The New NAFTA Pay For Trump's Wall?
Getty

Somehow, this week, the ‘trade’ and ‘government shutdown’ storylines managed to converge. President Donald Trump had originally threatened a government shutdown if he did not get $5 billion to pay for the wall he promised to build along the Mexican border.

In the face of stiff Congressional resistance, the President had to find a way to back down. But if Congress was not going to appropriate the money, how could his wall be paid for? That question was posed to White House Press Secretary Sara Huckabee Sanders, who replied:

Look, we’re not asking American taxpayers for that…The president has been clear that the USMCA deal would provide additional revenue through that deal that would show that Mexico has paid for the wall.”

This sounds ridiculous – and it is. But it may be instructive to work through why. So, let’s consider how the USMCA could conceivably pay for the President’s wall.

First, we need to assume that the agreement, signed on November 30, can actually get through Congress. That is by no means a sure thing, but that’s an issue for another column. For the moment, let’s assume it does.

Then, there is the question of whether one can raise revenue by cutting tariffs? After all, the point of a trade agreement is to lower barriers. The answer is actually yes, but not when you cut tariffs to zero. Tariff cuts can raise revenue when the initial tariff is high enough that it seriously restricts trade. As the tariff drops, trade flows can increase. It’s possible that there is less tariff revenue per item, but the increased trade volume means the overall revenue increases. Of course, once the tariff drops to zero, there is no revenue. Further, since the USMCA is meant to replace NAFTA, which already got rid of tariffs, the argument does notapply here. So tariff cuts will not fund the wall.

Next, is it possible to raise money by tightening rules of origin? One of the headline changes of the USMCA is to make it harder for cars to escape tariffs in North American trade by tweaking the “rules of origin.” This actually could raise revenue, but if it does, it will mean the President’s trade team failed in their central goal of driving auto production back to the United States. To see why, consider an auto producer who watches the requirement for North American content jump from 62.5 percent to 75 percent. That automaker, who currently produces across North America, faces a choice: rework supply chains to meet the new requirement, or pay the standard (MFN) tariff for imports from outside the trade bloc. That tariff is currently 2.5 percent. If automakers opt for the tariff, new revenues will come in. But the implication will be that President Trump’s rules of origin are ineffective. In fact, if the automakers are going to pay the 2.5 percent anyway, they may drop their North American content below 62.5 percent, since that threshold will no longer matter. So any revenue from this source is probably not something the President wants to brag about.

Suppose there were this kind of revenue. There is no particular reason to think Mexicans (or Canadians) would pay those tariffs; the burden could well fall on domestic automakers when they bring the cars in. Further, none of those funds would be ear-marked for anything; they would go into general revenues. For the last several years, the United States has taken in about $35 billion per year in “Customs Duties and Fees,” accounting for just over 1 percent of total federal government revenues. Those revenues get allocated as Congress specifies. There is nothing in the USMCA that sets up a separate slush fund for the President to deploy to the Rio Grande.

As a final possibility for paying for the wall through a trade deal, what if the pact stimulates broader growth and that, in turn, increases tax revenue? There are two problems with this idea. The first is that there is very little in the USMCA to suggest it will create an economic growth spurt in the United States. Its headline move is to make life more difficult in the automotive sector and when you start with free trade and then mostly just renew your vows, there is no reason to expect big economic effects. The second problem is the same as the one above – those additional revenues would come from American taxpayers and would go into general revenue.

It is tempting to let this claim slide. After all, if this is the President’s face-saving way to retreat from an ill-advised government shutdown threat, why not let him slink away quietly?

The problem is that we are currently engaged in multiple debates about what trade and trade agreements do. For those, we need to be clear-eyed in our analysis. Or at least not delusional. If the President wants to fund his wall, he will have to look somewhere other than the USMCA.