Rashida Tlaib will wear traditional Palestinian thobe to swearing-in
CLOSE Rashida Tlaib talks with the Free Press about political office and representing her constituents. Eric Seals, Detroit Free Press

Buy Photo Rashida Tlaib in front of one of the murals in southwest Detroit on August 21, 2018. (Photo: Eric Seals, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

WASHINGTON — Detroit’s newest congresswoman will be sworn into office wearing her heritage on her sleeve — and everywhere else.

When U.S. Rep.-elect Rashida Tlaib takes the oath of office along with the other members of the 116th Congress on Jan. 3, she will be wearing a traditional Palestinian thobe, or dress, made by her mother.

“She gave it to me before I won and said, ‘Wear this,’ and I said I have to win first. She said you’ve already won … This was before the primary,” said Tlaib, a Democrat who will become the first Palestinian-American woman to serve in the U.S. House of Representatives.

“She's a proud Palestinian woman and (she wants to see) her daughter wear something that I don’t usually wear,” added Tlaib, who as a lawyer, civic activist and former state representative is more likely to be seen in casual business attire. “I haven’t worn one in years. Palestinian thobes are very much your mother’s dress.”

Tlaib will also become, with Minnesota’s Ilhan Omar, one of the first two Muslim women elected to the House and is expected to use a copy of Thomas Jefferson's Koran — which belongs to the Library of Congress — for her ceremonial swearing in.

She won election in November to the seat formerly held by U.S. Rep. John Conyers, who stepped down more than a year ago.

U.S. Rep.-elect Rashida Tlaib, D-Detroit, will wear this Palestinian thobe, made by her mother, to her swearing in on Jan. 3, 2019. (Photo: Rashida Tlaib)

What is a thobe?

A thobe is a long dress of red, black and gold material, and with symbols — traditionally those representing peace and family — sewn in. Tlaib said anyone who is familiar with Palestinian heritage will recognize the style of dress, which she has already had dry-cleaned.

She said she remembers her mother — Fatima Elabed, who turned 63 in mid-December — and other women in her Detroit family sewing thobes when she and her siblings were young. But finding thobes now is difficult, she said.

Tlaib’s mother was born in a small village in Palestine and immigrated to the U.S. Her family is still in that region. Tlaib — the eldest of 14 children — has proposed organizing a trip for new members of Congress to see the village where her grandmother still lives.

Her concerns, she said, are first and foremost on the people of Michigan’s 13th Congressional District, one of the most impoverished in the country. But she is also mindful of what her election means to her family and Palestinians everywhere.

“When I wear it … it’s a real huge symbol,” she said of the dress, a photo of which she posted on Instagram, sparking a flurry of media coverage. “It’s history. It’s culture. People think of this connection.”

“I never thought… It’s such a big deal!” she said. “I’m doing it for my mom but I’m realizing how much bigger it is.”

Read more:

Palestinian-American candidate Rashida Tlaib is source of West Bank pride

How Detroit's Rashida Tlaib will make history in Washington

Contact Todd Spangler at 703-854-8947 or at tspangler@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter at @tsspangler.



Read or Share this story: https://www.freep.com/story/news/2018/12/18/rashida-tlaib-palestinian-thobe-congress/2348036002/