Michigan State Police trooper recovering after possible drug overdose from traffic stop
A Michigan State Police trooper is expected to be OK after a possible fentanyl overdose Wednesday after coming in contact with the drug during a search in a traffic stop.

This case illustrates the dangers law enforcement officers face from powerful street drugs.

According to a series of tweets from MSP Metro Detroit's verified account, the trooper and his partner conducted a traffic stop on Capitol Street in Lincoln Park of a potential narcotics suspect.

During the search of the suspect and his vehicle, the trooper began to feel lightheaded, nauseous and had an unsteady balance. His partner quickly recognized the trooper's behavior as having a possible drug overdose and administered two doses of Narcan, an opioid overdose reversal drug, from a first aid kit in the patrol vehicle. The trooper was taken to the nearest hospital and is expected to return to his next shift.

IT IS NEVER A ROUTINE:

Troopers from Metro South conducted a traffic stop on a possible narcotics suspect. One of the troopers started to feel lightheaded, nauseous and unsteady on his feet after searching a suspect. His partner noticed his behavior and started first aid. pic.twitter.com/Cc93qcrgUp — MSP Metro Detroit (@mspmetrodet) March 13, 2019

The suspect was arrested and a search warrant of his home in the 800 block of Capitol later recovered narcotics and two firearms.

"Please remember these troopers, deputies and officers face unknown dangers, seen and unseen, every single shift," a tweet said.

MSP 1st Lt. Mike Shaw said state troopers are trained to immediately act on similar incidents when it involves a citizen, but the same training applied when it involved an officer.

A similar incident happened in Kent County in 2017 when a Wyoming officer with the Kent Area Narcotics Enforcement Team became sick while a "white powdery substance" was being tested.

Portions of the sheriff's department evacuated on May 30 after the detective got sick. His heart rate increased and he started to feel nauseous, symptoms close to a case of drug exposure.

A hazardous materials team responded, and the detective was taken to a hospital. The detective was also given Narcan as a precaution.

According to the Drug Enforcement Administration's Detroit Division, just a 2 mg dose of fentanyl, a synthetic drug 80-100 times stronger than morphine, is enough to kill an officer if inhaled or absorbed through the skin.

Related: Street drugs change way officers in Michigan make stops

In 2015, Michigan witnessed 1,981 overdose deaths, marking the state's third consecutive year of record drug overdose fatalities, according to the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. Nearly 45 percent, or 884 deaths, were opioid related, and almost 20 percent, or 391, involved heroin.

Beginning in September 2017, the state police introduced a new protocol that requires substances thought to contain fentanyl to be sent directly to a crime lab for testing.

If officers spot a powder and aren’t sure whether it contains fentanyl, they’re required to wear protective masks and rubber gloves, make sure two officers are present, and have Narcan on hand, in case someone gets exposed.

Editor's note: An earlier version misstated how strong fentanyl is versus morphine. According to the DEA, it is 80-100 times stronger.

More: Wayne County exec blasts county treasurer over real estate dealings

More: Missing U.P. boy found; AMBER Alert canceled

Read or Share this story: https://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/wayne/2019/03/14/michigan-state-police-trooper-overdose/3160166002/