The Long History of Presidents Nominating Supreme Court Justices in Presidential Election Years
POLici is a new Cook Political Report feature providing our subscribers with fresh perspectives on American political trends by a panel of highly regarded political scientists.



Contributing Editor John Anthony Maltese is the Albert B. Saye Professor and Head of the Department of Political Science at the University of Georgia's School of Public and International Affairs.

In the wake of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia’s death, President Barack Obama announced his intention to fulfill his constitutional responsibility to nominate a successor to Scalia. Obama did so despite calls by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and other Republican leaders for him to withhold a nomination and leave the choice to his successor.Republican presidential nominees Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio joined the call for the president to forego nominating a successor to Scalia, although Cruz dodged a question at Saturday’s debate about whether he would likewise pledge to withhold Supreme Court nominations late in his own term if elected president. Cruz also erroneously claimed that there is “80 years of precedent of not confirming Supreme Court justices in an election year.” In fact, the Democrat-controlled opposition Senate resoundingly confirmed Ronald Reagan’s nomination of Anthony Kennedy in 1988 by a vote of 97-0.There is actually a long history of presidents nominating Supreme Court justices in presidential election years. Presidents have made 15 Supreme Court nominations in the calendar year of a presidential election that chose their successor (though two individuals, John C. Spencer and Reuben Walworth, were nominated twice—both in 1844). The Senate confirmed six of those 15 nominations: most recently Benjamin Cardozo in 1932 (which is probably what Cruz was trying to say, although presidents have nominated justices in the calendar year of an election as recently as 1968).Looking at Supreme Court nominations made by presidents in the previous calendar year but still within 365 days of the election that chose their successor adds six more names to the list. All six of those nominees were confirmed by the Senate. This list includes Anthony Kennedy, who Reagan nominated on November 30, 1987, and John Paul Stevens, who Gerald R. Ford nominated on November 28, 1975 (and who was confirmed by an opposition Senate by a vote of 98-0; times have changed).Prior to 1937, the inauguration of new presidents took place on March 4 rather than January 20, resulting in a longer lame-duck session than we now have. Ten different lame-duck presidents went so far as to nominate Supreme Court justices after the elections that determined their successors. In comparison, nominating someone roughly eight and a half months before the election, as Obama will likely do, does not seem late in the game at all.Four of these post-election nominations were made by presidents within the same calendar year as the election, but after the election had already occurred (three of them by presidents who knew they were being replaced by a member of the opposition party). Three of those four nominations were confirmed by the Senate (although one, John Jay, declined the post after being confirmed in 1800).Eleven more post-election nominations were made by lame-duck presidents between January 1 and March 4 of the calendar year after the election (eight by presidents who knew they were being replaced by a member of the opposition party). Andrew Jackson went so far as to nominate two people to the Supreme Court on his last day in office (in his case, at least, a fellow Democrat, Martin Van Buren, succeeded him; the Senate confirmed both nominees after Jackson left office).Such post-election nominations can smack of court-packing. A good example is John Adams’ January 20, 1801 nomination of John Marshall to be chief justice. Adams, a Federalist, had lost his 1800 re-election bid to Thomas Jefferson (who, though Adams’ vice president, led the rival Democratic-Republican Party). Federalists had also lost control of the House of Representatives and were on the brink of losing control of the Senate (that loss of control happened almost immediately as the result of special elections in 1801).It is no wonder, then, that Democratic-Republicans viewed the nomination of Marshall and his confirmation by the lame-duck Federalist-controlled Senate to be a repudiation of the election returns and a defiant poke-in-the-eye to its victors. The Democratic-Republicans were so incensed by this and other court-packing efforts by the lame-duck Federalists that they contemplated impeaching Federalist judges. Marshall went on to become one of the great Supreme Court justices, but the Democratic-Republicans still had good reason to be concerned by his appointment. Marshall sat on the Court for over 34 years. During that time, he frequently voted against the states-rights approach of the new Democratic-Republican majority (thereby helping to establish important precedents that determined the balance of power between the national government and the states for years to come).All told, presidents have made 32 nominations to the Supreme Court in the period ranging from 365 days prior to the election of their successor to the day their successor is inaugurated. The Senate confirmed 18 of those nominations (see full table here ). It is correct to say that the Senate is more aggressive than usual in exercising its power to block Supreme Court nominees during this period (blocking roughly 44% of the nominees during this period as opposed to only about 18% of nominees overall). Nonetheless, presidents have consistently fulfilled their duty to nominate Supreme Court justices in the last year of their term.To have expected President Obama to capitulate to calls by Republicans to withhold his nomination of a successor to Justice Scalia is unrealistic. Nonetheless, history suggests that there is a very real possibility that the Senate will block Obama’s nominee. If this year’s presidential candidates are hoping that this will allow one of them to make the appointment instead, they better be careful what they wish for. A divisive confirmation battle may not be the most auspicious start to a new presidency, as Richard Nixon learned in 1969. It could derail other issues that the new president hopes to focus on during the First Hundred Days and inflict lasting wounds between the two branches.