Governor Cuomo Directs Higher Education Services Corporation To Broaden Interpretation Of Merit Scholarship Eligibility For Gold Star Families
Senator John Brooks, Committee on Veterans, Homeland Security and Military Affairs Chair, said, "Our heroic servicemembers who fall in the line of duty and make the ultimate sacrifice to protect our nation are owed a debt of gratitude that can never be truly repaid. Thanks to the Governor's support we are going to be able to provide their families with full tuition assistance and ensure that those dependents are going to have the future they should have. We can't make up for the loss of a parent but we can certainly make sure that they get the education they deserve."

Assembly Member Deborah J. Glick, Committee on Higher Education Chair, said, "Of course, we not only fully support and have fully funded college assistance for spouses and children of Gold Star families, we also honor their service and the sacrifice they have made for our country. We have been dismayed and concerned over recent misinformation that could dissuade families from applying for the MERIT Scholarship program. I am grateful to Governor Cuomo for making it clear that these supports are available for families, and for clarifying the eligibility."

Senator Toby Stavisky, Committee on Higher Education Chair, said, "New York's military members have signed up to protect all of us and we have a responsibility to take care of them and their families, especially those who have given the ultimate sacrifice during their service. Today HESC has expanded the support we give family members to ensure there are no roadblocks in attaining a college degree for the next generation. I want to thank Governor Cuomo for his leadership by making this change today and also my colleague Senator Brooks for his service and his voice on this issue. Let us remember the sacrifices made and hope that families won't often need to utilize this program."

Robert Ortt, Ranking Member of the Committee on Veterans, Homeland Security and Military Affairs said, "This issue has always been about doing whatever it takes to ensure that our Gold Star families are treated with the honor and dignity that they deserve. While Gov. Cuomo and I disagree on many issues, in this case, we both recognize that helping the families of our severely injured and deceased service members is something everyone should support."

Assembly Member Steve Hawley, Committee on Veteran's Affairs Member, said, "Gold Star Families and disabled veterans have been neglected for far too long and today we are finally righting an injustice and fulfilling our obligation to them. We will never be able to fully repay our veterans and service members for their role in protecting our nation but I am proud to have led the statewide bipartisan effort to see that the MERIT Scholarship is expanded. It is paramount to cover all of our nation's heroes and their families under this program and I thank Governor Cuomo for doing the right thing."

SUNY Chancellor Kristina M. Johnson said, "It is vitally important that we always stand ready to help the families of fallen and injured servicemen and women during their time of need, and this initiative does just that by helping their children and spouses with free tuition at our SUNY campuses. I applaud the Governor for pushing forward this important initiative to help thousands of families achieve their education goals in honor of the servicemen and women who sacrificed so much for our nation."