- PRESCRIPTION DRUG DIVERSION: COMBATING THE SCOURGE
[House Hearing, 112 Congress] [From the U.S. Government Publishing Office] PRESCRIPTION DRUG DIVERSION: COMBATING THE SCOURGE ======================================================================= HEARING BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION __________ MARCH 1, 2012 __________ Serial No. 112-122 Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce energycommerce.house.gov U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 80-861 WASHINGTON : 2013 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001 COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE FRED UPTON, Michigan Chairman JOE BARTON, Texas HENRY A. WAXMAN, California Chairman Emeritus Ranking Member CLIFF STEARNS, Florida JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky Chairman Emeritus JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York MARY BONO MACK, California FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey GREG WALDEN, Oregon BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois LEE TERRY, Nebraska ANNA G. ESHOO, California MIKE ROGERS, Michigan ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York SUE WILKINS MYRICK, North Carolina GENE GREEN, Texas Vice Chairman DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado JOHN SULLIVAN, Oklahoma LOIS CAPPS, California TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas BRIAN P. BILBRAY, California JAY INSLEE, Washington CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin PHIL GINGREY, Georgia MIKE ROSS, Arkansas STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana JIM MATHESON, Utah ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington JOHN BARROW, Georgia GREGG HARPER, Mississippi DORIS O. MATSUI, California LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana Islands BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky KATHY CASTOR, Florida PETE OLSON, Texas DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia CORY GARDNER, Colorado MIKE POMPEO, Kansas ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia _____ Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade MARY BONO MACK, California Chairman MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina Vice Chairman Ranking Member CLIFF STEARNS, Florida CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas CHARLES F. BASS, New Hampshire JIM MATHESON, Utah GREGG HARPER, Mississippi JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois PETE OLSON, Texas MIKE ROSS, Arkansas DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex MIKE POMPEO, Kansas officio) ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois JOE BARTON, Texas FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio) (ii) C O N T E N T S ---------- Page Hon. Mary Bono Mack, a Representative in Congress from the State of California, opening statement............................... 1 Prepared statement........................................... 4 Hon. G.K. Butterfield, a Representative in Congress from the State of North Carolina, opening statement..................... 6 Prepared statement........................................... 8 Hon. Cliff Stearns, a Representative in Congress from the State of Florida, opening statement.................................. 13 Hon. Edolphus Towns, a Representative in Congress from the State of New York, prepared statement................................ 172 Witnesses R. Gil Kerlikowski, Director, Office of National Drug Control Policy......................................................... 13 Prepared statement........................................... 16 Answers to submitted questions............................... 175 Pamela Jo Bondi, Attorney General, State of Florida.............. 35 Prepared statement........................................... 37 Answers to submitted questions............................... 183 Jack Conway, Attorney General, Commonwealth of Kentucky.......... 44 Prepared statement........................................... 47 Answers to submitted questions............................... 189 Aaron E. Haslam, Senior Assistant Attorney General, State of Ohio 54 Prepared statement........................................... 56 Answers to submitted questions............................... 194 Joseph T. Rannazzasi, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Drug Enforcement Administration..................................... 78 Prepared statement........................................... 80 Answers to submitted questions............................... 199 John M. Gray, President and Chief Executive Officer, Healthcare Distribution Management Association............................ 105 Prepared statement........................................... 108 Answers to submitted questions............................... 210 Joseph H. Harmison, Owner, DFW Prescriptions, on Behalf of National Community Pharmacists Association..................... 116 Prepared statement........................................... 118 Answers to submitted questions............................... 246 Kevin N. Nicholson, Vice President, National Association of Chain Drug Stores.................................................... 125 Prepared statement........................................... 127 Answers to submitted questions............................... 249 Kendra A. Martello, Assistant General Counsel, Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America.......................... 140 Prepared statement........................................... 142 Answers to submitted questions............................... 252 David R. Gaugh, Vice President for Regulatory Sciences, Generic Pharmaceuticals Association.................................... 154 Prepared statement........................................... 156 Answers to submitted questions............................... 255 PRESCRIPTION DRUG DIVERSION: COMBATING THE SCOURGE ---------- THURSDAY, MARCH 1, 2012 House of Representatives, Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade, Committee on Energy and Commerce, Washington, DC. The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:10 a.m., in room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mary Bono Mack (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding. Members present: Representatives Bono Mack, Blackburn, Stearns, Harper, Lance, Cassidy, McKinley, and Butterfield. Staff present: Paige Anderson, Policy Coordinator, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Kirby Howard, Legislative Clerk; Brian McCullough, Senior Professional Staff Member, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Shannon Weinberg, Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; and Will Wallace, Democratic Policy Analyst. Mrs. Bono Mack. Good morning. If statistics hold true, by the time this hearing is over 10 Americans will have tragically and I believe needlessly died from prescription drug overdoses. Today prescription drug abuse is a deadly, serious, and rapidly escalating problem all across our Nation. We have a solemn obligation to tackle this growing epidemic head on, and I am going to keep beating the drums until Congress, the FDA, and the DEA come up with a comprehensive plan for action. The Chair now recognizes herself for an opening statement, and the clock is not working. That is all right for me. It won't be all right for you all, though, so don't get too comfortable. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARY BONO MACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA As Americans we rally around efforts to fight breast cancer, childhood diseases, and other serious health threats. But for far too long there have been only hushed whispers about prescription drug abuse, now the fastest-growing drug problem in America according to the CDC. Today as the death toll from prescription drug overdoses continues to rise sharply, it is time to move the story from the obituary page to the front page where it belongs. It is time to realize that we can't simply wish this horrific problem away, not with nearly 30,000 people a year dying from it. See no evil, hear no evil often leads to a society's unspoken evil, indifference. We can do better than that, and we must. Just about everyone knows someone who is affected by prescription drug abuse, which impacts an estimated 12.5 million Americans and is now considered a health epidemic by the CDC. According to a recent, ``Monitoring the Future,'' national survey nearly one in four twelfth-graders have abused prescription drugs. Today two classes of medicines, painkillers and insomnia and anxiety drugs, are responsible for about 70 deaths and nearly 3,000 emergency room visits a day. These are stunning numbers, but here is what is even more alarming. The death toll from overdoses of these powerfully-addictive medicines is now more than double the death toll from heroin, cocaine, and all other illegal drugs combined. As a result, for the first time ever drug deaths outnumber traffic fatalities and has become the leading cause of accidental death in America. So what is the answer? When it comes to prescription drug abuse, where are the safety belts and the airbags that we need to deploy? First, like anyone in recovery knows we have to admit we have a serious problem. Americans today simply are prescribed too many medicines. There is a pill for just about every ache, pain, and malady. So what is wrong with that? Well, consider this. Not long ago the DEA conducted three national drug take-back days, and I applaud them for that, and at those 3 take-back days they collected an astonishing 995,815 pounds of unused and unneeded medicines. That is 995,000 pounds, not pills, in just 3 days. Today doctor shopping is a widespread problem which contributes to our Nation's alarming prescription drug addiction rate, increases costs to all of us through higher insurance rates, and makes it extremely difficult for the DEA to crack down on abusers. Compounding the problem is an oftentimes false sense of security. ``If it is approved by the FDA and prescribed by a doctor, then it must be OK.'' Wrong. Too many pills taken at once or combining them with other drugs and alcohol can have a serious and even deadly consequence. But the issue confronting us today is much more complex and involved than just what have you found lately in Grandma's medicine cabinet. The black market sale of powerful and highly- addictive narcotic painkillers such as OxyContin and Vicodin is big business, prompting the DEA to attack the problem on multiple fronts from street-level sales all the way to the top of the supply chain. Targeted first were the so-called, ``pill mills'' in Florida which were largely unregulated until last year, and they routinely dispensed painkillers like they were M&Ms; from a gumball machine. There is yet another, more insidious side of the story as well. After becoming addicted to prescription painkillers, law enforcement authorities say more and more people are now switching to heroin. In San Diego County, which borders my district, drug treatment experts say the use of heroin by young adults has more than tripled since 2006. Much of this growth is due to people who have switched to heroin as a cheaper alternative to OxyContin, now going on the street for as much as $80 for an 80-milligram tablet. By contrast, OxyContin sells for about $6 a tablet in pharmacies. Personally, I will never forget the very chilling phone call I received one night from a constituent of mine who told me that his son had had a gun put to his head because he couldn't pay the street price any long for his OxyContin. So what is the answer? I believe my legislation, the Ryan Creedon Act, H.R. 2119, and the Stop Oxy Abuse Act, H.R. 1316, are good starting points. My goal is to improve prescriber education by getting doctors, dentists, nurse practitioners, and other prescribers up to speed on the dangers of addiction and to make certain that powerful and seductive narcotic prescription drug such as OxyContin are used to treat severe pain only, not moderate pain like a toothache or a sore knee. In far too many cases addiction becomes a much greater health threat than the original pain itself, and in far too many cases death is the final result of a failed rehab. So let us not continue to blame this on Grandma and her medicine chest. She knows better, and in our hearts Americans do, too. [The prepared statement of Mrs. Bono Mack follows:] [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.001 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.002 Mrs. Bono Mack. And I am happy to recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, the ranking member of our subcommittee, Mr. Butterfield, for his 5 minutes. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. Let me thank the chairman for holding today's hearing on this very important subject of prescription drug diversion, and I know that this issue is very important to you, and I admire your work on it. Prescription drug diversion is an ever-growing problem in our country. In fact, a couple years ago in 2010, seven million people, seven million, over the age of 12 were considered current users of a prescription pain reliever; tranquilizers, stimulant, or a sedative, that was not prescribed to them. Sadly, it has become clear that as legitimate prescription drug use rises, so, too, does the number of people who abuse these drugs and so, too, does the number of people who accidentally die from prescription drug overdose. It is unconscionable that since 1990, a little over 20 years ago, the deaths resulting from an overdose of prescription drugs have risen. It has risen five-fold. Sometimes must be done, and I agree with that. But the question is what and by whom. Some of the testimony we will hear today comes from manufacturers and distributors of prescription drugs. It seems to me that the security and safeguards these entities employ is very impressive and goes beyond what might be expected. The use, layers upon layers of-- they use layers upon layers of security. They hire third parties to audit the processes and make immediate changes if a vulnerability is indentified. They track shipments with GPS precision and have built in a lot of redundancy in their security procedures. Understandably, though, the further down the supply chain a particular drug travels the greater are the opportunities for diversion. The National Survey on Drug Use and Health reported that 76 percent, more than three-quarters of people who use prescription drugs non-medically, gain access to them from someone they know. I think this needs to be our focus as we go forward. To that end, we need to focus on anti-diversion efforts, and I am pleased that the director from the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy is here today to tell us about their action plan. In a perfect world the answer to this problem is personal responsibility, but in the real world it is clear the Federal Government does have a defined role to play. We need to provide greater support for education programs for young people so they can learn at an early age the dangers of misusing prescription drugs. We need to provide greater support for rehabilitation initiatives so those who are addicted to prescription drugs have access to the help they medically need, and we need to make sure DEA has access to the resources it needs to scrutinize all the players involved and the manufacturer, distribution, and dispensing of controlled substances. Most involved in this process are good and honest people. DEA needs to find the ones who are not. And so I would like to personally on behalf of the Democrats on this committee thank all of you for coming today, and I look forward to your testimony. I stand ready to work with each of you, Madam Chair, and our colleagues and witnesses to curtail prescription drug abuse in the United States of America. Thank you so very much. I yield back. [The prepared statement of Mr. Butterfield follows:] [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.003 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.004 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.005 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.006 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.007 Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Butterfield. Chairman Upton has yielded his 5 minutes for an opening statement to me in accordance with committee rules, and as his designee I now recognize Mr. Stearns for 2 minutes for an opening statement. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CLIFF STEARNS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chair, and just wanted to compliment you for this hearing on prescription drug diversion. Very important and I am also very pleased to have and welcome our attorney general, Florida's own attorney general, Pam Bondi. She is here to testify on this important hearing. She is Florida's 37th attorney general, sworn in in January of last year. She is a native of Florida, and she graduated from the University of Florida, which I represent, so I am proud to have her as a so-called constituent. She also graduated from Stetson Law School and was a prosecutor for almost 18 years. Among her top priorities is strengthening penalties to stop pill mills in the Sunshine State, which from our last hearing, Madam Chair, on this issue was a prevalent problem in our State, and with her dedication and leadership against prescription drug abuse, Florida went from having 98 of the top 100 dispensing physicians for oxycodone pills to have 13 dispensing physicians residing in Florida. So frankly her success in this effort resulted in recognition from the National Association of Drug Diversion Investigators, Florida Police Chiefs Association, and from the Florida Board of Medicine. So I want to welcome her, and I thank you, Madam Chair, for the opportunity to do so. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, and I just want to point out that there is a hearing going on in the Health Subcommittee with the Cabinet Secretary. So a lot of members are bouncing in and out. If they are able to attend, I just want to thank the members who are here. Mr. Butterfield. Madam Chairman, that is where I was until I figured out I was in the wrong place. Mrs. Bono Mack. I am glad you figured it out. But we do have three panels before us today. Each of our witnesses has prepared an opening statement. They will be placed into the record. Each of you will have 5 minutes to summarize that statement in your remarks. The good news is the clock is working, and there is a timer in front of you now. On our first panel we have the Honorable Gil Kerlikowske, Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy. Good morning, Director, and once again, thank you very much for being here. I am happy to recognize you now for 5 minutes for your statement. STATEMENT OF R. GIL KERLIKOWSKE, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY Mr. Kerlikowske. Thank you, Chairman Bono Mack and Ranking Member Butterfield and distinguished members of the subcommittee. It is a great opportunity for us to update you on this important issue of prescription drug abuse in the United States. Prescription drug abuse has been a major focus of the Office of National Drug Control Policy since my confirmation. I am particularly indebted to Chairman Bono Mack for calling me up to her office in the first week that I was in the office to really begin to educate me about an issue that, frankly, 3 years ago was not on the public's radar screen, but it is clearly in front of the public today. I included prescription drug abuse as a signature initiative as part of the administration's National Drug Control Strategy. As been mentioned, it has been categorized as a public health epidemic by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The scope of non-medical use of pharmaceuticals is striking. CBC found in 2008, that the opioid pain relievers were involved in 14,800 deaths, and opioid pain relievers are now involved in more overdose deaths as has been mentioned in heroin and cocaine combined. The vast majority of abused pharmaceutical drugs originally enter into circulation through a prescription. The quantity of prescription painkillers sold to pharmacies, hospitals, and doctors' offices has quadrupled from 1999, to 2010. When I testified last year before this subcommittee in April, the administration had just released that month its Comprehensive Prescription Drug Abuse Prevention Plan. The plan focuses on four major pillars. The first pillar is education. Most prescription painkillers are prescribed by primary care doctors, internists, and dentists, not pain specialists. The FDA is requiring manufacturers of these opioids to develop educational materials and training for prescribers. The administration is working with Congress to amend the Federal law to require mandatory education and training for prescribers, and we are also working very hard to educate the general public about the risks and the prevalence of prescription drug abuse and about the safe use and proper storage and disposal of these medications. The second pillar, monitoring. We focused on expanding and improving State prescription drug-monitoring programs. Forty- eight states have those laws. Despite the progress, some states lack operational programs. Many states operate PDMPs that lack interoperability with other states. But I am pleased to report the administration worked with Congress to secure legislative language to allow the Department of Veterans' Affairs to share prescription drug data with these PDMPs. Our third pillar focuses on safe disposal of unused and expired medications and through the National Prescription Drug Take Back Days that the DEA has collected and was talked about by the chair. The administration also recognizes the significant role that pill mills and rogue prescribers play in this issue. Our surveys and research show that with chronic addiction to prescription drug they are more likely to obtain their drugs from the pill mills than the recent initiates. And final pillar of the administration's plan focuses on improving law enforcement capabilities to address diversion. Across the country law enforcement regulatory and legislative actions are forcing doctors and shoppers and doctor shoppers and others seeking these sources of prescription drugs to be apprehended. The problem, of course, was highlighted in the State of Florida, which was in 2010, the epicenter of the Nation's pill mill epidemic, but I have to tell you that working with the attorney general in the State of Florida has led to marked changes in that State, and I couldn't be more pleased that not only she, but Attorney General Conway are also here. In 2011, ONDCP, our office, supported training events because we know if you are going to do the enforcement, it can't be just at the Federal level. It has to be at the State and local level also, and experts in law enforcement need that kind of training in order to investigate these complex cases. We are undertaking a data analysis project right now to examine the ways that prescription drugs are purchased, purchasing behaviors, and whether those patterns are indicative of suspicious behavior. We held a round table with members of the pharmacy community and law enforcement to discuss pharmacy robberies and burglaries. We called in the heads of organizations that worked on the security of the manufacturers and distributors to make sure that we were knowledgeable about what they were doing to secure these very potent pharmaceuticals. In closing just let me thank the members of Congress for their support on the ONDCP and my Executive Branch colleagues who know that without your efforts and without your support we would not make a difference in this very important area. Thank you. [The prepared statement of Mr. Kerlikowske follows:] [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.008 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.009 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.010 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.011 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.012 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.013 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.014 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.015 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.016 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.017 Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, Director. I will recognize myself now for 5 minutes for questioning. And just ask you with everything that your office is doing together, the DEA and the FDA, why are we losing this battle against the prescription drug epidemic, and you have mentioned a lot of progress we have made, but you do live in Florida, but prescription drug abuse has not decreased. What is the next step? Mr. Kerlikowske. I think the fact that all of these things are coming together, that we actually are starting to see some fruition to all of the work that has been going on. For instance, in the most recent Monitoring the Future Survey, eighth, tenth, and twelfth graders have actually reduced their level of use of prescription drugs, but I couldn't agree with the chair more that it is an epidemic, that it is so wide spread and that people still don't get it. They don't understand that these are dangerous, they can be deadly, and they can certainly be addictive. I think that one of the greatest hopes will be in the next step forward, and that is mandatory prescriber education. Physicians must be told and must have unequivocal information about the dangers of addiction, pain management, tolerance, dependence, and they really don't get that in medical school. The second part I know you will hear form the Drug Enforcement administration as non-enforcement. The laws have to be enforced, and people have to be prosecuted. Mrs. Bono Mack. I appreciate that and especially your viewpoint on prescriber education, but a problem for me, too, is we examined this problem. There are clearly gaps in the data, and we don't really know the extent of the problem. What are the gaps, and how can they be filled? Mr. Kerlikowske. Well, quite often we rely, for instance, on fatality data to come from the individual states, and we know that depending on the particular State, whether it is a medical examiner system or others, those states can often be delayed. We also know that at times, whether it is from fatalities from driving accidents or others, that the level of examinations to determine what the cause and whether or not that person had the drugs in their system is not always as thorough as it can and should be. There are data gaps, but I will be happy at another time to tell you about this new initiative to take some of the data and really identify and drill down into it. Mrs. Bono Mack. I would be happy to work with you on that. I think they are critical even for policymakers. We need that data critically. The DEA is going to testify that there are 1.4 million DEA registrants. That seems awfully high. Do you think that 1.4 million registrants is about right for America, or is that kind of a crazy number? Mr. Kerlikowske. Chairman, I actually wouldn't know what the right number would be, but I think when you look at nurse practitioners, physicians, and all of the other people that hold those DEA registration licenses across the country in the healthcare field, that the number doesn't seem completely out of line to me. I think more importantly is how they are policed. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, and lastly, should we be thinking about creating new classification schedules under the Controlled Substance Act with stricter regimes for the drugs that are clearly the biggest problems? Mr. Kerlikowske. I know that issue has come up before to put those into the higher schedule. I think the more important part is to try and keep them out of the hands of the abusers but not at the same time they get so restrictive that the issues that led us to where we are today 15 years ago, which was the clear indication that pain was not being adequately treated in the United States, I think the pendulum was too far over there. Clearly today the pendulum is too far over here when it comes to the availability of these. I am not sure scheduling would be the right answer, but we have to bring this back to some equilibrium. Mrs. Bono Mack. Are you working with the physicians who are saying that pain shouldn't always be treated solely with opioids and that there have to be other ways of treating pain, that this is creating an epidemic that is hurting more people than it is saving? Mr. Kerlikowske. I have. I have heard from a number of physicians that want to be much more flexible and understanding and treating pain rather than writing prescriptions for 30, 60, or 90 days worth of very powerful painkillers. They also want to make sure that there are systems in place where they can be adequately reimbursed for treatments other than what right now seems to be a very simple and quick method but not always particularly effective in treating pain by writing a script. Mrs. Bono Mack. In the last 22 more seconds that I do have something Attorney General Bondi cares deeply about are the opiate babies. Can you speak briefly to what you have learned about opiate babies? Mr. Kerlikowske. I can. I can tell you that in the past and having visited in one of the centers for newborns in Seattle the issue always centered around newborns and the addiction through heroin. Today when I met and saw all of those infants and actually held one of those infants, the issue was all about prescription drugs, and there was very little discussion about mothers using heroin. And so we are building some tremendous healthcare costs as a result of not treating this adequately. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, Director, and happy to recognize Mr. Butterfield for 5 minutes. Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. Again, thank you very much for coming forward today with your testimony. We have heard your testimony, and we appreciate so much what you do. I have a question that I would like to ask, and I may even ask it of the other panels as well, but I believe it is very critical, and it is central to the problem that we are dealing with. Efforts in one state may yield declines in the number of pills dispensed, hospitalizations, or deaths, any of which are very commendable achievements within that state's border, but how can we be sure that addicted individuals simply don't go to another state? Mr. Kerlikowske. I think the key would be on the example would be the fact that Florida had become such as has been talked about, so publicly an epicenter for not only the use of these very powerful, misuse and abuse of these very powerful prescription drugs for people within the State of Florida but for people traveling all the way through Appalachia and actually New York, Connecticut, and other places. The regulation of medicine is done at the state level. It is not done at the Federal level, and we have to provide the training, the technical assistance, the start-up money for the computer systems, and the assistance to law enforcement, particularly state and local law enforcement to understand how to investigate these complex cases. I would tell you that greater use of the PDMPs is necessary. Not as many physicians or people in the healthcare industry utilize them as should and that they need to be real time and that they need to be interoperable across states. When those things come together and I think we are seeing some of this in the number of states that are sharing the information, I think that that way we can stop that balloon effect that you were talking about, Congressman. Mr. Butterfield. We have been looking at the data in our office, and the data seems to suggest that the total number of elicit drug users was constant for 2 years, even though we have seen great strides in states like Kentucky and Florida and even Ohio. Are we on the right path with this? Mr. Kerlikowske. I think we are on the right path with this with what I believe is a very balanced way and a very comprehensive way of looking at this. I think that if I go back and look at where we were, and believe me, I am the first one to tell you that a lot more has to be done, particularly in redoubling our efforts in some of these areas, but I look at where we were 3 years ago. As a chief of police of a city of almost 700,000 people, I was really unaware of this prescription drug problem. I think that my colleagues who were sworn to protect people in the city and learn about what are the dangers when you don't realize it, when we didn't realize it and prosecutors and judges and many others did not realize it, we weren't paying attention to it because after all, it is a prescription, it is coming out of the medicine cabinet. It was a huge mistake. This is on the front page of every major newspaper on a regular basis. It is on television. We are moving in the right direction. Mr. Butterfield. Let me talk about tribal communities for a minute, and I only have a minute 50 left. As the National Drug Control Strategy points out, tribal communities have been particularly hard hit by unemployment and combined with problems accessing healthcare, education, and other services, tribal communities can be disproportionately vulnerable to prescription drug abuse. A 2009, study by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration found that American Indians are more than twice as likely as whites to abuse prescription drugs. What is the administration doing to help tribal communities address these unique challenges? Mr. Kerlikowske. We started looking at that almost immediately and a couple things that are done. First Assistant Secretary Echo Hawk from the Department of Interior has been a great partner, along with the Indian Health Service and along with the Bureau of Indian Affairs. We have made trips to a number of the tribal lands, for example, the Tohono O'odham Nation in Arizona, and the issues around dietary issues, alcohol issues, and illegal drugs was significant, but the growing problem that was pointed out to us is exactly as you said, and that is around the prescription drug issues. Mr. Butterfield. But are you working with them to set up databases? Mr. Kerlikowske. Education, so the education and prevention and working through the Indian Health Service and the Treatment Service, and let me just mention on the enforcement side for the first time one of our high-intensity drug trafficking groups, HIDTA, in Portland includes a member of--a tribal chief to help direct those needed enforcement resources back onto tribal lands. Mr. Butterfield. That includes databases and other resources? Mr. Kerlikowske. I don't know about the database in particular. I would think that the health service would probably be more knowledgeable about that. Mr. Butterfield. All right. Thank you. You have been very kind. Mr. Kerlikowske. Thank you. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Butterfield. The Chair recognizes Mr. Stearns for 5 minutes. Mr. Stearns. Thank you, Madam Chair. Is it true that prescription drug overdose deaths now surpass our car-related fatalities? Mr. Kerlikowske. It is true that all overdose deaths are now the leading, from drugs, misuse and abuse, not accidental, are the number one cause of accidental death in this country, ahead of gunshot wounds and ahead of car crash deaths, driven by prescription drugs. Mr. Stearns. That is a startling fact, don't you think? Mr. Kerlikowske. Yes. Mr. Stearns. Do you think based upon that that we should have a radical change in our approach? Mr. Kerlikowske. I think that we haven't gotten anywhere near the attention or near the traction to something that is killing more people in this country than car---- Mr. Stearns. And, in fact, 10 or 20 years ago I wouldn't find the statistics like it is today? Mr. Kerlikowske. Not at all. Mr. Stearns. And why do you think that occurred? Mr. Kerlikowske. One, I think that the driver of the prescription drugs as we have been, as has been mentioned a little bit, people don't see them as addictive, they don't see them as dangerous, and they don't see them as deadly, because they are, after all, a prescription. Mr. Stearns. I think in your opening statement you were talking about opiates were sold in 2010, to medicate every American adult six times a day for a month. That was in your statement. Mr. Kerlikowske. Yes. Mr. Stearns. Doesn't that put a line to the claim that we are just getting better at pain management? Mr. Kerlikowske. When I have spoken with the physicians who looked at and were instrumental in the early days of under- treating and the recognition of under-treating pain, I think that a clear recognition, and as I mentioned a minute ago I think that the pendulum was there and that in very good faith ways they worked very hard to make sure that people actually were adequately treated for pain. A few things were missing. One is the amount of education that a physician would need to clearly understand and recognize some of the dangers of these. The other is that as many people have mentioned, we have become kind of an overmedicated society. Mr. Stearns. How would we educate Americans to not be an overly medicated society? Mr. Kerlikowske. It is a pretty tough issue. It is kind of like dealing with the obesity issue. Mr. Stearns. Do you think it is something to do with our culture today that---- Mr. Kerlikowske. I think that the more important part is to educate the physicians around this, as physicians are so much more knowledgeable about dietary issues and the causes, I don't see the same level of knowledge among them and among healthcare practitioners when it comes to the addictive properties of these drugs. Mr. Stearns. Could you from your department make it more difficult for the doctors to provide prescription drugs in the areas that are causing the overdoses? Is there something that you could do? Mr. Kerlikowske. I--we are kind of a small policy shop that---- Mr. Stearns. You couldn't make any recommendations? Mr. Kerlikowske [continuing]. We bring all of these folks together. I think the key will be education and then making sure that they follow the rules, and I think that we are well on the way to hopefully getting that done. Mr. Stearns. You mentioned in your opening statement the actual cost to society is estimated at $56 billion in 2007, and maybe likely higher today. Do you have any idea what the cost in terms of devastating affects on families and communities--so if it is $56 million [sic] in 2007, what do you think it is today? Mr. Kerlikowske. Well, and I think that the most recent study on the costs to the United States taxpayer on drug abuse is well around $190 billion that---- Mr. Stearns. One hundred and ninety billion. Mr. Kerlikowske. For--and that includes all types of heroin, cocaine, marijuana issues, et cetera, but I think that you couldn't be more correct in putting forward the fact that it is not only a huge cost in our healthcare system, it is a huge personal cost and a huge personal tragedy the child that doesn't graduate from high school, the employer that wants to start a new business and can't find people that are drug free so that they will have less accidents and be more productive. All of these things play a huge part, and so the dollar cost is one thing. The tragedy to this country is another important part. Mr. Stearns. Lots of times all of us talk about the legal war on drugs, but we are also--I think we have to consider a war on prescription drugs, and so I guess the question is where does the current prescription drug war rank compared to our war on illegal drugs? Mr. Kerlikowske. I think my colleagues, particularly in the Drug Enforcement Administration, when they set their goals and they move forward each year in recognizing what the drug threat is, several years ago they recognized this issue much more quickly and actually changed their direction and focus. I think you will hear about the number of what are called tactical diversion squads, the number of investigations, the number of local law enforcement and prosecutors that have been trained in how to investigate these complex cases, because these are actually legal drugs that are manufactured and often through prescriptions or pill mills. So those are important steps forward. Mr. Stearns. Are we winning or losing? Mr. Kerlikowske. We are moving ahead. I am encouraged by a couple of things. One, the number of dispensed opioid prescriptions has flattened, and if you looked at the charts in a number of years, it looked like the space shuttle taking off. The amount of opioids manufactured has flattened, and the fact that in this most recent monitor in the future, eighth, tenth, and twelfth graders actually decreased in their use of one of the very powerful painkillers, Vicodin. I think we are moving there, but as the chair and others know so well, it is not enough, and it is not fast enough. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, Mr. Stearns, and I am pleased to recognize Mr. McKinley for 5 minutes for his questions. Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Briefly, I think you and I had a little conversation beforehand, before we began, and we were concerned about privacy. I still would, I would like you to expand a little bit about that. What--to me from an engineering for small business perspective, I am a little concerned about, very concerned about the privacy, but I know and I think you would recognize that if there were a national registry of all the prescription drug used in America, the pharmacies would be held responsible to check that registry to find out that they just got OxyContin just one day earlier for a 3-months' supply, and they would be able to say no. Isn't there something, some form, I know we don't want to have FDA, because as we have had other hearings here, someone being able to hack into that information. Mr. Kerlikowske. Right. Mr. McKinley. There were penalties according--that are related to that, but we all know if we had a list, if someone had a list, we could go hold those people responsible more so than the distributors that are doing the best they can to curtail that. Tell me a little bit about what efforts we can do in security privatizing those names so that individuals can't be identified but yet we--a pharmacy would be able to know that they have now, this is their third prescription for the same medicine in the last 2 weeks. Isn't there something you are doing on that? Mr. Kerlikowske. I think---- Mr. McKinley. I saw this the other night. I just think that is just great, education. It works so well with teenage pregnancies and everything else, hasn't it? Sanctions against governments that they continue to--so I really want something with more substance to it that is going to solve the problem. Mr. Kerlikowske. Sure. I think the answer is the prescription drug monitoring plans that are done by the state. Since the Federal Government doesn't regulate the practice of medicine and the state does, having the PDMP, that electronic database that would be used by all physicians and healthcare professionals that would be real time and that in states, particularly neighboring states, that information could be shared across the states. When it is led and directed and the start-up money comes from the Federal Government but led and directed by the state government, they can put in the protections about patient confidentiality and privacy. I think in the best of all worlds that national database would be a wonderful thing. I think it would be difficult to implement because of the protections that would be needed to prevent exactly as you said hacking, and I think that part of that national database would be the fact that it would be 5 or 6 or 7 years in the making. Right now we have all but two states that have PDMPs, and as they become more well used and more well robust, it will actually make a difference with their use. Mr. McKinley. So are you suggesting, and I think I understand, something that would not work with mail orders because they are ordered someplace else other than just in the state, but tell me again, you think that if pharmacists knew by looking at computer screen that that person got--would he or she still fill that prescription if he knew it was being violated? Mr. Kerlikowske. When I speak with all of the different groups and the individual pharmacists, and you look at their ethical standards and their patient safety practices and the number of pharmacists that have picked up the phone and either said, either called the physician saying something isn't right or the ones that have told that patient, you know what, I am not going to fill that because I have that information, I am pretty heartened by where the pharmacists are. But I think going upstream a little bit, that doctor that realizes that that patient that has come into his or her office has been to two or three other physicians or that patient that walks in on Friday evening to an emergency department and says, gee, I am traveling or I have lost my prescription or I need something like that, when that frontline, upstream person can take a look at that system and say, well, this is the third hospital you have been to this weekend or you are seeing two other doctors with a similar complaint, I am not going to be dealing with this, I think that is a help also. Mr. McKinley. So what do we do with that individual when they come in? Are they held? Mr. Kerlikowske. They are not held because I think that unless they actually get, unless there is a law violation, they are not going to be charged or they are not going to be held, but I think the other important part of this education piece is that they need to get into the treatment. I have met so many people now across this country on these travels that have become addicted to prescription drugs, have received proper quality treatment, and they are back. I mean, they are back taking care of their families, they are back paying taxes, they are back working, and I think that this is the entry point to get them the help that they are needed, because we are talking about a disease. We are talking about addiction. Mr. McKinley. OK. I guess we have run out of time. Thank you very much. Mr. Kerlikowske. Thank you, Congressman. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. Mr. Harper, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair. Director Kerlikowske, thank you for your time here and all that you are trying to do in a very serious situation. You know, with regard to the PDMPs, what do you think the biggest barrier is in the implementation of a drug-monitoring program for states whose programs have yet to go online? Mr. Kerlikowske. One of the barriers is the fact that it needs to be real time, and it needs to be ease of use. Physicians have about, as I have been told, about 16 minutes with a new patient to assess everything. These are busy practices and busy offices, and they need to be given a tool that is easy, that is accessible in order to use it and of course, once they do and they become schooled in it and rely on it, the physicians that I have spoken with tell me that it is a patient safety tool. Mr. Harper. OK. Now, we have 48 states that have authorized programs, 40, I understand, have operational programs. Are all of these state PDMPs created equal? Mr. Kerlikowske. No. Mr. Harper. OK. Mr. Kerlikowske. They are not, but we are fortunate at Rice University to have a center of excellence that takes the best practices that helps those that are--and of course, the heads of each of these agencies come together several times a year for us to be able to speak with them. We want to be able to make them as robust and helpful as possible, but I would be the first to tell you that some are better than others. Mr. Harper. Well, are there some that you would hold out as a role model for the other states or for those that have yet to go operational? Mr. Kerlikowske. I think you will hear from Attorney General Conway, and I think Kentucky is clearly one of those states that has addressed this not just with a very robust and smart PDMP and some pending changes that they have planned in their laws to make it an even better system. I would tell you that from what I have looked at in California, the CURES System, is another one. The Center for Excellence, they have done a very good job of putting in the hands of the people that use these, develop these systems, information that is necessary. Mr. Harper. What are you seeing as strengths and weaknesses as communication between the various states with their monitoring programs? Is that a weak link? Do you feel like that the communication between those states can be improved, and if so, what would you suggest? Mr. Kerlikowske. Now, you ask the million-dollar question, and I think you are exactly right. Some states are easier to get along with amongst each other on this particular issue and to work together. Some states when you look at these systems and it is not a huge amount of money but every state is facing difficult budget times, how much of a priority is it. But when I talked to these physicians or listen to these physicians in all these states, I said, look. If I am in eastern Kentucky, I really don't want to spend the time to check Ohio, West Virginia. I need to get to a system that is already linked to those neighboring states. Mr. Harper. Uh-huh. Do you--are the PDMPs the only option out there for states to implement the sharing of this information? Mr. Kerlikowske. Right now on the prescription drug abuse issue, those are the options. I think the healthcare technology in the future, e-prescribing, all of these other things will play a big role in the future and make it easier and more helpful. Mr. Harper. We want to thank you for your work on this very important topic, and with that I yield back, Madam Chair. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Harper. Director Kerlikowske, thank you so much for being here today and all of your hard work. You have been generous not only today but every day in working with me on these issues. I applaud you for raising the profile for many years and especially coming from somebody who said you didn't know 3 years ago, you certainly know now. I don't know that we have all the answers, but at least we are finally starting to confront it, and I look forward to working with you. Thank you, again, very much for being here today. Is there anything you would like to close--rather than a second round of questions, something you just need to say that you didn't get to say? Mr. Kerlikowske. Madam Chair, one--I am indebted to the committee and the members of Congress that take this issue on. You have so many issues in front of you, and yet as I mentioned to the President on the drug issue, when we think about keeping our kids in school and we think about who is going to be the workforce that we are all going to depend on in the future, I think about healthcare costs, I think about law enforcement issues. The more that we can do on the drug prevention side and the more that we can do to get people adequate treatment and get them back into the--into being productive members of society, none of that could happen without the will and the support and the help of members like you all. Thank you. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. And with that we are going to take a very, very brief recess just while we seat the second panel. Hopefully it is 30 seconds or so, and we ask the second panel to join the table. [Recess] Mrs. Bono Mack. All right. On our second panel we have four very distinguished witnesses who are very deeply involved in the issues of prescription drug abuse and prescription drug diversion, which clearly go hand in hand. We are honored today to have with us the Honorable Pamela Jo Bondi, attorney general for the State of Florida, the Honorable Jack Conway, attorney general for the State of Kentucky. Also joining us are Aaron Haslam, Senior Assistant attorney general for the State of Ohio, and Joseph Rannazzisi, Deputy Administrator for the Drug Enforcement Administration. Thank you all, again, for being with us this morning. To help you keep track of time there is a timer light on your table. When it turns yellow, you have a minute to wrap up. So, again, you don't have to come to a screeching halt when it turns red, but if you can wrap up your comments, we would appreciate it. So with that we are happy to recognize Attorney General Bondi for her 5 minutes, and please just remember to turn your microphones on, and you may begin. STATEMENTS OF PAMELA JO BONDI, ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF FLORIDA; JACK CONWAY, ATTORNEY GENERAL, COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY; AARON E. HASLAM, SENIOR ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF OHIO; AND JOSEPH T. RANNAZZISI, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION STATEMENT OF PAMELA JO BONDI Ms. Bondi. Thank you, Congresswoman Bono Mack, and thank you for championing this cause on behalf of our country, and thank you as well, Ranking Member Butterfield, for having us here today and also to Congressman Stearns from Florida and to all the committee members. We truly appreciate this. I am here to tell you about what Florida is doing to try to stop prescription drug abuse. As Congressman Stearns told you, just to put it in perspective, of the top 100 oxycodone dealers in the entire country, 98 of them were in Florida. Now we have 13, and that is with legislation that has been in effect barely a year. So last year we had over 900 pain management clinics registered within our state. Today we have 580, and I guarantee you that number is going to continue to plummet. I want to outline now briefly our comprehensive legislation and what we have done in our state. As you know, we have become the Oxy Express, and that is why I worked so closely with General Conway, with General DeWine in Ohio because what was happening, people were buying their drugs in Florida, taking them to Kentucky. I had to hug a mother in Kentucky when I was with General Conway who lost her daughter 2 years ago to prescription drugs that were bought in Florida, and that had to stop. So we passed, with that we passed tough new legislation in our state, and we are very proud of that legislation. Long, long overdue, let me tell you that. The common characteristics of a pill mill in Florida were cash business, $200 to $300 cash, armed guards at the door, little to no medical equipment at all. Just shelves and shelves of pills. These doctors who we call drug dealers wearing white coats are sitting in a back room just signing prescription pads, and it was legal, and it was killing our kids. So we had very weak regulatory oversight of the pain management clinics. We had limited oversights of the physicians who were dispensing, which was very important, and we had a non-operational prescription drug monitoring program. So with that we have now passed some very tough legislation, and we are very proud of that. One of the most important things to me was that we banned doctors from dispensing most abused narcotics, and we made that a violation of the ban, both a third degree felony and how do you hurt a bad doctor? Take their license away. So with that dispensing ban we feel that we have been very successful as well. We also have--we created a standard of care for physicians prescribing controlled substances. We require these doctors to either electronically prescribe or to use counterfeit-proof prescription pads, none of which had been done in our state. We also added, as I said, enhanced criminal penalties, which were very important and required all of these pharmacies to be re- permitted by the State of Florida. We did great things. We now have the PDMP up and running, which if you have any questions, I can discuss that with you as well, and with that, you know, we can always create tough new laws and onto something else, but what we did in Florida with Governor Scott's help, we started a strike force, and that is joint with Federal, state, and local officials all working together. You can pass these laws and move on, and it is not going to work. We are targeting these guys, and we are putting them out of business. And with that just--we have seven strike forces throughout our state, and if you have questions about the strike force, I can explain that in greater detail, but what we have done, since we have had the strike force is we have truly gone in and started putting these guys out of business. We are targeting them, and we are not letting up on them. We also have an educational component of this legislation, and that involves narcotics overdose prevention education, NOPE, and this task force, these remarkable people have done an amazing job of going into our schools and educating our children about this. We have also instituted along with DEA state drug take back days. I have participated personally in as many of those as I could. You would not believe the drugs that are being turned in, and it has gotten so successful that we plan on putting permanent drop boxes up at our police stations and our sheriff's offices as well. At two drug take back days alone we seized over five tons of prescription drugs. Unbelievable. So and we are very pleased to announce that as of February, 2012, our strike force efforts have resulted in 2,040 arrests, 34 of those are doctors. We have seized 390 weapons, almost $5 million, but there is one other problem. I have run out of time, but that is the babies being born addicted to prescription drugs, and that is our newest fight this session, and we are not going to give up on that as well. Thank you for all of your efforts, and we do know we have a long way to go, but I don't think any of us in this room are going to stop. Thank you. [The prepared statement of Ms. Bondi follows:] [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.018 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.019 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.020 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.021 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.022 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.023 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.024 Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. And General Conway, you are recognized for 5 minutes. STATEMENT OF JACK CONWAY Mr. Conway. Well, thank you, Chairwoman Bono Mack and Representative Butterfield for your commitment to this issue. I also want to recognize Congressman Guthrie, who is not here, but who is a fellow Kentuckian who works with our drug task forces on this very important issue. Prescription pill abuse is a reality that has touched the lives of just about every Kentucky family. It has touch my family's life in a very personal way. It has ravaged our communities, it has shattered families, and it has fueled crime. Depending on which study you believe, Kentucky is either the most third- or fourth-most medicated State in the entire country, and the four you always hear at the top of the list are Kentucky, West Virginia, Tennessee, and Oklahoma. Last year in Kentucky we had over 1,000 people that we documented died from prescription painkiller overdoses. That is more than we lost to auto accidents. And Madam Chairman, we actually think that is underreported, because our estimates are that only about half the people that actually die from overdoses autopsied by a medical examiner's offices. And when you take a look at the unnatural deaths in the Commonwealth of Kentucky, what you see over and over is not heroin or not cocaine, not even alcohol as much as you see Xanax, oxycodone, Methadone, and hydrocodone. Last year, Kentucky hospitals treated over 5,000 overdose patients. Now, this is an epidemic we first started to see in the 1990s in eastern Kentucky. Eastern Kentucky is a region of heavy industry, of laborers, of coal mines. We have more injury-prone jobs, but it is also an area of economic depression, and we have too many doctors who overprescribed and too many people became hooked. And because of the economic depression, people figured out they could sell their pills on the street, and a black market was born. And today when you go through eastern Kentucky, which I do on a regular basis, you will find that about 80 percent of the crime according to law enforcement and prosecutors is fueled by the abuse and the insidious addiction to prescription painkillers. The problem has spread across the Commonwealth. It is not just in eastern Kentucky. According to a ``Lexington Herald'' leader study not too long ago in 120 of our counties which we have total, 118 were up in the number of schedule two and three narcotics prescribed, and I am sad to report that estimates from law enforcement and those in the healthcare community say that we have only about 10 percent of the treatment beds that we actually need in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. You know, I am sick and tired of hearing about losing an entire generation to prescription pill abuse in the Commonwealth of Kentucky, so we have started a public education program for doctors and also for school children in Kentucky. I actually travel across the Commonwealth with two mothers from Morehead, Kentucky, who lost their daughters to prescription pill abuse, and it is really important to get people like that who look like the mothers of these kids to tell them their story, because they will listen to an elected official for 5 minutes or so, but when the mothers talk, they really listen. And here is what is disheartening. You can look at these kids, middle schoolers, high schoolers, and say, OK, you know, tell the truth. Just because I am the attorney general, tell the truth. How many of you have used a prescription pill or your best friend has used it for an off-label purpose. I am sad to report 70 or 80 percent of the hands go up. I ask them how many think that prescription pills are easy to get. Seventy or 80 percent of the hands will stay up. Then I will ask them how many of their parents lock up their medicine cabinets. All the hands will go down. I realize it is not a problem that starts with Grandma, but in some instances, particularly in Kentucky, it is an addiction that is starting in our homes. I have tried to do all I can. I have created the State's first prescription pill task force. That is my drug investigators working with local law enforcement. We are trying to collaborate and share resources in a time of dwindling law enforcement resources. We participated in Operation Flamingo Road, where we partnered with the DEA and the Kentucky State Police to round up 500 individuals who were vanning pills up from Florida in 2009. At that point we thought about 60 percent of our pills in our streets were coming from Florida. Pam Bondi told me a story one time that they executed a search warrant on a pain management clinic in Broward County, Florida, and they seized 1,700 patient records. Of those 1,700 individuals they seized the records 1,100 of them are from the Commonwealth of Kentucky. That is what we in law enforcement call ``a clue.'' We had people by the vanload going to Kentucky to bring pills back. And that is why I am not only happy to a friendship with Pam or General Bondi I should say, I am grateful that she came along at this time. She has done a tremendous job of taking on these pill pushers in her State. As she said, Florida was home to 97 or 98 of the Nation's top 100 prescribers of oxycodone. Now they are down to 13. This issue knows no party. It is an American tragedy. We are doing all we can. We have new legislation in the Commonwealth of Kentucky to reregulate our pill mills. We have entrepreneurs getting in the pill mill business. We need to stop them. We have the issue of the mail order forms cease shipping 90-day supplies of schedule two and three narcotics. I understand the issue of efficiency in our healthcare system, but that needs to be 30 days, and we need to make certain that we get doctors using these systems. Yes, we have KASPER, our PDMP. It is a good system, but only about 25 percent of our doctors are using it, and on top of that those of us in law enforcement can't see the data to do the investigations that we need to do, and I would be happy to talk with you a little bit more about that. I have heard the questioning here today, and I am out of time, so I am going to wrap up, but if you want to know what you can do to help, help us get all 50 states up with PDMPs and with systems that talk to one another. We can do our jobs if we can get those systems up and running and if we can get the doctors to use them. Thank you very much for the opportunity to appear. [The prepared statement of Mr. Conway follows:] [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.025 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.026 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.027 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.028 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.029 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.030 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.031 Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much, General Conway. Mr. Haslam, you are recognized for 5 minutes. STATEMENT OF AARON E. HASLAM Mr. Haslam. Thank you Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking Member Butterfield, and distinguished members of this committee. I thank you on behalf of Ohio attorney general Mike DeWine and all of Ohio for the opportunity to address you today. As the Chief Assistant Prosecutor and later the elected Prosecutor in Adams County, Ohio, I had a front row seat for the devastation that this scourge can cause on a community. In February, 2011, Ohio attorney general Mike DeWine recruited me to lead his prescription drug task force. Attorney General DeWine has been committed to using every resource Ohio has to fight this scourge. In Ohio we have taken nationwide--a nationwide stance in fighting back through changes in legislation, proactive law enforcement actions, partnering with prescribers and dispensers and being proactive with awareness, education, and treatment. Through this effort Ohio has raised public awareness, increased public education, and improved Ohio's investigations and prosecutions in both criminal and regulatory cases. However, to make a real difference we must limit the availability of prescription drugs to those individuals in actual need and in the proper quantities. In Ohio unintentional fatal and non-fatal drug poisoning has cost Ohioans $3.6 billion annually. Between the years of 1999, and 2007, Ohio's rate of opioid distribution increased 325 percent. During that same time period Ohio's unintentional drug overdose death rate increased 305 percent. If you will look to my left, you can see this remarkable correlation on the graph located closest to the back of the room. In 1997, Ohio averaged seven doses of opioids per capita. In 2010, our average dose of opioid per capita increased to 67. In less than 15 years Ohio watched that average dose of opioids per capital increase almost 900 percent. The chart to my left, the closest to the front of the room, will illustrate that the death rates during the current prescription drug scourge is much higher in Ohio than the death rates in Ohio during the heroin epidemic in the '70s and the crack cocaine epidemic in the 1990s. Ohio's leaders recognize the seriousness of Ohio's prescription drug problem. On February 8, 2011, Representatives Terry Johnson and Dave Burke, a physician and a pharmacist, introduced what is known as House Bill 93 in Ohio. The bill passed through the House and the Senate unanimously. With the support of the attorney general, Governor John Kasich signed the bill into effect on May 20, 2011, and it became law. Much like Florida, our pain clinics, our pill mills were not regulated. House Bill 93 for the first time regulated pain clinics in Ohio. It required physician ownership of pain clinics. It required prescribers to review our PMDP--sorry, our Prescription Drug Monitoring Program, which is known as OARRS in Ohio, and they had to do that when they were treating chronic pain patients. Attorney General DeWine has worked tirelessly to create a multidisciplinary approach to the investigation and prosecution of prescription drug cases. Attorney General DeWine has worked with law enforcement at the local, State, and Federal levels in Ohio to investigate prescription drug cases. We are currently working with county prosecutors and Federal prosecutors all across Ohio to prosecute these cases. He is proud to be a part of the State-wide team in an effort to protect Ohio's families. Our next step the attorney general believes is to build a bridge with State and Federal officials across the Nation. To have a true impact we must collaborate on a multi-State approach to combat this scourge. Ohio and the Nation must be proactive working with all the stakeholders to tackle this epidemic. When this happens you will see success. For example, in Scioto County, one of Ohio's hardest hit counties, also a border county to Kentucky, the last pill mill was closed this past December. Scioto County has a population of approximately 78,000 residents. At one time it housed 12 pill mills prior to Ohio's efforts. Today it houses zero pill mills. Just last week Scioto County learned that accidental overdoses decreased 17 percent and drug-related deaths decreased 42 percent in 2011. This was the first decrease Scioto County had seen in the past decade in these numbers. It had been a steady increase prior to 2011. I will end with a quote from Reverend Martin Luther King Jr., who said, ``We may have all come on different ships, but we are in the same boat now.'' Each of us may have arrived at the prescription drug scourge on a different ship, but today we are all in the same boat, and more importantly, people will die if we continue to ignore the scourge. Thank you. [The prepared statement of Mr. Haslam follows:] [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.032 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.033 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.034 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.035 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.036 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.037 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.038 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.039 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.040 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.041 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.042 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.043 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.044 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.045 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.046 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.047 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.048 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.049 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.050 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.051 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.052 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.053 Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. Mr. Rannazzisi, you are recognized for 5 minutes. STATEMENT OF JOSEPH T. RANNAZZISI Mr. Rannazzisi. Thank you. Chairman Bono Mack, Ranking Member Butterfield, distinguished members, on behalf of Administrator Michele Leonhart and the men and women of the Drug Enforcement Administration, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to appear today to discuss prescription drug diversion and the critical role the DEA plays in securing the integrity of the controlled substance supply chain and delivery system. Before I get going I would just like to thank the chairman and this committee for their leadership on this problem, and I also want to thank you for promoting the National Take Back Program. If I may throw in a plug, we will doing it again April 28, Saturday, State, Federal, local agencies with community groups working together to collect those drugs, and I want to thank you again for that. Also, I would like to thank the leadership of Director Kerlikowske, who has gone out of his way to ensure that we get the--all of the resources that we need to do our job. The abuse of pharmaceuticals continues to be a significant problem in the United States, and it is based on pharmaceutical diversion from the supply chain and the medication delivery system, and we believe that is the major reason. There is just holes in the system. Over the last few years individuals and organizations have created schemes within the healthcare delivery system that appear legitimate but are nothing more than illegal operations to facilitate the illegal distribution of pharmaceuticals. Pharmaceutical diversion facilitated by these operations can be prevented if DEA registrants would just fulfill their obligations under the Controlled Substances Act. The act was designed so that each DEA registrant is a link in the closed system of distribution. Each registrant, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, practitioners, and pharmacies have a critical role to play in keeping the distribution chain closed. Two major schemes have emerged to divert millions of dosigents, powerful addictive drugs. The first one a few years back was the internet pharmacy scheme. You could go online, and you could purchase pretty much any schedule three, four, or five controlled substance you would like. hydrocodone was the drug of choice, and it came out of the distribution chain, and really no one fulfilled their obligations to the chain. You had distributors that weren't doing due diligence on pharmacies that were ordering huge amounts of hydrocodone. The pharmacists weren't checking those prescriptions to ensure they were valid, that is they were issued for legitimate medical purposes in the usual course of professional practice, and the doctors weren't doing the same thing. They were just prescribing without a legitimate reason for prescribing. There was no medical determination made. It was a major breech in the system. But because of law enforcement's focus on that problem and then Congress coming in and passing the Ryan Haight Act, we basically shut down that system. Unfortunately, that system moved back to Florida and turned into pain clinics, and pain clinics grew. Now, these pain clinics, besides the fact that they are operating illegally, they were doing the same thing that the internet pharmacies did. The only difference is on the internet pharmacies there was no face-to-face visit. In pain clinics they actually see patients, but, again, the doctors are moving huge amounts of prescriptions out the door. Pharmacists are not checking the validity of those prescriptions. They are not ensuring they are valid prescriptions, and the wholesalers and distributors just continue to ship large amounts of drugs to those pharmacies without doing due diligence, without knowing their customer, without saying, well, why are you ordering? Why are you ordering this amount of drug when every other average pharmacy in the U.S. only orders this, and you are ten, 12, 14 times more than that? They have a responsibility under the act. They choose not to comply with that obligation. We are fighting this problem through education and regulatory control and enforcement. Since 2005, we have a distributor initiative that has educated distributors of their obligations under the act. When distributors fail to adhere to their obligations, DEA takes administrative or civil action against their registration. From mid 2010, through the end of 2011, we took action against five wholesaler distributors for unlawfully supplying Florida-based pain clinics or associated pharmacies with controlled substances. These actions included the issuance of immediate suspension orders and result in the restriction and loss of DEA registrations. We also focus our resources on practitioners that issue those prescriptions not for legitimate medical purpose. These practitioners feed the addiction of drug seekers and allow drugs to enter the elicit market and facilitate overdose and death. Rogue practitioner activity is not limited to Florida. In fact, rogue pain clinics are moving northward, and they operate in Georgia, Tennessee, Kentucky, and southern Ohio now in addition to out west. A DEA investigation with State and local and Federal agencies of a pain clinic doctor operating in Portsmouth, Ohio, culminated this February with the doctor being sentenced to four life terms for overdose deaths of four individuals. I have to wrap it up here, but we are making progress. DEA is using its regulatory authority to ensure compliance with the CSA and its implementing regulations. These measures that we are taking are beginning to show promise. We are strengthening the integrity of the system through registrant compliance. In closing I want to assure you that DEA is working closely with all of our counterparts; Federal, State, and local, and our regulatory counterparts as part of the Administrator's comprehensive approach to combating prescription drug abuse. We are committed to balancing the need for diversion control enforcement with the need for access to these important medications by legitimate users. Thank you for this opportunity to appear, and I look forward to answering any questions. [The prepared statement of Mr. Rannazzisi follows:] [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.054 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.055 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.056 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.057 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.058 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.059 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.060 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.061 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.062 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 80861.063 Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. I am going to recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning, and I would like to begin with General, Attorney General Bondi, and I know you care passionately and you and I have spoken about the opiate babies, and it is my belief that when people dabble with heroin or cocaine, they understand they are dabbling with a potential addiction. They don't necessarily think that when they start playing around with pharmaceuticals. Can you speak to why you are so focused on the opiate babies? I mean, you really are passionate about it. I would love for you to--you ran out of time, so please talk about it for a little bit if you could. Ms. Bondi. Absolutely. You know, right after we passed our legislation last session I started getting calls from neonatal intensive care nurses, neonatologists, and said there is another problem, and you have got to come see this. I went to Saint Joseph's Hospital in Tampa. Twenty percent of the babies going through the neonatal intensive care unit are born addicted to prescription drugs. Now, imagine the worst addict you can see on TV going through those withdrawals, that is how these babies are born into this world. Their incubators have to be covered with blankets. They are sensitive to light, to sound, to touch. Instead of milk, they are getting morphine or methadone. That is how these kids are coming into this world. All Children's Hospital in St. Petersburg, that is a premiere hospital for children, 30 percent of the babies going through the neonatal intensive care unit born addicted to prescription drugs, and it has to stop. Take it from a cost perspective. I take it from a life, babies' lives, but if you look at it from a cost perspective, Saint Joe's had to expand their NICU just to accommodate these babies. So it is costing taxpayers a fortune, and I think a lot of it really has to do with education, and that is why we have legislation proposed this session. I have talked to adoption lawyers, I have talked to nurses, we brought in the Board of Health, we brought in the Board of Medicine. It is all about working together to educate these women, because unfortunately, I think some of these women will say I have stopped drinking alcohol, I have stopped smoking marijuana, but because it is the word prescription drugs, they don't realize the harm that it is doing to their unborn child. What scared me to death, Chairman Bono Mack, was when I asked a doctor, I said, we can't let this become the next crack baby epidemic, and he said, we have already surpassed it. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you. I just wanted to say we don't even know the long-term consequences for these opiate babies, and I just want to turn with my limited time to Mr.--and hopefully we will have a second round of questioning, but Mr. Rannazzisi, you and I have had multiple discussions, and we are not always on the same page, but I applaud some of your efforts recently. You and I have talked about quotas. If Florida is having success at shutting down their pill mills, wouldn't the quotas show a correlating reduction in the quotas that you do allow the manufacturing of these drugs? Are you seeing that? Mr. Rannazzisi. Actually, we are seeing a decrease somewhat in Florida, but we are seeing the expansion of these pill mills throughout the country. If you go to Tennessee, Kentucky, southern Ohio, and most of those in southern Ohio were shut down, but we still continue to see those flow out, and I just right now, even though Florida is on the going downhill, states north of Florida are starting on the rise. This problem is just, again, just moving north and west. Mrs. Bono Mack. Well, I am just glad you hear you admit that and to say that. That is encouraging to me, but can you speak briefly about the Cardinal Case? Now that the district court has dissolved the temporary restraining order, what are the next steps in the Cardinal Case, and apparently Cardinal plans to appeal. If the district court's order is upheld, what is the next step? Mr. Rannazzisi. Because that case is in active litigation, I am not allowed to answer questions, however, I can tell you we have had cases similar to Cardinal in the case in the last 2 or 3 years. They are exercising their appeal rights, and we respect that. We will continue on with this program. Looking at our distributors, making sure that they meet their obligations under the act, and if they don't meet their obligations under the act, we will take the same action that we have taken. Mrs. Bono Mack. I am just encouraged because long ago you and I argued that it was all coming out of Grandma's medicine chest. Correct? Mr. Rannazzisi. Yes, ma'am, and not that I don't still believe it is coming out of the medicine chest, but I believe that we are handling it upstream now to prevent it from getting down to that level. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you for that. Mr. Haslam, you talk about shipments, whole cargo containers that go missing but they are unreported. Do you want to speak to that? Mr. Haslam. Anecdotally, law enforcement throughout Ohio has told us that they, that cargo shipments are falling off the trucks. We have heard---- Mrs. Bono Mack. Just magically. Mr. Haslam. Just magically. We have heard---- Mrs. Bono Mack. Yes. Mr. Haslam [continuing]. Through conversations with manufacturers about their security measures, and they do seem to be very good security measures as Director Kerlikowske alluded to earlier. However, there seems to be a point as it gets further down the chain that the security measures either weaken or are not as efficient, and once it gets to the distributors and then they send it to their distributors who send it out, there appear to be security measures that aren't in place that allow shipments to fall off of trucks. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you very much. My time is up, and I would like to recognize Mr. Butterfield for 5 minutes. Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. Let me go to the gentleman from the DEA. How do you pronounce your name? Is it Rannazzisi? Mr. Rannazzisi. Rannazzisi. Yes. Mr. Butterfield. Yes. All right. Thank you. Let me talk with you about the security procedures followed by the prescription drug manufacturers, specifically how the drug moves from raw materials to usable medicine, then to distributors, and then down to the wholesalers. Are you comfortable, sir, with the security mechanisms employed by these companies? Mr. Rannazzisi. The physical securities for the most, the physical security systems for the most part I am. We do onsite inspections every 3 years or so for manufacturers, importers, exporters, any other raw material holders, and if there is problems in physical security, we handle it onsite. We make suggestions, and generally it is corrected. Mr. Butterfield. All right. What kind of relationship does the DEA have with the prescription drug industry? Specifically, what programs does DEA employ to educate DEA manufacturers and distributors? How closely, if at all, does DEA audit or approve security measures employed by the manufacturers and distributors, and is there a difference in procedure for authorized distributors versus secondary distributors? Mr. Rannazzisi. Well, first of all, we are on site for these distribution and manufacturing facilities every 3 years. In addition, for instance, the wholesalers and the distributors, we have a program called the Distributor Initiative where we sit down, not as a group, but individually with each company, and we go over their distributions, and we talk to them about what to look for when they are sending their drugs downstream. We offer them assistance to help them identify what diversion is and where it is, and that is done individually by company. The manufacturers, we have an open door as far as the manufacturers go. I don't think we have ever had a problem with the manufacturers where we haven't rectified that problem. So we are regulators. We have a relationship between regulators and the industry, and we oversee them and make sure that they are operating under the act, in compliance with the act. Mr. Butterfield. All right. Technology advances have enabled new abuse deterrent drugs to take the place of conventional pills. I am encouraged by the addition of abuse- deterrent drugs into the marketplace, and while it is not a silver or magic bullet in completely stopping prescription drug abuse, it seems to be a tool that can greatly help. Some medications have been reformulated to be extremely difficult to crush and dissolve. These are what we call abuse deterrent drugs and new additions to the prescription drug marketplace and have not yet been widely adopted. But things are moving in the right direction. Question. How do you think abuse-deterrent formulations will have an impact on reducing opiate abuse, and how do we ensure that those who are addicted do not just switch to a new drug such as Fentanyl or heroin? Mr. Rannazzisi. I think that the abuse, well, first of all, we are very supportive of these assistance formulations. We think that is the future that will curb drug abuse. However, we also know that abuse-resistance formulations tend to stop drug abusers from ingesting the drug in certain manners, for instance, injection or snorting the drug. When they need to, they take it orally, and abuse-resistant medication generally does not affect how you take it orally. What we are seeing in the field is they are taking the drug orally with an agent that will give it a synergistic property to enhance the, for instance, for a drug like oxycodone, they will take it with an Alprazolam product or Carisoprodol, which is a muscle relaxant to enhance the product, the effects of the product. Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. I yield back. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Butterfield. Mr. Harper, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair, and if I could, Mr. Rannazzisi, if you I could ask you a few questions. First, what regulation does DEA have that specifically outlined the legal requirements that pharmacies, distributors, and manufacturers are required to take to avoid drug diversion? Mr. Rannazzisi. Well, for starters, pharmacists are held pretty much to the same standard that doctors are under 1306.04, 1306.04 says a prescription is not valid unless it is issued for legitimate medical purpose and use, of course, a professional practice. It also goes on to say that a corresponding responsibility exists with the pharmacist to ensure that the prescription is valid. Mr. Harper. OK. Mr. Rannazzisi. The manufacturers under 1301.71 and 1301.74 have to maintain a system that stops diversion or the diversion of controlled substances into other than a legitimate marketplace. And it also goes on to say that you also have to maintain a system of suspicious ordering monitoring, and they leave it up to the manufacturers and distributors to determine how to set up that system of suspicious ordering and monitoring. Mr. Harper. You know, I know the DEA has the ability to see unusual ordering patterns. Are there certain thresholds or levels that you pass on to the distributors to look for? Are you giving them guidelines to--that you pass off? Mr. Rannazzisi. No. I think what distributors have to do is look at their customers. They know their customers. I don't know all of their customers. They do. If they went onsite and looked at their customers, they could make a determination of what thresholds should be maintained for those individual registrant customers. The problem is is I don't believe that the distributors and the wholesalers are actually looking at their customers as closely as they should. If you have customers that on the average purchase, I don't know, 70,000 oxycodone tablets a year and you have customers purchasing well in excess of a million a year, I think that would trigger something where you should go onsite and find out why that is the issue. Mr. Harper. Does the DEA have those volume parameters that it uses but are not shared with manufacturers or distributors? Mr. Rannazzisi. No. We--no, we don't share, we don't give them volume parameters. That is up to them. It is their system that they are setting up. Mr. Harper. All right. Well, what guidance has DEA provided to the manufacturers, distributors, pharmacies, or whatever on the specific steps that they should be taking to identify fraudulent prescriptions? What advice are you giving them to look for or suggestions? Mr. Rannazzisi. Well, there are certain red flags. Mr. Harper. OK. Mr. Rannazzisi. For instance, a pharmacy. If you have, if you are sitting in we will say Portsmouth, Ohio, and all of your customers are coming from, I don't know, 80 or 100 miles away, and the doctor you are filling for is 100 miles the opposite way, and it is all cash transactions, and you are seeing this over and over again, you know, I am not the smartest guy, but red flags pop up in my mind when that happens. Mr. Harper. Yes. Mr. Rannazzisi. And I think those are typical red flags, and Attorney General Bondi I am sure, or any one of these distinguished gentlemen could tell they are seeing the same thing that I am seeing. So over and over again we see these red flags. The pharmacists should see them, too. Mr. Harper. Would you favor under the Controlled Substance Act to create a stricter requirement, legal requirement for the most problematic drugs? Mr. Rannazzisi. I think the requirements that are in place right now for these drugs are fine if the individuals within the supply chain and healthcare delivery system would follow them. The problem is that the doctors continue, not all doctors, 99 percent of the doctors are perfect. It is that small percentage of doctors that just don't want to fulfill their obligation. What they do is prescribe for illegitimate purposes, or they don't make a medical determination. They just go with patient-directed prescribing, which is just wrong. I think that if everybody within that supply chain would just police each other, we wouldn't have the problem that we have right now. Mr. Harper. I thank each of the witnesses for being here today and for your insight, and with that I yield back. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, Mr. Harper. Mr. McKinley, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. McKinley. Thank you again. Let us go back to Florida or maybe Kentucky, but let us start with Florida. When you have your program, your PDMP, do you have an identification system? Is that how--is that included in it? Ms. Bondi. We, as I am sure you are aware, we had some very difficult problems getting our PDMP in place, our Prescription Drug Monitoring Program. It was, you know, 48 states have a PDMP but many weren't up and running, and ours was one of them. We received some resistance. What we have done now is that it is up and running. We had some issues with getting it funded. Do you know who came forward? Mr. McKinley. Wait a minute. Do you have an identification so when someone comes in, is this--do they enter their name or something into---- Ms. Bondi. Yes. Mr. McKinley [continuing]. A file? Ms. Bondi. Yes, and it used---- Mr. McKinley. It is available for everyone in the State of Florida? Ms. Bondi. Absolutely, and it used to be 15-day reporting, and now we have limited that down to 7-day reporting. Mr. McKinley. OK. So---- Ms. Bondi. So we have shortened the reporting period. Mr. McKinley [continuing]. If it works in your State, why wouldn't that work nationally? Ms. Bondi. Well, and this is, like I said, brand new in our State because it had never been funded. So now it is funded by forfeiture funds from our sheriff for the next few years. Mr. McKinley. What about Kentucky? What are you doing in Kentucky? Do you have the database or names? Mr. Conway. We have the database, and what happens in Kentucky, we were one of the first states to bring a PDMP online, Congressman, but our doctors will go in and enter a patient name to see if that particular patient is doctor shopping. The problem we have in Kentucky is, it is a pretty good system, but only about 25 percent of our doctors are using it. It is not mandatory. It is not mandatory that ER docs, for example---- Mr. McKinley. OK. Thank you. What concerns me some is you have done a great job in Florida. You just chased them to another State. That is what I am hearing from the other testimony here, and what we are hearing from around the country is that you did a great job. It happens in law enforcement when you start performing your duties, they go someplace else because they are not going to change their behavior. They just transfer to another State. I am looking to see how we can capture them nationally. Ms. Bondi. And we still have a long way to go in Florida, but I think what we are doing is we are working together, and as long as I can tell you the two of us are still alive, we are going to put this, we are going to put these guys out of business. I mean, we work together constantly, we share ideas, we share thoughts, and we frankly in Florida we work great with the DEA. We--you have to work as a team, and I don't know if you were here earlier for that part of it, but you have to bring State, local, and Federal authorities and now wrap all of our states into this, because this is a national crisis, and I mean, we are in a war with drugs, and just the drug has changed. Mr. Conway. If I may address that point, Congressman, not to take up too much of your time, but Kentucky borders seven states, and the pharmacists when they fill a script, enter the data that goes into the system that doctors later check. The problem for us has been that the docs feel like it is too time consuming. The docs don't want to be forced to do this, and they don't have a system that they think is user friendly that they can type in, takes 30 seconds or less, and tells you if you are in eastern Kentucky whether or not this patient has been to West Virginia, Ohio, or Virginia or Tennessee. And that is what we don't have, and really a State like Kentucky can't get to where we need to be. We can't get 50 states with a good system that is interoperable unless we have the help of the Federal Government. Mr. McKinley. And Ohio, do you have the names up on--do you have with your program, do you have the names, the individual, so they know, we know what prescription drug they are acquiring? Mr. Haslam. We do, Congressman, and our program has been up and running for many years as well just as Kentucky's has. Mr. McKinley. Do you see a problem with that going nationally? Mr. Haslam. I don't. I think it is one of the necessary tools that we are going to need to fight this epidemic. Mr. McKinley. How do you deal with the privacy matter, because that seems to be the hang up, the confidentiality of people to access. What--how did you get around that for the State of Ohio? Mr. Haslam. Well, it is very protected by--our Ohio State Pharmacy Board houses that program, and they are very protective over the information and who it goes to and how it is distributed, and that is how they get around it. They make sure that it is protected, but it is, it is a necessary tool in this battle as we move forward. Mr. McKinley. So you are saying some states, in your three states, you all have that. You are doing something along that line. Mr. Conway. The information is protected. Only the doctor is going to see it, and if we have a designated case open on a specific target, we can ask to see the KASPER data, but one of the problems we have seen is that the Board of Medical Licensure when they see disturbing trends are not forwarding onto law enforcement. We have that problem in Kentucky. Mr. Haslam. That is the same issue in Ohio, Congressman. It is a great tool. It is under-utilized by our physicians. House Bill 93 required physicians that are treating pain management to utilize it, but as, exactly as you have alluded to, as we have success in law enforcement, we are squeezing the balloon and people are just moving to other states. And what has happened, the three states represented here today have all worked wonderfully together to tackle this issue and to share that information and investigations. Mr. McKinley. I know the time. I think you are great models. I just want to see it replicated in all 50 states so we can protect this thing. We can't have you operating in the middle. So thank you. I yield back my time. Mrs. Bono Mack. Thank you, and Dr. Cassidy, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. Cassidy. Thank you, Madam Chair. First I will say that we are introducing Mike Ross and I from the other side of the aisle, H.R. 4095, which is the Stop Online Pharmacy Safety Act, which attempts to close down or at least prevent the publicizing of these rogue pharmacies. So hopefully we will get some cosponsors on this. Secondly, Mr. Rannazzisi, man, I keep on thinking with the databases you all have, if we gave them to Google, I have no doubt that Google knows what color dress my daughter has on today. And so it seems like data mining could really go a long way to pinpointing these problems for a specific intervention. I am told by industry that you all have lots of data forwarded to you regularly. My question is why not? Mr. Rannazzisi. I think the data they are referring to is our ARCOS System. Mr. Cassidy. Yes. Mr. Rannazzisi. Yes. Under 827(D) they are required to send all narcotic control substance transactions to us to be put in a database, and we do have that information, and quite frankly, we use that information to assist us in investigations. However, that information is proprietary. It is protected information. I can't release that information to industry, and they have asked---- Mr. Cassidy. But you could release it to local law enforcement. Mr. Rannazzisi. If local law enforcement is involved in investigation and they request the information, yes, we can. Mr. Cassidy. Let me ask because as I go through the testimony you have rank ordered states in which there is the highest prescriptions per capita of controlled substances, you have related it to over 65 how many people on Medicare Part D are getting X amount per, in a certain region. I also see other statistics where you speak about three or four physicians moving from one State to another, so you have physician level, and I am sure you also have a pharmacy level. It just seems, again, if Google had that or some other data miner had that, we could have a specifi