Dwayne Johnson for President!
“Mmm… With any job you come into, you've got to prove yourself. And…” Johnson pauses, performing lightning-fast mental calibrations. “Personally, I feel that if I were president, poise would be important. Leadership would be important. Taking responsibility for everybody. [If I didn't agree with someone] on something, I wouldn't shut them out. I would actually include them. The first thing we'd do is we'd come and sit down and we'd talk about it. It's hard to categorize right now how I think he's doing, other than to tell you how I would operate, what I would like to see.”

“What would you like to see?”

“Right?” Johnson says, laughing. He's obviously a little nervous, plucking at the spandex material stretching across his massive thighs, but he doesn't attempt to end the line of questioning. “I'd like to see a better leadership. I'd like to see a greater leadership. When there's a disagreement, and you have a large group of people that you're in a disagreement with—for example, the media—I feel like it informs me that I could be better. We all have issues, and we all gotta work our shit out. And I feel like one of the qualities of a great leader is not shutting people out. I miss that part. Even if we disagree, we've got to figure it out. Because otherwise I feel, as an American, all I hear and all I see in the example you're setting is ‘Now I'm shutting you out. And you can't come.’ [Disagreement] informs us. The responsibility as president—I [would] take responsibility for everyone. Especially when you disagree with me. If there's a large number of people disagreeing, there might be something I'm not seeing, so let me see it. Let me understand it.”

It's a diplomatic answer. Few people would argue with the value of great leadership. To date, Johnson's embryonic political platform has largely consisted of similar neutral statements, and a robust love for the troops. I want to get more specific.

“What are your thoughts on the Muslim ban?”

“I completely disagree with it,” he says without hesitation. “I believe in our national security to the core, but I don't believe in a ‘ban’ that bans immigrants. I believe in inclusion. Our country was built on that, and it continues to be made strong by that. And the decision felt like a snap judgment. I feel like the majority of, if not all, Americans feel that protection is of huge importance. But the ideology and the execution [of national-security initiatives] is where we really have to be careful of not making those snap decisions, because there's a tail effect... Within 24 hours, we saw a ‘tail effect.’ It grew to heartache, it grew to a great deal of pain, it grew to a great deal of confusion, and it had a lot of people scrambling.”

Could Johnson do better? Could he really run for president? Barring the adoption of policy points that are completely unhinged (like spending $8 billion to build a colony in the earth's core—though, if anyone could do that, it would be Dwayne Johnson), there's much to suggest Johnson could chart a fast and furious ride to the White House. He's a quick study with boundless attention to detail. Beyond his popularity—and the fact that his head often looks like a big, round smiley face—he's got a politician's warm, deep voice, which projects authority, capability, and strength. And he possesses a startling steel-trap memory. Johnson simply remembers everything about people: biographical details, offhand anecdotes, entire conversations. It's the quality that allows him to treat everyone like a close friend, the silent secret to his supercharged charm.

“I believe in our national security to the core, but I don't believe in a ‘ban’ that bans immigrants. I believe in inclusion. Our country was built on that”

Johnson describes himself as a “feminist” raised by “strong women.” He's spoken openly about his experiences with depression and has positioned himself as a mental-health advocate. His popularity as a professional wrestler gives him a strong heartland base, and the fact that he grew up all over the United States—while his dad worked the wrestling circuit—gives him local ties, literally, from coast to coast (Connecticut, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Florida, Georgia, Tennessee, Texas, California, Washington, and Hawaii). In person, he projects an aura of unshakable calm (a trait he's used in Hollywood to play all manner of high-stakes lifesavers, from fire-department rescue pilot to Green Beret to lifeguard during a riptide). With his jacked body and love of horses, Johnson could be the only candidate with a chance of earning the respect of Vladimir Putin in the virility department. He's equally capable of killing a terrorist with a chair shot or with kindness.