Baldwin hires lawyer over Tomah VA fallout
CLOSE

Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Wis. (Photo: File/Gannett Wisconsin Media)Buy Photo

WASHINGTON – Sen. Tammy Baldwin has hired a powerful Washington lawyer to represent her as she continues to grapple with the fallout from her office's handling of the Tomah Veterans Affairs crisis.

Attorney Marc Elias offered the first public acknowledgment on behalf of Baldwin that she fired top Wisconsin aide Marquette Baylor for her actions after the senator received a critical inspection report about opiate prescription practices at the Tomah VA Medical Center.

Baldwin did not act on the report for four months, despite repeated pleas from a whistleblower, who urged Baylor to do something about the report last fall.

"Marquette Baylor was terminated because her long-term performance on a range of issues did not meet with the Senator's expectations for effective constituent service," Elias said in a statement on Thursday. "As Deputy State Director for Constituent Services, her handling of the problems at the Tomah VA was only one of those issues."

He said Baylor rejected a severance offer that would have included a separation agreement with "standard confidentiality language" provided by the Senate's chief employment lawyer.

"Based on legal guidance provided by the Office of the Senate Chief Counsel for Employment, Marquette was offered a separation agreement that is standard for a Senate employee of her tenure and seniority," Elias said.

Baylor had worked for Baldwin since 2013 and earned $80,000 last year, Senate records show. She previously worked for former Sen. Herb Kohl.

Elias did not provide a copy of the agreement or disclose what the accompanying cash payout would have been. His statement was initially reported by the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.

Baldwin has refused to answer questions about the firing some four weeks ago, the severance deal, and what happened with the inspection report and the whistleblower – whether she read the report or was briefed on it, and what she knew when about the whistleblower's pleas. She was the only member of Congress to receive a copy of the report.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-5042. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

A Baldwin aide did not immediately respond to a message seeking answers again Thursday to those questions.

The report included findings by the VA inspector general that practitioners at the Tomah facility were prescribing "unusually high" amounts of opiates to veteran patients, raising "serious concerns." Baldwin did not call for an investigation of narcotics prescription practices at the center until last month, when news reports revealed that a 35-year-old Marine Corps veteran died from an overdose while an inpatient at Tomah last August.

Elias has been called the "go-to" lawyer for Democrats in trouble. He was called in after former Louisiana Sen. Mary Landrieu improperly used taxpayer funds to pay for charter flights last year, and after Missouri Sen. Claire McCaskill was dinged for the same issue in 2011. Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid tapped Elias after his campaign paid $31,000 to his granddaughter last year for "holiday gifts."

-- Contact dslack@usatoday. Follow @donovanslack.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1Et3lKA