CMS Approves Maryland’s 1332 Waiver For State-Based Reinsurance Program
On August 22, 2018, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the Department of Treasury approved Maryland’s application to establish a state-based reinsurance program for 2019 through 2023. Maryland had identified August 22 as the latest possible date for approval to give the state time to finalize plans and rates for 2019. The reinsurance program is expected to reduce premiums by about 30 percent (relative to what premiums would have been in the absence of the waiver) and increase enrollment in the individual market by about 5.8 percent in 2019.

Maryland will have the largest state-based reinsurance program approved to date and follows similar recent approvals in Wisconsin, Maine, and New Jersey. The program builds off of Maryland’s prior experience administering a supplemental state-based reinsurance program for 2015 and 2016. The waiver is approved through 2023; however, the reinsurance program may ultimately be shorter because Maryland expects its state funds to be expended by 2021.

How The Maryland Program Will Work

The reinsurance program will be administered by the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange and use an overall attachment point model. For 2019, insurers will be reimbursed for 80 percent of an enrollee’s claims with a cap of $250,000. The attachment point has not yet been determined but was modeled by actuaries at $20,000.

The total expected cost of the reinsurance program is $462 million for 2019. It will be funded through a 2.75 percent assessment on certain health insurance plans and Medicaid managed care organizations. This assessment is essentially what insurers would have owed to the federal government under the ACA’s health insurance tax, which was suspended by Congress for 2019, but will now be collected by the state.

The Departments deemed Maryland’s waiver application to be complete on July 5 and accepted comments on the application until August 4. There were a total of 8 comments from entities such as patient advocacy organizations, the Maryland Hospital Association, the Maryland attorney general’s office, and insurers. All of the comments were in support of the waiver, and the Departments responded to them here.

The comments reflected additional feedback on concerns that had been raised during public hearings and the state’s comment period regarding the need to coordinate between the state’s reinsurance program and the federal risk adjustment program. The concerns seem to be based on the composition of the offerings of the two major insurers in the individual market, one of which offers more expensive preferred provider organization (or PPO) products while the other offers less expensive health maintenance organization (or HMO) products. Kaiser Permanente’s comments to the Departments include additional actuarial analysis and an extended discussion on the need for an equitable state reinsurance program.

The Maryland Health Benefit Exchange commissioned additional analysis and held an additional public hearing on this issue. On August 4, the state submitted an addendum to its waiver application regarding its intent to adjust for potential duplication of payments under reinsurance and risk adjustment. The Departments concluded that the calculation of an additional “risk adjustment dampening factor”—to be determined by the board of the Exchange at a later date—did not impact their analysis of the waiver application.

In a letter to Maryland Health Benefit Exchange Director Michele Eberle on August 22, the Departments laid out specific terms and conditions that the state must accept for the waiver to go into effect. Once the waiver is accepted, the Departments will notify Maryland of the amount of pass-through funding for 2019. This notification will arrive no later than October 31, 2018. The Departments also released a fact sheet about Maryland’s reinsurance program.

Federal Government Sidesteps Maryland Request To Modify EDGE Server For Reinsurance Program

Although the waiver has been approved, the Departments sidestepped a request from Maryland and insurers to modify parts of the federal EDGE server infrastructure to allow it to be used for administering the reinsurance program. (The EDGE server is a data processing tool currently used for the risk adjustment program and previously used for the reinsurance program). In its application, Maryland noted that it could administer the reinsurance program without additional resources if the EDGE server could be modified. However, in the absence of modifications, it would cost an estimated $434,000 for 2019.

Insurers similarly supported the use of the EDGE server to simplify the process and reduce administrative costs. The Departments did not respond to this request directly, noting only that they “continue to explore the viability of states leveraging the EDGE server infrastructure to implement state reinsurance programs.”

Maryland becomes the eighth state with an approved 1332 waiver and the seventh state to use a 1332 waiver for a state-based reinsurance program (alongside Alaska, Minnesota, Maine, New Jersey, Oregon, and Wisconsin). Maryland’s application was the last pending Section 1332 waiver currently under consideration by the Departments.