Health Insurance Coverage For Children and Young Adults Under 26
If a plan covers children, they can be added to or kept on a parent's health insurance policy until they turn 26 years old.

Children can join or remain on a parent's plan even if they are:

Married

Not living with their parents

Attending school

Not financially dependent on their parents

Eligible to enroll in their employer’s plan

These rules apply to both job-based plans and individual plans bought inside or outside the Marketplace.

When someone turns 26 Under-26 coverage ends on a child’s 26th birthday. When a child loses coverage on their 26th birthday, they qualify for a Special Enrollment Period. This lets them enroll in a health plan outside Open Enrollment.

They may qualify for tax credits and other savings based on their income.

They can enroll up to 60 days before their 26th birthday. Their Special Enrollment Period ends 60 days after their birthday.

If they enroll before their birthday, coverage can start as soon the first day of the month they lose coverage. If they enroll during the 60 days after their birthday, coverage can start the first day of the month after picking a plan.

If they don’t enroll in health coverage within 60 days of their birthday, they may not be able to get coverage until the next Open Enrollment period.

If they aren’t insured, they may have to pay the fee that some uninsured people pay. If they’re uncovered for less than 3 months of the calendar year, they don’t have to pay the fee. If it’s 60 days before or after your 26th birthday, start your application now.

How to get coverage for adult children

Adult children may be enrolled during a plan’s Open Enrollment period or during other special enrollment opportunities.

When a parent applies for a new plan in the Marketplace, they can usually sign up an under-26-year-old on the same application. They should include them on the list of people to be covered.

For job-based coverage, the employer or insurance company can provide details.

If an adult child under 26 isn’t a dependent

If a child under 26 isn't a dependent for the parent’s tax purposes, the child should fill out his or her own application to apply for a tax credit. They can select the same plan, if they choose, but will be on a different policy.

Note: This is true only if anyone on the same application wants to qualify for premium tax credits and lower out-of-pocket costs based on household size and income. The same rules apply for all tax dependents. For example, children who claim their parents as tax dependents on their tax return need to follow these instructions.

In this case, contact the Marketplace call center at 1-800-318-2596 (TTY: 1-855-889-4325). The representative will explain how to fill out the application.

More answers