Health Care Coverage for American Indians and Alaska Natives
If you’re an American Indian or an Alaska Native you may have new health insurance benefits and protections in the Marketplace.

Some benefits are available to members of federally recognized tribes. Others are available to people of Indian descent or who are otherwise eligible for services from the Indian Health Service, a tribal program, or an urban Indian health program.

Important: Members of federally recognized tribes and Alaska Native shareholders can enroll in Marketplace coverage any time of year. There is no limited enrollment period for these groups, and they can change plans as often as once a month.

Special Marketplace protections and benefits for American Indians and Alaska Natives

The Health Insurance Marketplace benefits American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) by providing opportunities for affordable health coverage. This coverage can be through a private health plan bought in the Marketplace, Medicaid, or the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP).

If you’re a member of a federally recognized tribe:

If you buy private insurance in the Health Insurance Marketplace, you won’t have to pay out-of-pocket costs like deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance if your income is up to around $70,650 for a family of 4 ($88,320 in Alaska).

You can enroll in Marketplace health insurance any month, not just during the yearly Open Enrollment period.

If you’re an American Indian or Alaska Native or are otherwise eligible for services from the Indian Health Service, tribal program, or urban Indian health program:

You have special cost and eligibility rules for Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) that make it easier to qualify for these programs.

If you don’t have health insurance, you won't have to pay the fee that most other people without health insurance must pay.

Regardless of income, you won’t have any out-of-pocket costs for items or services provided by the Indian Health Service, tribal programs, or urban Indian programs (known as I/T/Us), including Contract Health Services.

Indian Health Services and Marketplace insurance

If you enroll in a private health insurance plan through the Health Insurance Marketplace:

You can get (or keep getting) services from the Indian Health Service, tribal health programs, or urban Indian health programs.

You can also get services from any providers on the Marketplace plan.

More Answers: American Indians and Alaska Natives