17 times Hillary Clinton stood with Planned Parenthood
Hillary has always stood with Planned Parenthood—and always will.

Hillary has always stood with Planned Parenthood—and always will.

This week, following a horrific attack on a clinic in Colorado Springs, the Senate voted to defund Planned Parenthood. Today, Planned Parenthood is coming together in a national day of solidarity, to remember the victims of the attack and take a stand against efforts to limit women’s access to affordable and safe health care. Hillary is proud to stand with them—today, and every day.

1. When she broke down what “defunding Planned Parenthood” really means …

2. … more than once.

They want to deprive millions of women from getting cancer screenings, finding out whether they have HIV, getting help on family planning and contraceptives. It is a mean-spirited, partisan attack on an organization that has been there for women, often the only place that young women, lower-income women, have been able to go and get treated with respect and get the kind of health care they deserve. September 23, 2015

3. When she schooled the speaker of the House …

Hillary to @SpeakerBoehner: Shutting down our government over a partisan attack on Planned Parenthood is just wrong.https://t.co/m7ZEPnkjf6 — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) September 17, 2015

4. … and a Republican presidential candidate …

Jeb is just wrong. ✔️ 2.7 million patients for

✔️ 900K cancer screenings and

✔️ 4.5M STI tests and treatments/year https://t.co/dpbWI0jn1E — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) August 25, 2015

5. … and ANOTHER Republican presidential candidate …

6. … and, basically, the whole Republican party …

7. … because they don’t seem to be listening …

I would hope that the Republicans … would not put our country and our economy in peril pursuing some kind of emotionally, politically charged, partisan attack on Planned Parenthood to shut our government down. September 17, 2015

8. … and they really, really should be.

What’s really pro-family: Supporting equal pay, paid leave, affordable child care, and Planned Parenthood. #GOPdebate — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) November 11, 2015

9. When she was the only candidate to bring up Planned Parenthood and reproductive rights during the first Democratic debate…

Last night, Hillary was the only candidate to confront GOP attacks on Planned Parenthood. http://t.co/kHpSMSC4C5 — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) October 14, 2015

10. … and the first person to bring it up at the second debate.

All of us support funding Planned Parenthood. November 14, 2015

11. When she highlighted just a few of the many reasons she’s proud to stand with Planned Parenthood …

12. … and then laid out even MORE of those reasons.

We should be supporting Planned Parenthood—not attacking it.https://t.co/h8u9LYGMwc — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) November 30, 2015

13. When she “pinked out” in solidarity with Planned Parenthood …

14. … and talked about the fight for reproductive rights nationwide …

Proud to #StandWithPP in the fight for affordable health care. Don’t mess with Texas women's health. https://t.co/PnxV6yI5Xv — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) November 23, 2015

15. … and made sure everybody knew how important it was, even her Snapchat followers.

16. When she stood with Planned Parenthood through tragedy.

17. And when she reminded people how simple this really is.

This really isn’t complicated. When you attack Planned Parenthood, you attack women’s health, and when you attack women’s health, you attack America’s health. August 4, 2015

Read more about Hillary’s plan to protect the rights and opportunities of women and girls.