Hillary Clinton’s Initiative to Combat America’s Deadly Epidemic of Drug and Alcohol Addiction
Drug and alcohol addiction is a national epidemic and our nation is failing to address it. Nearly 23 million Americans suffer from a substance use disorder, yet only about one in ten receive treatment. This is a problem that touches Americans everywhere, from our biggest cities to our smallest towns, and from our richest enclaves to our poorest neighborhoods. It is a problem that did not just appear overnight, but has worsened in recent years. And we cannot arrest and incarcerate our way out of it. We need a new approach to tackling this complex challenge. The costs to our nation of not doing so are huge: reduced productivity, overloaded health care and criminal justice systems, and hundreds of thousands of human lives lost.

Today, Hillary Clinton is making clear that this deadly epidemic of addiction must be addressed head-on and is proposing a bold proposal to do so. Her $10 billion Initiative to Combat America’s Deadly Epidemic of Drug and Alcohol Addiction sets forth ambitious goals to prevent and treat substance use disorders, and to support people in recovery. It provides multi-faceted federal policy leadership and substantial financial incentives to states to achieve those goals through cooperative partnerships.

Hillary Clinton’s Vision and Commitment

Prevention: Empower communities to implement preventive programming for adolescents about drug use and addiction. Clinton believes that we need to do far more as a nation to educate our youth, as well as their families, teachers, coaches, mentors and friends to intervene early in order to prevent drug and alcohol abuse and addiction. School-based programs that are developmentally appropriate, and community-wide peer mentoring and leadership programs, can be highly effective means of delaying or preventing the first use of alcohol or drugs. Clinton will help state and local leaders put in place effective, evidence-based, and locally-tailored programs to meet their needs. Treatment and Recovery: Ensure that every person suffering from drug or alcohol addiction can obtain the comprehensive, ongoing treatment he or she needs, and stay in recovery. Substance use disorders are chronic diseases that affect the brain. Like chronic diseases that affect other systems of the body, they cannot be overcome with one-off interventions. Recovery is only possible through effective and ongoing care, not neglect or stigmatization or episodic treatment. Clinton’s plans are designed to make sure everybody can get the continuing support they need by expanding in-patient and out-patient services, increasing the pipeline of trained providers, mobilizing peer recovery coaches, and fully enforcing our mental health and addiction parity laws so that insurance practices are not a barrier to treatment. First Responders: Ensure that all first responders have access to naloxone. Clinton believes that naloxone, a rescue drug that stops opioid overdoses from becoming fatal, must be in the basic toolkit for every first responder. Prescribers: Require licensed prescribers to have a minimum amount of training and to consult a prescription drug monitoring program before writing a prescription for controlled medications. Clinton wants to ensure that prescribers have the information and training they need to treat patients with chronic pain appropriately, and to identify patients who may be at risk of, or already experiencing, addiction. Criminal Justice Reform: Prioritize rehabilitation and treatment over prison for low-level and nonviolent drug offenses and end the era of mass incarceration. Sixty-five percent of people in prisons and jails meet medical criteria for substance use disorders, yet lack access to proper treatment. And too many people have been incarcerated for too long for petty drug crimes. Clinton believes we need to reform our criminal justice system and pursue alternatives to incarceration for low-level and nonviolent drug offenses, and ensure that people get the treatment they need to get back on their feet. Clinton also believes we should foster more collaboration between our public health and criminal justice systems before, during, and after a person is released from prison, to ensure continuity of care for those who suffer from substance use disorders and are arrested and incarcerated.

New Federal-State Partnerships to Prevent and Treat Addiction

Hillary Clinton will launch a $7.5 billion fund to support new federal-state partnerships over 10 years, through which stakeholders will come together to prevent and treat addiction. The proposal to states is bold but simple: If a state comes forward with a comprehensive plan for how it will deliver upon the national goals set forth above with respect to its community, that state will be eligible for generous new grant funding. States must specify how they will work with local governments and stakeholders, and can then receive $4 of federal support for every $1 they commit. Examples of policy interventions that Clinton encourages states to pursue, to deliver upon the five goals, include:

Prevention: Help school districts implement age-specific drug education programs that have been found to have meaningful effects on risky behavior, such as LifeSkills; help communities develop peer and mentorship programs that involve competence and resilience building, afterschool activities, community service, parental leadership, and other similarly-effective strategies, for preventing substance abuse.

Help school districts implement age-specific drug education programs that have been found to have meaningful effects on risky behavior, such as LifeSkills; help communities develop peer and mentorship programs that involve competence and resilience building, afterschool activities, community service, parental leadership, and other similarly-effective strategies, for preventing substance abuse. Treatment and Recovery: Identify gaps in treatment across communities—from in-patient, to out-patient (including medication assisted treatment), to recovery support, to the number of qualified providers—and propose a plan to close those gaps. Steps to build out the treatment and recovery infrastructure include more investment in hospitals, residential facilities, community-based health centers (CHCs), and community behavioral health centers (CBHCs); recovery community organizations; expanded provider training through grants to educational facilities; rigorous enforcement of insurance parity laws so that health insurance covers needed treatment for substance use disorders; peer support and subsidized childcare for individuals during courses of treatment; and enacting a “no wrong door” approach to treatment, i.e., through merging state licenses, so that primary care providers, CHCs, and CBHCs can more easily treat drug and alcohol addiction. States may also find that they need better data collection on substance abuse and addiction in order to appropriately identify gaps in treatment.

Identify gaps in treatment across communities—from in-patient, to out-patient (including medication assisted treatment), to recovery support, to the number of qualified providers—and propose a plan to close those gaps. Steps to build out the treatment and recovery infrastructure include more investment in hospitals, residential facilities, community-based health centers (CHCs), and community behavioral health centers (CBHCs); recovery community organizations; expanded provider training through grants to educational facilities; rigorous enforcement of insurance parity laws so that health insurance covers needed treatment for substance use disorders; peer support and subsidized childcare for individuals during courses of treatment; and enacting a “no wrong door” approach to treatment, i.e., through merging state licenses, so that primary care providers, CHCs, and CBHCs can more easily treat drug and alcohol addiction. States may also find that they need better data collection on substance abuse and addiction in order to appropriately identify gaps in treatment. First-Response: Create a state fund to help police, fire departments, and EMTs purchase naloxone; and create naloxone training programs for first responders.

Create a state fund to help police, fire departments, and EMTs purchase naloxone; and create naloxone training programs for first responders. Prescribers: Direct prescribers of controlled medications to use state prescription drug monitoring programs to ensure that opioid painkillers are being used appropriately for patients who need them; and impose a training requirement as a condition of obtaining a state license to write prescriptions.

Direct prescribers of controlled medications to use state prescription drug monitoring programs to ensure that opioid painkillers are being used appropriately for patients who need them; and impose a training requirement as a condition of obtaining a state license to write prescriptions. Criminal Justice Reform: Increase investment in local programs that appropriately divert people to treatment instead of the criminal justice system; for counties with “specialized courts” and “drug courts,” encourage local officials to enable participants to receive medication assisted treatment and prioritize reintegration into the community over sanctions; and improve information systems and coordination across the criminal justice and public health systems, to ensure continuity of care in prison and after release for incarcerated individuals suffering from substance use disorders.

Immediate Federal Actions

Clinton would also take concrete federal actions to make progress on these goals. She would: