Culberson’s response to Harvey under political attack
WASHINGTON - After Hurricane Harvey flooded much of Houston - including the hotly contested Seventh Congressional District - Republican incumbent John Culberson used his position on the House Appropriations Committee to stamp his name on billions of dollars in disaster recovery funds.

By February, he could claim a leading hand in securing $141 billion in congressional appropriations to help the victims of the 2017 hurricanes in Texas, Florida and Puerto Rico.

But as the nine-term congressman faces an unusually tough reelection against Democratic challenger Lizzie Pannill Fletcher, the city’s troubled history of flooding and the federal government’s long backlog of flood control projects has come under sharp political attack.

Fletcher, a Houston attorney making her first run for office, argues that Houstonians are paying the price for Culberson’s small government philosophy and a Republican-led Congress that she says has been slow to fund critical improvements to the Addicks and Barker dams, both aging structures that were deemed to be at “high risk” of failure as early as 2004.

She also has homed in on key votes cast by Culberson, who she labels a climate change skeptic, saying that they undermined flood prevention efforts in Texas and across the country.

“We can’t just look at the last nine months,” she said in an interview. “We need to look at the last nine terms.”

Fletcher’s focus on flood infrastructure in the lead-up to Harvey comes as many Democratic candidates, trying to win back control of Congress, have made opposition to President Donald Trump a centerpiece of their campaigns.

Fletcher too opposes Trump on a swath of issues from health care to immigration, issues on which Culberson has lined up with the president. But in the affluent, historically Republican district that bore the brunt of spillovers from the Addicks and Barker reservoirs, the trauma from Harvey crosses party lines.

“Harvey was life-changing for so many people, especially in this district,” Fletcher said. “For people who have been affected by Harvey, this is ‘The Issue’, or the Number One issue.”

When it comes to flood control, Culberson is ceding no ground, saying that he sees flood control as an essential part of protecting the quality of life in Houston.

“I’ve always made sure the Army Corps and the Flood Control District receive every single dollar they have ever asked for,” Culberson said in an interview. “They cannot receive more than they ask for, by law.”

Culberson also calls the charge that he’s a climate change denier “absurd.”

“Of course I understand the climate is changing,” he said. “I just want to know the facts.”

A former state representative who runs as a “Jeffersonian” Republican, Culberson arrived in Congress in 2001, the same year Tropical Storm Allison flooded downtown Houston. Since that time, he says he has secured more than $322 million in federal funds for Brays Bayou, Buffalo Bayou and White Oak Bayou, critical waterways that are supposed to keep Houston dry.

Federal, state and local governments have spent millions for flood control over the years in the region surrounding Houston, the nation’s fourth-largest city. But long-sought improvements to the 1940s-era Addicks and Barker dams -the city’s primary bulwark against flooding - have undergone a tortured history of legal, bureaucratic and political wrangling.

While even Democrats acknowledge that there’s plenty of blame to go around, much of it stemming from modern development pressures that have stretched the earthen structures beyond capacity, some focus their attention on Congress and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which built and operate the two dams.

“When we need monetary solutions, it is on Congress to act,” Fletcher said. “And it’s on our representative to make sure it gets done.”

Culberson said that’s exactly what he’s done, noting that he helped secure the $72 million in funding to replace the dams’ spill gate structures, which have been the focus of concern. “Once the Corps recommended they be replaced, I made sure they got very dollar they needed,” he said. “That work is fully funded and underway.”

Even before Fletcher won a hard-fought primary runoff against progressive activist Laura Moser last month, Democrats in Washington were preparing the case against Culberson, suggesting that his anti-tax, ideologically-conservative world view had left the city’s infrastructure needs wanting.

A March 6 memo from the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee cast Culberson as a “career politician” out of touch with his district. In particular, Democrats pointed to Culberson’s vote against a 2007 spending bill funding “emergency response and preparedness in flood zones across the country.”

They also criticized his votes against the 2007 Dam Rehabilitation and Repair Act and a procedural measure in 2011 to reauthorize the troubled National Flood Insurance Program.

Culberson aids explained that the 2007 disaster relief bill, including $6.8 billion for Gulf Coast hurricane relief, faced a veto threat from then President George W. Bush because it also tied billions in defense spending to overseas troop withdrawals. He ultimately supported a bill that removed the controversial troop withdrawal provisions and provided $7.6 billion for disaster relief, much of it stemming from Hurricane Katrina.

Culberson’s office said the disputed dam legislation created a grant program for states in rehabilitating non-federally owned dams. Since Addicks and Barker are owned entirely by the federal government, they would not have benefited from the program.

And on the flood insurance program, Culberson said that all he voted against was a Democratic “procedural trick vote.” Ultimately, he voted in support of the final bill, and has continued to cast votes funding the program, even as some conservative Republicans have criticized it for insolvency and overspending.

More significantly, Culberson also was the only Texas Republican in Congress to support the $50 billion relief effort after Superstorm Sandy devastated parts of the East Coast in 2012. That vote inoculated him from charges of hypocrisy leveled at other conservative Texas lawmakers who sought more help from Washington in the wake of Harvey.

But the heart of the dispute over Culberson’s record on storm damage and flood control centers on Addicks and Barker, long a source of contention in Houston.

Internal Army Corps documents unearthed as part of a 2011 Sierra Club lawsuit show that engineers have been concerned at least since 2004 that the two structures could be at “high risk” of failure due to seepage, erosion and piping issues.

In 2009, Addicks and Barker got the Corps’ worst safety classification, rating them among the six most dangerous in the country, at risk of “catastrophic failure.”

The Corps made some structural repairs in 2012, but it wasn’t until 2015 that studies were completed and designs approved for the $72 million effort to construct new outlet gates. Culberson cites his ranking position on the Appropriations Committee for securing that money, and argues that apart from the gates, the dams are sound.

But the project was still underway last August when Harvey’s flood waters peaked, forcing officials to release water that flooded downstream neighborhoods.

Jim Blackburn, a Houston environmental lawyer who filed the Sierra Club lawsuit, said that even with the new gates, some of the structural issues associated with the reservoir levees have not been addressed.

“That is on Rep. Culberson, among others,” Blackburn said. “He has been on the Appropriations Committee for a long time and did not secure the funding to get this work done. He let the community down on Addicks and Barker.”

But Blackburn doesn’t only blame Culberson.

“It was clear that both congressional representatives and state and local politicians were more concerned about getting the Corps permits issued for the Grand Parkway than they were about fixing Addicks and Barker,” he said. “I hold Rep. Culberson and all of our elected officials, Democratic and Republican, (responsible) for the poor state of Addicks and Barker and the poor state of communications between the Corps and the citizens supposedly served by the Corps.”

Others familiar with the annual infrastructure spending process say the Corps is perennially underfunded. It currently has a backlog of $100 billion in projects nationwide that have been approved by Congress, but not yet funded, according to Texas A&M professor Leonard Waterworth, a former Army Corps district commander in Galveston.

But much hinges on congressional politics and Congress as a whole, Waterworth said, “is not very proactive.”

Culberson says he is trying to address that though new provisions in a pending water infrastructure bill that would expedite Army Corps studies for Houston and Coastal Texas.

Some Congress watchers also blame the GOP’s 2011 moratorium on earmarks - congressionally directed spending that hit the skids after notorious abuses like Alaska’s $220 million “Bridge to Nowhere.”

The ban took the purse strings out of the hands of individual lawmakers for their districts, effectively nationalizing major infrastructure decisions inside the White House and the Office of Management and Budget.

In the wake of Harvey, Culberson has called for a return to a congressional earmarking process for flood control projects, saying it would take critical local spending decisions out of the hands of “unelected bureaucrats.” But for now, there seems to be little appetite in Congress to bring back earmarks, which were a popular target of the Tea Party movement in 2010.

Others point to the need for many Army Corps flood control projects to be funded first through local taxing authorities before being reimbursed by the federal government, a cumbersome process that slows down work. “The problem is they don’t have up-front financing,” said Bill Kelly, the government relations director for the city of Houston.

But beyond financing, Culberson and other local officials also have been blamed for not anticipating that a major storm like Harvey could overfill the Addicks and Barker reservoirs and flood the surrounding neighborhoods - information that the Corps had allegedly forecast before it was forced to spill water out of the dams and into the Buffalo Bayou, flooding nearly 10,000 homes downstream.

In response, Culberson called in February for the Justice Department to investigate whether the Corps violated any laws by failing to alert the public to its own forecasts before Harvey hit. Corps officials in Houston said they did brief local officials on their flooding projections, but that it was up to the municipal authorities to decide what to do with the information.

Whoever is to blame, Fletcher views the communication failure as part of her case against Culberson. “It’s more than just not being a leader,” she said. “What we need is a real partner who believes that the federal government has a role to play here.”

Said Culberson: “My responsibility is to ensure that the Army Corps and the Flood Control District have every dollar they ask for, and I’ve done so.”

kevin.diaz@chron.com