Homeland Security & Governmental Affairs Committee
WASHINGTON — Sen. Ron Johnson (R-Wis.), chairman of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, released a report Wednesday, “Securing Israel: Lessons Learned From A Nation Under Constant Threat Of Attack,” detailing the policies and procedures that the government of Israel has taken to secure its homeland.

“My committee's mission is to enhance the economic and national security of America. In December, I traveled to Israel to meet with top Israeli officials, including Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, as well as soldiers and others on the front lines of Israeli security defenses. We discussed Israel’s approach to border security, aviation security, and cybersecurity.

“During this trip I had the opportunity to examine the walls and fencing along the West Bank and Sinai. The results speak for themselves. After the completion of the fencing at the Sinai, illegal crossers dropped from more than 16,000 in 2011 to less than 20 in 2016. This is an important example for the United States, as we begin further construction of fencing along our southwest border. I am pleased that the Trump Administration is serious about securing our borders and enhancing our national security.”

The report compares Israeli security experiences to the security policies of the United States. There is much the United States can learn from Israel as Secretary Kelly and the Trump Administration take important steps forward in securing our homeland.

Key Findings of the report:

Israel constructed a fence along its border with Egypt in approximately two years.

Israel spent $415 million ($2.9 million per mile) to construct a 143-mile fence on its border with Egypt. The United States has spent $2.3 billion to construct 654 miles of pedestrian and vehicle barrier fencing along the U.S.-Mexico border, averaging about $3.5 million spent per mile—representing a 21 percent higher cost per mile than Israel.

Israel spends approximately $8.3 million annually ($58,000 per mile) to maintain its 143-mile fence bordering Egypt. The United States spends $50 to $55 million annually ($77,000 per mile) maintaining its 650 miles of fencing along the border with Mexico—33 percent more than Israel.

Israel stations approximately one person for every 1.2 miles of fencing along its border with Egypt. The United States stations approximately 1 person for every 2.2 miles of its border with Mexico.

The number of illegal crossers on the Israel-Egypt border dropped after the construction of the fence, from more than 16,000 in 2011 to less than 20 in 2016—a 99 percent decrease.

The report can be found here.

###