Top 15 Inspirational Quotes that Will Change Your Life
From the intelligent quotes of Mark Twain to the inspirational phrase of Muhammad Ali, every quote encourages a person to look around the world with a clear perspective.

Here are few interesting as well as inspirational quotes compiled by "All that is Interesting", which will change the way you see the world.

"You will not be punished for your anger, you will be punished by your anger." – Buddha

"I don't count my sit-ups; I only start counting when it starts hurting because they're the only ones that count." - Muhammad Ali

"There are only two tragedies in life: one is not getting what one wants, and the other is getting it." - Oscar Wilde

"Anger is an acid that can do more harm to the vessel in which it is stored than to anything on which it is poured." - Mark Twain

"Everyone you meet is afraid of something, loves something, and has lost something."

"Everybody has a plan until they get punched in the mouth." - Mike Tyson

"The human race has one really effective weapon, and that is laughter." - Mark Twain

"You can tell how smart people are by what they laugh at." - Tina Fey

"The good thing about science is that it's true whether or not you believe in it." - Neil deGrasse Tyson

"When you're 20 you care what everyone thinks, when you're 40 you stop caring what everyone thinks, when you're 60 you realize no one was ever thinking about you in the first place."

"The most dangerous risk of all – the risk of spending your life not doing what you want on the bet you can buy yourself the freedom to do it later."

"The world is a dangerous place to live; not because of the people who are evil, but because of the people who don't do anything about it." - Albert Einstein

"Isn't it funny how day by day nothing changes, but when you look back everything is different." - C.S. Lewis

"The truth is, everyone is going to hurt you. You just got to find the ones worth suffering for." - Bob Marley

"It is never too late to be what you might have been." - George Eliot