Here's the truth about Sen. Joe Donnelly's effectiveness and Donald Trump's attacks against him
CLOSE Donald Trump and Mike Pence delivered a rally to over 7,000 attendees in Elkhart, Thursday, May 10, 2018. (Robert Scheer/IndyStar)

In this April 7, 2017, file photo, U.S. Sen. Joe Donnelly, D-Ind., arrives for the confirmation vote for Supreme Court nominee, Neil Gorsuch, on Capitol Hill in Washington. (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite/AP)

WASHINGTON — When President Trump came to Elkhart, Ind., this month, he had some campaign advice for Mike Braun, the Republican’s newly chosen Senate nominee.

“The Center for Effective Lawmaking named Joe Donnelly the least effective Democrat lawmaker in the United States Senate. I don't know, Mike, but I think that will be a very good phrase to run by,” Trump told the crowd, while dubbing Donnelly “Sleepin’ Joe.” “He's never sponsored a bill that has become a law.”

Republicans — who had previously called the incumbent "Do-nothing Donnelly" — have already gotten lots of mileage out of the Center for Effective Lawmaking’s rating on Donnelly. And Trump’s comments are highlighted in digital ads Republicans recently started.

Donnelly’s campaign maintains there are 41 bills and other legislative measures he’s introduced that have become law.

Hoosier Politics newsletter: Get more politics coverage delivered straight to your inbox

Here’s a look at both sides’ claims:

What’s the Center for Effective Lawmaking?

The center Trump cited is a nonpartisan effort directed by two political scientists —Craig Volden of the University of Virginia and Alan E. Wiseman of Vanderbilt University. The duo wanted to come up with a way of measuring the success of members of Congress in passing legislation.

How do they measure effectiveness?

The researchers look at the bills lawmakers introduced, how substantive they were and how far they made it through the legislative process to come up with a "legislative effectiveness score" for each member. The scores are compared with those of other lawmakers who were members of the same party and had a similar level of seniority and committee leadership positions to gauge whether the lawmaker under- or over-performed.

How does the center rate Donnelly’s effectiveness?

In the most recent assessment, which covers 2015-2016, Donnelly’s “legislative effectiveness score” was the lowest of the 44 Senate Democrats rated. The center said he sponsored 15 substantive bills, two of which saw committee action, but none became law. The center said that record was below what they would have expected for someone at his seniority level in the minority party. (In the same time period, then-Sen. Dan Coats' legislative effectiveness score was even lower than Donnelly's, and was the second worst for a Senate Republican.)

NEWSLETTERS Get the News Alerts newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-357-7827. Delivery: Varies Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for News Alerts Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

What about Donnelly’s past ratings?

The center rated Donnelly’s legislative effectiveness during his first two years in the Senate as also “below expectations” for a freshman Democrat. During his six years in the House, Donnelly “met expectations,” according to the ratings.

What about the 41 measures Donnelly says he sponsored that became law?

Some of those bills were incorporated into other legislation that was signed into law under another lawmaker’s name. For example, Donnelly introduced legislation in 2013 to improve suicide prevention efforts for members of the military. Donnelly serves on the Senate Armed Services Committee, which included that measure in a defense policy bill that became law in 2014. But because Donnelly’s bill did not pass on its own, the center does not count it as a victory for him.

Volden said that’s because lawmakers often try to claim credit for parts of larger bills. Sometimes they deserve credit but other times “it’s them putting a spin on things,” Volden said. The center does not try to make its own assessment.

Donnelly also includes in his tally of legislative accomplishments bills for which he was the lead co-sponsor. For example, Donnelly worked with Coats on a 2013 law that lets the federal government correct mistakes when burying veterans in national cemeteries. But because the bill was filed listing Coats as the sponsor and Donnelly as the cosponsor, it’s not counted as a win for Donnelly.

(A different assessment of lawmakers, created by former Sen. Richard Lugar, does give significant value to bipartisan collaboration on bills. On Lugar’s “Bipartisan Index,” Donnelly has the second-highest score among senators for how often he has co-sponsored bills authored by a member of the other party, and how often his bills have attracted co-sponsorship from Republicans.)

Finally, Donnelly’s list of 41 successful legislative measures also includes amendments to other bills. Those are not tracked by the center.

So does the center’s ranking mean Donnelly is not an effective lawmaker?

“Not necessarily,” the center says on its website. There are other ways of being effective including working behind the scenes to help others’ bills pass, having legislative proposals included in others’ bills, controlling the action as a party leader or blocking opponents’ legislation. None of those components are included in the center’s “legislative effectiveness score.”

The measure also doesn’t look at other aspects of a lawmakers’ job, such as helping constituents with Social Security benefits, communicating with constituents, voting in sync with a district, or holding federal agencies accountable for how they’re spending taxpayer dollars.

“We see our scores as being one of a variety of pieces of information that voters could weigh in an objective manner,” Volden said.

What do Republicans think of the center’s ranking of GOP lawmakers?

The center rated Vice President Pence’s legislative effectiveness as falling “below expectations” for five of his six terms in the House. In 2014, when Pence was Indiana’s governor and contemplating a 2016 presidential bid, his spokeswoman dismissed the center’s analysis saying: “Clearly, the authors don’t understand how Congress works.”

What about Trump’s claim that Donnelly has “never sponsored a bill that has become a law?”

Congress.gov, the official website for federal legislative information, tracks legislation introduced by lawmakers. Like the Center for Effective Lawmaking, it does not track whether a bill becomes law as part of another piece of legislation, but only if it is enacted on its own. By that measure, the site does not show any bills for which Donnelly was the top sponsor becoming law. That’s the same for about one-fifth of the Senate, including for Indiana’s other senator, Republican Todd Young.

Congress.gov does show Donnelly has had 19 amendments agreed to in the House or Senate since joining Congress in 2007.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Read or Share this story: https://indy.st/2rVLwG3