Claim: Reporter Secretly Recorded Offering Woman $1000 to Accuse Moore
There’s a claim spreading on social media that a reporter was taped while reportedly offering a woman $1000 to accuse Senate candidate Roy Moore of sexual improprieties.

The unconfirmed rumor, which seems to have originated from a former Secret Service agent, claims the woman taped the conversation she had with the reporter and sent copies to the Etowah Co. District Attorney and the FBI.

She has a pic of the woman named Beth and taped the conversation on her phone.I told her to take it to the DA,s office but be sure to keep a copy. https://t.co/crHHrgkVGb — Doug Lewis #MAGA (@umpire43) November 10, 2017

@umpire43 You might advise your friend w the tape to contact the Moore team directly as well. Somehow I’m not sure the Co DA’s office is out of reach of the establishment’s particular brand of corruption — Gооse (@pjikx) November 10, 2017

We will find out JustBrenda. Jean contacted Etowah Co District Attorney. He has sent a Marshall to pick up the phone https://t.co/Afb28uj18N — Doug Lewis #MAGA (@umpire43) November 10, 2017

Done Bradd. FBI has been notified but Jean does not trust them so she is dealing directly with her Co DA. Cant blame her with FBI in stories every day https://t.co/wlJv5ZmYH7 — Doug Lewis #MAGA (@umpire43) November 10, 2017

While the claim has yet to be verified, what we do know so far is that prior to accusing Moore of sexual misconduct, the Washington Post endorsed his opponent, Doug Jones, on Oct. 23.

Additionally, Moore’s accusers, all of whom allege the incidents occurred decades ago, don’t seem to have known each other very well previously, yet all the sudden they appeared in the public spotlight at the same time to make their accusations only weeks before an election with national implications.

This is noteworthy because, in contrast, the allegations made against Harvey Weinstein began with ONE accuser whose story encouraged other alleged victims to start speaking out – and many of the accusations were far more recent. Plus the fact that Weinstein was caught on tape, and some of his accusers weren’t victims but rather just witnesses of his questionable behavior.

Additionally, Moore spent years on the Supreme Court of Alabama, so why didn’t the accusations come sooner if they’re true? That would have been a disservice to the people of Alabama if valid accusations were kept in the dark.