NASA Discovers New Planet Covered With Marijuana, ‘Weed Planet’ Hoax Goes Viral
Marijuana supporters will definitely find this latest “discovery” relatively interesting. It has been reported by a website that a new planet covered with marijuana was recently discovered by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). According to NewsWatch 28, a statement about the new planet, identified as “Planet X637Z-43,” was reportedly released by NASA’s Astrophysics Division director Mr. David Charbonneau.

Here’s an excerpt of the announcement:

“The discovery of Kepler-X69X is a significant step toward finding worlds like our planet Earth. We always presume that people aren’t interested in science by anything but it’s false. We have been getting calls for information about this planet; mostly by young people love smoking pot.”

The website that published about the marijuana planet “discovery” also indicates that the planet is actually habitable. According to the website’s article, NASA experts have reportedly detected “sufficient levels of oxygen and nitrogen to support human life.”

The experts added, “Chlorophyll concentration analyses generated by Kepler lead us to believe that the level of THC in these marijuana plants is 3000% higher than the plants found on Earth. If that doesn’t motivate young people to explore space, I don’t know what will.” The complete analysis of the planet also revealed the TetraHydroCannabinol (THC) in the marijuana plants on the planet are reportedly 6000% higher than those found on Earth. So, the plants are highly potent.

Of course, the astonishing discovery has definitely caught the attention of an overwhelming number of social media users. While many have taken to Twitter with words of elation about the shocking find, others have questioned the validity of the seemingly questionable report and the facts presented.

This morning NASA discovered a planet covered in marijuana with enough oxygen and nitrogen to sustain life. — Malik Lambert (@malikrlambert) May 27, 2015

It's true NASA found a planet covered in marijuana with THC over 6000% — Panamara (@RealOfficial_CJ) May 27, 2015

NASA hs announced dis mornin dat thy hav discovered a planet completely covrd wit marijuana, a discovery dat hs takn scientists by surprise — Amuran (@Amurantweets) May 25, 2015

Nasa just found a planet, covered in marijuana, with thc levels 3000 percent higher.. hahaha bye!!!! — Amanda ॐ (@a_walkerr) May 27, 2015

Although several news outlets have reported the shocking find as an official breaking news report, unfortunately for marijuana lovers, the report is completely false! NewsWatch 28, the site that originally reported the claim, is a satirical news outlet, known for publishing eye-catching stories with outlandish details for entertainment purposes.

A fake news article reports that @NASA has discovered a new planet covered with marijuana: http://t.co/WjvJd8FKSZ pic.twitter.com/NGsICdrB6j — snopes.com (@snopes) May 27, 2015

For those who don’t know, the comedic site has published numerous stories that have surprisingly gone viral because of readers who immediately believe the details presented in the outlandish reports. Snopes wrote a report debunking the “news,” indicating that the claims were false! While the report is rather comical, it’s probably safe to say many social media users may not find the humor in it because some were really hoping the discovery was true! Unfortunately, no one will be moving to Planet X637Z-43 because it does not exist.