How Trump Regulatory Rollback Boosts Small Businesses
President Trump's Agriculture Department recently withdrew a regulation targeting organic farms, incentivizing more farmers and ranchers to stay in the organic farming business. As American Farm Bureau spokesman Dale Moore explained: "(The rule) would have forced many of them either out of the organic sector, if not out of business."

X

It's only the latest in a long line of pro-growth regulatory rollbacks. Since Inauguration Day, President Trump has slashed well over 1,500 planned regulatory actions. The Trump administration has repealed 22 regulations for each new rule issued, cutting regulatory costs by more than $8 billion. In fact, federal regulations are now at their "lowest count since records began being kept in the mid-1970s."

Small business owners are counting their blessings. For years, America's most dedicated job creators — who account for two-thirds of all new U.S. jobs — have been drowning in red tape. According to a National Small Business Association (NSBA) survey, one-third of small business owners spend more than 80 hours a year meeting regulatory requirements. In their first year of operation, small business employers pay an average of $83,000 in regulatory costs just to remain compliant.

In the NSBA's words: "The impact of regulatory burden cannot be overstated. More than one-third have held off on business investment due to uncertainty on a pending regulation, and more than half have held off on hiring a new employee due to regulatory burdens."

Imagine if that $83,000 was going back into the U.S. economy. This is unacceptable. The more time and money job creators spend on regulatory compliance, the fewer resources they have to expand their business and increase hiring.

For example, record retention requirements issued by the Labor Department, Internal Revenue Service, and other federal agencies place undue pressure on small business owners to keep track of annual statements, contracts, licenses, permits, and tax returns. Retention requirements vary based on the document, confusing job creators with limited time. Invoices and receivables must be kept for five years, while personnel files only have a three-year requirement. Contracts and employee withholding forms, meanwhile, carry a seven-year requirement.

How does the government expect small business owners to keep track of different retention requirements when they're busy serving customers, clients, and employees? Why not just make the requirements uniform across the board?

I challenge Congress to propose and pass the Save Small Business Act to reduce all document retention requirements to one year for employers with fewer than 100 employees. Standardizing the retention process for America's smallest businesses would save them millions of dollars and countless hours in compliance time.

Alas, the government only complicates the already complex process of business management. Trust me: Running a small business is difficult. Running a successful one is even harder. Eight in 10 entrepreneurs who start businesses fail within the first 18 months of operation.

As the president and CEO of Joseph's Lite Cookies in Florida, I run a family-owned, sugar-free cookie business. We bake more than 12 million sugar-free cookies a day, in addition to supplying other diabetic-friendly products. But our cookie business didn't just fall into success — it took years of hard work and perseverance. I spent countless early mornings and late nights growing my business and, yes, complying with government regulations.

Why does the government make it even harder to do our jobs? And create them for others?

Lawmakers should be giving entrepreneurs a hand, not a hurdle. Fortunately, there is light at the end of the tunnel because of President Trump's regulatory rollback agenda. Small business owners finally have an ally in the White House, who cuts red tape instead of choking us with it.

Semprevivo is the president and CEO of Joseph's Lite Cookies in Florida. He is an adjunct professor of finance, real estate and insurance at Indian River State College and the best-selling author of "Madness, Miracles, Millions."

Click here for more Commentary and Opinion from Investor's Business Daily.

Want to make more money in the stock market? Start with IBD University.