Understanding Your Letter 5600C
The IRS is sending you this letter because it appears that you may have reported owing too much Health Care Shared Responsibility Payment (SRP) on your 2014 income tax return. Under the law, individuals are required to either have health coverage for each month, qualify for an exemption, or make an SRP with their tax return. You reported an SRP either on Line 61 of your Form 1040, Line 38 of your Form 1040A, or Line 11 of your Form 1040EZ.

What you need to do

Read your letter carefully.

Review the situation to see if you agree with the information in the letter.

You may want to

File a Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, if you want to correct the SRP that you reported on your 2014 tax return. Attach Form 8965, Health Coverage Exemptions, if you want to claim an exemption. If you don’t currently have an outstanding balance for taxes due to the IRS, you can choose to apply any excess SRP amount that was paid to your estimated tax payments for a future year, or you can receive a refund. If you have an outstanding balance, we will apply the excess SRP to your oldest balance due.



Answers to Common Questions

What is an individual Shared Responsibility Payment?

The individual shared responsibility provision requires you and each member of your family to do one of the following:

Have qualifying health coverage called minimum essential coverage

Qualify for a health coverage exemption

Make a shared responsibility payment when you file your federal income tax return

Many people already have minimum essential coverage and do not need to do anything more than maintain that coverage and report their coverage when they file their tax returns.

Where do I find how to calculate my individual SRP?

The instructions for Form 8965 include a worksheet that can be used to review the calculation of your SRP. You can also visit /Affordable-Care-Act/Affordable-Care-Act-Estimator-Tools for an estimate of your SRP.

What are some common errors in calculating the individual SRP?

You may have reported owing too much SRP for several reasons. Examples include the following: