Publication 974 (2016), Premium Tax Credit (PTC)
Under the health care law, certain health coverage is called minimum essential coverage (MEC). You generally cannot take the PTC for an individual in your tax family for any month that the individual is eligible for minimum essential coverage, except for coverage in the individual market, defined below. Minimum essential coverage includes:

For more information on what is minimum essential coverage, see www.irs.gov/Affordable-Care-Act/Individuals-and-Families/Individual- Shared-Responsibility-Provision.

If an individual in your tax family is enrolled in a qualified health plan for which APTC was made and the individual is or will soon become eligible for other MEC, you must notify the Marketplace about the other MEC and that the APTC for the individual’s coverage should be discontinued. If the Marketplace does not discontinue APTC for the first calendar month beginning after the month you notify the Marketplace, the individual is treated as eligible for the other MEC no earlier than the first day of the second calendar month beginning after the first month the individual may enroll in the other MEC. A different rule applies to Medicaid and CHIP eligibility, discussed later under Government-Sponsored Programs

In general, an expatriate health plan is certain health insurance coverage that is offered to foreign nationals who are temporarily assigned for work in the United States, United States residents who are temporarily working outside of the United States, and certain non-employees (such as students and missionaries) who are travelling internationally. To qualify, the health insurance coverage generally must offer a minimum level of benefits in the region in which the covered individual is temporarily located and be offered by a qualifying expatriate health insurance issuer. An expatriate health plan is considered employer-sponsored coverage for a primary insured who receives it through his or her employer (and for that employee’s covered dependents). It is considered coverage in the individual market for any other primary insured.

A health plan offered in the individual market is health insurance coverage provided to an individual by a health insurance issuer licensed by a state, including a qualified health plan offered through the Marketplace. Even though these plans are MEC, eligibility for coverage in the individual market does not prevent an individual from qualifying for the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan purchased through the Marketplace.

If a determination is made that an individual who is enrolled in a qualified health plan for which APTC is made is eligible for Medicaid or CHIP but the Marketplace does not discontinue APTC for the first calendar month beginning after the eligibility determination, the individual is treated as eligible for Medicaid or CHIP no earlier than the first day of the second calendar month beginning after the eligibility determination.

If Medicaid or CHIP coverage for you or a family member is terminated due to nonpayment of premiums, you cannot get the PTC for the coverage of that individual (for the remainder of the year of the termination).

In November, Freda enrolled in a qualified health plan for the following year and got APTC for her coverage. Freda lost her part-time job and on April 10 applied for coverage under the Medicaid program. Freda’s application was approved on May 15, with Medicaid coverage retroactively effective April 1. For purposes of the PTC, Freda is considered eligible for government-sponsored coverage on June 1, the first day of the first calendar month after her application was approved. Freda may be eligible for the PTC for January through May.

If APTC is being paid for coverage in a qualified health plan and you become eligible for government coverage that is effective retroactively (such as Medicaid or CHIP), you will not retroactively lose the PTC for your coverage. You can get the PTC for your coverage until the first day of the first calendar month after you are approved for the government coverage.

In addition, an individual is considered eligible for minimum essential coverage under a Medicaid or Medicare program for which eligibility requires a determination of disability, blindness, or illness only when the responsible agency makes a favorable eligibility determination.

While you are generally considered eligible for government-sponsored minimum essential coverage (and are ineligible for the PTC) if you are able to enroll in that coverage, you are considered eligible for government-sponsored coverage under the following programs only if you arein the program.

Medicaid coverage for comprehensive pregnancy-related services and CHIP coverage based on pregnancy, if the individual is enrolled in a qualified health plan at the time she becomes eligible for Medicaid or CHIP.

The facts are the same as Example 1 , except that Ellen did not apply for the Medicare coverage by September 30. Ellen is considered eligible for government-sponsored coverage beginning on October 1. She can get the PTC for her coverage for January through September. She cannot get the PTC for her coverage in a qualified health plan as of October 1, the first day of the fourth month after she turned 65.

Ellen was enrolled in a qualified health plan with APTC. She turned 65 on June 3 and became eligible for Medicare. Ellen must apply to Medicare to receive benefits. She applied to Medicare in September and was eligible to receive Medicare benefits beginning on December 1. Ellen completed the requirements necessary to receive Medicare benefits by September 30 (the last day of the third full calendar month after the event that established her eligibility, turning 65). She was eligible for Medicare coverage on December 1, the first day of the first full month that she could receive benefits. Thus, Ellen can get the PTC for her coverage in the qualified health plan for January through November. Beginning in December, Ellen cannot get the PTC for her coverage in the qualified health plan because she is eligible for Medicare.

In general, you cannot get the PTC for your coverage in a qualified health plan if you are eligible for government-sponsored minimum essential coverage. You are generally considered eligible for a government-sponsored program if you meet the criteria for coverage under the program. But see Exceptions , later. However, you will not lose the PTC for your coverage until the first day of the first full month you can receive benefits under the government program. If you can be covered under a government-sponsored program, you must complete the requirements necessary to receive benefits (for example, submitting an application or providing required information) by the last day of the third full calendar month following the event that establishes eligibility (for example, becoming eligible for Medicare when you turn 65). If you do not complete the necessary requirements in this time, you will lose the PTC for your coverage in a qualified health plan beginning with the first day of the fourth calendar month following the event that makes you eligible for the government coverage.

The Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), except certain CHIP coverage for pregnancy services. (Certain coverage often called a “CHIP buy-in program” is not considered a government-sponsored program and is discussed later under Other Coverage Designated by the Department of Health and Human Services .)

Coverage under a section 1115 demonstration waiver program (except for coverage under a section 1115 demonstration program that HHS has designated as MEC — see Other Coverage Designated by the Department of Health and Human Services , later).

Coverage of medically-needy individuals (except for coverage for medically-needy individuals that HHS has designated as MEC — see Other Coverage Designated by the Department of Health and Human Services , later).

Employer-Sponsored Plans

The following employer-sponsored plans are MEC.

Group health insurance coverage for employees under: An insured plan or coverage offered in the small or large group market within a state. A governmental plan, such as the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program. A grandfathered health plan offered in a group market. A self-insured group health plan for employees. Coverage under certain expatriate health plans for employees (discussed earlier).

In general, these employer-sponsored plans may also include post-employment or COBRA coverage.

Employer-sponsored plans that are MEC are also referred to as eligible employer-sponsored plans.

Exceptions. The following paragraphs discuss when employer-sponsored plans are not considered MEC and the circumstances in which you may be eligible for the PTC even if you have an offer of coverage under an employer-sponsored plan. The following paragraphs discuss when employer-sponsored plans are not considered MEC and the circumstances in which you may be eligible for the PTC even if you have an offer of coverage under an employer-sponsored plan.

Excepted benefits. Employer-sponsored health coverage that is limited to excepted benefits is not MEC. Excepted benefits include stand-alone vision and dental plans, workers' compensation coverage, and coverage limited to a specified disease or illness. Employer-sponsored health coverage that is limited to excepted benefits is not MEC. Excepted benefits include stand-alone vision and dental plans, workers' compensation coverage, and coverage limited to a specified disease or illness.

Affordability and minimum value. Even if you had the opportunity to enroll in coverage offered by your employer, you are considered eligible for an employer-sponsored plan (and cannot get the PTC for your coverage in a qualified health plan) only if the employer-sponsored coverage is affordable (defined later) and the coverage provides minimum value (defined later). Your tax family members also may be unable to get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan for months they were eligible to enroll in employer-sponsored coverage offered to them by your employer but only if the coverage was affordable and provided minimum value for you. In addition, if you or your family member enrolls in the employer coverage, the individual enrolled cannot get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan, even if the employer coverage is not affordable or does not provide minimum value. Even if you had the opportunity to enroll in coverage offered by your employer, you are considered eligible for an employer-sponsored plan (and cannot get the PTC for your coverage in a qualified health plan) only if the employer-sponsored coverage is affordable (defined later) and the coverage provides minimum value (defined later). Your tax family members also may be unable to get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan for months they were eligible to enroll in employer-sponsored coverage offered to them by your employer but only if the coverage was affordable and provided minimum value for you. In addition, if you or your family member enrolls in the employer coverage, the individual enrolled cannot get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan, even if the employer coverage is not affordable or does not provide minimum value.

Waiting periods and other periods without access to benefits. You are not considered eligible for employer coverage, and can get the PTC for your coverage in a qualified health plan if you are otherwise eligible, for a month when you cannot receive benefits under the employer coverage (for example, you are in a waiting period before the employer coverage becomes effective). However, if you could have enrolled in employer coverage that is affordable and provides minimum value and you did not enroll during an enrollment period, you cannot get the PTC for your coverage in a qualified health plan for the period you could have been enrolled in the employer coverage. You are not considered eligible for employer coverage, and can get the PTC for your coverage in a qualified health plan if you are otherwise eligible, for a month when you cannot receive benefits under the employer coverage (for example, you are in a waiting period before the employer coverage becomes effective). However, if you could have enrolled in employer coverage that is affordable and provides minimum value and you did not enroll during an enrollment period, you cannot get the PTC for your coverage in a qualified health plan for the period you could have been enrolled in the employer coverage.

Coverage after employment ends. If your employment with an employer ends and you are offered employer coverage by your former employer (for example, COBRA or retiree coverage), you are considered eligible for that employer coverage for PTC purposes only for the months that you are enrolled in the employer coverage. This same rule applies to an individual who may enroll in the coverage by reason of a relationship to a former employee. If your employment with an employer ends and you are offered employer coverage by your former employer (for example, COBRA or retiree coverage), you are considered eligible for that employer coverage for PTC purposes only for the months that you are enrolled in the employer coverage. This same rule applies to an individual who may enroll in the coverage by reason of a relationship to a former employee.

Individual not in your tax family. An individual who can enroll in your employer coverage who is not a member of your tax family (for example, an adult non-dependent child under age 26) is considered eligible for the employer coverage for PTC purposes only for the months the individual is enrolled in the employer coverage. An individual who can enroll in your employer coverage who is not a member of your tax family (for example, an adult non-dependent child under age 26) is considered eligible for the employer coverage for PTC purposes only for the months the individual is enrolled in the employer coverage.

How to determine if the plan is affordable. Your employer coverage is generally considered affordable for you and for a family member if your share of the annual cost for self-only coverage, which is sometimes referred to as the employee required contribution, is not more than 9.66% of your tax family’s household income for 2016. For 2017, this threshold will increase to 9.69%. Self-only coverage is used for this calculation even if you have a spouse or dependents and therefore would enroll in coverage that is not self-only coverage (for example, family coverage). However, employer-sponsored coverage is not considered affordable if, when you or a family member enrolled in a qualified health plan, you gave accurate information about the availability of employer coverage to the Marketplace, and the Marketplace determined that you were eligible for APTC for the individual’s coverage in the qualified health plan. See Your employer coverage is generally considered affordable for you and for a family member if your share of the annual cost for self-only coverage, which is sometimes referred to as the employee required contribution, is not more than 9.66% of your tax family’s household income for 2016. For 2017, this threshold will increase to 9.69%. Self-only coverage is used for this calculation even if you have a spouse or dependents and therefore would enroll in coverage that is not self-only coverage (for example, family coverage). However, employer-sponsored coverage is not considered affordable if, when you or a family member enrolled in a qualified health plan, you gave accurate information about the availability of employer coverage to the Marketplace, and the Marketplace determined that you were eligible for APTC for the individual’s coverage in the qualified health plan. See Determining affordability at the time of enrollment , later, for more information on this rule.

Certain employer arrangements. An employee’s required contribution for employer-sponsored coverage may be affected by various arrangements offered by the employer. An employee’s required contribution for employer-sponsored coverage may be affected by various arrangements offered by the employer.

Wellness program incentives. If the employer that offered you (or your spouse) employer-sponsored coverage for 2016 also offered a wellness incentive that potentially affected the amount that you had to pay towards coverage, the following rules apply: if the condition for satisfying the wellness incentive (in other words, the condition the employee must meet to pay the smaller amount for coverage) relates exclusively to tobacco use, your required contribution is based on the amount you would have paid for coverage if you had satisfied the condition for the wellness incentive. Wellness incentives relating exclusively to tobacco use are treated as satisfied in determining your required contribution regardless of whether you would have actually earned the incentive had you enrolled in the coverage. If factors other than tobacco use are part of the condition for satisfying the wellness incentive, your required contribution is based on the amount you would have paid for coverage had you not satisfied the wellness incentive. If the employer that offered you (or your spouse) employer-sponsored coverage for 2016 also offered a wellness incentive that potentially affected the amount that you had to pay towards coverage, the following rules apply: if the condition for satisfying the wellness incentive (in other words, the condition the employee must meet to pay the smaller amount for coverage) relates exclusively to tobacco use, your required contribution is based on the amount you would have paid for coverage if you had satisfied the condition for the wellness incentive. Wellness incentives relating exclusively to tobacco use are treated as satisfied in determining your required contribution regardless of whether you would have actually earned the incentive had you enrolled in the coverage. If factors other than tobacco use are part of the condition for satisfying the wellness incentive, your required contribution is based on the amount you would have paid for coverage had you not satisfied the wellness incentive.

Example. George can enroll in employer coverage. George’s monthly premiums for self-only coverage are $450. If George, who is a smoker, attends a smoking cessation class, his monthly premiums will be reduced by $100. If George completes a cholesterol screening, his monthly premiums will be reduced by $50. Whether or not George actually completes either of these wellness program incentives, for purposes of determining whether the coverage is affordable for George, his required contribution will be considered to be the amount reduced by the $100 incentive for attending a smoking cessation class but not reduced by the $50 incentive for completing a cholesterol screening. Therefore, for purposes of determining whether his coverage is considered affordable, George’s required contribution is $350. George can enroll in employer coverage. George’s monthly premiums for self-only coverage are $450. If George, who is a smoker, attends a smoking cessation class, his monthly premiums will be reduced by $100. If George completes a cholesterol screening, his monthly premiums will be reduced by $50. Whether or not George actually completes either of these wellness program incentives, for purposes of determining whether the coverage is affordable for George, his required contribution will be considered to be the amount reduced by the $100 incentive for attending a smoking cessation class but not reduced by the $50 incentive for completing a cholesterol screening. Therefore, for purposes of determining whether his coverage is considered affordable, George’s required contribution is $350.

Health reimbursement arrangements (HRAs). If the employer that offered you employer-sponsored coverage for 2016 also contributed (or offered to contribute) to an HRA that may be used to pay premiums for the employer-sponsored coverage, your required contribution for the employer-sponsored coverage is reduced by the amount the employer contributed (or offered to contribute) to the HRA for 2016, as long as you were informed of the HRA contribution offer by a reasonable time before you had to decide whether to enroll in the coverage. If the employer that offered you employer-sponsored coverage for 2016 also contributed (or offered to contribute) to an HRA that may be used to pay premiums for the employer-sponsored coverage, your required contribution for the employer-sponsored coverage is reduced by the amount the employer contributed (or offered to contribute) to the HRA for 2016, as long as you were informed of the HRA contribution offer by a reasonable time before you had to decide whether to enroll in the coverage.

Health flex contributions. If the employer that offered you (or your spouse) employer-sponsored coverage for 2016 also made (or offered to make) a health flex contribution for 2016, your required contribution for the employer-sponsored coverage is reduced by the amount of the health flex contribution (or offer). A health flex contribution is an employer contribution to a cafeteria plan that may be used only to pay for medical care (and not taken as cash or other taxable benefits), and is available for use toward the purchase of minimum essential coverage. Cafeteria plan contributions that may be used for expenses other than medical care are not health flex contributions and so do not reduce your required contribution. If the employer that offered you (or your spouse) employer-sponsored coverage for 2016 also made (or offered to make) a health flex contribution for 2016, your required contribution for the employer-sponsored coverage is reduced by the amount of the health flex contribution (or offer). A health flex contribution is an employer contribution to a cafeteria plan that may be used only to pay for medical care (and not taken as cash or other taxable benefits), and is available for use toward the purchase of minimum essential coverage. Cafeteria plan contributions that may be used for expenses other than medical care are not health flex contributions and so do not reduce your required contribution.

Opt-out payments. If the employer that offered you (or your spouse) employer-sponsored coverage for 2016 offered you an additional payment if you declined to enroll in the coverage (an “opt-out payment”), your required contribution for employer-sponsored coverage is increased by amounts that the employer offered to pay you for declining the coverage. In some cases, an employer may make this opt-out payment only if the employee both declines the coverage and also satisfies another condition (such as enrolling in coverage offered by the employee's spouse). If your employer imposed other conditions on receiving the opt-out payment (in addition to declining the employer's health coverage), you may treat the opt-out payment as increasing the employee's required contribution only if you can demonstrate that you met the conditions (such as enrolling in coverage offered by your spouse's employer). If the employer that offered you (or your spouse) employer-sponsored coverage for 2016 offered you an additional payment if you declined to enroll in the coverage (an “opt-out payment”), your required contribution for employer-sponsored coverage is increased by amounts that the employer offered to pay you for declining the coverage. In some cases, an employer may make this opt-out payment only if the employee both declines the coverage and also satisfies another condition (such as enrolling in coverage offered by the employee's spouse). If your employer imposed other conditions on receiving the opt-out payment (in addition to declining the employer's health coverage), you may treat the opt-out payment as increasing the employee's required contribution only if you can demonstrate that you met the conditions (such as enrolling in coverage offered by your spouse's employer).

More information about employer arrangements. You should contact your employer if you have questions about the effect of the employer arrangements described above on your required contribution. You should contact your employer if you have questions about the effect of the employer arrangements described above on your required contribution.

Determining affordability at the time of enrollment. Your employer coverage is not considered affordable, if, when you enroll in a qualified health plan, the Marketplace determines that your required contribution for employer coverage will be more than 9.66% of what the Marketplace estimates will be your household income and therefore that you are eligible for APTC for coverage in the qualified health plan. Eligibility for employer coverage in this situation does not disqualify you from taking the PTC when you file your tax return, even if your required contribution for coverage was not more than 9.66% of the household income on your return. However, you will be treated as eligible for affordable employer coverage based on the household income on your tax return if: You did not provide current information to the Marketplace relating to your household income and the required contribution for your employer coverage during each annual re-enrollment period, or

You provided incorrect information to the Marketplace about your required contribution with reckless disregard for the truth. Your employer coverage is not considered affordable, if, when you enroll in a qualified health plan, the Marketplace determines that your required contribution for employer coverage will be more than 9.66% of what the Marketplace estimates will be your household income and therefore that you are eligible for APTC for coverage in the qualified health plan. Eligibility for employer coverage in this situation does not disqualify you from taking the PTC when you file your tax return, even if your required contribution for coverage was not more than 9.66% of the household income on your return. However, you will be treated as eligible for affordable employer coverage based on the household income on your tax return if:

Example 1. Celia is single and has no dependents. Her household income for 2016 was $47,000. Celia’s employer offered its employees a health insurance plan that provided minimum value and for which the required contribution was $3,450 for self-only coverage for 2016 (7.3% of Celia’s household income). Because Celia’s required contribution for self-only coverage did not exceed 9.66% of household income, her employer’s plan is considered affordable for Celia, and Celia is considered eligible for the employer coverage for all months in 2016. Celia cannot get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan. Celia is single and has no dependents. Her household income for 2016 was $47,000. Celia’s employer offered its employees a health insurance plan that provided minimum value and for which the required contribution was $3,450 for self-only coverage for 2016 (7.3% of Celia’s household income). Because Celia’s required contribution for self-only coverage did not exceed 9.66% of household income, her employer’s plan is considered affordable for Celia, and Celia is considered eligible for the employer coverage for all months in 2016. Celia cannot get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan.

Example 2. The facts are the same as in The facts are the same as in Example 1 , except that Celia is married to Jon and the employer’s plan required Celia to contribute $5,300 for coverage for Celia and Jon for 2016 (11.3% of Celia’s household income). Because Celia’s required contribution for self-only coverage ($3,450) does not exceed 9.66% of household income, her employer’s plan is considered affordable for Celia and Jon. Both Celia and Jon are considered eligible for the employer coverage for all months in 2016 and cannot get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan.

Example 3. Don was eligible to enroll in employer coverage in 2016. Don’s required contribution for self-only coverage that provided minimum value was $3,700. Don applied for coverage in a qualified health plan through the Marketplace. The Marketplace projected that Don’s 2016 household income would be $37,000 and determined that Don’s employer coverage was unaffordable because Don’s required contribution was more than 9.66% of Don’s household income. Don enrolled in a qualified health plan through the Marketplace with APTC and not in the employer coverage. In December, Don received an unexpected $2,500 bonus, which increased his 2016 household income to $39,500. Although Don’s required contribution for the employer coverage was not more than 9.66% of the household income on Don’s tax return, Don is considered not eligible for the employer coverage for 2016 because the Marketplace estimated that the employer coverage would cost more than 9.66% of Don’s household income. Don can get the PTC if he otherwise qualifies. Don was eligible to enroll in employer coverage in 2016. Don’s required contribution for self-only coverage that provided minimum value was $3,700. Don applied for coverage in a qualified health plan through the Marketplace. The Marketplace projected that Don’s 2016 household income would be $37,000 and determined that Don’s employer coverage was unaffordable because Don’s required contribution was more than 9.66% of Don’s household income. Don enrolled in a qualified health plan through the Marketplace with APTC and not in the employer coverage. In December, Don received an unexpected $2,500 bonus, which increased his 2016 household income to $39,500. Although Don’s required contribution for the employer coverage was not more than 9.66% of the household income on Don’s tax return, Don is considered not eligible for the employer coverage for 2016 because the Marketplace estimated that the employer coverage would cost more than 9.66% of Don’s household income. Don can get the PTC if he otherwise qualifies.

Example 4. Hal was eligible for employer coverage for 2016. His required contribution for self-only coverage was $3,400, and Hal enrolled in the coverage. His household income for 2016 was $33,000, which means that his required contribution was more than 9.66% of his household income. Even though the employer coverage was not affordable, Hal cannot get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan because he enrolled in the employer coverage. Hal was eligible for employer coverage for 2016. His required contribution for self-only coverage was $3,400, and Hal enrolled in the coverage. His household income for 2016 was $33,000, which means that his required contribution was more than 9.66% of his household income. Even though the employer coverage was not affordable, Hal cannot get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan because he enrolled in the employer coverage.

Example 5. Elsa is married and has 2 dependent children. Her household income for 2016 was $39,000. Elsa’s employer offered only self-only coverage to employees. No family coverage was offered. The plan had a required contribution of $3,000 for self-only coverage for 2016 (7.7% of Elsa’s household income) and provided minimum value. Because Elsa’s required contribution for self-only coverage was not more than 9.66% of household income, her employer’s plan is considered affordable for Elsa. Thus Elsa is considered eligible for the employer coverage for 2016 and cannot get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan. However, because Elsa’s employer did not offer coverage to Elsa’s spouse and children, Elsa could take the PTC for her spouse and 2 children if they enrolled in a qualified health plan and otherwise qualify. Elsa is married and has 2 dependent children. Her household income for 2016 was $39,000. Elsa’s employer offered only self-only coverage to employees. No family coverage was offered. The plan had a required contribution of $3,000 for self-only coverage for 2016 (7.7% of Elsa’s household income) and provided minimum value. Because Elsa’s required contribution for self-only coverage was not more than 9.66% of household income, her employer’s plan is considered affordable for Elsa. Thus Elsa is considered eligible for the employer coverage for 2016 and cannot get the PTC for coverage in a qualified health plan. However, because Elsa’s employer did not offer coverage to Elsa’s spouse and children, Elsa could take the PTC for her spouse and 2 children if they enrolled in a qualified health plan and otherwise qualify.

Example 6. The facts are the same as in Example 5 , except that Elsa’s employer also offers coverage to Elsa’s spouse and children. The premiums for family coverage cost $6,900 (17.7% of Elsa’s household income). Because the required contribution for self-only coverage was not more than 9.66% of Elsa’s household income, the employer coverage is considered affordable for Elsa and her family. Elsa could not take the PTC for anyone in her family. The facts are the same as in, except that Elsa’s employer also offers coverage to Elsa’s spouse and children. The premiums for family coverage cost $6,900 (17.7% of Elsa’s household income). Because the required contribution for self-only coverage was not more than 9.66% of Elsa’s household income, the employer coverage is considered affordable for Elsa and her family. Elsa could not take the PTC for anyone in her family.

Determining affordability for part-year period. If you are employed for part of a year or employed by different employers during the year, you determine whether your coverage is affordable by looking separately at each coverage period that is less than a full calendar year. For each period, the coverage is affordable if your required contribution for the entire year would not be more than 9.66% of your household income for the year. If you are employed for part of a year or employed by different employers during the year, you determine whether your coverage is affordable by looking separately at each coverage period that is less than a full calendar year. For each period, the coverage is affordable if your required contribution for the entire year would not be more than 9.66% of your household income for the year.

Example. Elvis was enrolled in a qualified health plan without APTC beginning in January 2016. He began working for a new employer in May that offers health insurance coverage with a calendar year plan year. Elvis’ required contribution for the employer coverage for the remainder of the year was $200/month, which would be $2,400 for the full plan year. Elvis does not enroll in the employer coverage or inform the Marketplace of the offer of employer coverage. Elvis’ household income for the year is $20,000. Elvis’ employer coverage is considered unaffordable for the period May through December because his required contribution for the full plan year, $2,400, is more than 9.66% of his household income. As a result, Elvis could take the PTC for May through December if he otherwise qualifies. Elvis was enrolled in a qualified health plan without APTC beginning in January 2016. He began working for a new employer in May that offers health insurance coverage with a calendar year plan year. Elvis’ required contribution for the employer coverage for the remainder of the year was $200/month, which would be $2,400 for the full plan year. Elvis does not enroll in the employer coverage or inform the Marketplace of the offer of employer coverage. Elvis’ household income for the year is $20,000. Elvis’ employer coverage is considered unaffordable for the period May through December because his required contribution for the full plan year, $2,400, is more than 9.66% of his household income. As a result, Elvis could take the PTC for May through December if he otherwise qualifies.

Coverage year not a calendar year. If your employer’s plan year is not the calendar year and you are a calendar year taxpayer, you determine whether your coverage is affordable by looking separately at the portion of the calendar year in each plan year. A coverage period in 2016 that falls in a plan year beginning in 2015 is considered affordable if your required contribution for the entire plan year is not more than 9.56% of your household income for 2016. A coverage period in 2016 that falls in a plan year beginning in 2016 is considered affordable if your required contribution for the entire plan year is not more than 9.66% of your household income for 2016. If your employer’s plan year is not the calendar year and you are a calendar year taxpayer, you determine whether your coverage is affordable by looking separately at the portion of the calendar year in each plan year. A coverage period in 2016 that falls in a plan year beginning in 2015 is considered affordable if your required contribution for the entire plan year is not more than 9.56% of your household income for 2016. A coverage period in 2016 that falls in a plan year beginning in 2016 is considered affordable if your required contribution for the entire plan year is not more than 9.66% of your household income for 2016.

Example 1. Tim’s employer offers health insurance coverage with a plan year of July 1 – June 30. His required contribution for the plan year that began on July 1, 2015, was $250 per month ($3,000 for the entire plan year). Tim enrolled in a qualified health plan on January 1, 2016, and did not apply for APTC. Tim’s household income for 2016 is $30,000. Tim’s required contribution for the plan year, $3,000, is 10% of his household income for 2016. Because 10% is more than 9.56% (the required contribution percentage for the plan year beginning in 2015), Tim’s employer coverage for January 1, 2016 – June 30, 2016, is not considered affordable, and Tim can take the PTC for those months if he is otherwise eligible. Tim’s employer offers health insurance coverage with a plan year of July 1 – June 30. His required contribution for the plan year that began on July 1, 2015, was $250 per month ($3,000 for the entire plan year). Tim enrolled in a qualified health plan on January 1, 2016, and did not apply for APTC. Tim’s household income for 2016 is $30,000. Tim’s required contribution for the plan year, $3,000, is 10% of his household income for 2016. Because 10% is more than 9.56% (the required contribution percentage for the plan year beginning in 2015), Tim’s employer coverage for January 1, 2016 – June 30, 2016, is not considered affordable, and Tim can take the PTC for those months if he is otherwise eligible. For the plan year that began on July 1, 2016, Tim’s required contribution was reduced to $200 per month (or $2,400 for the entire plan year). Tim’s required contribution of $2,400 is 8% of his 2016 household income. Because 8% is not more than 9.66% (the required contribution percentage for the plan year beginning in 2016), Tim’s employer coverage for July 1, 2016 – December 31, 2016, is considered affordable and he is not eligible for the PTC for those months. For the plan year that began on July 1, 2016, Tim’s required contribution was reduced to $200 per month (or $2,400 for the entire plan year). Tim’s required contribution of $2,400 is 8% of his 2016 household income. Because 8% is not more than 9.66% (the required contribution percentage for the plan year beginning in 2016), Tim’s employer coverage for July 1, 2016 – December 31, 2016, is considered affordable and he is not eligible for the PTC for those months.

Example 2. Maria’s employer offers health insurance coverage with a plan year of September 1 – August 31. Maria’s required contribution for the employer coverage for the plan year September 1, 2016 – August 31, 2017, is $3,700. Maria’s household income for 2016 is $37,000. Maria’s employer coverage is considered unaffordable for the period September 1 – December 31, 2016, because her required contribution for the plan year, $3,700, is more than 9.66% of her 2016 household income. If Maria enrolls in a qualified health plan for 2017 and requests APTC, the Marketplace will determine whether the employer coverage is considered affordable for the period January 1, 2017 – August 31, 2017, by comparing Maria’s required contribution for the plan year beginning in 2016, $3,700, to her estimated 2017 household income. Maria’s employer offers health insurance coverage with a plan year of September 1 – August 31. Maria’s required contribution for the employer coverage for the plan year September 1, 2016 – August 31, 2017, is $3,700. Maria’s household income for 2016 is $37,000. Maria’s employer coverage is considered unaffordable for the period September 1 – December 31, 2016, because her required contribution for the plan year, $3,700, is more than 9.66% of her 2016 household income. If Maria enrolls in a qualified health plan for 2017 and requests APTC, the Marketplace will determine whether the employer coverage is considered affordable for the period January 1, 2017 – August 31, 2017, by comparing Maria’s required contribution for the plan year beginning in 2016, $3,700, to her estimated 2017 household income.