Broun: Military Intervention in Syria Not Within Our National Interests
Rep. Paul Broun joins other Georgia lawmakers in voicing opposition to President Obama's calls for military action.

Rep. Paul Broun, whose 10th District includes Dacula , does not support military intervention in Syria.Broun's press secretary Christine Hardman emailed the following statement from Broun to Dacula Patch:“I do not believe America should be militarily involved in Syria. Without there being any direct threat to American national security, I do not find military intervention in Syria to be within our national interest, particularly in our current economic state.”Broun joins several other Georgia lawmakers in voicing opposition to military action in Syria. 11Alive reports that as of Sept. 3, President Obama did not have a single yes vote from any of Georgia's 14 House members.Georgia's two U.S. Senators are a different matter.In an Aug. 28 statement posted on his website , Sen. Saxby Chambliss expressed support for taking action against the Assad regime:“Based on available intelligence, there can be no doubt the Assad regime is responsible for using chemical weapons on the Syrian people. It is time for the United States to act in a serious way, and send a clear message to Assad and his allies that the world will not tolerate chemical or biological attacks. Continuing to do nothing is not an option. Short of putting troops on the ground, I believe a meaningful military response is appropriate.”Sen. Johnny Isakson issued a statement on Aug. 31 in which he said, "If we fail to take strong action against Syria for this horrendous attack, then we are sending a signal to Syria as well as to Iran and North Korea that they are accountable to no one."Though supportive of taking action, Isakson chastised President Obama for not acting more urgently:“It is appropriate for the president to seek authorization from Congress, although I wish he would have called us back to vote on this immediately rather than waiting until Sept. 9. I support the use of military action in Syria. If we fail to take strong action against Syria for this horrendous attack, then we are sending a signal to Syria as well as to Iran and North Korea that they are accountable to no one.”