Donald Trump's tariffs will cost Ford $1B, CEO Jim Hackett says
CLOSE The American auto company said Tuesday it will transfer production of the next Ford Focus model to China. Video provided by Newsy Newslook

Jim Hackett, President and CEO of Ford Motor Company, speaks during their press preview at the 2018 North American International Auto Show in Detroit in January 2018. (Photo: JEWEL SAMAD, AFP/Getty Images)

Ford CEO Jim Hackett on Wednesday told Bloomberg Television that his company faces $1 billion in lost profits from President Donald Trump's tariffs.

“The metals tariffs took about $1 billion in profit from us — and the irony is we source most of that in the U.S. today anyways,” Hackett said in the interview. “If it goes on longer, there will be more damage.”

A Ford spokesman told the Free Press that Hackett was referencing Ford internal forecasts of an increase of about $1 billion in steel and other metal costs in 2018 and 2019 due to tariffs.

Hackett described business as stalled by the uncertainty that Trump's tariffs on steel and aluminum from China and Canada, which have led to a range of retaliatory tariffs.

At the end of August, Ford cited Trump's tariffs on cars from China in cancelling plans to import to the United States the Focus Active SUV, meant to take the place of the Focus car as Ford shifts production to pickups and SUVs.

That led Trump to crow that Ford would build the car in the United States and a correction from Ford that it could not make money that way.

Read more: Ford cancels plan to import Focus crossover from China, blames trade war

Read more: Trump: Now Ford can build Focus in U.S.; Ford: That makes no sense

Hackett said, “What we’re urging our administration to do — where we’re in China and in Europe — we say, you need to come to agreement quickly."

Ford says it has the most hourly employees in the U.S. — 56,000 — and builds more vehicles here than any other automaker.

Uncertainty about the escalating trade dispute, with Trump levying new tariffs on Chinese goods this month, are bad for the business environment, Hackett said.

NEWSLETTERS Get the Business Watch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Get todays business headlines delivered to your inbox. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Business Watch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

“Business, you hear them talk about, they count on certainty,” he said. “In this case, we’re kind of frozen. A lot of businesses aren’t sure and that’s not good.”

Read or Share this story: https://www.courier-journal.com/story/money/companies/2018/09/27/donald-trump-tariffs-ford-motor/1440601002/