Tom Barrett calls for closing Lincoln Hills, reopening Ethan Allen
Young men walk to their next class session at Ethan Allen School for Boys in the Town of Delafield in 2007. (Photo: Journal Sentinel files)

Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett is calling for state officials to close Wisconsin's troubled Northwoods youth prison and reopen the Waukesha County juvenile correctional facility shut down five years ago by Gov. Scott Walker.

Barrett told the Journal Sentinel that Lincoln Hills School for Boys and Copper Lake School for Girls have been a failed 'experiment.' And he said he wants immediate steps taken to reopen Ethan Allen School for Boys.

'It is time for the state to accelerate its analysis for closing Lincoln Hills and reopening Ethan Allen,' Barrett said. 'Clearly they undertook an experiment to move all of the juvenile facilities far away from the community that's most affected by juvenile crime, and as has been well-documented, it has not worked well.'

But Barrett's push to reopen Ethan Allen was met by immediate skepticism from Waukesha County officials.

News broke in December that Lincoln Hills is under criminal investigation for allegations of inmate abuse, child neglect, destruction of public records and misconduct in office.

The crisis has left local officials scrambling to find safe alternatives for the dozens of young offenders from Milwaukee currently held at Lincoln Hills.

'The question becomes what happens to the young people there. And some of the young people need to be in a secure facility,' Barrett said. 'And from a logistics standpoint, from a cost standpoint, from a programmatic standpoint, from a staffing standpoint, Ethan Allen provides an opportunity that must be explored very, very quickly.'

The state closed Ethan Allen School in 2011, a move that sent all young male offenders to Lincoln Hills. Southern Oaks in Racine County was closed at the same time, with girls to be placed at the Copper Lake facility on the Lincoln Hills grounds. The closures were part of Walker's 2011 budget.

At the time, the Republican governor said the closures were necessary because the state Department of Corrections had been unable to reduce operating expenses at juvenile facilities enough to align with dramatically lower populations.

Local officials representing the area encompassing the Ethan Allen School questioned the logistics of Barrett's proposal.

Waukesha County Executive Paul Farrow, who previously served as a Republican state lawmaker, noted that reopening the school would be costly.

'Ethan Allen is an older building,' Farrow said. 'Because it's been dormant for five years now, it's going to need some work, so we'd incur some costs.'

Peter Wolff, the supervisor on the Waukesha County Board whose district used to host the school, said he was concerned that Barrett has not yet indicated where the school would get the resources to operate.

'It would be nice for Milwaukee to step up and help with the funding,' he said.

Walker administration officials in 2014 included the Ethan Allen School site in the Town of Delafield on a list of 10 possible properties to sell and it has not been sold.

Milwaukee County officials on Monday called for the closure of Lincoln Hills as part of a proposed overhaul of the state's juvenile justice system. County officials said their proposal involves a regional plan that is more focused on treatment, education and behavioral health.

Tristan Cook, spokesman for the corrections department, said state officials have received input from a number of stakeholders and reviewed various state-level juvenile justice models from around the country, but no final decisions have been made regarding potential changes.

The mayor said he met with corrections department officials last week, and delivered the message to them that the Lincoln Hills situation was 'very bad.'

'Now is the time to move,' Barrett said. 'Now is the time to act.'

The criminal probe of Lincoln Hills has been running for 18 months and is now headed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The U.S. Department of Justice is also investigating whether a pattern of civil rights abuses has occurred.

In recent months, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel has reported the institution's security director was demoted because he had not reviewed sexual assault reports and a guard was subjected to an investigation after she reported an inmate had rubbed against her breasts and crotch — even as officials waited months to criminally investigate the inmate.

Most recently, the Journal Sentinel reported the top psychologist at the facility faced no discipline after admitting he'd said to a co-worker that a teenage inmate with mental health issues had breasts that looked 'used and abused' and 'worn out' after he saw her run naked down a hall.