Milwaukee County plans local treatment center for teen offenders in wake of Lincoln Hills crisis
Buy Photo Milwaukee County has proposed leasing a five-story building at 4777 N. 32nd St. for a local residential treatment center for juveniles that would be an alternative to imprisonment at Lincoln Hills. (Photo: Mark Hoffman, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

Milwaukee County has proposed hiring Wisconsin Community Services at a cost of $2.7 million this year to run a treatment center for male teens on Milwaukee's north side.

The center would provide county judges with an alternative to imprisonment for some youth offenders, county Health and Human Services officials said.

Boys between the ages of 14 and 17 would be placed there by a judge only if officials determine they do not require a secure lockup, such as the county detention center or the Lincoln Hills School for Boys, Wisconsin's juvenile prison. Serious juvenile offenders would continue to be incarcerated.

The proposed contract with the private agency follows a two-year search for alternatives to sentencing county youth to the state's troubled Lincoln Hills prison in northern Wisconsin.

As of December, there were 74 boys from Milwaukee County at Lincoln Hills, but only 33 of them are considered serious juvenile offenders.

The County Board's finance committee will act Thursday on the Department of Health and Human Service's request to award the contract to Wisconsin Community Services. The board will act on the contract at its Feb. 1 meeting.

Concern for safety of teens at Lincoln Hills was prompted by disclosure of an ongoing criminal investigation at the prison into allegations of abuse, neglect, sexual assault and excessive use of force. The investigation was revealed publicly after a December 2015 law enforcement raid of Lincoln Hills and Copper Lake School for Girls, which share a campus, near Irma in Lincoln County.

Treatment of youths at the Lincoln Hills School for boys is “inhumane,” Milwaukee County Circuit Chief Judge Maxine White said after a January 2016 visit there.

In February 2016, the County Board authorized the Health and Human Services Department to identify secure detention options and agreed to remove all county youth from the Lincoln Hills and Copper Lake.

This month, Gov. Scott Walker disclosed an $80 million plan to transform Lincoln Hills School into an adult prison after opening five smaller teen prisons around the state.

Three of the youth prisons likely will be built in southeastern Wisconsin to be close to Milwaukee, Racine and other communities where the majority of juvenile inmates come from.

While the county has been able to expand its Milwaukee County Accountability Program inside the locked detention facility at the juvenile justice center in Wauwatosa, state regulations do not allow the county to set up a secure residential care center in the community.

Officials turned their attention to a different type of residential treatment program for juvenile offenders. The proposed center is not a lockup.

Doors would be locked from the outside to prevent unauthorized people from entering but those doors would not be locked from the inside, according to Mark Mertens, delinquency and court services administrator.

Opening of exit doors from the inside would be set on a time delay to enable staff to respond and prevent someone from walking away, Mertens said. Cameras also would monitor all entrances and exits.

Youths would find it difficult to walk away unnoticed for another reason, Mertens said. There would be no more than four juveniles per one staff member during the day, he said.

The county Health and Human Services Department has negotiated the lease of a five-story building at 4777 N. 32nd. St. in Milwaukee that would provide 24 beds, according to Mertens. He spoke Wednesday at a meeting of the board's health and human needs committee.

The building is owned by Bishop's Creek Community Development Corporation, an affiliate of Holy Redeemer Institutional Church of God in Christ. The proposed treatment center would provide space for 24 youth enrolled in the program for four to six months, Mertens said.

RELATED: Lincoln Hills: Scott Walker to close troubled teen prison and open five regional centers for juvenile offenders

RELATED: Chief judge calls Lincoln Hills treatment ‘inhumane’

RELATED: Crisis at Lincoln Hills juvenile prison years in making

Buy Photo Lincoln Hills School for Boys and Copper Lake School for Girls have been the subject of a criminal investigation for three years. (Photo: Mark Hoffman, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

State Rep. David Bowen (D-Milwaukee) spoke Wednesday in favor of the Wisconsin Community Services contract to provide juvenile treatment services.

"This option can be used effectively to restore young people back to our community," Bowen said.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2DHULAX