Foxconn will not need a permit from Army Corps of Engineers for impact to Wisconsin wetlands
Buy Photo Water collects before flowing in the Kilbourn Road Ditch just north of County Line Road and east of I-94 in Mount Pleasant. The ditch, or stream, runs north-south in Mount Pleasant in the general vicinity of where Foxconn Technology Group will likely construct a large industrial plant. Foxconn will be exempted from environmental requirements any other company would have to follow. Foxconn can fill in isolated wetlands. It can build in a stream running through the property. If it wants, planners can even change the course of the stream. (Photo: Mike De Sisti / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers says it has no jurisdiction over wetlands that will be filled as part of Foxconn Technology Group’s plans for a massive electronics plant in rural Racine County.

The Corps’ decision could help hasten construction by removing a potential roadblock for construction of the $10 billion plant, which would have allowed for the public to offer comments on the permit and potentially push for changes in how the site is developed to avoid wetlands.

Wisconsin lawmakers changed state law in September to accommodate the company by giving up state authority over wetlands on the Foxconn property. The Corps, however, still had the power to weigh in on the project.

Foxconn officials have said the sprawling plant, which has also triggered plans for a major upgrade to local roads and a widening of I-94, could employ up to 13,000 people.

FULL COVERAGE: Foxconn updates

RELATED: Rep. Mark Pocan says Foxconn will be demise of Scott Walker and other Republicans

A law signed by Republican Gov. Scott Walker on Sept. 17 provides for up to $3 billion in financial incentives for the company, with supporters touting the economic impact and spinoff employment linked to the plant.

The legislation also exempted Foxconn from some environmental requirements: The company can fill in wetlands that are regulated by the state and change the course of streams.

While the state would allow Foxconn to fill wetlands, that loss would require that new wetlands be created. Under existing law, for every 1 acre lost, a developer must create 1.2 acres elsewhere. The Foxconn legislation requires greater mitigation — 2 acres for every 1 acre lost.

Also, the company is not required to undergo an environmental impact statement. Such a study evaluates the potential effect a project can pose to humans and the environment.

During debate on the legislation, supporters defended the environmental exemptions, saying the federal government would still have oversight and questioned why, for example, Foxconn would need two government agencies assessing the impact a project that would be the largest private development in state history.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

“From a regulatory standpoint, we tried to eliminate some of the duplicative processes,” Kurt Thiede, deputy secretary of the Department of Natural Resources, told lawmakers on Aug. 3.

Six days later, DNR Secretary Cathy Stepp told members of the Natural Resources Board in Milwaukee: “We want to hit the ground running and make sure that the regulatory processes and bureaucracy are not in the way of job creation in Wisconsin.”

Stepp said, however, the agency would make sure all state environmental protections remained in place.

Stepp has since left the post and now serves in the Trump administration as director of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s regional office in Chicago, which includes Wisconsin.

Many Democrats criticized the size of the incentive package and environmentalists took issue with the exemption granted to the company.

Tressie Kamp, an attorney with Midwest Environmental Advocates, said Wednesday the effect of the Corps’ decision means the public will have no say in wetlands impacts caused by the project.

Foxconn is expected to occupy about 22 million square feet in the Village of Mount Pleasant for manufacturing liquid crystal display panels.

Wetlands are generally protected because they prevent flooding. They also play key roles as habitat for wildlife and for filtering pollutants.

A federal wetlands permit could have required Foxconn to look for alternatives or minimize the impact on wetlands, and Kamp said citizens, or lawyers representing them, could have filed comments on project.

There was also the potential that the Corps would have held a public hearing in which the public could have asked questions about the scope of the project.

“This means that potential opportunities for the public to comment on this project are lost,” Kamp said.

She said, however, that citizens could challenge the Corps decision.

The heart of the federal agency’s decision rests on the type of wetlands that pepper the land where Foxconn is planning to build. The federal agency concluded on Dec. 8 that a pond and 42 wetlands covering 26 acres were isolated and not connected to waters of the United States.

The authority of the Corps covers wetlands that can connect to other water bodies. On the Foxconn property, that would mean the Kilbourn Road ditch or a tributary of the north branch of the Pike River.

Foxconn’s construction plans steer away from such waters, according to documents the company submitted to the Corps.

“Right now, we don’t have any authority on the site,” said Todd Vesperman, a section chief for the agency’s office in Green Bay. “We are basically done. We will not be doing an environmental analysis.”

That could change, he said, if Foxconn decides to push its development farther west and near the Kilbourn Road ditch.

A Foxconn spokeswoman said officials were traveling or just returning from the holidays and were not immediately available to respond to questions.

The Corps made field visits this fall and agreed with the assessment of a consultant hired by Foxconn — the Brookfield office of TRC Companies Inc. — that the wetlands were isolated.

Kamp said that environmental groups expect to weigh in on other environmental permits Foxconn will need for air emissions, including hazardous pollutants, wastewater and its handling of stormwater.

The DNR says Foxconn has applied for an air permit for construction of an initial assembly plant.

Eric Ebersberger, who is coordinating permitting for the DNR on the Foxconn project, said that the agency has not received applications for other permits.

Foxconn also has not yet provided a timeline to the agency for when it will be filing for other permits, he said.

Foxconn said it wants to open its first assembly plant on the site a year from now.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2CBK0zu