Wisconsin U.S. Senate race: Leah Vukmir, Kevin Nicholson debate at UW-Milwaukee; others join later
Republican U.S. Senate candidates Kevin Nicholson and Leah Vukmir stand at their podiums at the start of a debate at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Thursday. (Photo: Tyger Williams / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Republican U.S. Senate hopefuls Leah Vukmir and Kevin Nicholson sought to sway undecided voters and burnish their conservative credentials during a high-stakes debate Thursday night at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.

But most of all, they were all in on President Donald Trump. When asked, neither candidate could come up with one thing Trump has done that they would push back on.

"I look at President Trump's agenda and say it's a darn good one," Nicholson said, pointing to tax reform, pulling out of the Iran nuclear deal and opening talks with North Korea.

Vukmir said "a liberal elite and the media want nothing more than to bring this president down. I want to see President Trump succeed. When he succeeds, America succeeds."

The race is in a dead heat and 30 percent of GOP primary voters are undecided, according to the latest Marquette University Law School Poll.

Vukmir, a state senator from Brookfield, stressed her legislative experience in helping Gov. Scott Walker enact conservative policies. Nicholson, a Delafield businessman and U.S. Marine veteran who has never held elected public office, pitched himself as a political outsider.

They even had warm words for each other. Nicholson said Vukmir's "love of her family" comes through, especially her love for her son who is serving in the military.

"I'm impressed, Kevin, with your ability to reach people and your sincerity about your service to our country," Vukmir said.

The winner of the Aug. 14 primary will meet Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin in November.

Nicholson said being conservative "isn't just what we do in government and politics, it's about living a full life."

"I stand for life, I stand for our Second Amendment and most of all I stand for our Constitution," Vukmir said.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Vukmir said Wisconsin Republicans have "moved the conservative ball down the field. We are not establishment Republicans in Wisconsin; we are activist Republicans."

"I have been through the gauntlet, when we had riots in the Capitol," she said of the demonstrations over Act 10.

Asked if health care was a privilege or a right, Vukmir said, "Health care is important for all individuals." She said under Obamacare "we have not created an affordable health care system."

"We have a broken health care system," she said, adding the issue needs to be brought back to the states.

Nicholson said "health care is one of a series of services ... you can go out in the market and buy." He said prices can't be set.

"Price transparency, consumer choice and recent honest ability to save money in health care savings accounts will drive down the cost of health care."

Asked about protections for those with pre-existing conditions, Nicholson pointed to high-risk pools, which were available in Wisconsin before implementation of Obamacare.

Asked about the trade war ignited by Trump's tariffs on imported steel and aluminum, Vukmir said Trump is a negotiator who is "making a difference."

She said the "real bad actor" is China. "China is eating our lunch. We have a $375 billion trade deficit with China." She said Trump wants to fix that.

State Sen. Leah Vukmir and businessman Kevin Nicholson. (Photo: Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Vukmir said farmers are telling her that "they will give this president an opportunity" on the tariff issue.

Nicholson said the trade war isn't doing permanent damage to Wisconsin's economy. He said Trump is telling America's trading partners to go back to the negotiating table.

"Our farmers and our producers will say they do want access to these markets," he said. "We're going to sell more soybeans in Europe."

On immigration, Nicholson said a wall should be built on the southern border with Mexico. He said the country should have a merit-based immigration system.

"We need to fix the entire system," he said. "We can't do it piecemeal."

Vukmir said she "stands with President Donald Trump when he says first and foremost build that wall. ... Then we can talk about a process for those DACA residents," young undocumented immigrants known as Dreamers.

"We have to have a pathway for them," Vukmir said, adding that she supported a "merit-based system."

On abortion, Nicholson said life begins at conception and "is a gift from God."

"Life needs to be protected," he said. His expectation is that judges understand the Constitution as a "pro-life document."

"Our Constitution makes it quite clear, every life counts," he said.

Nicholson said he wasn't raised in a pro-life family and said he was "dumb" when he supported a woman's right to choose in a speech in 2000 at the Democratic National Convention. Nicholson was then the president of the College Democrats of America.

Vukmir said she has been "100 percent pro-life." She said the country and the state are "increasingly pro-life."

"I will stand for nominees for the Supreme Court who also look to that Constitution, that document that upholds life," she said.

Vukmir said she would look at "the specifics" of Baldwin's "Buy America" bill to require U.S.-made steel, iron and aluminum be used in new water infrastructure projects.

Nicholson said Baldwin's bill "is for show."

"Let's talk about the real policy prescriptions that can drive growth," he said.

During the final 30 minutes, Nicholson and Vukmir were joined by three other GOP candidates — Charles Barman, Griffin Jones and George Lucia.

Baldwin's campaign said Thursday that it raised nearly $1.2 million in the past 25 days — that's more than either the Nicholson or Vukmir campaigns raised from April through June.

Baldwin's pre-primary report to the Federal Election Commission will also show 8,500 new supporters.

RELATED: Kevin Nicholson, Leah Vukmir clash in first Republican U.S. Senate debate

RELATED: Wisconsin GOP Senate candidate Leah Vukmir embraces 'Nurse Ratched' reputation in debate with Kevin Nicholson

RELATED: Marquette poll: Leah Vukmir and Kevin Nicholson in a dead heat in GOP U.S. Senate primary

The Democratic Party of Wisconsin issued a release on the debate Thursday night.

"The contrast in Wisconsin's Senate race couldn't be any more clear after tonight. While Tammy Baldwin does right by Wisconsin — whether it's standing up to the president of her own party or working with the president of the opposing party — Leah Vukmir and Kevin Nicholson would be rubber stamps for Donald Trump's agenda and work for the corporate special interests and billionaires bankrolling their campaigns," party spokesman Brad Bainum said.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2vbGiH4