Scott Walker says he'll issue some vetoes even as he shows support for lame-duck bills
CLOSE

Addressing members of the media for the first time after failing to win re-election in the 2018 race, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker addresses members of the media from his office in Madison. (Photo: Wisconsin State Journal)

Gov. Scott Walker said Tuesday he will likely veto some measures passed by the Republican-controlled Legislature but signaled he generally supports the package.

The legislation, Walker said, would not make Tony Evers a weak governor.

For the first time since lawmakers passed the measures and amid calls from Democrats and some Republicans to veto all of them, Walker said he doesn't agree with the criticism of the legislation that shifts powers from the governor's office and the attorney general's office and gives it to the Legislature.

"For all this hype and hysteria — much of which I think is driven by fundraising for political purposes — the bottom line is there is not a fundamental shift in powers, no matter what happens with this legislation," Walker told reporters in Waukesha on Tuesday. "Read it. Just read it. There is not a fundamental shift out there."

While I review the bills passed last week, take a look at my straightforward criteria for them: https://t.co/NHeFa3hHOe — Governor Walker (@GovWalker) December 11, 2018

Walker in a lengthy Facebook post Tuesday defended the proposals, saying Evers "will still have some of the strongest powers of any governor in the nation if these bills become law."

CLOSE Gov.-elect Tony Evers urged Scott Walker to veto legislation that will curtail the power of the incoming governor and attorney general. WisconsinEye

RELATED: WEDC would use audit spot checks, business owners' word to verify job creation under lame-duck bill

RELATED: Wisconsin lawmakers reject bill to protect pre-existing conditions, scale back Democrats' power

RELATED: Lawsuit looms over proposed limit to early voting in Wisconsin

Walker said in the post Evers "will have the power to veto legislation and he will have some of the broadest line-item veto authority of any governor in the nation," among other powers.

"None of these things will change regardless of what I do with the bills passed in the state Legislature last week," Walker wrote.

Walker did not point out that some of the measures giving the Legislature more power are similar to those he has vetoed in the past for intruding on his authority.

He said he would not act on the lame-duck bills until he could unveil a new incentive package for Kimberly-Clark, with the goal of keeping a Fox Valley paper-making plant open and saving hundreds of jobs.

At a stop in Green Bay, Evers expressed a waning optimism that Walker will veto the entire package of legislation. He wants to see the entire package repealed and said he won’t negotiate with the governor over specific provisions because “it’s all bad.”

“I’m still hopeful – I mean, it’s fading hope to be honest – that the will of the people will have been met and recognized as what it is,” he said.

Buy Photo Gov.-elect Tony Evers, appearing on NBC's "Meet the Press" Sunday, criticized the lame-duck legislation passed by Republicans in the Legislature last week that would limit his powers. (Photo: Michael Sears / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Walker doesn't yet have the bills passed by lawmakers during an overnight legislative session that ended the morning of Dec. 5. Walker in his Tuesday post also listed the criteria he's using to determine whether to sign the legislation once he receives the bills.

In doing so, Walker signaled support for the measures.

"Does it improve transparency? Will it make it easier for people to know what is going on in their government?" Walker wrote. "For example, one of the bills calls for a report on people who receive a pardon by the governor. It seems reasonable that the public should know if a convicted felon is pardoned of his or her crime."

Walker also suggested he supported measures that would allow the Legislature to have a say over how incoming Democratic Attorney General Josh Kaul spends money from legal settlements, a decision currently up to Republican Attorney General Brad Schimel's Department of Justice.

"Does it increase accountability? Will it continue to put checks and balances in place to ensure that state government is accountable to the hard-working people of Wisconsin?" Walker wrote. "For example, it makes sense that lawmakers should have some say in how the state might spend a multi-million legal settlement."

Senate Minority Leader Jennifer Shilling, D-La Crosse, said Walker was trying to downplay the effects of the legislation.

"No matter how Gov. Walker tries to spin it, the lame-duck proposals undermine the will of Wisconsin voters and consolidate more power in the hands of Republican politicians," Shilling said in a statement.

The legislation would limit early voting to roughly two weeks before an election, despite a similar limit being found unconstitutional by a federal judge in 2016, and give the Legislature more power over decisions currently made by Walker and Schimel alone — including picking the head of the state's jobs agency, which oversees the $3 billion taxpayer-funded incentive package for Foxconn.

Governor Scott Walker talks the media at the 8th Annual Governor's Small Business Summit in Waukesha Tuesday. (Photo: Mary Spicuzza / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Asked if he believes limiting early voting to two weeks before an election is the right thing to do, Walker said, "Early voting is great, it just should be uniform."

"The idea that in some communities it's a couple weeks, and in others communities it's twice or three times as long, I think is a legitimate concern that people who live in communities where they're not able to afford to do longer early voting," Walker said.

Walker's openness to providing more say to the Legislature over state agencies comes after rejecting similar measures in his last state budget that would require state agencies to report to the Legislature.

In vetoing the measures, Walker said the language would put an unfunded mandate into state law and would "encroach" on his office's "responsibility to manage state agency programs within the statutes and funding levels set by the Legislature."

Walker also advocated against reshaping state government in the final weeks of an outgoing governor's term in 2010 when he asked then-Gov. Jim Doyle not to act on a number of measures, including making permanent appointments, and asked the Legislature not to approve public employee union contracts.

Now, Walker has appointed Department of Administration Secretary Ellen Nowak to the Public Service Commission and Attorney General Brad Schimel as a Waukesha County judge.

Walker over the weekend issued a series of tweets responding to criticism over what Democrats have characterized as hypocrisy, saying the appointments are comparable to what he asked Doyle to refrain from making because Doyle's were civil service positions.

RELATED: Tony Evers says he will 'take any steps possible' to prevent GOP plan to take away his power

"None of the 82 positions confirmed by the Senate last week were civil service. 78 of the positions were submitted to the Senate months ago (3 were because of recent resignations)," Walker tweeted.

He also defended his 2010 request not to approve state employee contracts, which would have delayed implementation of his collective bargaining measure known as Act 10.

"In 2010, I asked them not to move on state employee contracts that would bind the new gov and Legislature for years. In contrast, we stopped new Requests for Proposals (RFPs) after the election so the new administration could start over with the process before issuing contracts," Walker said.

Democrats and a number of Republicans have called on Walker to reject the legislation passed by lawmakers last week, and some have said to think about his legacy in calling for vetoes.

RELATED: 'It's a hot mess': Tony Evers urges Scott Walker to veto GOP lame duck proposals limiting his powers on 'Meet the Press'

Walker over the weekend responded to that criticism, tweeting 21 times about factors that will contribute to his legacy as governor.

OUR LEGACY - More people are employed in Wisconsin this year than at any other time in the history of our state. — Scott Walker (@ScottWalker) December 8, 2018

"OUR LEGACY - More people are employed in Wisconsin this year than at any other time in the history of our state," Walker said in his first in the series of tweets.

Walker also is considering the package of legislation as he downplays his role in writing it.

Last week, Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald of Juneau said Walker “came up with some ideas on how things should be handled” and said Walker’s chief of staff, Eric Schutt, “has been a big part of all of those discussions” about the legislation.

But Walker spokesman Tom Evenson characterized Walker’s role much differently.

“The governor’s staff was briefed by legislative leaders as to their plans but were not involved in negotiations over the extraordinary session legislation,” Evenson said by email.

Also on Tuesday, Walker wrote in an emailed newsletter that he hopes to share "good news" about a potential taxpayer-funded incentive package for Fox Valley paper-maker Kimberly-Clark.

Walker initially called on lawmakers to return to Madison to take up a $70 million package for the company to save a few hundred jobs, but the bill died without enough support from lawmakers.

"We're not giving up. If it's the last thing I do — quite literally, if it's the last thing I do over the next few weeks — we're going to find a way to save the jobs at Kimberly-Clark," Walker said. "That's more important to me than any of the other things that are pending in state government through the end of the year."

Asked if he plans to sign the GOP lame-duck proposals, Walker said, "My priority right now is on Kimberly-Clark. So I've set aside anything else that would get in the way of that. Hopefully, in the next few days we'll have something to announce about Kimberly-Clark."

Patrick Marley of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and Haley BeMiller of the Green Bay Gazette contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2018/12/11/scott-walker-lame-duck-bills-dont-make-tony-evers-weak-governor/2275075002/