How much of Democratic Gov. Tony Evers' budget will survive the GOP Legislature? (Spoiler: Not much)
Buy Photo Gov. Tony Evers blows a kiss to his wife, Kathy, before delivering his State of the State address at the Capitol in Madison in January. (Photo: Mark Hoffman / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

MADISON - Gov. Tony Evers will introduce his first state budget Thursday full of proposals Democrats have long called for — from a massive funding increase for public schools to an expansion of Obamacare.

But Republicans have made clear much — if not all — of Evers' two-year spending plan will immediately be thrown out.

The release of the new governor's first budget will be the most significant moment in nearly a decade for Wisconsin Democrats, whose policy ideas have been ignored for eight years in the GOP-controlled state Legislature.

But it also marks the beginning of a grueling fight with Republicans who oppose nearly everything in it and have the power to rewrite everything.

"Many of the budget proposals Governor Evers has pushed thus far are unserious, marking major departures from how the Senate has operated in previous years," said a statement from Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald, R-Juneau.

Buy Photo Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald is shown on the floor of the Senate. (Photo: Mark Hoffman / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Evers wants to decriminalize smoking and selling small amounts of marijuana; increase funding for schools by more than $1 billion; expand BadgerCare Plus through Obamacare; freeze enrollment of taxpayer-funded students at private voucher schools; and end gerrymandering by establishing a nonpartisan commission to draw election maps, among other measures.

"It is incredibly disappointing that Republicans are labeling these kinds of commonsense proposals as “unserious” and refusing to work with the governor before they have even seen the entire budget," Evers' spokeswoman Melissa Baldauff said in a statement. "The budget process itself is a negotiation. The first step is the governor introducing his budget, and he is starting from a place of bipartisanship agreement by proposing initiatives that have broad support from the public."

Fitzgerald said Evers' plans include "far-left policy" that will make "bipartisan agreement difficult."

"His plans will raise the tax burden on our state’s job creators, potentially increase the cost of private health insurance, and harm the voucher program that promotes student success regardless of zip code – all items he knows Republicans do not favor," Fitzgerald said.

Yet both Fitzgerald and Baldauff said they wanted to find a table for Republicans and Evers to sit down at together.

The Legislature's budget-writing committee — controlled 12-4 by Republicans — will spend the coming months reshaping the budget. It will then return it to Evers, who can carve it up using his line-item veto powers.

Evers has provided details of many of his budget plans in recent weeks but still has not said how he plans to pay for his funding increases.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Another big unknown is how Evers plans to address the longstanding issue of road funding — a question that stalled approval of the last budget for months.

Evers is set to release his state budget proposal at 7 p.m. Thursday in an address in the Wisconsin State Capitol.

Here's a look at the big issues Evers and Republicans who control the Legislature need to hash out before the budget will pass:

Schools

Buy Photo Hope Prima in Milwaukee participates in the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program. (Photo: Mark Hoffman / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

What's being proposed? Evers, who served as the state's school superintendent until he was sworn in as governor in January, wants to increase funding for public schools by $1.4 billion and provide $600 million to help school officials pay for special education costs. At the same time, Evers wants to cap enrollment in private voucher schools and suspend expansions of independent charter schools.

RELATED: Gov. Tony Evers seeks to freeze enrollment in private voucher schools, suspend charter school expansion

RELATED: Tony Evers seeks $1.4 billion increase for Wisconsin schools

RELATED: Tony Evers to seek unprecedented $600 million more in special education funding

Will Republicans support this? No. Republican lawmakers have questioned how the state could afford such an increase and broadly support the expansion of school choice, which saw significant growth since they gained control of the Legislature in 2011.

Taxes

Buy Photo Wisconsin Capitol. (Photo: Michael Sears, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

What's being proposed? Both Republicans and Evers want to cut income taxes for middle-class families by 10 percent but don't agree how to do it. Evers vetoed a tax cut proposal passed by Republicans earlier this month that would pay for the cut by using a budget surplus. Evers called the funding plan unsustainable.

Evers will include in his budget a cut that is paid for in part by reducing a tax break manufacturers receive. He also wants to increase funding for the earned income tax credit, which provides tax breaks or cash payments to the working poor.

RELATED: Tony Evers vetoes the GOP tax cut bill but plans to include his own cut in the state budget

Will Republicans support this? No. Republicans have called the plan unacceptable because it would increase taxes on some manufacturers. GOP lawmakers could try again to replace his planned tax cut with their own.

Health care

Buy Photo A protester rallies outside a Milwaukee hospital in 2013 after then-Gov. Scott Walker's decision to turn down federal funding to expand BadgerCare. (Photo: Rick Wood/Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

What's being proposed? By accepting federal dollars, Evers plans to expand Medicaid to make BadgerCare available to 76,000 more people. The plan would free up $280 million in state money over two years that could be used for other purposes.

Evers also plans to seek $28 million in new funding for women's health care and for measures to reduce infant mortality.

RELATED: Gov. Tony Evers and Republicans square off over BadgerCare

Will Republicans support this? Probably not. Legislative leaders have said they are dead set against the Medicaid expansion and Assembly Speaker Robin Vos told reporters this month that, "Republicans are not going to put one more nickel into Planned Parenthood than we do right now."

Marijuana

(Photo: Getty Images)

What's being proposed? Anyone living in Wisconsin would not be charged with a crime for carrying, smoking or selling marijuana in amounts of 25 grams or less under Evers' budget plan. That amounts to enough marijuana that could fit inside a standard size Ziplock bag.

Evers also wants to legalize marijuana for medicinal use.

RELATED: Gov. Tony Evers calls for decriminalization of recreational marijuana use

Will Republicans support this? No. Some Republicans support legalizing medical marijuana but have expressed strong opposition to decriminalizing recreational pot.

Election maps

. (Photo: Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

What's being proposed? Evers wants to create an apolitical commission to oversee nonpartisan drawing of legislative boundaries in an effort to end gerrymandering in Wisconsin.

Will Republicans support this? Probably not. Republican legislative leaders are defending the state's current maps in federal court, which were drawn in a partisan manner.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2019/02/27/how-much-tony-evers-budget-survive-legislature-not-much/3002996002/