Donald Trump heralds end of 'collusion delusion' in return to battleground Wisconsin
ASHWAUBENON – President Donald Trump on Saturday celebrated the end of what he called a "collusion delusion" investigation into whether he conspired with Russian officials and laid out why Wisconsin — the state that delivered him the 2016 election — should stick with him through a second term.

His trip to Wisconsin came just hours after a deadly shooting at a California synagogue celebrating the last day of Passover.

"Our entire nation mourns the loss life, prays for the wounded and stands in solidarity with the Jewish community," Trump told the crowd of more than 10,000 at the Resch Center in Ashwaubenon. "We're going to get to the bottom of it. We're going to get to the bottom of a lot of things happening in our country."

To a booing crowd, the president took aim at Democratic Gov. Tony Evers — criticizing him for pledging to veto Republican legislation that would require doctors to transport to hospitals babies who survive failed abortions.

"Your Democratic governor shockingly stated he will veto legislation that would protect Wisconsin babies," Trump said. "The baby's born. The mother meets with the doctor. They take care of the baby. They wrap the baby beautifully and then the doctor and the mother determine whether they will execute the baby."

Evers said he would veto the legislation because of existing protections and criminal penalties in state law and obstetrics experts say the scenario described by Trump "never really happens." The bill comes as Republican lawmakers nationwide are sending their liberal-leaning governors similar bills that could energize conservative voters.

Democratic Lt. Gov. Mandela Barnes tied Trump's comments to a national environment that fostered Saturday's shooting.

"We also cannot accept this," Barnes tweeted. "This is the kind of dangerous rhetoric that encourages the violence carried out today."

RELATED: Tony Evers will veto 'born alive' abortion bill advanced by GOP lawmakers

Trump returned to Wisconsin on Saturday after tearing down a blue wall in 2016 and to start his bid to keep this pivotal state from Democrats' grasp in 2020.

The president is counting on the economy to be the key.

"The poverty rate for Wisconsin families has reached its lowest rate in 22 years," Trump said to cheers. "The unemployment rate for Wisconsin workers has reached historic — it's never been this low ever, ever. Think about that."

The poverty rate in the state is not the lowest in 22 years, however. Data from 2016 — the most recent data available — actually shows an increase from 9.7% to 10.8%.

Mark Lewins, a U.S. Navy veteran who lives in Krakow, is persuaded — especially by Trump's 2017 $1.5 trillion tax overhaul.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"As a businessman, he’s come in and did a lot of good for our country," Lewins said Saturday. "He’s helped jobs out, he’s helped companies come back to America because of the tax breaks. He’s actually helped me … I have a lot bigger paycheck coming back.”

Tariffs and Harley-Davidson

Trump on Saturday defended his efforts to step up the trade war with the European Union over tariffs imposed on Milwaukee's Harley-Davidson and other American companies.

"Look at Harley-Davidson," Trump explained. "India charged 100 percent tariffs on a Harley-Davidson. But when they send their motorcycles, because they make them, to us, we charge them nothing. So I called up Prime Minister (Narendra) Modi I said, ‘Unfair.’ He cut it 50%, but I said, ‘That’s not good enough because look, 50% to nothing.’ And what we’re doing is changing all of that stuff.”

His comments on Harley came eight months after he encouraged a boycott of the company because it was moving production of some of its motorcycles overseas.

That episode caused headaches for Walker and other Republicans who were torn between allegiance to a president from their party and an iconic Wisconsin brand.

Trump also hammered his key issues of immigration and combating terrorism by the Islamic State.

He and his son Donald Trump Jr., who opened for his father, also both told the cheering crowd that Democrats put all their hopes behind their “collusion delusion," referring to an investigation by Special Counsel Robert Mueller into whether his campaign conspired with Russian officials to influence the 2016 election.

Trump called it "the greatest political hoax in American history.”

Wisconsin's key role

Some Republican leaders of the Wisconsin state Legislature met the president at Green Bay's Austin Straubel International Airport as he exited the plane accompanied by U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson of Oshkosh. The president was greeted by a throng of supporters yelling "Thank you!"

Trump called Johnson "Wisconsin Tough" during the rally and praised by name the Republican members of the federal delegation in attendance.

The largest cheers came later for former Gov. Scott Walker, who also attended Saturday's rally and serves as a chairman for Trump's campaign in Wisconsin.

Trump thanked Walker, who was defeated by Evers in November, and said the former governor "has a bright future."

Wisconsin was one of three Midwestern states that were part of a so-called blue wall for Democrats that in 2016 years ago voted instead for Trump, despite many of the state's top Republicans — including some who attended Saturday's rally — urging their colleagues to vote against Trump.

Walker ran against Trump for the Republican nomination for president and withdrew from the race calling for others to do the same so one GOP candidate in the wide field could emerge who could defeat Trump. Now Walker wholly supports Trump.

The 2016 election was the first time in three decades the GOP presidential candidate had won over Wisconsin voters.

"These are Trump states. These are not Republican states," Trump's 2020 national campaign press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said in an interview Saturday.

The final 10 electoral votes putting Trump over the 270 finish line came from Wisconsin.

His Saturday rally will likely be the first of many ahead of the 2020 election: Wisconsin voters delivered the final 10 electoral votes to secure Trump's election in 2016.

"You're going to see a lot of President Trump in Wisconsin," McEnany said. "This was one of the states that was so key to him in 2016."

RELATED: Donald Trump wants to work with Tony Evers on getting 13,000 Foxconn jobs, campaign says

But Wisconsin also is where Democrats swept statewide races in 2018, taking out Walker and former Attorney General Brad Schimel — two Trump allies.

"The knife-edge politics of Wisconsin mean that Trump will not be able to take the state for granted," said Barry Burden, director of the Elections Research Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. "However important Wisconsin is to the Trump campaign, it will be even more essential to the Democrats."

RELATED: Trump heads to Wisconsin as both parties prepare for an epic 2020 election fight

RELATED: Wisconsin already expected to be a war zone for the 2020 presidential race

Michigan and Pennsylvania, like Wisconsin, are traditionally blue states in presidential elections that were won by Trump. He can lose two of the three in 2020 and still win re-election, Burden said, while Democrats need to win all three.

Wisconsin will be one of the toughest battlegrounds in 2020, with Democrats already preparing their fight to flip Wisconsin back to blue. Of the 20 candidates seeking the Democratic nomination for president, five have already visited the state.

One of them is U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders, who won the 2016 Democratic presidential primary in Wisconsin and leads in popularity among Wisconsin voters in recent polling.

RELATED: Cheese jokes, huge crowds, floral couches: Five times sitting presidents visited Wisconsin

Trump on Saturday took a couple swings at his Democratic challengers, calling the front-runners "Sleepy Joe" Biden and "Crazy Bernie" Sanders.

“We say tonight that America will never be a Socialist country,” Trump said to loud cheers. “You took back your country with that great election two and a half years ago.”

“Four more years,” the crowd chanted in response.

Sanders this week paid for a front-page ad in the Green Bay Press-Gazette ahead of Trump's visit alleging to readers the president lied to them about saving middle-class jobs.

His campaign plans to keep focused on the economy by tying the president's $1.5 trillion tax overhaul to companies who used the new tax breaks to create restructuring plans that included layoffs in Wisconsin.

Both Sanders and Trump are expected to run against the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement, which decimated manufacturing jobs in Wisconsin.

"You look around the Wisconsin you still the scars," Trump said Saturday. "I want to make it almost impossible to leave Wisconsin and go to Mexico.

Democrat group fires back

Priorities USA, a top Democratic super PAC, is already spending six figures just on Saturday to answer Trump's visit.

The ad buy is part of a $100 million "early spending program" in the "blue wall" states and Florida between Friday and May 3. It will feature digital ads criticizing Trump over the issue of health care.

That's the issue that loomed large in the 2018 state races and ultimately contributed to Republicans' defeat.

In 2016, Trump ran on repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act — an effort that has failed multiple times largely over the high number of people who would lose health insurance under the various GOP proposals.

Trump continued his criticism of a health care vote taken from Sen. John McCain, who died in August.

"We should have had health care, but one man decided to vote against it at the last minute ... even though he campaigned on it for eight years," Trump said as the crowd booed.

Burden says because Walker did not accept federal funds to fully expand Medicaid or set up a state exchange, it's likely more difficult for Wisconsin voters to determine whether the Affordable Care Act is a success or a failure in the state.

"To be frank, Trump is going to spin this issue in whatever ways seem advantageous," Burden said. "He is likely to brag that some popular parts of the Affordable Care Act have been maintained and that his party is going to produce an even better health care system that covers everyone."

Democrats see Trump's 2016 promises related to health care as unfulfilled and intend to make that central to their message.

"People are noticing he’s made a lot of promises and not delivered," Martha Laning, chairwoman of the Democratic Party of Wisconsin, said. "He said he was going to create a new health care that was so much better and so much less expensive."

Laning said the Wisconsin Democrats have to effectively communicate why their candidate will be different.

"In 2016, the Democrats, we did not do a good job of telling (voters) what Democratic leadership would offer them," Laning said. "'This is what we're doing to make your lives better' — I believe that's what's key to us winning Wisconsin."

But Mark Jefferson, executive director of the Republican Party of Wisconsin, sees a wider path in Wisconsin for Trump than he had three years ago when he narrowly won the state over former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

"It's a very similar electorate to what we saw last time and I think he has some advantages that he didn't have," Jefferson said.

Jefferson said Trump's popularity in the state was rooted, in part, because he's a "nontraditional" Republican. But that's also what hurt Trump in the deeply conservative Milwaukee suburbs, Jefferson said.

Now that Trump has had a few years under his belt, Jefferson sees a chance to build enthusiasm for Trump on the issues of the economy and his Supreme Court picks.

"There is a lot for them to like this time around," Jefferson said.

Recent polling from the Marquette University Law School shows the president's approval among Wisconsin voters has risen by 2 points to 46 percent compared to 52 percent of voters disapproving.

Just 28 percent say they will definitely vote to re-elect Trump next year, while 14 percent say they will probably vote for him.

Meanwhile, 54 percent say they will probably or definitely vote against the president.

"One concern for Trump is that more Wisconsinites disapprove than approve of his job performance," Burden said. "Wisconsin voters had unfavorable opinions toward Trump in 2016, but they also disliked Hillary Clinton. His opponent in 2020 is not likely to be subject to such animus and will invest more in Wisconsin than Clinton did."

Patrick Marley of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and Doug Schneider of the USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin contributed to this report.

Contact Molly Beck at (608) 258-2263 or at molly.beck@jrn.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MollyBeck.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2019/04/27/donald-trump-president-arrives-wisconsin-effort-keep-state/3576113002/