'A healthy city starts with healthy moms and babies': Mayor Tom Barrett signs measure creating doula pilot program for 53206
Mayor Tom Barrett signs legislation Tuesday creating a joint pilot program with the Milwaukee County Department of Health and Human Services to provide doulas to 100 expectant mothers in the 53206 ZIP code. The event was held at Canaan Missionary Baptist Church on North 11th Street. He was joined at the bill signing by Milwaukee Health Commissioner Jeanette Kowalik, left; doulas, County Supervisor Marina Dimitrijevic, standing in center, and Alds. Khalif Rainey and Milele Coggs. (Photo: Mary Spicuzza / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

One hundred mothers in one of Milwaukee's most distressed neighborhoods will soon have access to a support system aimed at helping them deliver and nurture healthy babies.

Mayor Tom Barrett on Tuesday signed legislation creating a joint pilot program with the Milwaukee County Department of Health and Human Services to provide doulas to 100 expectant mothers in the troubled 53206 ZIP code.

"A healthy city starts with healthy moms and babies," Barrett said during a bill signing event at Canaan Missionary Baptist Church on North 11th Street.

Barrett was joined by Aldermen Khalif Rainey and Milele Coggs, County Supervisor Marina Dimitrijevic, Milwaukee Health Commissioner Jeannette Kowalik, Dalvery Blackwell of the African American Breastfeeding Network, Julia Means of Ascension Health and a group of doulas.

Rainey, the lead sponsor of the measure at City Hall, said that addressing problems like infant mortality and reducing incarceration rates has to be a priority for everyone, including elected officials.

"If these aren't addressed, again we have missed the mark," Rainey said.

RELATED: Council approves program to provide doulas for 100 expectant moms in Milwaukee's 53206 ZIP code

RELATED: Milwaukee may implement a pilot program for doulas to address infant mortality in 53206

Under the measure, the Milwaukee Health Department will compensate 100 doulas to help expectant mothers in the 53206 ZIP code. The program will be funded with up to $100,000 from Milwaukee County.

Rainey worked with Dimitrijevic to develop the program.

"This is just the beginning. This is a pilot program. But think about the power of 100 doulas, 100 women and families and children," Dimitrijevic said.

"We will have the healthiest babies in the nation," she said.

Dimitrijevic and Kowalik spoke of the importance of city and county officials, as well as public agencies and private groups, working together to combat infant mortality.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"We can't do this alone," Kowalik said. "We have to have partnerships."

The measure comes as Gov. Tony Evers’ has pledged to spend $618,000 in his 2019-'21 budget to fund doula training.

Doulas are certified professionals trained to support expectant mothers' nutritional, physical and mental health with culturally sensitive pregnancy and childbirth education. They typically emphasize prenatal nutrition, labor coaching, breastfeeding, safe sleeping habits and stress reduction techniques.

Many have additional specialties, such as massage, hydrotherapy, lactation consultations, yoga, aromatherapy and organizational skills.

Coggs said: "It is far beyond time that we work together, collaborate on solutions, so that years from now we are not having these same conversations about all the negative we know exists. We know we have the power and the knowledge and the ability and the resources to help change those outcomes."

Contact Mary Spicuzza at (414) 224-2324 or mary.spicuzza@jrn.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MSpicuzzaMJS or Facebook at https://www.facebook.com/mary.spicuzza.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2019/04/02/milwaukee-mayor-tom-barrett-signs-bill-creating-53206-pilot-program/3345193002/