Tony Evers and Scott Walker are fighting over a teacher who looked at porn at school — here's the rest of the story
CLOSE The day after the election Scott Walker and Tony Evers gave differing versions about how Evers handled a teacher caught watching pornography. Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

Kromrey Middle School teacher Andrew Harris is at the center of an election-year fight between Gov. Scott Walker and State Superintendent Tony Evers. (Photo: Max Bayer, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

MADISON - His name is Andrew Harris. He's a science teacher in Middleton. And he's in the middle of the biggest debate of the governor's race.

Voters are weighing whether to give Gov. Scott Walker a third term or replace him with State schools Superintendent Tony Evers while also trying to make sense of a convoluted case involving the teacher who looked at pornography at school nearly a decade ago.

The race for governor is only a week old. But already both sides are flooding television screens, radio airwaves and Facebook timelines of potential voters with snippets of a saga that the Middleton-Cross Plains School District wants to put behind it.

Both candidates are seeking to portray the case as a simple one to understand — but there's more to the story.

Here's some background:

Harris, the former vice president of the district's teachers union, was caught looking at pornographic material at school along with six of his colleagues in 2010. Until then, he had not had any disciplinary issues.

The district employees' email and internet activity were discovered after a female colleague of Harris complained to supervisors in 2009 after Harris showed her a photo of a woman's genitalia — prompting a districtwide investigation. District officials handed down discipline ranging from a reprimand to Harris' termination.

Harris appealed the firing because his discipline was harsher than others' who were caught looking at similar material and argued he was targeted because of his union activity.

The school district's decision to fire Harris came after he had provided colleagues with an update on contract negotiations, in which Harris said district officials didn’t value teachers. That statement was shared with a reporter from the local newspaper and angered the district superintendent and board president, according to a report written by an arbitrator who reviewed the firing after Harris filed a grievance through the teachers union.

RELATED Bice: Teacher revocations spike under Tony Evers after GOP accuses him of being tardy on issue

RELATED: Governor candidate Tony Evers let teacher keep license after porn viewing, but high standard shielded instructor

The arbitrator ultimately ruled Harris should be given a suspension rather than be fired because the other employees were given lesser punishments for "doing the same or similar types of things," according to the arbitrator's report.

While then-district Superintendent Don Johnson said Harris' conduct was worse than others and resulted in the harshest punishment, a circuit court judge and a state appeals court judge upheld the arbitrator's ruling to give Harris his job back. The Wisconsin Supreme Court decided not to take up the case.

Harris was reinstated in 2014 after Evers decided he could not take away Harris' license because state law at the time of the offenses did not allow him to because students were not exposed to the pornography — a requirement that was removed in 2011 after Republicans passed a bill with Evers' support.

Harris returned to the classroom after being away for four years — prompting protests and angering many parents at the time, some of whom wanted district officials to provide a study hall to offer students who felt uncomfortable in Harris' classroom.

Some of those parents reached out to Evers and Walker asking them to intervene.

Evers maintains he objected to Harris' behavior, but state law prevented him from keeping Harris out of the classroom.

But Walker says Evers should have begun a process to revoke Harris' license and let the courts settle the matter if Harris had appealed.

POLITIFACT: Third attack ad vs. Tony Evers in teacher porn has some of the same problems

RELATED: It's Tony Evers vs. Scott Walker: 5 takeaways from the 2018 Wisconsin primary election

RELATED: State GOP attacks Evers for declining to revoke license of Middleton teacher

The case has emerged as the central attack against Evers by Walker at a time when the school district just wants to move on.

But that's not stopping the candidates from talking about it. To help sort it all out, here's some context to the claims you'll hear in the coming weeks:

Claims vs. context

What you'll hear: Middleton-Cross Plains School District science teacher Andrew Harris looked at pornography at school.

What you need to know: A school district investigation revealed Harris was one of seven teachers in the district who looked at pornographic material at school during the workday. District investigators found 23 emails sent to Harris from Harris' sister that included pornographic photos, jokes and movies, according to a 2010 district report. Among the emails were:

• A minute-long video featuring a woman unzipping her shirt to reveal her breasts (report doesn't note whether the woman was wearing a bra).

• A joke about anal intercourse.

• An animated photo depicting a penis made out of snow spitting snowballs.

• An email with the subject line "New Wipers" with a photo of a naked woman lying face down on the hood of a car with her legs spread apart acting like windshield wipers.

• 10 images in one email of a woman exposing or almost exposing her breasts and genitalia in various poses.

• A movie clip of a soccer player with dwarfism who performs sexual acts or has sexual intercourse 11 times with one woman.

• An image of a target painted on a woman's genitalia.

• An email containing five images of women's breasts. Harris replied "Wow those are bizarre nips!!!!!...."

The other teachers investigated also received and shared emails, images and jokes containing pornographic material.

What you'll hear: Tony Evers could (or couldn't) have revoked Andrew Harris' teaching license.

What you need to know: Harris looked at the pornography over a span of about a year until a fellow teacher complained in 2009. At that time, the Department of Public Instruction could begin a process to revoke licenses of teachers who engaged in "immoral conduct," which was defined then as "conduct or behavior that is contrary to commonly accepted moral or ethical standards and that endangers the health, safety, welfare, or education of any pupil."

The argument between Walker and Evers hinges on those last 12 words.

In firing Harris, the Middleton-Cross Plains School District argued Harris' conduct did trigger the legal basis for Evers to revoke. But then-Superintedent Don Johnson also told parents and reporters the case did not involve children in any way, which was a key factor in Evers' decision, according to the DPI.

Evers says he couldn't have revoked Harris' license because the law at the time of the offense required DPI to prove Harris had put students in danger. While Harris looked at the pornographic material at school, he didn't look at it during classes and students never saw it.

“While your conduct certainly was highly inappropriate for an educator, it does not meet the legal definition of immoral conduct contained in the 2008-'09 law,” the 2014 letter from DPI to Harris said. “Specifically, the Department’s investigation confirmed the school district’s public statements that your conduct did not involve children in any manner.”

The Middleton-Cross Plains School District at the time of Evers' decision not to seek revocation blasted Evers for not considering the fact that Harris looked at the pornographic material for months.

Walker asked Evers to do so in 2014 and now says Evers is relying on a bureaucratic reasoning and should have revoked the license anyway and let the courts decide if Harris had appealed.

POLITIFACT: Wisconsin GOP mostly misfires in attack on governor candidate Tony Evers over school porn case

Harris' attorney, William Haus, said in an interview that Harris would certainly have appealed if Evers had tried to take away his license.

The arbitrator who ruled in favor of Harris returning to the classroom said because no students were exposed to the material and because Harris deleted all emails he received that contained the pornographic material, there was no risk of students stumbling upon the pornography.

What you'll hear: Tony Evers worked to change state law in response to the Andrew Harris case.

What you need to know: A group of Republican lawmakers introduced a bill to change the definition of "immoral conduct" in 2011 to allow a teaching license to be revoked in any situation involving a teacher looking at pornography at school, regardless of whether students saw it.

GOP Rep. Steve Kestell, who authored the bill, said DPI did not push the bill and said it was the Middleton-Cross Plains School District officials who contacted lawmakers.

"I don't remember DPI being particularly helpful or even very involved in the process. It certainly wasn't a case where DPI was 'pushing' for the law to be changed," Kestell said. "The best I could say is that they didn't oppose the legislation."

But emails provided to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel from the DPI show its legislative liaison, Jennifer Kammerud, discussed the legislation with Kestell as it was being drafted.

DPI officials also testified at hearings in favor of the legislation, praising the fact that the department would no longer have to prove that looking at pornography endangers children in order to pursue revocation.

The bill was passed in 2011 — three years before Evers decided not to try to take away Harris' license.

Walker signed the bill, but aides did not testify in favor of the bill. And Walker did not promote signing the bill at the time.

What you'll hear: Scott Walker told Tony Evers to revoke Harris' license

What you need to know: Not at first. While it's true Walker ultimately wrote a letter to Evers saying he believes Evers had the authority to revoke Harris' license — thereby implying Walker would support Evers in a legal challenge — Walker first said the matter was best left up to the Middleton-Cross Plains School Board.

When a parent of students in the district wrote a letter to Walker in 2014 asking him to intervene, a Walker aide told the parent to contact School Board members.

The aide also told the parent that the issue was "decided in the courts" when two judges upheld an arbitrator's decision to give Harris his job back, leaving it out of Walker's jurisdiction.

RELATED: Bice: Scott Walker cites concerns of aide and others in calling out porn-viewing teacher

Walker then switched gears and sent a letter to Evers after the Wisconsin State Journal published a story on Walker's aide's advice and after Walker's deputy press secretary on a Facebook post voiced concerns that her daughter may end up getting Harris as a teacher during the upcoming school year.

What you'll hear: Likely nothing from Harris or Middleton-Cross Plains School District officials

What you need to know: The last time Harris spoke publicly about the matter was in 2014, when he had just returned to the classroom after a four-year absence as the case rocked the Middleton community.

"If I were a parent in this situation, I would want to know what’s going on,” Harris told the Middleton Times-Tribune at the time. “I made a mistake, and I’m sorry for the mistake I made. I’d like to rebuild the trust, show people that I’m a good teacher.”

Harris said then he wanted to put the matter behind him.

In late 2017, a district spokesman told the Wisconsin State Journal Harris "has done great work since his return" and rejected Republicans' arguments that Evers left students in danger by not trying to revoke Harris' license.

And last week a district official said neither the district nor the board had any comment on the case.

But now — more than four years after Harris was reinstated — the case is being publicized more than ever.

Haus, Harris' attorney, said Walker's focus on the case is akin to shooting someone in the street for bumping into you accidentally.

"It just isn't fair to get raked over the coals over and over again because somebody thinks there is a political advantage to it," Haus said.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2Bzs75e