The Devil's Advocates Radio Network - Wisconsin
Around 50 volunteers came to Waukesha County Republican Party headquarters to listen to Trump’s speech and prepare for the upcoming campaign.



“We’re keeping America great,” said Veronica Diaz, a language medical interpreter from Milwaukee. “Trump is the man. He is doing all the things he said he was going to do for America and for our economy.”



Alex Ledezma, a college student from Madison, said Trump is the “first president to speak out against socialism in the 21st century. Socialism is pouring into our policies slowly but surely.”



“No one wants to pay higher taxes,” he added. “Everyone wants to save a couple of bucks in their pocket.”



www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/elections/2019/06/18/gop-activists-prepare-trumps-re-electio... ... See MoreSee Less GOP activists prepare for Trump's re-election campaign in Wisconsin During watch parties across the state, Republican volunteers begin training for 2020 presidential campaign.

Happy Hour starts NOW!

Happy Tuesday! @realdonaldtrump says will arrest 'millions of illegal aliens' as @aoc says administration is running concentration camps on the border. Christine Neuman-Ortiz @voces_milwaukee joins us at 5:00.



Swing voters, Iran policy, acting Defense Secretary Pat Shanahan 'going to spend more time with family' leaving another void in Cabinet, polling shows Trump catching up to Biden in swing states.



In #wisconsin, Trump & Clinton still owe $75k for 2016 events. Did they get the invoice? Also #WEDC says Exact Sciences owes no money, met job goals.



All that and more, plus your calls/texts at 844-967-2789! ... See MoreSee Less Video

"I don't think reparations for something that happened 150 years ago for whom none us currently living are responsible is a good idea," McConnell said. "We've tried to deal with our original sin of slavery by fighting a civil war, by passing landmark civil rights legislation. We elected an African American president."



McConnell was asked about reparations during a weekly press conference, which comes a day before the House Judiciary Committee will hold the first hearing on the issue in a decade.



"I think we're always a work in progress in this country, but no one currently alive was responsible for that, and I don't think we should be trying to figure out how to compensate for it. First of all, it would be pretty hard to figure out who to compensate. ... No, I don't think reparations are a good idea," McConnell continued.



thehill.com/homenews/senate/449136-mcconnell-reparations-arent-a-a-good-idea ... See MoreSee Less McConnell: Reparations aren't a 'good idea' Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) on Tuesday said that he does not support reparations for descendants of slaves, a topic that has become a point of debate in the 2020 election cycle.

President Trump on Tuesday refused to apologize to the “Central Park Five” for calling for their executions over rape and assault convictions that were later overturned.



“You have people on both sides of that. They admitted their guilt,” Trump told reporters as he left the White House for a campaign rally in Florida.



thehill.com/homenews/administration/449181-trump-refuses-to-apologize-to-central-park-five-they-a... ... See MoreSee Less Trump refuses to apologize to Central Park Five: 'They admitted their guilt' President Trump on Tuesday refused to apologize to the “Central Park Five” for calling for their executions over rape and assault convictions that were later overturned.