What you should know about the Confederate flag's evolution
The flag is a symbol of slavery and white supremacy to many but a matter of states' rights and Southern heritage for others. Here's how the controversial flag has evolved:

First Confederate flag: “The Stars and Bars”

The first official flag of the Confederacy was adopted on March 4, 1861, and was almost immediately criticized by peers because of matters of principle and functionality. Some Confederates disliked "Stars and Bars" because it looked similar to the flag that represented the Union, a group to which they were ideologically opposed. The similarity also drew confusion on the battlefield, though separate battle flags eventually would flourish. The number of stars on the flag eventually totaled 13 by 1863.

South Carolina

Mississippi

Florida

Alabama

Georgia

Louisiana

Texas

Virginia

Arkansas

Tennessee

North Carolina

Kentucky

Missouri

Second flag: “The Stainless Banner”

By 1863, the Army of Northern Virginia's square battle flag was so popular among the Confederacy that it was incorporated into the upper left corner of the new flag. The white rectangle symbolizes the "supremacy of the white man," according to William T. Thompson, the flag's designer. "As a people we are fighting to maintain the Heaven-ordained supremacy of the white man over the inferior or colored race," Thompson wrote. The second flag faced criticism for being too white, with complaints that it could be mistaken for a truce sign in battle.

Third flag: “The Blood-Stained Banner”

The dominance of the mostly white design in the second flag became such an issue that a third flag design was successfully adopted on March 4, 1865. However, the third and last flag was rarely manufactured – the Confederacy fell within a month.

The Confederate flag today

The battle flag is what most Americans identify with the Confederacy today. It still recently hung in South Carolina's Capitol until state legislators approved removing it from the Statehouse grounds. The Charleston shooting may have propelled the state's governor and other legislators to vote for the removal of the flag, but a handful of other Southern states' flags also don the secession-era relic.

Influences in state flag designs