David P. Fidler : Faculty and Staff of Indiana University Maurer School of Law
Biography

Professor Fidler specializes in international law, national security, and emerging technologies. He is one of the world’s leading experts on cybersecurity law and policy and cyberspace and international law. Professor Fidler is an adjunct senior fellow for cybersecurity with the Council on Foreign Relations, served as the chair of the International Law Association’s Study Group on Terrorism, Cybersecurity, and International Law, and the editor of and a contributor to the award-winning The Snowden Reader (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2015).

Professor Fidler is also an internationally recognized expert in global health and biosecurity threats. He is an associate fellow with the Centre on Global Health Security at the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House), has been an international legal consultant for the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and World Health Organization, and is on the Roster of Experts that advises the Director-General of the World Health Organization under the International Health Regulations. He was a member of the Harvard-London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine’s Independent Panel on the Global Response to Ebola and provided advice to the UN Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Global Response to Health Crises. He served as a consultant to the U.S. Department of Defense’s Defense Science Board on the threat of bioterrorism and as a member of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s committee on dual-use biological research of concern.

Professor Fidler has also worked extensively on the rule of law in counterinsurgency and stability operations, including his participation in the Interagency Afghanistan Integrated Civilian-Military Pre-Deployment Training Course organized by the Departments of Defense, State, and Agriculture and the U.S. Agency for International Development. He has also published frequently on the globalization of baseball, with a focus on improving how Major League Baseball operates in Latin American countries.