Allegations Against Kavanaugh
Sep 18, 2018

WASHINGTON, D.C. – Supreme Court nominee Judge Brett Kavanaugh “categorically and unequivocally” denies a 36-year-old, unconfirmed allegation by Christine Blasey Ford of an alleged drunken sexual assault when both were teenagers. Ford graduated in 1984 from Holton-Arms School, an all-girls school in Bethesda, Maryland, which is located seven miles away from Georgetown Prep, the all-boys school Kavanaugh attended during the same period.



Ford, a professor at Palo Alto University, identified herself as the anonymous woman who wrote a letter to Rep. Anna Eshoo alleging Judge Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her in 1982 when they were in high school. However, Ford has apparently changed her story dramatically over the years. In fact, news reports indicate she can’t even remember the location, the year, how she got to and from the home, or how many people were involved. Below are disturbing facts that undermine her story:

Ford waited 36 years to reveal this alleged incident. In 2012, she brought up this alleged assault in a couples therapy class at the same time Mitt Romney was running for president and Brett Kavanaugh’s name was being mentioned in the media as someone Romney might appoint to the Supreme Court should he win the presidency. However, she never mentioned Kavanaugh’s name and claimed the alleged assault involved four people. Now, she changed her story to two people.

Ford is a registered Democrat who has made donations to Bernie Sanders, the DNC and ACT BLUE, a far-left political action group. She also signed an anti-Trump letter on border policy and was part of an anti-Trump march involving the president’s alleged cutting of funding for science research. She made a hat to look like a brain patterned after the offensive hats worn during the so-called “Women’s March” in D.C. protesting President Trump.

Ford’s attorney, Debra Katz, has a history of Democratic activism and spoke in public defense of Bill Clinton against the accusations by Paula Jones. Katz also said that former Minnesota Democratic Senator Al Franken should not resign, even though multiple women accused him of ongoing sexual harassment. Katz is the vice chair of the board of the Project On Government Oversight, an organization funded by George Soros, which co-signed a letter to Senator Dianne Feinstein and Senator Grassley along with a variety of leftist groups demanding Kavanaugh records.

The one alleged witness who Ford claims was at the scene was Mark Judge, Kavanaugh’s Georgetown Prep classmate. Judge said Ford’s allegation never happened: “It's just absolutely nuts. I never saw Brett act that way.” In addition, Mark Judge wrote a critical book about private prep schools and how he witnessed debauchery and out-of-control behavior from students at these schools. It seems apparent that if he had seen this alleged assault, Judge would have written about it. He didn’t and doesn’t even know Ford.

Senator Diane Feinstein reportedly held the letter since July from Ford. Feinstein remained silent until Senate Democrats failed to have the hearings canceled. She did not take the letter seriously until pressured by other Democrats and liberal groups to release it.

Ford has a brother, Ralph Blasey, who worked for Baker Hostetler, a law firm that retained Fusion GPS, the infamous DC company that produced the unverified Steele dossier on President Donald Trump and Russia, sparking the Russia investigation.

“The 36-year old allegation against Judge Brett Kavanaugh by Christine Blasey Ford is a shameful, desperate attempt to destroy a person in order to stop his nomination to the Supreme Court,” said Mat Staver, Founder and Chairman of Liberty Counsel. “Judge Kavanaugh has gone through six FBI background investigations for his work in the White House, confirmation to the Court of Appeals, and now the Supreme Court, with not a hint of improper actions toward any woman. It’s apparent that Democrats are trying to pull out every nasty tactic to block Judge Kavanaugh from serving on the nation’s Highest Court because he adheres to the Constitution. We saw the same thing happen to Justice Clarence Thomas, but the despicable tactics have escalated. This is a serious injustice to a man who has by all accounts led a life of respect for God, women, and the law, by someone who has an ever-changing story with plenty of political motivation. A 36-year old unverified allegation during high school that runs counter to everyone who knew Brett Kavanaugh should not be given an opportunity to turn the confirmation process into a circus,” said Staver.

Liberty Counsel is an international nonprofit, litigation, education, and policy organization dedicated to advancing religious freedom, the sanctity of life, and the family since 1989, by providing pro bono assistance and representation on these and related topics. Liberty Counsel provides broadcast quality TV interviews via Hi-Def Skype and LTN at no cost.