Loyola Law School, Los Angeles
Justin Levitt

Associate Dean for Research

Professor of Law

Gerald T. McLaughlin Fellow

Justin Levitt, Associate Dean for Research, Professor of Law

Constitutional Law

Law of the Political Process

Criminal Procedure

The Motives of Public Actors

Links

Education

BA, magna cum laude, Harvard College

JD/MPA, magna cum laude, Harvard Law School / Harvard Kennedy School

Background

A nationally recognized scholar of constitutional law and the law of democracy, Professor Justin Levitt recently returned to Loyola after serving as a Deputy Assistant Attorney General in the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice. At DOJ, he primarily supported the Civil Rights Division’s work on voting rights and protections against employment discrimination (including LGBT rights in the workplace).

Levitt has published in the Harvard Law Review, the Yale Law and Policy Review, the Columbia Law Review, the Georgetown Law Journal, the William & Mary Law Review, the peer-reviewed Election Law Journal, and the online publications of the flagship law reviews at Yale and NYU, among others. He has served as a visiting faculty member at the Yale Law School, at USC's Gould School of Law, and at Caltech. He was honored to receive Loyola's Excellence in Teaching Award for 2013-14.

Levitt has been invited to testify before committees of the U.S. House and Senate, the U.S. Civil Rights Commission, several state legislative bodies, and both federal and state courts. His research has been cited extensively in the media and the courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court. He maintains the website All About Redistricting, tracking the process of state and federal redistricting around the country, including litigation.

Levitt served in various capacities for several presidential campaigns, including as the National Voter Protection Counsel in 2008, helping to run an effort ensuring that tens of millions of citizens could vote and have those votes counted. Before joining the faculty of Loyola Law School, he was counsel at the Brennan Center for Justice at NYU School of Law, for five years. He also worked as in-house counsel to the country's largest independent voter registration and engagement operation, and at several nonprofit civil rights and civil liberties organizations.

At Loyola, Levitt established the Practitioner Moot Program, a complimentary service to the community allowing attorneys with pending appellate matters to practice their arguments before faculty experts and experienced advocates. Under the program, Loyola has hosted recent moots for cases later argued in the Supreme Court, the Ninth Circuit, the California Supreme Court, and the California Courts of Appeal, among others.

Levitt served as a law clerk to the Honorable Stephen Reinhardt of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. He holds a law degree and a masters degree in public administration from Harvard University, and was an articles editor for the Harvard Law Review. He is admitted to the bar in California, New Jersey, New York, and the District of Columbia, and to the U.S. Supreme Court, the U.S. Courts of Appeal for the Fourth Circuit, Ninth Circuit, and Eleventh Circuit, and the U.S. District Courts in the Central District of California and Northern District of Florida.

Selected Scholarship

Primary Articles

Essays and Shorter Scholarship

Monographs and Book Chapters

In the News

Levitt has been invited to testify as an expert on election law before committees of the U.S. House and Senate (statements here, here, here, and here); the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (here and here); federal and state courts; state legislative bodies in Alaska, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Nevada, New York, Oregon, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin; and local bodies in Los Angeles County and Dallas.

Levitt has also appeared in film, TV (domestic and international), radio, and podcast, and has been quoted as an election law and redistricting expert by numerous newspapers, magazines, and news services, including the Associated Press, Reuters, New York Times, Wall St. Journal, Washington Post, New Yorker, USA Today, The Hill, The Nation, Politico, Los Angeles Times, Sacramento Bee, Miami Herald, Kansas City Star, Houston Chronicle, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Palm Beach Post, Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel, Minneapolis Star-Tribune, Atlanta Journal-Constitution, and St. Petersburg Times.

Levitt has also published many shorter opinion pieces, including in the New York Times, Washington Post, SCOTUSblog, Politico, The Hill, Roll Call, Pacific Standard, and the Huffington Post; he has also been a regular contributor to Summary Judgments, the Election Law Blog, the ACSblog, and the Brennan Center for Justice blog.

Public Service

Levitt serves as a faculty advisor for the Loyola chapter of the American Constitution Society, and is an avid supporter of public interest work. He is an Advisor for the Course of Study in Law and the Political Process, is the co-chair of Loyola's Faculty Workshops, and has served as the faculty advisor for the Loyola Law Review. In 2015, he served on the Search Committee for Loyola's next Dean; he has also served on the Curriculum Committee and Instructional Technology Committee. Beyond Loyola, he regularly provides assistance to legislators and administrators from both major political parties, and has represented nonpartisan nonprofit organizations and officials and former officials from both major political parties in court. He also serves on the Board of Directors of the Fair Elections Center, and as a member of the Advisory Committee to the Los Angeles County Voting Systems Assessment Project.