How to Register
New Hampshire residents who will be 18 years of age or older on Election Day, and a United States Citizen may register with their Town or City Clerk. Polls are open from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. unless posted otherwise.

For your convenience, the Office of the City Clerk is open for voter registration Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and Tuesday evenings until 8:00 p.m., excluding holidays unless posted otherwise. All applications must be approved by the Board of Registrars before being added to the checklist.

In order to register to vote in the City of Manchester you must meet the following requirements:

Valid New Hampshire Driver's License with current Manchester address on the front.

All Other Registrants:

Proof of Identification:

Valid Driver's License, Non-Driver's ID, Current Passport, Military ID, or a completed Qualified Voter Affidavit signed under the penalties of voting fraud set forth by State Law.

Valid Driver's License, Non-Driver's ID, Current Passport, Military ID, or a completed Qualified Voter Affidavit signed under the penalties of voting fraud set forth by State Law. Proof of Domicile:

There are numerous documents that will be accepted to prove your domicile in the city of Manchester. The following is just an example of a few of these documents:

There are numerous documents that will be accepted to prove your domicile in the city of Manchester. The following is just an example of a few of these documents: Valid NH vehicle registration, utility bill (with applicant's name on it, i.e. Telephone, Gas, Electric), school document showing you live in campus housing, rental or lease agreement in your name, tax bills, medical bills, pay stubs showing your Manchester address or other monthly bills, postmarked mail within the last 30 days.

If you are a naturalized citizen you will also need to provide proof of your citizenship or you will be asked to complete a Qualified Voter Affidavit signed under the penalties of voting fraud set forth by State Law.

For additional questions regarding the voter registration process and how the latest 2017 voting laws affect you, please refer to the NH Attorney General's memorandum issued on September 18, 2017.

Military or Oversees Citizen Registration:

If you are a member of the military you can obtain from your commanding officer a Standard Form 76 (red and white form), Federal Post Card Application - Registration and Absentee Ballot Request. If you are an oversees citizen or if your commanding officer does not have the form you can print out the online version of the Federal Post Card Application and mail it to the City Clerk's Office, One City Hall Plaza, Manchester, NH 03101.

The Office of the City Clerk continues our commitment to making your election experience as pleasant as possible. In an effort to minimize waiting in long lines on Election Day, our annual Voter Registration Drive provides prospective voters with numerous opportunities to register to vote at locations within the community.