House Passes Spending Bill Without Obamacare Fix
WASHINGTON -- The House passed the $1.3-trillion omnibus spending package meant to keep the government running until Sept. 30 in a vote of 256-167, leaving the Senate barely 35 hours to get the same legislation approved by Friday at midnight to avert a shutdown.

The bill boosts funding for the National Institutes of Health, the CDC, and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) as well as other key agencies, but keeps funding flat for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

From the floor on Thursday, Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) lauded the biggest increase in defense spending in 15 years.

He also cheered "record funding" for the VA, "to make sure that our veterans receive better care at better facilities" and provisions to make schools safer, citing inclusion of the "Fix NICS" bill, which strengthens firearm background checks, and the "STOP School Violence Act," which funds early intervention, mental health, and school security, he said.

"Both are provisions that the Parkland families asked Congress to include in this legislation," he said, alluding to the mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in February.

Meanwhile, Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) lamented the bill's lack of a fix for DACA -- the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program -- which President Trump plans to phase out -- blaming Ryan for failing to bring the issue to a vote despite his earlier pledge.

The bill also does not include the health insurance stabilization bill from Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.) and Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine). They had wanted the omnibus package to include measures restoring for 3 years the cost-sharing reduction subsidies (monies that help insurers defray out-of-pocket costs for low-income enrollees), establishing 3 years of reinsurance (monies that help pay for the sickest of patients and keep premiums from spiking) at $10 billion per year, and streamlining the 1332 waiver process to allow states more flexibility in health plan design.

Senate Democrats, including Sen. Patty Murray (D-Wash.) who partnered with Alexander on an earlier version of a stabilization package, rejected the Alexander-Collins measures because they included new abortion restrictions.

Health Insurance Provisions

Some policy analysts were also frustrated by the omission of the stabilization measures.

"We are extremely disappointed that Republicans and Democrats have been unable to agree on health insurance legislation for the individual market. Leaving this out of the House-passed government spending bill for 2018 continues to highlight the inability of both parties to come together on a proposal to address increasing costs and availability of coverage in the individual insurance market in many areas of the country," said G. William Hoagland, senior vice president for the Bipartisan Policy Center, and Katherine Hayes, the center's health policy director, in a press statement.

"Stabilizing this market is critical to driving down their premium costs and providing certainty for insurers to provide their coverage. It is imperative that lawmakers jump-start negotiations on this issue," they wrote. "We have kicked this can down the road far too long."

Kip Piper, MPA, a Washington-based healthcare reform consultant, echoed Hoagland and Hayes' concerns about the omitted stabilization provisions.

"Stabilization of the failed Obamacare individual market is needed, especially since regrettably there is little interest in Washington to deregulate and give states flexibility," he wrote, while noting a "legitimate concern" that certain "cures" could exacerbate the problem or "direct money in the wrong direction."

Overall, Piper saw the lack of healthcare provisions in the bill as "disappointing but not surprising."

"There is not enough agreement between Democrats and Republicans on health policy to fill a microscope slide," he told MedPage Today in an email.

Tackling the Opioids Crisis

Piper noted that, in relation to the opioid crisis, "the bill includes an array of law enforcement and public health related provisions, more programs, and about $4 billion in additional funding – on top of money approved in earlier legislation."

Only about $1 billion of those dollars would be directed to states and tribes who are better poised to design and execute solutions for their communities, Piper noted.

"It will be important for funds to be as flexible as possible," he added.

Piper was also disappointed to see no change to the Institutions for Mental Diseases exclusion, which bars states from using federal dollars to pay for residential treatment in facilities with more than 16 beds.

"IMDs could play an important role in addressing opioid treatment if Congress were to finally drop the misguided, counterproductive prohibition," he said.

Investing in Science

Research advocates were energized by the $3 billion in increased funding for NIH which could help fund initiatives to "deepen our understanding of complex diseases, furthering efforts to eradicate many of these health threats," wrote Mary Woolley, president and CEO of Research!America in a press statement.

She also called the increased funding for the CDC "crucial" for the nation to respond to the spectrum of public health issues "from diabetes to global pandemics,"and described the increased monies for the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality -- which the Trump administration has proposed to terminate -- as "a sound investment to achieve higher quality, lower cost health care."

Nancy Brown, CEO of the American Heart Association, in a press statement, applauded the NIH funding boost, calling it "the most substantial federal support the NIH has received since the agency's budget was doubled nearly two decades ago."

If the omnibus is passed, she urged the NIH to direct more dollars to heart and stroke research.

However, like Piper, Hoagland and Hayes, Brown was disheartened by the exclusion of stabilization measures targeting the individual health insurance market.

"While we are extremely pleased that Congress has reached a consensus on NIH funding, we hope they can do the same when it comes to a stabilization bill ... This failure needs to be addressed promptly to protect patients and keep costs down," Brown wrote.

Neglecting Hepatitis C, HIV?

AIDS advocates, meanwhile, were frustrated that Congress "failed to adequately fund CDC's hepatitis activities" which target the rising number of infectious disease cases caused by the opioid epidemic.

"As part of the Fiscal Year 2018 Omnibus Appropriations package, Congress did increase CDC hepatitis spending by $5 million, to $39 million, but it is far from what jurisdictions across the country need to deal with the rapid increases in hepatitis C, hepatitis B, and HIV due to injection drug use," wrote Carl Schmid, deputy executive director of The AIDS Institute, a national nonprofit, in a press release.

The Institute had requested $100 million to build prevention and education programs, expand testing, establish surveillance systems, and connect people with care and treatment in communities that lack a public health infrastructure, Schmid wrote.

"Not adequately funding hepatitis prevention programs now will just lead to increased infections, which in the long run will not only impact people's lives, but cost the healthcare system more," Schmid concluded.

If the bill passes the Senate, President Trump is expected to sign it. However, any changes made in the Senate version would require a new vote in the House, increasing the threat of a government shutdown beginning on Saturday.

2018-03-22T18:01:29-0400