Abolish ICE: Why California Dems aren’t joining the new progressive rallying cry
California’s top Democratic hopefuls are backing away from the “Abolish ICE” rallying cry that has emerged as a mantra for progressive activists, signaling an uneasiness with the party’s bold left turn in one of the country’s most deeply blue states.

None of the Democrats running in the 10 most competitive House races in the Golden State support dissolving the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency, according to a Bay Area News Group survey of the candidates over the last week.

That hasn’t stopped the Republicans from using the debate against them. GOP strategists have seized on the nascent movement as a wedge issue, hitting Democrats in California and around the country with ads about abolishing ICE in an attempt to paint them as extreme.

The debate has also revealed fault lines inside the Democratic party between fired-up liberal activists and more cautious candidates running in districts that have elected Republicans for years.

“You don’t have an infection on your toe and cut off your entire foot,” said Katie Hill, a Democratic nonprofit executive running in a competitive district in the hills and desert towns of northern Los Angeles County. “It shows you the need for more sane politicians — politicians who are committed to fighting for what needs to happen, not just rabble-rousing their base.”

Liberals have argued that U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement or ICE — which was formed in 2003 in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks — needs to be done away with to prevent abuses of undocumented immigrants. Attention on the idea grew over the last month amid a barrage of news stories about migrant children removed from their families.

Hill and the other Democrats running in closely-watched Republican-held districts up and down California denounced the Trump administration’s immigration crackdown, including the “zero-tolerance” policy that separated more than 2,300 children from their parents. Several called for reforms to how the agency enforces immigration rules.

But they contend that doing away with ICE wouldn’t stop the hard-line policies put in place by President Trump.

“ICE is a scapegoat for what the president is doing from the very top of government,” said Ammar Campa-Najjar, a Democrat running against Rep. Duncan Hunter in a heavily Republican San Diego-area district. Even if ICE is abolished, he said, “Trump could come up with a different acronym for a different agency, and it would still have the same problems.”

Others criticized Trump while praising rank-and-file agents. Central Valley Democrat TJ Cox, who’s running against Rep. David Valadao, said that “the hardworking and honorable men and women that work for ICE are put in a very untenable position” because of the administration’s directives.

Several polls have found that most Americans oppose abolishing ICE. Hill, who is running against Rep. Steve Knight, said that a debate over the proposal “isn’t healthy” for the Democratic Party, and “gives ammo straight into the hands of Republicans.”

GOP operatives are ready to use that ammo. Last month, a SuperPAC backing congressional Republicans launched Facebook ads attacking Hill and Josh Harder, a Central Valley Democratic candidate, over the ICE issue. The ads, paid for by Defending Main Street PAC, declared that “liberal Democrats in Katie Hill’s party are trying to abolish ICE and weaken our border security.” (The PAC didn’t respond to a request for comment.)

The ads were small — costing only $100 each, according to federal campaign finance reports — but they could be a preview of more to come. Already, Republicans have hit the airwaves in several other key districts around the country with TV ads trying to tie Democrats to abolishing ICE.

Trump himself has predicted that the debate over the issue will carry his party to victory, saying in a Fox News interview last month that Democrats would “never win another election” if they come out against ICE.

Jack Pandol, a spokesman for the National Republican Congressional Committee, argued that the issue was fair game because the Democratic base supports scrapping the agency, despite the California candidates’ own positions. If the party retook the House in November, he suggested, they’d do away with ICE.

“A Republican Congress is all that’s standing in the way,” Pandol said.

So far, however, only about a dozen Democratic members of Congress have actually come out in favor of dissolving the agency. Even as potential presidential candidates, including Sens. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., and Kirsten Gillibrand, D-N.Y., have supported the idea, the vast majority of the party’s elected officials aren’t onboard. Party leaders like House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-San Francisco, have kept their distance from the debate.

The California House races could make or break Democrats’ hopes of retaking the chamber. From a tactical standpoint, it would be more advantageous for the party to talk about changing ICE instead of abolishing it, suggested Jack Pitney, a political science professor at Claremont McKenna College.

“Obviously Trump and his supporters are going to be pressing this issue, but I think the smart Democrats are going to use language like ‘reform’ and ‘restructure’ rather than abolish,” he said.

Hill argued that liberal Democrats needed to tone down their rhetoric or risk losing more moderate and competitive seats like hers.

“The members of Congress who are supporting abolishing ICE are in these very progressive districts that would never ever vote for a Republican in a million years,” she said. “But that doesn’t do any good for those of us in districts across the country … where you can’t just go for the most progressive red meat.”

WHAT DEMOCRATS SAY ON ABOLISHING ICE

Jessica Morse, CA-04: “National security is too important to be used as a political football. By improving rather than abolishing ICE, I believe we can have strong border security that reflects our American value of respect for human dignity and supports our economy.” (running against Rep. Tom McClintock)

Josh Harder, CA-10: “The Trump administration diverted our law enforcement from their job of securing our border in order to rip children from their parents. We should be working to reform ICE, and bringing it back to its mission of protecting our borders, not serving the political whims of politicians in Washington.” (running against Rep. Jeff Denham)

TJ Cox, CA-21: “Everyone knows what ICE should be doing: Not targeting hardworking farm workers that are making a living. They should be going after the criminals and the people that really have bad intent.” (running against Rep. David Valadao)

Andrew Janz, CA-22: “While dangerous criminals who are here illegally should properly be deported, as a career prosecutor, I know that having ICE officials threatening crime victims and witnesses is making us all less safe.” (running against Rep. Devin Nunes)

Katie Hill, CA-25: “If we’re focused on the talk about abolishing ICE, then we’re missing the point. It’s just noise… Where our focus needs to be is getting Democrats in Congress, passing immigration reform, and passing a pathway to citizenship for Dreamers.” (running against Rep. Steve Knight)

Gil Cisneros, CA-39: “Gil does not support abolishing ICE… He believes Congress must look into and address the multiple stories of ICE detaining legal residents, including some U.S. citizens, and deporting law-abiding immigrants rather than going after criminals and terrorists.” — spokesman Nic Jordan (running against Republican candidate Young Kim)

Katie Porter, CA-45: “ICE should be focused on its core public safety mission, not targeting families. The real issue here is the failure of Donald Trump’s leadership.” (running against Rep. Mimi Walters)

Harley Rouda, CA-48: “The women and men of ICE need to get back to their actual, all-important jobs — protecting our national security and not taking part in a policy that rips children away from their parents at the border.” (running against Rep. Dana Rohrabacher)

Mike Levin, CA-49: “No, I do not support abolishing ICE… Our country needs immigration enforcement, but ICE should not be subject to the whims of the executive branch, and should administer our nation’s immigration laws in a humane manner.” (running against Republican candidate Diane Harkey)

Ammar Campa-Najjar, CA-50: “If we abolish ICE, another iteration of ICE will come up under President Trump that will continue these draconian measures… these actions will continue unless there’s restraint on the president himself.” (running against Rep. Duncan Hunter)