Definition of Picnic by Merriam-Webster
We picnicked in the park.

This winter is a picnic compared with last year's.

The annual school picnic is this weekend.

We ate our picnic by the lake.

We decided to have a picnic on the beach.

Recent Examples on the Web: Noun

Advice and tips from these sailors can also apply to other activities like camping, hiking and picnics. Susan Selasky, Detroit Free Press, "How 5 Port Huron-to-Mackinac racers feed sailboat crews," 13 July 2018

Peach and tomato bread salad is your next picnic salad or serve with anything barbecued. Ellise Pierce, star-telegram, "It's time to start cooking with summer’s tasty top prize — Texas peaches," 10 July 2018

Taurus love nice things, such as picnics with wine and cheese in the park, or better yet, being taken shopping. Sophie Saint Thomas, Allure, "What Your Zodiac Sign Says About Your Online Dating Style," 6 July 2018

Nelson invited O’Rourke on stage to play guitar with him during his annual 4th of July picnic in Austin on Wednesday in front of thousands of the country music star’s fans. Jeremy Wallace, Houston Chronicle, "Beto O’Rourke plays guitar with country music legend Willie Nelson," 5 July 2018

Some purchase 74 hot dogs to feed the whole family at their Fourth of July picnic, but Joey Chestnut? Lindsay Kimble, PEOPLE.com, "Joey Chestnut Wins the 2018 Nathan's Hot Dog Eating Contest After Downing 74 Franks and Buns," 4 July 2018

As a precaution the park in Boone County has also closed an access road to the lake as well as a nearby picnic shelter. Nancy Daly, Cincinnati.com, "Fish moved from lake at Big Bone Lick State Historic Site," 4 July 2018

So leave the picnic basket at home and check back here to see the full guide. Philip Potempa, Daily Southtown, "Guide to outdoor dining in Chicago suburbs: Tribes Alehouse in Tinley Park," 11 July 2018

So leave the picnic basket at home and check back here to see the full guide. Donald Liebenson, chicagotribune.com, "Guide to outdoor dining in Chicago suburbs: Beelow's NorthShore in Highland Park," 11 July 2018

Recent Examples on the Web: Verb

Other activities include biRoadwatching, hiking, picnicking and playing host to the state's oldest outdoor dance at the park’s concession building. Jerry Garcia, San Antonio Express-News, "State parks abound in the San Antonio area," 11 June 2018

This giant park features more then 830 feet of interactive fountains and a large grassy area perfect for picnicking or just relaxing. 8. Carolina Gusman, sandiegouniontribune.com, "San Diego Comic-Con 2018: 15 free things to do before and after Comic-Con around San Diego County," 13 July 2018

There will be plenty of children, hammocks and tables for picnicking. New York Times, "Free (or Cheap) Things to Do in NYC This Weekend," 5 July 2018

Legoland does not permit outside food or drinks but has grassy areas just outside the park gates if visitors want to picnic. Dawn Gilbertson, azcentral, "San Diego discounts, deals, money-saving tips," 29 June 2018

Penn Treaty Park has come back to life with dog walkers and picnicking families. Inga Saffron, Philly.com, "Will a new riverfront concert venue close the gap between Fishtown and the Delaware - or widen it?," 28 June 2018

But the large one was patterned after one at a favorite childhood place where Peg picnicked. Joanne Kempinger Demski, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, "At Home With: English Tudor in South Milwaukee says 'garden' inside and out," 14 June 2018

Dozens of people picnicking at the Presidio stopped at a table to write personal messages, which will be combined with thousands of similar sentiments collected from across the country. Jill Tucker, San Francisco Chronicle, "SF civilians write thank-you notes for Memorial Day flag," 27 May 2018

A few days later, artist Kerry James Marshall’s 1997 painting of black people picnicking in a park sold for $21 million. Michael Andor Brodeur, BostonGlobe.com, "False alarm: Who to call when you’re white and scared," 17 May 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'picnic.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.