Virginia Tech: Testing shows 'amazing' Flint water improvements
marc-edwardsjpg-03c887e60add3612.jpg

Virginia Tech professor Marc Edwards speaks outside Flint City Hall in this Flint Journal file photo. Edwards spoke on recent Flint water testing results during a news conference at Virginia Tech Friday, Dec. 2.

(Flint Journal file photo)

FLINT, MI -- Virginia Tech researchers who helped uncover problems with Flint's water said Friday, Dec. 2, the situation is dramatically improving with just 6 percent of first-draw samples collected last month registering above the federal threshold for lead.

Professor Marc Edwards and researchers from the university said results from water sampling sponsored by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in November showed the continued improvement in lead levels.

Homes registering above 15 parts per billion of lead have dropped from 17 percent in August 2015 to 15 percent in March 2016 to 6 percent in November.

"The story (in Flint) is actually an amazing success story," Edwards said.

'Beginning of the end' for Flint water crisis health disaster, Edwards says Despite the positive news, Edwards still recommended residents continue to use filtered or bottled water until further notice.

Testing for Shigella in homes "found no positive detection," Edwards said in an email to MLive-The Flint Journal. "This supports the recent CDC study that indicates the Shigella problem is not from the water."

Shigella is a highly contagious bacteria that is spread person-to-person after it leaves the infected person via their feces and spreads by contaminated hands, food, surfaces or water.

In October, the Genesee County Health Department said it had received reports of 75 cases of Shigellosis during the previous 12 months, about six times the number in a typical year.

Virginia Tech researchers also said there are low levels of disinfection byproducts in city water.

"We also have continued to monitor Legionella, and found that even in the few homes with detects this summer, they were undetectable a few months later. We credit the EPA and the state and city for good distribution system maintenance," Edwards' email says.