ALEX JONES TRIAL: Jones tears up, tells ex-wife’s lawyer, you have ‘no decency, zero’
7:05 p.m. update: Alex Jones returned to the stand late Thursday afternoon, answered a few lingering questions from attorneys for both sides and from the jury, and ended his testimony. Among the witnesses expected to testify Friday are Jones’ parents, who live in Austin.

Read the full report on Thursday’s testimony here on mystatesman.com.

Earlier: Alex Jones teared up on the stand Thursday afternoon and in an emotional outburst, told his ex-wife’s attorney that he has “no decency, zero.”

“You sit here and twist things, I’ve never seen anything like it in all of literature or the movies,” Jones said, his face wrought with emotion, to Bobby Newman, an attorney for Kelly Jones, seated a few feet in front of him. “You have won the award sir. No decency, zero.”

Newman had just described how their son had been distraught for three days after not being able to visit with his mother.

But Jones said that was because Kelly Jones had spurned the son’s visit, sending him home with his father, and that Newman’s version turned the facts on their head.

FIRST READING: Alex Jones: `We’re the most bona fide, hard-core, Real McCoy thing there is.’

Newman is attempting to show that Jones has been responsible for their children’s alienation from their mother. Jones has insisted that he bent over backwards — if anything tried too hard — to make the children visit and get along with their mother, to no avail.

“I should not have pushed as hard as I did,” he said.

But when Newman asked to describe Kelly Jones’ good qualities as a mother, Jones asked, looking at his ex-wife, “that women or now.”

“I cannot perjure myself,” Jones said. “She doesn’t have any good qualities.”

Later, he qualified that, saying she has some good qualities but, “any good is sandwiched with bad.”

“There’s a term, `no good,’” he said. “It doesn’t mean there’s no good in it. It means no good comes out of it.”

Jones completed his testimony for the day around 4:45 p.m. He is expected to be back on the stand on Friday.

Earlier: Alex Jones, under cross-examination at his child custody trial, said he brings “none of the bombasity, none of the rage” he displays on Infowars home with him when he is parenting his three children.

“None of the adult type content, that’s not taken home,” Jones said under questioning from Bobby Newman, an attorney for his ex-wife, Kelly Jones.

Newman’s cross-examination of Jones began on a cordial note.

“Good morning, Mr. Jones,” Newman said.

“Hi, howya doin?” Jones replied.

But it went quickly downhill from there.

“You haven’t had any chili this morning?” Newman asked Jones.

“Is that a serious question?” Jones asked Newman.

It was. Newman was referring to Jones’ statement in a March 4 affidavit attributing his inability to remember the names of some of his children’s teachers to having just eaten a “big ol’ bowl of chili, yah.”

“The Chili Parlor’s right over there,” Jones said, gesturing.

Jones said that he had two breakfast tacos in advance of today’s testimony, and no chili.

Newman, as restless and hyperkinetic a figure as Jones, set about trying to undermine the portrait of Jones as a near-perfect father presented under examination by Randall Wilhite, one of his attorneys.

Newman used that same March affidavit to tie Jones up in knots about whether he had acknowledged having sex with a woman, who remains a friend, even after his new wife, Erika, moved into his home following their engagement in November 2015.

In the affidavit, Jones acknowledges that he continued having sex with that other women until about March 2016. But, when Newman pressed Jones to confirm his previous testimony, Jones offered a befuddled look and said, “I’d have to see a calendar.”

Newman pressed on but Jones continued to say, “I don’t have a calendar in front of me,” refused to confirm that the sex continued after his fiance had moved in, and said that in any case, his new wife — who is eight-plus months pregnant — knew all about the other relationship.

Jones also acknowledged that he had smoked marijuana in Texas, in violation of state law, in the last year-and-a-half or two years. He said it was part of his practice to test marijuana once a year so that he can determine its strength, a practice that he said had led him to believe it is too strong and and should not be legalized but simply decriminalized.

And then, in a flourish that echoed his Infowars broadcast, he said that the legalization campaign was a dangerous path being funded by liberal philanthropist George Soros. Soros, a frequent target, is at the center of Jones’ mapping of a pernicious global elite.

Of his marijuana testing protocol, Jones said, “That’s what police do. They smoke it once a year too.”

“I talked about it on the air,” Jones said of his smoking in Texas.

Earlier this year, Jones smoked marijuana on Joe Rogan’s podcast in California, where it is legal.

Earlier: Returning to the witness stand Thursday, Alex Jones described an emotionally harrowing New Year’s Eve 2016 when his children spent the day with his ex-wife, Kelly Jones, who he said was brow-beating them to change their testimony in what would be the child custody trial now in its fourth day.

In a series of panicked phone calls to him, he said his children begged him to come get them and bring them home and asked, apparently in response to what their mother had told them about why he had custody of them, “Is it true that you bought off the courthouse and Donald Trump is doing all this?”

Jones’ attorney, Randall Wilhite, said the testimony and a tape of one of the phone calls was vivid evidence of Kelly Jones’ episcodic “emotional dysregulation,” which Jones said could leave her “locked in a room for three days, absolutely manic or driving through both lanes of traffic for an hour-and-a-half, absolutely manic.”

It is that emotional dysregulation — defined in court as an episodic tendency to respond in a manner and with an intensity out of proportion to the circumstances — Wilhite and Alex Jones said, that has made it impossible for her to gain greater access to the children.

Earlier: Alex Jones, the Austin-based broadcast personality with a global audience in the millions, is expected to take the stand for a second day Thursday in a custody trial to determine whether his ex-wife, Kelly Jones, will gain custody of their three children.

Alex Jones testified Wednesday afternoon that he means what he says on his show, Infowars, though he often uses satire and comedy.

Jones is often brusque and at times antagonistic and threatening on his show. Kelly Jones’ attorneys will cross-examine Alex Jones Thursday. They have argued that his on-air persona is no different than Alex Jones as a parent.

State District Judge Orlinda Naranjo banned electronic devices from the courtroom effective Wednesday afternoon, but the American-Statesman will still provide periodic updates throughout the day.