Responding to Oil Spills in the U.S. Arctic Marine Environment
Preface

Balance. This is an important word in the Arctic, an area that serves as an integrator of many of the Earth’s large-scale systems and processes, and also an area where choices made have substantial impact on the Arctic and its neighbors. Many competing forces coexist and collide in the Arctic: harsh environmental conditions, economic drivers, science and technology capabilities, logistical and infrastructure challenges, ecosystem protection needs, food security concerns, and the needs of traditional cultures and societies. Balancing the needs and requirements of these forces is part of the challenge and opportunity presented in the complex, large-scale system that is the Arctic.

Within this context, the National Research Council was asked by eight sponsors who represent many of these drivers to consider the adequacy and sufficiency of resources, technology, research, human resources, funding, and logistics to respond to an Arctic oil spill. The committee sought to balance in its work traditional and scientific knowledge of the Arctic and of oil spill response operations, engineering, technology, policies, procedures, and equipment. It considered the needs and concerns of the committee’s sponsors; government, public, private, for-profit and not-for-profit organizations; citizens and organizations with Arctic interests; and the needs and interests of Arctic inhabitants. The committee also considered lessons learned from events and case studies from oil spill response efforts around the world.

The committee’s work was enhanced by the participation and input provided by a number of individuals, organizations, and groups, many of whom are listed elsewhere in this report. The committee solicited input from workshop participants, speakers, and experts across the spectrum of traditional knowledge, science, engineering, vessel and oil spill operations, and regulatory and government affairs. The committee’s work was also enhanced by the insight, experience, and collegiality of its globally distributed members, as it followed the tenets of an earlier National Research Council (1996) report, to “get the science right and get the right science; to get the participation right and get the right participation; and to develop an inclusive and thoughtful analytic-deliberative process.” The result is a report that considers the adequacy of and needs for oil spill response in the U.S. Arctic, drawing on the wisdom and expertise of many in and of the Arctic, and that considers significant challenges in an important ecosystem.

It was my privilege to work with our committee; our project sponsors; our study director,