The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of Immigration
they have greater eligibility for some programs. However, their immigrant status, even if legal, may make them ineligible for other programs.

Immigration confers economic benefits on the native-born population as a whole but, among the native-born, there are likely to be winners and losers. While pre-existing workers most similar to immigrants may experience lower wages or a lower employment rate, pre-existing workers who are complementary to immigrants are likely to benefit, as are native-born owners of capital. Beneficial effects of skilled immigration are likely to be reinforced in the presence of capital-skill complementarity, where native-owned capital becomes more productive when combined with high-skilled labor; the panel delves into these consequences of immigration in Chapters 4 and 5. These benefits may be further augmented if there are “productivity spillovers” between high-skilled immigrants and the native-born workforce.

This chapter summarizes trends in the skill mix of the immigrant population and addresses how these trends compare with those of natives. Educational attainment is examined, as are differences in the occupations of immigrants and the native-born. The chapter also examines the extent of economic assimilation: the rate at which the economic outcomes of immigrants catch up with those of native-born Americans, focusing on employment, wage, and English-language acquisition outcomes. It also reviews some of the differences between immigrants and the native-born in terms of poverty rates and participation in social assistance programs. The descriptive statistics presented here serve to link the discussion of context and history in Chapter 2 and the analyses of wage, employment, and fiscal impacts in later chapters.

Education Profiles

Trends in the skills of immigrants relative to those of the native-born help answer questions such as whether today’s immigrants face greater or lesser barriers to full economic assimilation than in the past and whether they are likely to displace or complement native-born workers in certain segments of the labor market if they arrive in sufficiently large numbers. In this section, the panel examines changes in the distribution of educational attainment of immigrants over successive cohorts, relative to the corresponding native-born cohorts.

The education of a cohort of immigrants at a given point in time can be divided into two components: (1) the initial level of education they attained prior to their arrival in the United States, and (2) additional education attained after immigrating. Higher amounts of both are expected to lead to