8 Past and Future Fiscal Impacts of Immigrants on the Nation
to the mean in correlated measures: Those lowest in the distribution on one measure are more likely to have a large increase on the other measure, while those at the highest end of the distribution are more likely to have a decrease. Still, there is an overall trend toward increasing educational attainment with immigrant generation. To see this, imagine starting with just five parents, each in one of the parental education categories, so that their average group category is 3. If they all had the same fertility pattern, they would have offspring with an average group category of 3.4.

Comparing Tables 8-8 and 8-9 shows that children of U.S.-born parents also have upward educational mobility, but not as much as the children of immigrants. For example, the children of immigrants with less than a high school education have a 17.1 percent chance of achieving only this level (i.e., making no upward transition), while children of third-plus generation parents in category 1 have a 29.4 percent chance of only attaining that same level. Repeating the calculation in which five parents, one from each educational category, have children, the children’s average group category would be only 3.2, in contrast with the 3.4 for the children of immigrants. Note that this calculation abstracts from the education distribution of the parents and only indicates relative upward educational mobility. The fact that immigrants’ children appear to have more upward mobility is perhaps consistent with the narrative of immigrants coming to the United States for the specific purpose of giving their children better opportunities than they had in their home countries. If true, first generation parents may be relatively more focused on educational attainment for their children than native-born parents. This result carries through to the patterns of tax payments by generation: If second generation children go on to achieve higher levels of education, one would also expect that they will be higher earners and thus pay relatively more in taxes than other groups.

Table 8-10 provides a different perspective on how educational transmission plays out in the forecast for a sample of new immigrants ages 20-30 who have been in the United States less than 5 years. Each column shows an educational distribution. The leftmost column is the immigrants’ actual education as observed in the CPS. Immigrants who are observed at ages under 25 are at first assigned their parent’s observed education, as shown in the leftmost column. Their projected ultimate educational attainment after age 25 (second column in Table 8-10) can be higher or lower than this initial assignment. Although some immigrant children of highly educated immigrants may end up with less education, the overwhelming trend here is toward upward mobility (e.g., compare the second column with the first), with the share projected to be in the lowest attainment category falling to half that of their immigrant parents. The third and fourth columns show the predicted ultimate educational distribution of the children and grandchildren of the immigrants whose observed distribution is in the first column. The