The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of Immigration
Robert Hauser, executive director of the Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, provided institutional leadership and substantive contributions during meetings—Connie also contributed to the writing of the report as well. Kirsten Sampson-Snyder, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, expertly coordinated the review process. Robert Katt provided meticulous, insightful, and thorough final editing that improved the readability of the report for a wide audience. Esha Sinha provided highly capable data analyses for the panel and helped coordinate panel meetings. We also thank program associate Anthony Mann for his well-organized and efficient logistical support of the panel’s meetings.

On behalf of the panel, I would like to express our deep gratitude to our study director, Christopher Mackie. He did a superb job in keeping us on track and coordinating all our myriad activities from our review of the existing literature to our original data analyses. He helped organize our meetings and develop the structure of the panel’s final report, contributed to our literature review and the drafting and reworking of the report’s chapters, and shepherded the report through the final review process. We all benefited enormously from his superlative organizational skills, insightful input into the report, and resourcefulness, as well as his patience and good humor. Speaking personally, it has been a great pleasure to collaborate with Chris on this important endeavor.

We thank the consultants to the panel who were absolutely critical to the extensive data analyses underlying major parts of this report. Collaborating with members of the panel, Gretchen Donehower (University of California, Berkeley) and Ryan Edwards (Queens College and University of California, Berkeley) produced the national-level fiscal impact estimates. Sarah Gault (Urban Institute) provided data analysis for the state and local fiscal impacts estimates. Julia Gelatt (Urban Institute) provided a range of data analyses of educational and occupational profiles of the population.

Finally, and most importantly, a note of appreciation is in order for my fellow panel members. Despite their many professional commitments, every panel member donated countless hours and shared extensive expertise to make this report possible. As a result, the report reflects the collective expertise and commitment of all panel members: Michael Ben-Gad, City, University of London; George J. Borjas, Harvard University; Christian Dustmann, University College London; Barry Edmonston, University of Victoria; Isaac Ehrlich, State University of New York at Buffalo; Charles Hirschman, University of Washington, Seattle; Jennifer Hunt, Rutgers University; Dowell Myers, Sol Price School of Public Policy at the University of Southern California; Pia Orrenius, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas; Jeffrey S. Passel, Pew Research Center; Kim Rueben, Urban Institute; Marta Tienda, Princeton University; and Yu Xie, Princeton University. This group—deliberately chosen for their varied perspectives, diverse back-