Trump claims 44,000 people were outside his Springfield rally
Buy Photo President Donald Trump speaks at a rally at JQH Arena in Springfield on Friday, Sept. 21, 2018 (Photo: Nathan Papes/News-Leader)Buy Photo

President Donald Trump boasted about the large crowds his rallies have drawn across the country during a rally in Rochester, Minnesota last week.

Trump claimed that 44,000 people were outside of a "big arena" in Missouri and invoked the name "Josh." He was ostensibly talking about his recent rally with Republican Senate candidate Josh Hawley, held at JQH Arena in Springfield on Sept. 21.

The arena, which had a capacity of about 11,000 during that event, filled up long before everybody in line could get in.

Did an excess of 55,000 people flood Missouri State University's campus on that drizzling September night? Or did Trump exaggerate the size of the crowd, as he has been accused of doing in the past?

More: Thousands flood MSU for Trump's rally. Here are their stories.

Some officials say it's hard to know how many people were unable to get into the rally.

MSU spokeswoman Suzanne Shaw said the arena filled up around 20 minutes before the president completed his speech, and door attendants started turning people away.

"As far as the number of those who were not able to get in, we cannot project," Shaw said in an email.

Police spokeswoman Jasmine Bailey said, "The only definitive number I can give you is that we know at least 12,000 people showed up."

Cora Scott, director of public Information and civic engagement with the city of Springfield, said she received word from David Hall — the former Springfield fire chief and current emergency preparedness manager for MSU — that about 2,000 people were unable to get into the rally.

About 20,000 tickets were "sold" online, according to Hall, Scott said. People hoping to attend the rally were required to reserve free tickets through donaldjtrump.com.

More: Trump protesters, supporters mostly peaceful, police say

Not everyone standing outside JQH was there to support the president. There were a few hundred protesters near the entrance who hoisted signs and chanted.

For context, Trump's claim that 44,000 people were outside the Springfield rally would mean a crowd that's equivalent to more than a quarter of Springfield's total population. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that about 167,000 live in the city of Springfield.

In the weeks since the president's visit to Springfield, his projection of how many people were unable to get into JQH Arena for his rally has doubled.

On the day of his visit, Trump did a one-on-one interview with local news station KY3.

During the interview, Trump said "there's like 20,000 people outside" of the rally.

A KY3 reporter interjected: "Actually, it's more like 30-plus thousand people .... (They're) just coming out of the woodwork. There's only a certain amount that can get inside. I was saying we're going to have mass riots in the streets because people here are just staunch supporters."

It's unclear how KY3 arrived at the estimate of 30,000 people.

On the night of the rally, News-Leader reporters repeatedly asked law enforcement officers and other authorities for crowd size projections.

At the time, a lieutenant with the police department provided an open-ended statement saying that "more than 11,000 people" came to campus for the rally.

Read or Share this story: https://www.news-leader.com/story/news/local/ozarks/2018/10/10/donald-trump-springfield-rally-crowd-size-attendance/1569753002/