GOP Congressman Desantis under fire at town hall meeting in Daytona
DAYTONA BEACH — Not even a microphone was able to raise Republican Congressman Ron DeSantis' voice above shouts and applause Saturday at a town hall meeting at Bethune-Cookman University.

A few hundred people packed the university's auditorium to question DeSantis, R-Palm Coast, during one of three "Discussion with Desantis" events he held over the course of the day.

But discussion wasn't what people were seemingly looking for as the crowd often drowned out the questioner — and even the congressman.

For an hour and a half, people strained their arms and their voices, many anxious about the GOP's plan to replace the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare.

DeSantis’ supporters crowded the front seats, closest to him, while the balcony was full of more derisive and critical attendees. DeSantis had the only microphone, which seemingly added to the hostility as people had to shout to make their questions heard.

Often during the forum, the congressman found himself having to stand quietly until the crowd calmed or forced to yell over the cacophony.

"All you can do is show up and take the fire and let the chips fall where they may," said DeSantis, who represents Florida's House District 6 which includes all of Volusia and Flagler counties, and portions of St. Johns and Lake counties.

According to The Associated Press, the GOP health care plan would repeal unpopular fines Obama's law levies on people who don't carry health insurance. It also would replace income-based subsidies, which the law provides to help millions of Americans pay their premiums, with age-based tax credits that may be skimpier for people with low incomes.

DeSantis, though no fan of Obamacare, acknowledged the GOP had rushed its replacement plan through House committees.

"I don’t think this is the best process," he said. "It is complicated to understand how each little provision interacts with existing law."

The congressman recently found himself in the middle of the fiery debate on health care after comments he made on CNN.

He said of health care that "if people really need it, if they show up to the emergency room, they do get care, it just gets passed on to other folks."

DeSantis spoke about the controversial comment Saturday, saying "he had conflated two ideas" and that going to the emergency room "was not the way to handle that situation."

Several in the crowd urged adopting a single-payer health care system. The congressman replied that the free market was the way to lower costs. The crowd and DeSantis appeared to agree on only a single point when it came to health care: that members of Congress should be on the same insurance plans as the rest of the country.

Attendees also asked about medical care for servicemembers, school choice, recent threats against Jewish community centers, President Donald Trump's tax releases and audits of the Defense Department.

DeSantis gave talkative answers and, at times, single words. When asked if he supported appointing a special prosecutor to investigate the Trump administration's alleged ties to Russian President Vladimir Putin, his answer was an emphatic "No."

He rarely was able to speak without triggering shouts from the crowd.

"I think one gentleman pointed out that a lot of these groups are organized and playing off the same sheet of music," DeSantis told The News-Journal as he was exiting the auditorium. "But the First Amendment lets you organize, and if that's the way you want to approach it, I think that is fine."

Sharon Levine, who lives in DeLand and asked a question on climate change, said that the town hall was successful because she now "knows where he stands."

While there was a lot of shouting among the crowd, Levine said she was able to find common ground with a 15-year-old Libertarian attendee.

"People are passionate and worked up," Levine said. "But on the issues, I don't think we are that far apart."