As GOP health-care bill falters, locals rally to keep Obamacare
On the day the Affordable Care Act lived to see another, dozens in Volusia and Flagler counties rallied in support, while their representative in Congress said its failed replacement might have been worse.

U.S. Rep. Ron DeSantis wasn't asked to vote Friday, but he was among the Freedom Caucus members whose refusal to join in lockstep with Republican leadership led to the collapse of Obamacare's replacement bill Friday.

Following House Speaker Paul Ryan's announcement that no vote would be taken because neither he nor President Trump could secure enough votes for passage, DeSantis issued this statement:

"The House health care bill is a flawed piece of legislation produced by a hasty process and it shows: by leaving the core architecture of Obamacare in place, it does very little to address the core problems of rising health insurance premiums and lack of consumer choice that have harmed so many Americans. In fact, it very well may have caused insurance premiums to increase 15 to 20 percent over and above the anticipated Obamacare increases over the next several years, which is unacceptable."

Democrats opposed the repeal of Obamacare, pointing to the Congressional Budget Office estimate that millions will lose health insurance without it. DeSantis and the Freedom Caucus argued the repeal-and-replace legislation doesn't go far enough to de-federalize the health-care system.

"There was no reason to rush this bill through the House to begin with," DeSantis said. "Congress should take its time and pass a good bill that actually repeals Obamacare, puts a downward pressure on insurance premiums and expands competition in the marketplace. Failure is not an option."

However, dozens of his constituents who rallied in Palm Coast, DeLand and Port Orange Friday say a repeal would fail them.

"I have a really dear friend who's 55 and has diabetes," said Joan Buback of Palm Coast. Before Obamacare, her friend would have had to sell her house to pay the more than $1,200 per month premium for insurance, Buback said. "Now that she has ACA, she pays $300 a month and can keep her home."

Buback also has a granddaughter who is on Medicaid: "Who knows what is going to happen with that?"

Dana Humphrey, an Indivisible organizer who joined about 50 at the Port Orange rally, said Friday the fight to keep Obamacare must continue.

"Obviously, it's not going to end here," she said. "Our representative has been trying for years to take away our health care. ... He doesn't realize how many people in his district depend on the (ACA) for their insurance. It's life or death for these people and they are very upset."

Iris Graim, of Palm Coast, who called herself a "snowbird," brought her rescue dog Millie to the rally with her. "My husband and I are in the ACA. We're under 65," she said. "If they repeal it, we're screwed."

The rally attracted attention from cars passing by, with one driver stopping and saying, "I'm with you. Everybody in the country should have health care."

Diana Becker of Indivisible Flagler organized the event and said: "We're rallying today to support the ACA. We wanted to let them know we're not going away."