Chasing the Midterm Blue Wave in Orange County
There is a blue wave in Orange County, a treacherous, thrilling monster known as the Wedge. It forms north of a harbor jetty in Newport Beach, in CA-48, the coastal congressional district that Harley Rouda, an ex-Republican real-estate developer, appears to be easing from the clutches of Dana Rohrabacher, who has held the seat for three decades. Down coast from there is CA-49, which includes San Clemente, where Richard Nixon had his Western White House, a Mission Revival Spanish estate he named Casa Pacifica, which was built, in the nineteen-twenties, by a Democratic donor. The Democrat hosted F.D.R.; Nixon entertained Kissinger. On Tuesday night, when Mike Levin, an environmental lawyer and a Democrat, pulled ahead in his race to take CA-49’s open seat—vacated by the Benghazi-obsessed Republican Darrell Issa—a cheer went up at the Hilton by the Orange County Airport, in Irvine. Levin’s lead meant that the other blue wave, the one by which disgusted voters, Democratic or not, were supposed to turn out Trump-aligned Republicans, was building. For prognosticators, Orange County, closely associated with rich, retired Republicans, has been the site of furious speculation: Would lifelong, even generational fiscal conservatives and independents rather vote for Democrats than for the Party of Trump?

Irvine, a little inland from the coast, is part of CA-45, where Katie Porter, a professor of consumer-protection law, had hoped to overtake the Republican incumbent, Mimi Walters, in a race that was supposed to be an indicator of the region’s changing political makeup. Porter’s name, in pink poster paint on a board emblazoned with dressing-room lights, adorned the entrance to a ballroom at the Hilton. Inside, supporters mingled, waited, checked phones, booed Senator Ted Cruz, of Texas, when he appeared on a large screen, and drank. When my eyes grew fatigued from watching screens, they sought shoes: flip-flops, Birkenstocks, Converse, hiking shoes, a few pairs of party flats with bows, Vans. Polling, a notoriously inexact science, had called the race for the Forty-fifth a tossup. I had a fleeting thought that there might not be enough party-flat-wearing women in the crowd for a Porter win. In the hotel bar, where everyone was watching CNN, I heard someone at a table of Porter people say, about the nationwide results, “Honestly, it’s not going to be as much of a blowout as I thought. I thought it’d be a frickin’ landslide.”

Back in the ballroom, I asked two Porter volunteers, in Vans, friends since elementary school, what drew them to Porter. “I live below the poverty line with my father,” Shayan Ehssan, who is Persian-American, told me. He is nineteen and goes to a community college. “I like the liberal agenda,” he said. His friend, Joshua Chaires, who is nineteen and identifies as Chicano, said that, unlike in 2016, the elders in his community had been hounding him. “They’ve been on us to vote,” he said. “Telemundo has been telling our generation that we could make the change.” (Nationally, youth turnout was up sharply, largely benefitting Democrats.) Nearby, a group of students from the University of California, Irvine, where Porter teaches at the law school, congregated. They saw Porter as part of their agenda, to push for free university education. (Porter, an expert on bankruptcy, had promised to alleviate the student-debt crisis.) One of them mentioned that it was also midterm season at U.C.I. “We think this test is going to determine our future,” she said. “Really, this vote is.”

Student debt is not part of the incumbent’s platform; she’s far more interested in the national debt, and how to reduce it by cutting government spending. Mimi Walters was the only Orange County Republican to vote for Trump’s tax plan. Defending it, she said that her constituents—business owners and those with 401(k)s and stock portfolios—were thriving. Her allegiances were clearly with high earners, not with community-college students living with their dads. “Remember,” Walters told CNBC, “Many people who are in the, let’s say $200,000-$500,000 range, they had the alternative minimum tax. We’ve done away with it.” Porter, on the other hand, told me last week that the tax plan, which capped mortgage-loan deductions and did away with state and local tax deductions, was unmistakably designed to punish Californians for leading the resistance to the Trump Administration. As the returns trickled in, Walters established a small lead.

Shortly before 11 P.M., chants of “Ka-tie, Ka-tie” filled the ballroom. The votes weren’t fully counted, but the crowd's mood dimmed. Porter’s closest supporters and her family filled the stage. One of them, a woman in a long black dress, stifled tears. A complex, anxious mood of celebration took hold in the room: not the ecstatic abandon of a wedding, late night, nor the huddled, sore-eyed storytelling of a funeral, but more like a birth—emotional, personal, the end of a long process that is the beginning of an even longer one, full of hazard, full of promise.

Addressing the room, Porter, in a blue dress and snazzy heels, recounted the genesis of her candidacy. It took place on Election Night, in 2016, after which she planned to go to Washington as an adviser to President Hillary Clinton’s transition team. “It felt like a dream, to be able to go to Washington, D.C., and help my fellow-Americans. And then that dream shattered,” she said. “That’s it, I thought. My chance to go to Washington, my chance to do my part for my country is gone.” Then, she said, prompted by her partner, who stood on the stage behind her, she decided that she would try to get to Washington by other means. “The next day, I had my first conversation about running for Congress.”

The Wedge, when it’s working, is a freak phenomenon—a thick, twenty-foot peak that breaks only a few yards from shore. It’s easy, even for an experienced wave rider, to break his neck in the shallows. Then there is the backwash, a powerful countervailing drain that drags back from the beach. The hoped-for blue wave in Orange County this election season was not the monster some had foretold—it was not a landslide, a tsunami, a blowout, an earthquake, or any other metaphor of overwhelming force, the potency of which is felt especially by Californians who can easily experience the real thing. The margins were narrow, even where the Democrats prevailed.

By morning, Walters was some six thousand votes ahead, though the race had not yet been called.* But the success of Porter’s sharply progressive candidacy in a stodgy, moneyed place, a place with so much Republican history and cultural mythology on its side, has meaning even if she does not prevail. Orange County no longer feels so reliably Republican. (See the obituary for the region’s conservative white identity in Wednesday’s Los Angeles Times.) Katie Porter, in her blue dress, stood on the stage, waving for the cheering crowd. There was the blue wave.

After publication, it was reported that Orange County had a number of uncounted ballots, leaving Porter with a chance at victory. A previous version of this piece said that the race had been officially called.