One Year of #MeToo
Sexual assault and sexual harassment have been sources of pain and suffering for countless centuries, but the #MeToo movement began just a year ago. Journalism has played a role in this. On October 10, 2017, The New Yorker published the first in a series of articles by Ronan Farrow in which women brought allegations of rape, sexual assault, and sexual harassment against the film executive Harvey Weinstein. (Weinstein denied that he had committed rape or sexual assault.) Farrow’s story came several days after a remarkable story in the Times, by Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey, reported allegations that Weinstein had sexually harassed multiple women and paid them for their silence. As interest in the accusations against Weinstein crested, the actress Alyssa Milano posted to Twitter, “If you’ve been sexually harassed or assaulted write ‘me too’ as a reply to this tweet,” prompting thousands of women (and men) to reactivate a slogan that the activist Tarana Burke had coined in 2006. Almost instantly, #MeToo became shorthand for a decentralized campaign against gender-based violence and abuse. Weinstein was hardly the first powerful man to be investigated for disgraceful behavior toward women—Roger Ailes and Bill O’Reilly at Fox News preceded him—but Weinstein’s fall catalyzed the movement, and what followed has been a long line of prominent men in politics, media, show business, corporate leadership, and many other fields who have been called to account.

To mark a tumultuous year, we asked eight of our writers to look back on #MeToo in order to anticipate what could—or should—come next. As it happens, we gave them this assignment in the midst of the battle over Brett Kavanaugh’s appointment to the Supreme Court. Kavanaugh’s ascent to the nation’s highest court has only intensified the discussion of #MeToo, and is bound to play a critical role in the midterm elections next month. In this package, Jia Tolentino assesses the backlash against #MeToo, while Masha Gessen asks what real justice for victims could look like. Amanda Petrusich measures her own anger while also taking solace in the relative optimism of her students. Doreen St. Félix describes the movement’s need for a more flexible language. Helen Rosner sizes up the ongoing reckoning in the restaurant industry. Katy Waldman looks at the movement’s impact on the literary world. Han Zhang reports on how #MeToo spread via social media and chat apps in China, eluding government surveillance. And Allyson Hobbs writes about her own sexual assault and African-American traditions of testimony. Right now, many women and men are searching for rational answers to questions about the workplace, about justice, and about the ways in which we conduct our private lives. It is our wish that these pieces add something vital to that conversation.