United States Senator
- Washington, D.C. - Today, U.S. Senator Jim DeMint (R-South Carolina), chairman of the Senate Steering Committee, commended U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi for considering a one-year earmark ban and pledged to force a vote this week on a similar earmark ban in the U.S. Senate.



“Nancy Pelosi and I don’t agree on many things, but if she’s willing to take a stand for taxpayers, I’ll work with her to put an end to the earmark favor factory,” said Senator DeMint. “Americans have been disgusted by the backroom deals and earmark kickbacks used to ram through bad legislation and drive up our debt. Right now, earmark lobbyists are flooding Capitol Hill hoping to secure billions in taxpayer dollars for special interest projects. The Senate will have the opportunity this week to stand with Americans and put a stop to this wasteful spending. Our nation is drowning in debt that will be paid by our children and we’ll never stop Washington’s spending addiction unless members of both parties take bold action. We need to focus on balancing the budget, not pork barrel spending that has wasted money on bridges to nowhere, teapot museums, and monuments to politicians.”



In 2007, Senator DeMint worked to enact Speaker Pelosi’s earmark transparency reforms as part of Senate ethics legislation. Today, Roll Call reports that Speaker Pelosi is planning to enact a complete ban on earmarks for one year.



The national debt is more than $12 trillion, the President’s budget predicts a $1.6 trillion deficit this year, and the unfunded liability to pay for entitlements in the future exceeds $100 trillion. According to the Congressional Research Service, last year’s pork barrel spending included 11,320 earmarks totaling nearly $32 billion.



Earlier this year, Senator DeMint introduced a one year earmark ban on February 4th with 15 Republican senators and Democrat Senator Claire McCaskill (D-Missouri). The list of Republican cosponsors includes Senators Richard Burr (R-North Carolina), Saxby Chambliss (R-Georgia), Tom Coburn (R-Oklahoma), John Cornyn (R-Texas), Mike Crapo (R-Idaho), John Ensign (R-Nevada), Lindsey Graham (R-South Carolina), Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa), Johnny Isakson (R-Georgia), Mike Johanns (R-Nebraska), Jon Kyl (R-Arizona), George LeMieux (R-Florida), John McCain (R-Arizona), James Risch (R-Idaho), and Jeff Sessions (R-Alabama).



###