Senator John McCain (August 29, 1936 - August 25, 2018)
Senator John Sidney McCain III has died following a battle against brain cancer.

The senior senator from Arizona was elected in 1986 and served in the United States Senate for 31 years until his passing.

Lt. Commander McCain and President Nixon, April 14, 1973

Prior to his political career, Sen. McCain followed in his family's tradition of military service. The son and grandson of four-star United States Navy admirals, he attended the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, then served in the Navy from 1958 until his retirement in 1981. He attained the rank of Commander and received several medals and commendations during his military career including: the Silver Star, three Bronze Stars with combat "V", the Purple Heart, two Legion of Merit with combat "V", the Distinguished Flying Cross, and two Navy and Marine Corps commendations with combat "V".

Then-Lieutenant Commander McCain was shot down on October 26, 1967 while flying a mission over North Vietnam and was held as a Prisoner of War until his release on March 14, 1973. He suffered permanent injuries during his capture and time in captivity. On May 24, 1973, the future Senator attended the gala White House dinner and events honoring former Vietnam Prisoners of War.

Lt. Commander McCain and President Nixon, May 24, 1973

Following his 22 years of military service to his country, John McCain III won his first election campaign and became a freshman congressman in the United States House of Representatives. He served four years in the 98th United States Congress before running and winning Arizona's U.S. Senate race for a seat in the 100th Congress. During his four terms in the Senate, he chaired the Indian Affairs, Armed Services, and Commerce Committees. He also made two bids for the Presidency in 2000 and 2008.

In addition to a lifetime of service to the nation, Senator McCain was also a writer. He authored or coauthored several books including but not limited to: The Restless Wave, Faith of My Fathers, Why Courage Matters, Character is Destiny, Hard Call, and Worth the Fighting For.

Senator McCain is survived by his wife Cindy Lou Hensley McCain, seven children, and his brother Joseph Pinckney McCain II.