Kurt Russell on 'Deepwater Horizon,' Hollywood and more
Calm, confident Kurt Russell doesn't look as if he's ever been lost. Yet people keep finding him.

First, back in the '70s, John Carpenter discovered the former kid star was really a leading man, and - rescuing him from the muck of bad, live-action Disney comedies -- put him in TV's "Elvis" (and a string of great genre pictures).

Then Mike Nichols realized Russell was a serious actor and cast him in "Silkwood," opposite Meryl Streep. Recently, Russell was found again, and hired for Quentin Tarantino's hard, hip "Death Proof" and "The Hateful Eight."

Now, with "Deepwater Horizon," it's time for audiences - and maybe Oscar voters - to rediscover Kurt Russell once more.

In Peter Berg's based-on-fact movie, opening Friday, Russell, 65, joins Mark Wahlberg and John Malkovich as "Mister Jimmy" - the head of a bunch of roughnecks running an offshore oil rig. Jimmy's famous for running a very tight, and almost tediously safe, ship.

And then the rig blows and all hell breaks loose.

"He's a man thrown into an extraordinary situation," Russell says. "He'd just gotten his seventh annual award for being the best guy at safety. And then this catastrophe happens, and he's got to deal with it. The irony of that is just beyond compare."

It isn't a side to the story that got much attention back then. Sure, the newspapers and TV spent plenty of time talking about the ecological and economic destruction, showing birds with muck on their wings and oil spewing into the ocean. That got plenty of attention. But that over 100 lives had been at risk - and 11 lost - got less play.

"Yeah, I thought that was kind of interesting," Russell says. "It was a complete ecological disaster, a total catastrophe - you could see the explosion from outer space. But the human element, that hadn't really been explored. I thought that was kind of sad, honestly. Because these were regular Joes who - well, you know, sometimes something comes up and you've got a choice. You're either going to fold, or you're going to perform. And these guys did what they had to do."

I tell him that sounds like - and his performance reminded me of - John Wayne. Russell laughs.

"Yeah, well, maybe more like Ward Bond," he says.

Russell's old-movie knowledge comes naturally. His dad was Bing Russell, a former ballplayer who scored dozens of Western roles; for more than a decade, he was the deputy on TV's "Bonanza." Kurt followed him into the business as a kid, and within a year had landed his own, short-lived series, "The Travels of Jamie McPheeters." A 10-year contract with Walt Disney followed.

"I guess I didn't fall very far from the tree," Russell says. "My dad seemed to enjoy what he did and, starting out as such a young kid, it just seemed to come natural to me. Hit the mark, say the line, do the thing. The camera didn't bother me, and I thought, well, this is a great way to make money. And I've spent 55 years doing it."

There was a short break when Russell, like his father - who ended up as owner of the Class A Portland Mavericks - decided to take a shot at baseball. Russell got as far as AA ball when, in '73, an on-field collision with a runner tore his rotator cuff, and pretty much ended his prospects. (The love of the game runs in the family; Russell's nephew, Matt Franco, spent eight years in the majors, playing mostly for the Mets.)

After striking out on the field, Russell went back to the soundstage. But his old Disney career -- and generally conservative outlook - left him looking out of step with the times. He was a little too wholesome, a little too square. When other teens had been making the scene at Woodstock, he'd been making "The Computer Wore Tennis Shoes."

"My generation couldn't stand me," he said later, "and I couldn't stand them."

It was John Carpenter who revived the actor's career, giving him the lead in "Elvis." It garnered Russell an Emmy nomination - and a long-running partnership with the director, who then cast him in a string of cult hits including "Escape From New York," "The Thing" and "Big Trouble in Little China."

"John believed in me as an actor, and gave me opportunities other directors might not have," Russell says. "He has a unique view of the world, and a storytelling style that's really fun to be a part of. I always appreciated his determination, and his guts... 'The Thing' - the way we ended that movie, you weren't supposed to have an ending like that, even back then. There were some people who just did not get what we were doing. And 'Big Trouble' - I mean, I never had anything to do with Comic-Cons or any of that stuff, but I went to my first one this year, and boy, people have taken that movie and just made it their own."

For a while, Russell was the king of the smart, cocky genre picture. But he did other things too, loftier things, like "Silkwood" and "Tequila Sunrise" and "Swing Shift" (where he teamed with Goldie Hawn, his live-in partner since 1983). And some of them, like "Tombstone" and "Miracle," even brought him some serious acclaim.

"Right from the start, I tried to keep eyes and ears open, and keep learning," he says. "And as time went by, I began expanding on that, and I guess eventually directors started to say 'Yeah, I want him, I want his energy, I like his range.' I mean, after 55 years at this, they can see what I can do. And I've been very lucky, the directors I've gotten to work with. John, Mike Nichols, Bob Zemeckis, Ronnie Howard. Tarantino, man -- that was awesome."

So why do people have to keep rediscovering Kurt Russell? Why, after all these years, does it seem every so often - and it's about to happen again, with "Deepwater Horizon" - people suddenly see him like it's the first time?

A large part of it, he suspects, is that - today's phone interview notwithstanding - he doesn't do much publicity, and never has.

"Back when I was a kid, I'd be doing a TV show and the unit publicist would come on the set and that's it, I'd run off and hide up in the rafters," he says. "I just have an aversion to it. I had a personal publicist for two movies, way back, 'Tequila Sunrise' and 'Tango & Cash,' and after that I said, nope, not for me. I'm doing this junket because I'm obligated and yeah, I want to show we're open for business, and support the movie any way I can. But this is not what I signed on for, when I got into this career. I just want to do the work and play the part. The rest of it, I don't mean it in a derogatory way, but it's a game I just never wanted to play."

Not only has he avoided the publicity machine, for years he and Goldie and their family - including her children, Oliver and Kate Hudson, whom Russell mostly raised, and their kid together, Wyatt - lived as far away from Hollywood as possible, spending time in Palm Desert and, when Wyatt started playing serious hockey, in British Columbia.

"Staying away from Hollywood didn't take much of an effort," Russell says with a laugh. "There is a whole world in Los Angeles that's based on maneuvering. You say the right thing in interviews, you say yes to the right events and charities, and if you do it correctly you become someone they talk about. You become a player in the system and you're looked at as a professional, or dedicated, or whatever. You become a part of their thing, and they become part of yours... It's a wild web that can be weaved and there are people who love, love, love to play that game. And I'm not putting it down. But for me, it's just like pulling teeth. I just could never do it."

Another thing he couldn't do, quite honestly, was put a smile on his face and pretend to support whatever progressive Hollywood's cause du jour was.

"This is a business that's heavily promulgated by people who have a politically liberal bent," he says. "I don't begrudge them that. I'm a libertarian; frankly, I think my liberalness goes far beyond theirs in a lot of ways. But yeah, we think differently, and maybe that's cut me out of some things. I don't care. People know I get along great with all kinds of directors, all kinds of actors. And I tell you, you hire me, I will show up, 24/7, and I will give you 100%. I will help you fix whatever problems come up. You hire me, I'm your boy. It's just, it's all about the work. And when that's done, I am done."

It's been a long, frank, animated conversation with someone who swears he hates doing interviews. He may have to get used to them. Russell's turn in "Deepwater Horizon" is the kind of part that figures in Oscar campaigns, and gets noticed in end-of-the-year nominations. And Russell - modest, hard-working and well-seasoned - is the kind of actor who often wins the thing outright.

Typically, it's not something he spends much time thinking about.

"Yeah, people talk about awards and stuff all the time in Hollywood," he says. "I never thought much about that. But I do have six different action figures based on me. I'll take that any day."

Stephen Whitty may be reached at stephenjwhitty@gmail.com. Follow him on Twitter @stephenwhitty. Find him on Facebook.