Why immigrants seeking asylum have a better chance in Newark vs Atlanta
NEWARK--In Newark, an immigrant here illegally seeking to remain on a claim of asylum has a better than 2 in 1 chance of prevailing in federal immigration court.

In Atlanta, the odds are considerably stacked the other way. Some go as far as calling it an "asylum free" zone. Only about 2 percent of asylum seekers there are successful, according to federal data.

Nationwide, with asylum claims rising, and rate of those being granted the right to stay can hinge on where an immigrant appears and which judge hears the case.

"The disparity is incredible," said Lori Nessel, director of the Seton Hall University School of Law Center for Social Justice. "Something is wrong when it varies that much."

The U.S. Justice Department's Executive Office for Immigration Review, or EOIR, reported that nationally, about 43 percent of asylum seekers in pleadings before immigration court judges were granted the right to stay here in fiscal year 2016.

But as the Trump administration continues to step up its fight to remove those seeking sanctuary, numbers show much depends on where an immigrant appears.

In Newark, for example, immigration court judges on the 12th floor of the Peter W. Rodino Federal Building granted 85 requests and denied 43 in 2016. In New York, 85 percent of asylum requests were granted and three out of four asylum seekers asylum appearing before immigration court judges in San Francisco were allowed to remain.

"The data does show that in certain cities, immigrants may have statistically a better chance of prevailing in their cases," observed immigration attorney Harlan York of Newark. "Atlanta is notoriously among the lowest. They're known for having some very tough judges."

In Atlanta, the courts granted 14 requests and denied 590. In Seattle, judges approved less than half the bids for asylum. Immigrants asking for asylum in Houston had less than 1 in 10 chance of being successful.

Why the disparity?

For an alien living in the United States seeking to remain here under a claim of asylum, they must establish that they are refugees who cannot return to their country "because of persecution, or a well-founded fear of persecution on account of their race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion," according to immigration officials.

It remains a high bar to prove in any court.

At least three Indonesian Christian immigrants were deported from New Jersey in June after losing a decades-long battle to stay in the U.S. over fears of religious persecution. They had applied for asylum more than 10 years ago, but missed a critical deadline for eligibility and were ordered deported.

The arbitrariness of determining refugee status is not new. Immigration advocates have long called it "refugee roulette." And as the numbers of those facing removal grow, the issue has become more pronounced.

EOIR did not respond to questions about the disparity. But some of the difference may be due to the demographics as well as proximity to the U.S. border, suggested Lauren Major, an attorney with the American Friends Service Committee in Newark, which represents people facing removal proceedings.

She noted that immigrants fighting deportation in areas like New York and Newark, where there are a lot of immigration lawyers and funding for pro bono lawyers, are more likely to have legal representation--a major factor that determines success in court, studies have shown.

"But I definitely think that some of it is just the luck of where you are placed in deportation proceedings because judges and Department of Homeland Security attorneys can make a big difference and vary widely, and it's not fair," Major said.

Those being held in detention--some already under a deportation order, or taken into custody upon arrival in this country for lack of proper visas--are even less likely to be successful.

At the Stewart Detention Facility in Lumpkin, Ga., only 16 of 242 asylum seekers won their cases.

Why NJ immigration courts are backlogged

At the Elizabeth Detention Center near Newark Liberty International Airport, where the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement contracts for a lock-up facility that can hold 300 men and women, judges holding immigration court hearings granted asylum status last year to 135 people and denied 172 others.

There was even disparity between judges who handle cases at Elizabeth, according to an analysis by the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, or TRAC, a nonpartisan, nonprofit data research center based at Syracuse University.

It found that between fiscal year 2011 and 2016, Immigration Court Judge Mirlande Tadal--who worked for Travelers Aid Immigration Legal Services in New York and was a former attorney investigator for the New York Commission on Human Rights before her appointment as an immigration judge by former Attorney General Janet Reno in 1995--granted 27.8 percent of all asylum claims. The TRAC analysis found Judge Dorothy Harbeck, a former state Superior Court arbitrator who was appointed as an immigration judge in September 2006, granted 55.2 percent of asylum claims.

EOIR does not allow the media to speak with judges.

Joyce Phipps, an immigration lawyer from Bound Brook and director of Casa de Esperanza, a nonprofit group serving immigrants and refugees, said detention centers present special problems.

She noted some being held in custody already have prior removal orders. At the same time, most of those in detention do not have lawyers.

"The grant rate is always lower for people without counsel," Phipps said.

Unlike those tried in criminal court in this country, undocumented immigrants do not have the right to an attorney if they cannot afford one. Those in removal proceedings may hire counsel at their own expense, if there is no delay to the government. But many simply cannot afford a lawyer.

Yet even those with representation are at a disadvantage. They are given significantly less time to obtain evidence than in other proceedings outside, said Phipps.

"I usually worked with 3 to 4 weeks, rather than 6 months as in Newark," she said of clients she represented in Elizabeth.

Nessel said the data demonstrates a system that is inherently unfair. She argued that the concept of the justice system is that there's equal protection, and that two people making the same arguments should have the same chance at prevailing in court.

"The likelihood of being protected should not hinge on what judge they are appearing before," Nessel said.

Ted Sherman may be reached at tsherman@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @TedShermanSL. Facebook: @TedSherman.reporter. Find NJ.com on Facebook.