Nevada: Legislature Adjourns Sine Die with Governor Sandoval Signing Critical Gun Legislation
Late last night, the Nevada Legislature adjourned their legislative session sine die and today, Governor Brian Sandoval signed pro-gun Senate Bill 175 and Senate Bill 240 into law. The 2015 legislative session was a successful year for gun owners in the Silver State as huge improvements were made to Nevada’s gun laws. Please thank Governor Sandoval for signing both SB 175 and SB 240.

Governor Brian Sandoval:

(775) 684-5670

Email

SB 175 makes drastic improvements to Nevada’s gun laws. This is done by improving Nevada’s preemption statutes, ensuring consistency in gun laws throughout the Silver State and most importantly, abolishing handgun registration in Clark County. SB 175 also improves the self-defense statutes by extending the castle doctrine to include automobiles, protects from civil liability those who have used force justifiably, and creates a rebuttable presumption in state law for when a person is acting in self-defense. Finally, SB 175 expands the list of out-of-state permits that will be recognized to carry concealed in Nevada. SB 175 passed the Assembly on May 22 with a 25-17 vote and was signed by Governor Sandoval today.

SB 240, introduced by state Senator Michael Roberson (R-20), requires a court to transmit within 5 business days certain records of adjudication concerning an individual’s mental health to the Central Repository for Nevada Records of Criminal History for purposes relating to purchasing and possessing a firearm. In addition, SB 240 also removes the fees on voluntary background checks and provides provisions to target “straw purchasers.” Further, SB 240 includes improvements to the state preemption laws and abolishes the handgun registration requirements in Clark County. SB 240 passed the Assembly on May 21 with a 23-18 vote and was signed by Governor Sandoval today.

As previously reported, Assembly Bill 136, introduced by Assemblyman John Ellison (R-33) was signed by Governor Sandoval on Wednesday, May 27, and will take effect on July 1, 2015. AB 136 recognizes the right of archery hunters to carry a firearm for personal protection. While afield, hunters may face threats from large predators or violent crime, and the limitations of archery equipment can leave a hunter helpless. There is simply no reason why a hunter using a bow and arrow should lose his or her ability, and therefore right, to personal protection. AB 136 also allows for the adoption of reasonable accommodations for those hunters with certain disabilities.

AB 121, introduced by Assemblymen Jim Wheeler (R-39), John Ellison (R-33) and Brent Jones (R-35), prohibits schools from disciplining certain pupils for simulating a firearm or dangerous weapon or wearing clothes and accessories which depict firearms. AB 121 passed the Senate on May 22 with a 15-6 vote and has been sent to Governor Sandoval for his signature.

Assembly Bill 167 makes changes to current Nevada law regarding law-abiding gun owners storing and carrying firearms and ammunition on the premises of a family foster home and with foster children. AB 167 would authorize law-abiding gun owners to store firearms and ammunition on the premise of a foster home in a locked secure storage container. Further, it would allow an individual to carry a firearm on their person off the property, in the presence of a child, if they possess a permit to carry concealed. AB 167 passed the Senate last Friday with a 16-3 vote and has been enrolled to be sent to the Governor.

Senate Joint Resolution 11 passed the Assembly on May 4 with a 32-10 vote and has been sent to the Secretary of State. As previously reported, SJR 11, sponsored by state Senator Scott Hammond (R-18), proposes an amendment to the Nevada constitution that establishes an individual right to hunt, trap and fish in The Silver State. SJR 11 would ensure that wildlife conservation and management decisions continue to be based on sound science in order to preserve Nevada’s hunting heritage and to protect it against future attacks from well-funded, anti-hunting organizations. In order to be put before voters on the ballot, this bill must pass two consecutive legislative sessions. This is the first step to amending the Nevada Constitution to protect Nevadan’s right to hunt, trap and fish. SJR 11 must also pass the 2017 legislative session.

Unfortunately, a number of bills died in the Senate Judiciary Committee, including several which related to campus carry and parking lots.

Thank you to all NRA members and Second Amendment supporters for your active involvement throughout the 2015 legislative session. Your NRA will continue to stand and fight for the rights of law-abiding gun owners and sportsmen across Nevada.