NRA-PVF Endorses Joe Manchin for U.S. Senate in West Virginia
Fairfax, Va. – The National Rifle Association Political Victory Fund (NRA-PVF) is endorsing Joe Manchin for U.S. Senate in West Virginia.

“Joe Manchin is committed to protecting the Right to Keep and Bear Arms guaranteed to all Americans,” said Chris W. Cox, chairman of NRA-PVF. “His strong dedication and voting record have earned him an “A” rating from the NRA-PVF, and we proudly endorse him for re-election to the U.S. Senate.”

While serving in the United States Senate, Joe Manchin signed a bipartisan letter opposing any international treaty by the United Nations or any other global organization that would impose restrictions on American gun owners. Manchin also cosponsored S. 2188, “The National Right-to-Carry Reciprocity Act,” which would have ensured that law-abiding Americans with a valid concealed handgun permit would have been able to carry a concealed handgun in any other state that does not prohibit concealed carry. In addition, Manchin cosponsored S. 570, a bill that would prevent the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives from circumventing the will of Congress by centralizing records of thousands of Americans’ long gun purchases.

As Governor of West Virginia, Manchin signed state “Castle Doctrine” legislation to restore the right to self-defense in a person’s home and property. He also signed state legislation to increase reciprocity for West Virginia Right-to-Carry permit holders.

“Voters in West Virginia can trust that Joe Manchin will respect their right to self-defense and will honor their rich hunting heritage,” Cox continued. “We urge all NRA members and gun owners in West Virginia to vote Joe Manchin for U.S. Senate on November 6.”

Chris W. Cox is NRA's chief lobbyist. He also serves as chairman of NRA-PVF. The National Rifle Association Political Victory Fund is responsible for political candidate ratings and endorsements. These are based on candidate voting records, public statements and responses to NRA-PVF questionnaires.

Established in 1871, the National Rifle Association is America's oldest civil rights and sportsmen's group. More than five million members strong, NRA continues to uphold the Second Amendment and advocates enforcement of existing laws against violent offenders to reduce crime. The Association remains the nation's leader in firearm education and training for law-abiding gun owners, law enforcement and the armed services. Be sure to follow the NRA on Facebook and on Twitter @NRA.