Nations Granting Birthright Citizenship
Birthright Citizenship is the automatic granting of citizenship to children born within a nation's borders or territories. The United States and Canada are the only developed nations in the world to still offer Birthright Citizenship to tourists and illegal aliens. The map to the left shows the nations that still grant Birthright Citizenship -- the nations in RED are the developed nations; the nations in ORANGE are the non-developed nations.

8 U.S.C. § 1401 : US Code - Section 1401 (1952) grants automatic citizenship to any person born in the United States.

The following are among the nations repealing Birthright Citizenship in recent years:

Australia (2007)

New Zealand (2005)

Ireland (2005)

France (1993)

India (1987)

Malta (1989)

UK (1983)

Portugal (1981)

For a complete list of sources used in the development of this list, click here: Notes and Citations Regarding Birthright Citizenship Laws. Much of the information comes from the websites of the individual countries or the United Nations.

DEVELOPED NATIONS*

Birthright Citizenship YES NO Canada Andorra United States Australia Austria Belgium Bermuda Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Faroe Islands Finland France Germany Greece Holy See Hong Kong Iceland Ireland Israel Italy Japan Liechtenstein Luxembourg Malta Monaco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Portugal San Marino Singapore Slovakia Slovenia South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan United Kingdom OTHER NATIONS

Birthright Citizenship YES NO Antigua and Barbuda Afghanistan Argentina Albania Barbados Algeria Belize Angola Bolivia Armenia Brazil Bahamas Chile Bahrain Columbia Bangladesh Dominica Belarus Ecuador Benin El Salvador Bhutan Fiji Bosnia and Herzegovina Grenada Brunei Darussalam Guatemala Bulgaria Guyana Burkina Faso Honduras Burundi Jamaica Cambodia Mexico Cameroon Nicaragua Central African Republic Panama Chad Paraguay China Peru Colombia St. Kitts and Nevis Comoros St. Lucia Côte d'Ivoire St. Vincent and the Grenadines Croatia Trinidad and Tobago Djibouti Uruguay Egypt Venezuela Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Georgia Ghana Guinea Haiti Hungary India Indonesia Iran Iraq Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyz Republic Lao PDR Latvia Lebanon Liberia Libya Lithuania Macedonia Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mauritania Mauritius Moldova Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Myanmar Namibia Nepal Nigeria Oman Papua New Guinea Philippines Poland Qatar Romania Russia Samoa São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Solomon Islands South Africa Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vietnam Yemen Zimbabwe

* - List of Developed Nations determined by IMF(International Monetary Fund)