Fire Damages Another Islamic Site in Sweden
Video

BERLIN — A basement room used as a place of worship by Muslims in a southern Swedish town was destroyed by a fire on Monday, officials and the imam for the town said. It was the second time in the past week that an Islamic worship center was damaged by a fire in Sweden, where a far-right party with an anti-immigration stance has been gaining support and influence.

A statement from the police in the county of Skane said they were investigating possible causes, including arson. The fire broke out early Monday in the basement of an apartment block in Eslov, about 20 miles northeast of Malmo, a city of about 260,000 in southern Sweden. No one was injured in the fire, which was quickly extinguished, the police said.

For decades, Sweden has been among the most welcoming European countries for refugees from around the world, but in recent years that tradition of openness has been tested as the influx has strained the welfare system, schools and housing. As a result, the right-wing Sweden Democrats party, which campaigns on an anti-immigration platform, has become the country’s third largest.

The party this month nearly toppled the center-left government of Prime Minister Stefan Lofven by voting with the center-right against the national budget. Over the weekend, Mr. Lofven reached a deal with the center-right by adopting its budget, thus avoiding early elections that could have strengthened the Sweden Democrats.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That deal came just after five people were injured in a Christmas Day fire in a mosque in Eskilstuna, near Stockholm, which the authorities also suspect may have been arson.

200 Miles Norwegian Sea FINLAND SWEDEN Gulf of Bothnia NORWAY Stockholm Eskilstuna Baltic Sea Eslov DENMARK North Sea POLAND GERMANY

Samir Muric, an imam who leads the Muslim community in Eslov, where Monday’s fire broke out, said that local politicians had offered his congregation of about 100 an alternate place of worship and that supporters had organized a demonstration for Tuesday.