Donald Trump Finds Improbable Ally in WikiLeaks
Counting on an “October surprise” bombshell has never been a winning gambit for a struggling presidential nominee, and Republican pollsters say that the WikiLeaks email will do little to help Mr. Trump attract more undecided voters, especially women, or reassure wavering Trump supporters.

More than anything, pollsters say, the emails will merely reinforce the views of relatively narrow numbers of people who are intensely suspicious of government. “Trump has a hard-core base,” said Neil Newhouse, a Republican pollster. “They ought to spend less time figuring out how to reinforce those people and more time trying to add to his vote column.”

Mr. Trump, at a rally on Wednesday afternoon in Ocala, Fla., called the hacked campaign emails “unbelievable” and urged voters to read the messages “released by WikiLeaks.” He said the emails “make more clear than ever, just how much is at stake in November and how unattractive and dishonest our country has become.”

“It tells you the inner heart,” he said. “You got to read it.”

For many of Mr. Trump’s supporters, the sudden appearance of confidential Clinton campaign emails is a stroke of fortune that, they think, could improve Mr. Trump’s chances of winning on Nov. 8. “I think if he makes it a big deal, if he keeps on pressuring on it, it really will help,” said Diego Rielo, 24, of Gainesville, Fla.

Dane Graves, 47, of Dunnellon, Fla., said the email disclosures were a strategic benefit for Mr. Trump because they “reaffirmed” comments that he has made as a candidate about the two-faced nature of politicians and alleged malfeasance in government.

“He’s not basing his campaign on WikiLeaks — it’s only backing up what he’s been saying the whole time,” Mr. Graves said. “It’s really backing up what the people have been feeling all of this time about the corruption of government, embedded, just the trickle-down corruption.”

Some veteran Republican strategists say the WikiLeaks disclosures may be heartening to Mr. Trump and his supporters, but the emails are highly unlikely to influence undecided voters in battleground states like Ohio and North Carolina..

“There’s real nihilism in the Trump campaign right now, just determined to do anything and say anything to make this the most disgusting final weeks in a presidential campaign ever,” said Steve Schmidt, who was a senior adviser to John McCain’s campaign in 2008. “Distrust of Clinton is pretty well baked into parts of the electorate right now. But 55 to 60 percent of the country is open to a Clinton presidency and wants to see the next president get to work with Congress to help the country.”