Gripes About Obamacare Aside, Health Insurers Are in a Profit Spiral
Wall Street has rewarded companies like UnitedHealth for steadily increasing profits in other businesses, and generally hasn’t penalized them much for the public exchange losses, Ms. Skolnick said.

UnitedHealth’s share price, in other words, has been relatively unscathed by its problems with Obamacare public exchanges, even as its statements about the unprofitability of the exchanges made headlines and contributed to public perceptions that Obamacare is in deep trouble. (The Congressional Budget Office indicated Monday that some of these fears are overblown: The public exchange markets, it said, “would probably be stable in most areas under either current law or the legislation” to replace Obamacare in the House of Representatives.)

In Ms. Skolnick’s view, the Affordable Care Act could indeed use some modifications, but the fundamental problem with the public exchanges is one of “adverse selection,” in which relatively sick people have occupied an outsize part of those markets, making it difficult for insurance companies to come up with profitable pricing. But the root cause is that the “mandate,” the requirement that everyone buy health insurance, is too weak, she said, not too strong. The House legislation would make matters worse by imposing a surcharge for people who have let their insurance lapse. “I think that’s weaker,” she said.

There are plenty of good things in Obamacare for these companies. The expansion of Medicaid has been a boon for them, said Lance Wilkes, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein. “It’s not a high-margin business for the managed care companies, but it’s a steady one and it has been a growing one,” he said. The companies offer insurance to low-income residents in various states under Medicaid, he said, while Medicare plans for older people have also been a growth area.

Mr. Claxton of the Kaiser Family Foundation said, “As the baby boom population ages, people are leaving their workplace health care plans, which have been steady and profitable for the managed care companies but aren’t growing, and going on Medicare in big numbers, and companies like UnitedHealth see this as an opportunity.”

Direct government premiums from Medicaid and Medicare amount to 25 percent of UnitedHealth’s revenue, and the company is moving rapidly into other areas: In January, it announced the $2.3 billion purchase of Surgical Care Affiliates, an outpatient surgery chain, as part of an aggressive move to provide direct medical services.

Expanding portfolios of businesses and deft moves to stanch losses may be why the managed care companies have, for the most part, been favored by the stock market. (The industry has endured some thwarted mergers — between Aetna and Humana, and Anthem and Cigna — and continuing headaches from public exchanges.)

Paul D. Ryan, the speaker of the House of Representatives, has said repeatedly that Obamacare is in a “death spiral.” That’s a debatable proposition. But it seems irrefutable that the big managed care stocks are in a different kind of spiral — a profit spiral — that is twirling upward.