Scaramucci Calls for Inquiry After ‘Leak’ of Financial Form
Mr. Scaramucci filed the disclosure form in connection with his previous, short-lived job with the Trump administration at the Export-Import Bank. Under federal law, anyone can request such a report on a government website 30 days after its receipt.

Mr. Scaramucci’s report says it was filed on June 23, which means it could be publicly released by the bank on July 23, or last Sunday. Politico did not indicate whether it obtained the report through such a regular request.

Asked why he thought the report had been leaked illegally, Mr. Scaramucci responded by text: “They aren’t in process yet.” But when told his form could be released on July 23, he did not respond further.

In an interview on Fox News earlier in the day, Mr. Scaramucci complained about leaks and Washington’s backstabbing culture.

“What I don’t like about Washington is people do not let you know how they feel,” he said. “They’re very nice to your face and then they take a shiv or a machete and they stab it in your back. I don’t like it. I’m a Wall Street guy, and I’m more of a front-stabbing person, and I’d rather tell people directly how I feel about them than this sort of nonsense.”

He added that he expected Attorney General Jeff Sessions to announce an investigation into intelligence leaks within days. “If there are senior people inside the administration who are trying to get them to leak information on each other, we’re getting that to stop right now because that does not serve the president,” Mr. Scaramucci said in the Fox interview.

The Justice Department issued a statement saying that it agreed. “We have seen an astonishing increase in the number of leaks of classified national security information in recent months,” said Sarah Isgur Flores, the department spokeswoman.

“We agree with Anthony that these staggering number of leaks are undermining the ability of our government to function and to protect this country,” she added. “Like the attorney general has said, ‘Whenever a case can be made, we will seek to put some people in jail,’ and we will aggressively pursue leak cases wherever they may lead.”