Senate Republicans Embrace Plan for $1.5 Trillion Tax Cut
That may prove a tricky task, since House lawmakers may be more reluctant to enact tax cuts that would add to the deficit.

Still, any tax cut may wind up being temporary. Under existing Senate rules, Republicans can pass legislation with a simple majority only if the bill is not found to add to the deficit after a period of 10 years. That means all — or part — of the tax legislation could expire after a decade if official estimates of the costs do not align with Republicans’ optimistic economic growth projections.

Republicans on the Senate Budget Committee have been wrestling for weeks over how big a tax cut is feasible and have been under pressure to reach a budget deal this month so that the work on tax legislation can officially begin in October. Still, while the Republicans may coalesce around a $1.5 trillion tax cut, the details of the actual plan remain fraught with lawmakers divided on some key issues such as the corporate tax rate and which, if any, deductions will be eliminated or scaled back.

Some details of the plan are expected to be released next week when the “Bix Six” working group of Republican congressional leaders and the White House economic team outline their policy framework.

President Trump said this month that the wealthiest Americans might end up paying a bit more in order to lower tax bills for the middle class. A White House official said on Tuesday that while the rich would not see a benefit from the tax plan no final decisions on top rates had been reached.

Republicans have been wary of sharing too many details given the intense lobbying crush that is expected once it becomes clear which industries stand to win or lose valuable provisions currently ingrained in the tax code. Those include things like the mortgage interest deduction and the deduction for charitable donations.

Financing tax cuts through deficit spending essentially means the government will borrow money to pay for tax reductions, rather than finding spending cuts to make up for the lost revenue.