These Claims About ‘Chain Migration’ Are Not Accurate
Mark Krikorian of the Center for Immigration Studies, an advocacy group that favors more limits on immigration, said he was unsure what Mr. Trump was referring to in Mr. Saipov’s case. But “it’s obviously not the relatives” sponsored by the attacker, Mr. Krikorian said, given the waiting period and limits to family-based immigration.

Theoretically, had Mr. Saipov obtained citizenship, he could have petitioned for his parents and three sisters (whose spouses and children under 21 could have also immigrated with them) to gain residency. Even in this hypothetical, it would have taken more than a decade for Mr. Saipov to sponsor 22 to 24 relatives.

Because there are numerical limits for family-based immigration each year, there is a long queue for visas. (As of Nov. 1, more than 3.9 million people were waiting in line.) After a petition is filed and approved, would-be immigrants are essentially handed a ticket number called the “priority date” and can only apply for a green card when the State Department calls their number.

The waiting period can last a few months to more than two decades, depending on the country of origin, the sponsor’s immigration status and the applicant’s relationship to their sponsor. In January, for example, Uzbek immigrants sponsored by American-citizen siblings could begin to apply for a green card if their priority date was before June 22, 2004, a waiting period of 13.5 years.

Some Republican claims about DACA exacerbating “chain migration” have been overstated.

Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas argued on the Senate floor on Monday that immigrants who came to the United States as children could petition their relatives for green cards, including “the very parents who brought them here, in violation of the law, in the first place.” Representative Dave Brat of Virginia, in an interview this month on Bloomberg, estimated that giving legal status to some 800,000 people who entered the country as part of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals policy could lead to an influx of “three to four million”

potential relatives when “multiplied by chain migration.”