Wisconsin Legislature: 111.36
111.34 Annotation Disability Law in Wisconsin Workplaces. Vergeront & Cochrane. Wis. Law. Oct. 2004.

111.34 Annotation ADA and WFEA: Differing Disability Protections. Backer & Mishlove. Wis. Law. Oct. 2004.

111.34 Annotation Out of Office: Extended Leave Under the ADA. McClurg. Wis. Law. Oct. 2018.

111.345 111.345 Marital status; exceptions and special cases. Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 111.322 , it is not employment discrimination because of marital status to prohibit an individual from directly supervising or being directly supervised by his or her spouse.

111.345 Annotation A work rule intended to limit extramarital affairs among coemployees was not discrimination because of marital status. Federated Rural Electric Insurance v. Kessler, A work rule intended to limit extramarital affairs among coemployees was not discrimination because of marital status. Federated Rural Electric Insurance v. Kessler, 131 Wis. 2d 189 388 N.W.2d 553 (1986).

111.35 111.35 Use or nonuse of lawful products; exceptions and special cases.

111.35(1)(a) (a) Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 111.322 , it is not employment discrimination because of use of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours for a nonprofit corporation that, as one of its primary purposes or objectives, discourages the general public from using a lawful product to refuse to hire or employ an individual, to suspend or terminate the employment of an individual, or to discriminate against an individual in promotion, in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment, because that individual uses off the employer's premises during nonworking hours a lawful product that the nonprofit corporation discourages the general public from using.

111.35(1)(b) (b) Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 111.322 , it is not employment discrimination because of nonuse of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours for a nonprofit corporation that, as one of its primary purposes or objectives, encourages the general public to use a lawful product to refuse to hire or employ an individual, to suspend or terminate the employment of an individual, or to discriminate against an individual in promotion, in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment, because that individual does not use off the employer's premises during nonworking hours a lawful product that the nonprofit corporation encourages the general public to use.

111.35(2) (2) Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 111.322 , it is not employment discrimination because of use or nonuse of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours for an employer, labor organization, employment agency, licensing agency or other person to refuse to hire, employ, admit, or license an individual, to bar, suspend or terminate an individual from employment, membership or licensure, or to discriminate against an individual in promotion, in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment or labor organization membership if the individual's use or nonuse of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours does any of the following:

111.35(2)(a) (a) Impairs the individual's ability to undertake adequately the job-related responsibilities of that individual's employment, membership or licensure. Impairs the individual's ability to undertake adequately the job-related responsibilities of that individual's employment, membership or licensure.

111.35(2)(b) (b) Creates a conflict of interest, or the appearance of a conflict of interest, with the job-related responsibilities of that individual's employment, membership or licensure. Creates a conflict of interest, or the appearance of a conflict of interest, with the job-related responsibilities of that individual's employment, membership or licensure.

111.35(2)(c) (c) Conflicts with a bona fide occupational qualification that is reasonably related to the job-related responsibilities of that individual's employment, membership or licensure. Conflicts with a bona fide occupational qualification that is reasonably related to the job-related responsibilities of that individual's employment, membership or licensure.

111.35(2)(d) (d) Constitutes a violation of s. Constitutes a violation of s. 254.92 (2)

111.35(2)(e) (e) Conflicts with any federal or state statute, rule or regulation. Conflicts with any federal or state statute, rule or regulation.

111.35(3)(a) (a) Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 111.322 , it is not employment discrimination because of use of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours for an employer, labor organization, employment agency, licensing agency or other person to offer a policy or plan of life, health or disability insurance coverage under which the type of coverage or the price of coverage for an individual who uses a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours differs from the type of coverage or the price of coverage provided for an individual who does not use that lawful product, if all of the following conditions apply:

111.35(3)(a)1. 1. The difference between the premium rates charged to an individual who uses that lawful product and the premium rates charged to an individual who does not use that lawful product reflects the cost of providing the coverage to the individual who uses that lawful product. The difference between the premium rates charged to an individual who uses that lawful product and the premium rates charged to an individual who does not use that lawful product reflects the cost of providing the coverage to the individual who uses that lawful product.

111.35(3)(a)2. 2. The employer, labor organization, employment agency, licensing agency or other person that offers the coverage provides each individual who is charged a different premium rate based on that individual's use of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours with a written statement specifying the premium rate differential used by the insurance carrier. The employer, labor organization, employment agency, licensing agency or other person that offers the coverage provides each individual who is charged a different premium rate based on that individual's use of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours with a written statement specifying the premium rate differential used by the insurance carrier.

111.35(3)(b) (b) Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 111.322 , it is not employment discrimination because of nonuse of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours for an employer, labor organization, employment agency, licensing agency or other person to offer a policy or plan of life, health or disability insurance coverage under which the type of coverage or the price of coverage for an individual who does not use a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours differs from the type of coverage or the price of coverage provided for an individual who uses that lawful product, if all of the following conditions apply:

111.35(3)(b)1. 1. The difference between the premium rates charged to an individual who does not use that lawful product and the premium rates charged to an individual who uses that lawful product reflects the cost of providing the coverage to the individual who does not use that lawful product. The difference between the premium rates charged to an individual who does not use that lawful product and the premium rates charged to an individual who uses that lawful product reflects the cost of providing the coverage to the individual who does not use that lawful product.

111.35(3)(b)2. 2. The employer, labor organization, employment agency, licensing agency or other person that offers the coverage provides each individual who is charged a different premium rate based on that individual's nonuse of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours with a written statement specifying the premium rate differential used by the insurance carrier. The employer, labor organization, employment agency, licensing agency or other person that offers the coverage provides each individual who is charged a different premium rate based on that individual's nonuse of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours with a written statement specifying the premium rate differential used by the insurance carrier.

111.35(4) (4) Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 111.322 , it is not employment discrimination because of use of a lawful product off the employer's premises during nonworking hours to refuse to employ an applicant if the applicant's use of a lawful product consists of smoking tobacco and the employment is as a fire fighter covered under s. 891.45 or 891.455

111.355 111.355 Military service; exceptions and special cases.

111.355(1) (1) Employment discrimination because of military service includes an employer, labor organization, licensing agency, employment agency, or other person refusing to hire, employ, admit, or license an individual, barring or terminating an individual from employment, membership, or licensure, or discriminating against an individual in promotion, in compensation, or in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because the individual is or applies to be a member of the U.S. armed forces, the state defense force, the national guard of any state, or any reserve component of the U.S. armed forces or because the individual performs, has performed, applies to perform, or has an obligation to perform military service. Employment discrimination because of military service includes an employer, labor organization, licensing agency, employment agency, or other person refusing to hire, employ, admit, or license an individual, barring or terminating an individual from employment, membership, or licensure, or discriminating against an individual in promotion, in compensation, or in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because the individual is or applies to be a member of the U.S. armed forces, the state defense force, the national guard of any state, or any reserve component of the U.S. armed forces or because the individual performs, has performed, applies to perform, or has an obligation to perform military service.

111.355(2) (2) Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 111.322 , it is not employment discrimination because of military service for an employer, licensing agency, employment agency, or other person to refuse to hire, employ, or license an individual or to bar or terminate an individual from employment or licensure because the individual has been discharged from military service under a bad conduct, dishonorable, or other than honorable discharge, or under an entry-level separation, and the circumstances of the discharge or separation substantially relate to the circumstances of the particular job or licensed activity.

111.36 111.36 Sex, sexual orientation; exceptions and special cases.

111.36(1) (1) Employment discrimination because of sex includes, but is not limited to, any of the following actions by any employer, labor organization, employment agency, licensing agency or other person: Employment discrimination because of sex includes, but is not limited to, any of the following actions by any employer, labor organization, employment agency, licensing agency or other person:

111.36(1)(a) (a) Discriminating against any individual in promotion, compensation paid for equal or substantially similar work, or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment or licensing on the basis of sex where sex is not a bona fide occupational qualification. Discriminating against any individual in promotion, compensation paid for equal or substantially similar work, or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment or licensing on the basis of sex where sex is not a bona fide occupational qualification.

111.36(1)(b) (b) Engaging in sexual harassment; or implicitly or explicitly making or permitting acquiescence in or submission to sexual harassment a term or condition of employment; or making or permitting acquiescence in, submission to or rejection of sexual harassment the basis or any part of the basis for any employment decision affecting an employee, other than an employment decision that is disciplinary action against an employee for engaging in sexual harassment in violation of this paragraph; or permitting sexual harassment to have the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an employee's work performance or of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment. Under this paragraph, substantial interference with an employee's work performance or creation of an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment is established when the conduct is such that a reasonable person under the same circumstances as the employee would consider the conduct sufficiently severe or pervasive to interfere substantially with the person's work performance or to create an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment. Engaging in sexual harassment; or implicitly or explicitly making or permitting acquiescence in or submission to sexual harassment a term or condition of employment; or making or permitting acquiescence in, submission to or rejection of sexual harassment the basis or any part of the basis for any employment decision affecting an employee, other than an employment decision that is disciplinary action against an employee for engaging in sexual harassment in violation of this paragraph; or permitting sexual harassment to have the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an employee's work performance or of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment. Under this paragraph, substantial interference with an employee's work performance or creation of an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment is established when the conduct is such that a reasonable person under the same circumstances as the employee would consider the conduct sufficiently severe or pervasive to interfere substantially with the person's work performance or to create an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment.

111.36(1)(br) (br) Engaging in harassment that consists of unwelcome verbal or physical conduct directed at another individual because of that individual's gender, other than the conduct described in par. Engaging in harassment that consists of unwelcome verbal or physical conduct directed at another individual because of that individual's gender, other than the conduct described in par. (b) , and that has the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment or has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with that individual's work performance. Under this paragraph, substantial interference with an employee's work performance or creation of an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment is established when the conduct is such that a reasonable person under the same circumstances as the employee would consider the conduct sufficiently severe or pervasive to interfere substantially with the person's work performance or to create an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment.

111.36(1)(c) (c) Discriminating against any woman on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, maternity leave or related medical conditions by engaging in any of the actions prohibited under s. Discriminating against any woman on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, maternity leave or related medical conditions by engaging in any of the actions prohibited under s. 111.322 , including, but not limited to, actions concerning fringe benefit programs covering illnesses and disability.

111.36(1)(d)1. 1. For any employer, labor organization, licensing agency or employment agency or other person to refuse to hire, employ, admit or license, or to bar or terminate from employment, membership or licensure any individual, or to discriminate against an individual in promotion, compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of the individual's sexual orientation; or For any employer, labor organization, licensing agency or employment agency or other person to refuse to hire, employ, admit or license, or to bar or terminate from employment, membership or licensure any individual, or to discriminate against an individual in promotion, compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of the individual's sexual orientation; or

111.36(1)(d)2. 2. For any employer, labor organization, licensing agency or employment agency or other person to discharge or otherwise discriminate against any person because he or she has opposed any discriminatory practices under this paragraph or because he or she has made a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under this paragraph. For any employer, labor organization, licensing agency or employment agency or other person to discharge or otherwise discriminate against any person because he or she has opposed any discriminatory practices under this paragraph or because he or she has made a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under this paragraph.

111.36(2) (2) For the purposes of this subchapter, sex is a bona fide occupational qualification if all of the members of one sex are physically incapable of performing the essential duties required by a job, or if the essence of the employer's business operation would be undermined if employees were not hired exclusively from one sex. For the purposes of this subchapter, sex is a bona fide occupational qualification if all of the members of one sex are physically incapable of performing the essential duties required by a job, or if the essence of the employer's business operation would be undermined if employees were not hired exclusively from one sex.

111.36(3) (3) For purposes of sexual harassment claims under sub. For purposes of sexual harassment claims under sub. (1) (b) , an employer, labor organization, employment agency or licensing agency is presumed liable for an act of sexual harassment by that employer, labor organization, employment agency or licensing agency or by any of its employees or members, if the act occurs while the complaining employee is at his or her place of employment or is performing duties relating to his or her employment, if the complaining employee informs the employer, labor organization, employment agency or licensing agency of the act, and if the employer, labor organization, employment agency or licensing agency fails to take appropriate action within a reasonable time.

111.36 Annotation Federal law may be looked to in interpreting sub. (1) (b) and (br). Under federal law “hostile environment" sexual harassment is actionable if it is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and create an abusive working environment. Kannenberg v. LIRC, Federal law may be looked to in interpreting sub. (1) (b) and (br). Under federal law “hostile environment" sexual harassment is actionable if it is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and create an abusive working environment. Kannenberg v. LIRC, 213 Wis. 2d 373 571 N.W.2d 165 (Ct. App. 1997), 97-0224

111.36 Annotation The exclusion of contraceptives from an employer or college or university sponsored benefits program that otherwise provides prescription drug coverage violates Wisconsin law prohibiting sex discrimination in employment and in higher education, ss. 111.31 to 111.395, 36.12, and 38.23. The exclusion of contraceptives from an employer or college or university sponsored benefits program that otherwise provides prescription drug coverage violates Wisconsin law prohibiting sex discrimination in employment and in higher education, ss. 111.31 to 111.395, 36.12, and 38.23. OAG 1-04

111.36 Annotation Emotional distress injury due to on-the-job sexual harassment was exclusively compensable under s. 102.03. Zabkowicz v. West Bend Co., Division of Dart Industries, Inc. Emotional distress injury due to on-the-job sexual harassment was exclusively compensable under s. 102.03. Zabkowicz v. West Bend Co., Division of Dart Industries, Inc. 789 F. 2d 540 (1986).

111.36 Annotation Expanding the Notion of “Equal Coverage": The Wisconsin Fair Employment Act Requires Contraceptive Coverage for All Employer-Sponsored Prescription Drug Plans. Mason. 2005 WLR 913.

111.36 Annotation Sexual harassment. Gibson, WBB March, 1981.

111.365 111.365 Communication of opinions; exceptions and special cases.

111.365(1) (1) Employment discrimination because of declining to attend a meeting or to participate in any communication about religious matters or political matters includes all of the following: Employment discrimination because of declining to attend a meeting or to participate in any communication about religious matters or political matters includes all of the following:

111.365(1)(a) (a) Discharging or otherwise discriminating against an employee because the employee declines to attend an employer-sponsored meeting or to participate in any communication with the employer or with an agent, representative, or designee of the employer, the primary purpose of which is to communicate the opinion of the employer about religious matters or political matters. Discharging or otherwise discriminating against an employee because the employee declines to attend an employer-sponsored meeting or to participate in any communication with the employer or with an agent, representative, or designee of the employer, the primary purpose of which is to communicate the opinion of the employer about religious matters or political matters.

111.365(1)(b) (b) Threatening to discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee as a means of requiring the employee to attend a meeting or participate in a communication described in par. Threatening to discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee as a means of requiring the employee to attend a meeting or participate in a communication described in par. (a)

111.365(2) (2) Notwithstanding s. Notwithstanding s. 111.322 , it is not employment discrimination because of declining to attend a meeting or to participate in any communication about religious matters or political matters for an employer to refuse to hire or employ an individual, to suspend or terminate the employment of an individual, or to discriminate against an individual in promotion, in compensation, or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because the individual declines to attend a meeting or to participate in a communication described in sub. (1) (a) if any of the following applies:

111.365(2)(a) (a) The employer is a religious association not organized for private profit or an organization or corporation that is primarily owned or controlled by such a religious association and the primary purpose of the meeting or communication is to communicate the employer's religious beliefs, tenets, or practices. The employer is a religious association not organized for private profit or an organization or corporation that is primarily owned or controlled by such a religious association and the primary purpose of the meeting or communication is to communicate the employer's religious beliefs, tenets, or practices.

111.365(2)(b) (b) The employer is a political organization, including a political party or any other organization that engages, in substantial part, in political activities, and the primary purpose of the meeting or communication is to communicate the employer's political tenets or purposes. The employer is a political organization, including a political party or any other organization that engages, in substantial part, in political activities, and the primary purpose of the meeting or communication is to communicate the employer's political tenets or purposes.

111.365(2)(c) (c) The primary purpose of the meeting or communication is to communicate information about religious matters or political matters that the employer is required by law to communicate and no information is communicated about those matters beyond what is legally required. The primary purpose of the meeting or communication is to communicate information about religious matters or political matters that the employer is required by law to communicate and no information is communicated about those matters beyond what is legally required.

111.365(3) (3) This section and s. This section and s. 111.322 do not limit any of the following:

111.365(3)(a) (a) The application of s. The application of s. 11.1207

111.365(3)(b) (b) The right of an employer's executive, managerial, or administrative personnel to discuss issues relating to the operation of the employer's program, business, or enterprise, including issues arising under this section. The right of an employer's executive, managerial, or administrative personnel to discuss issues relating to the operation of the employer's program, business, or enterprise, including issues arising under this section.

111.365(3)(c) (c) The right of an employer to offer meetings or other communications about religious matters or political matters for which attendance or participation is strictly voluntary. The right of an employer to offer meetings or other communications about religious matters or political matters for which attendance or participation is strictly voluntary.

111.37 111.37 Use of honesty testing devices in employment situations.

111.37(1) (1) Definitions. In this section: In this section:

111.37(1)(a) (a) “Employer", notwithstanding s. “Employer", notwithstanding s. 111.32 (6) , means any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation to an employee or prospective employee. “Employer", notwithstanding s. 111.32 (6) , does not include the federal government.

111.37(1)(b) (b) “Lie detector" means a polygraph, deceptograph, voice stress analyzer, psychological stress evaluator or other similar device, whether mechanical or electrical, that is used, or the results of which are used, to render a diagnostic opinion about the honesty or dishonesty of an individual. “Lie detector" means a polygraph, deceptograph, voice stress analyzer, psychological stress evaluator or other similar device, whether mechanical or electrical, that is used, or the results of which are used, to render a diagnostic opinion about the honesty or dishonesty of an individual.

111.37(1)(c) (c) “Polygraph" means an instrument that fulfills all of the following requirements: “Polygraph" means an instrument that fulfills all of the following requirements:

111.37(1)(c)1. 1. Records continuously, visually, permanently and simultaneously any changes in cardiovascular, respiratory and electrodermal patterns as minimum instrumentation standards. Records continuously, visually, permanently and simultaneously any changes in cardiovascular, respiratory and electrodermal patterns as minimum instrumentation standards.

111.37(1)(c)2. 2. Is used, or the results of which are used, to render a diagnostic opinion about the honesty or dishonesty of an individual. Is used, or the results of which are used, to render a diagnostic opinion about the honesty or dishonesty of an individual.

111.37(2) (2) Prohibitions on lie detector use. Except as provided in subs. Except as provided in subs. (5) and (6) , no employer may do any of the following:

111.37(2)(a) (a) Directly or indirectly require, request, suggest or cause an employee or prospective employee to take or submit to a lie detector test. Directly or indirectly require, request, suggest or cause an employee or prospective employee to take or submit to a lie detector test.

111.37(2)(b) (b) Use, accept, refer to or inquire about the results of a lie detector test of an employee or prospective employee. Use, accept, refer to or inquire about the results of a lie detector test of an employee or prospective employee.

111.37(2)(c) (c) Discharge, discipline, discriminate against or deny employment or promotion to, or threaten to take any such action against, any of the following: Discharge, discipline, discriminate against or deny employment or promotion to, or threaten to take any such action against, any of the following:

111.37(2)(c)1. 1. An employee or prospective employee who refuses, declines or fails to take or submit to a lie detector test. An employee or prospective employee who refuses, declines or fails to take or submit to a lie detector test.

111.37(2)(c)2. 2. An employee or prospective employee on the basis of the results of a lie detector test. An employee or prospective employee on the basis of the results of a lie detector test.

111.37(2)(d) (d) Discharge, discipline, discriminate against or deny employment or promotion to, or threaten to take any such action against, an employee or prospective employee for any of the following reasons: Discharge, discipline, discriminate against or deny employment or promotion to, or threaten to take any such action against, an employee or prospective employee for any of the following reasons:

111.37(2)(d)1. 1. The employee or prospective employee has filed a complaint or instituted or caused to be instituted a proceeding under this section. The employee or prospective employee has filed a complaint or instituted or caused to be instituted a proceeding under this section.

111.37(2)(d)2. 2. The employee or prospective employee has testified or is about to testify in a proceeding under this section. The employee or prospective employee has testified or is about to testify in a proceeding under this section.

111.37(2)(d)3. 3. The employee or prospective employee, on behalf of that employee, prospective employee or another person, has exercised any right under this section. The employee or prospective employee, on behalf of that employee, prospective employee or another person, has exercised any right under this section.

111.37(3) (3) Notice of protection. The department shall prepare and distribute a notice setting forth excerpts from, or summaries of, the pertinent provisions of this section. Each employer that administers lie detector tests, or that has lie detector tests administered, to its employees shall post and maintain that notice in conspicuous places on its premises where notices to employees and applicants for employment are customarily posted. The department shall prepare and distribute a notice setting forth excerpts from, or summaries of, the pertinent provisions of this section. Each employer that administers lie detector tests, or that has lie detector tests administered, to its employees shall post and maintain that notice in conspicuous places on its premises where notices to employees and applicants for employment are customarily posted.

111.37(4) (4) Department's duties and powers.

111.37(4)(a) (a) The department shall do all of the following: The department shall do all of the following:

111.37(4)(a)1. 1. Promulgate rules that are necessary under this section. Promulgate rules that are necessary under this section.

111.37(4)(a)2. 2. Cooperate with regional, local and other agencies and cooperate with, and furnish technical assistance to, employment agencies other than this state, employers and labor organizations to aid in enforcing this section. Cooperate with regional, local and other agencies and cooperate with, and furnish technical assistance to, employment agencies other than this state, employers and labor organizations to aid in enforcing this section.

111.37(4)(a)3. 3. Make investigations and inspections and require the keeping of records necessary for the administration of this section. Make investigations and inspections and require the keeping of records necessary for the administration of this section.

111.37(4)(b) (b) For the purpose of any hearing or investigation under this section, the department may issue subpoenas. For the purpose of any hearing or investigation under this section, the department may issue subpoenas.

111.37(5)(a) (a) Except as provided in sub. Except as provided in sub. (6) , this section does not prohibit an employer from requesting an employee to submit to a polygraph test if all of the following conditions apply:

111.37(5)(a)1. 1. The test is administered in connection with an ongoing investigation involving economic loss or injury to the employer's business, including theft, embezzlement, misappropriation and unlawful industrial espionage or sabotage. The test is administered in connection with an ongoing investigation involving economic loss or injury to the employer's business, including theft, embezzlement, misappropriation and unlawful industrial espionage or sabotage.

111.37(5)(a)2. 2. The employee had access to the property that is the subject of the investigation under subd. The employee had access to the property that is the subject of the investigation under subd. 1.

111.37(5)(a)3. 3. The employer has a reasonable suspicion that the employee was involved in the incident or activity under investigation. The employer has a reasonable suspicion that the employee was involved in the incident or activity under investigation.