Election Results 2010
State Highlights

Connecticut voters defied the national trend by electing Democratic candidates in several close races.

Attorney General Richard Blumenthal defeated his Republican opponent, Linda E. McMahon, in a hard-fought and often vitriolic race that was the most expensive Senate contest in the nation. Two Democrats in tight Congressional races held onto their seats. The race for governor was too close to call on Wednesday, with the Connecticut secretary of state declaring that Dannel P. Malloy, the Democrat, had won, while the Republican candidate, Thomas C. Foley, declined to concede.

Scott McLean, a political science professor at Quinnipiac University, said Democrats, particularly Mr. Blumenthal, benefited from well-timed visits by President Obama, Michelle Obama and former President Bill Clinton, which energized the party’s faithful. “There definitely would have been some Democratic losses in the state, if not for the effectiveness of the get-out-the-vote effort,” Mr. McLean said.

Indeed, the uncertainty in the governor’s race was due in part to high turnout in the Democratic stronghold of Bridgeport, which led officials to keep the polls open an extra two hours after polling places ran out of ballots. Mr. Malloy, a former seven-term mayor of Stamford, is trying to become the first Democrat to win the seat since 1986. Mr. Foley, a prominent Republican fund-raiser and the former ambassador to Ireland, used his own money to outspend Mr. Malloy by almost two to one. The incumbent, M. Jodi Rell, a Republican, is retiring after six years in the post.

In the Senate race, Mr. Blumenthal started out as a favorite but soon found himself struggling to repair his reputation after he made statements implying that he had served in Vietnam, when he did not. He was forced to fend off a challenge by Ms. McMahon, a former World Wrestling Entertainment executive who spent tens of millions of dollars of her own money on the race but faced obstacles of her own, like a lack of support among women.

The seat became open when Christopher J. Dodd, a Democrat, announced his retirement.

In the Fourth Congressional District, Jim Himes won re-election against Dan Debicella, a Republican state senator. In the Fifth District, Representative Christopher S. Murphy fought off a challenge by Sam S. F. Caligiuri, a Republican.

KATIE THOMAS