Florida's Corporate Income Tax

Florida Enterprise Zone Program Florida's Enterprise Zone Program expired on December 31, 2015. See Taxpayer Information Publication 15ADM-04 issued September 8, 2015, which explains how each of the enterprise zone incentives is phased out.

Who Must File?

All corporations (including tax-exempt organizations) doing business, earning income, or existing in Florida.

Every bank and savings association doing business, earning income, or existing in Florida.

All associations or artificial entities doing business, earning income, or existing in Florida.

Foreign (out-of-state) corporations that are partners or members in a Florida partnership or joint venture. A “Florida partnership” is a partnership doing business, earning income, or existing in Florida.

A limited liability company (LLC) classified as a corporation for Florida and federal income tax purposes is subject to the Florida Income Tax Code and must file a Florida corporate income tax return.

An LLC classified as a partnership for Florida and federal income tax purposes must file a Florida Partnership Information Return (Florida Form F-1065) if one or more of its owners is a corporation. In addition, the corporate owner of an LLC classified as a partnership for Florida and federal income tax purposes must file a Florida corporate income tax return.

A single member LLC disregarded for Florida and federal income tax purposes is not required to file a separate Florida corporate income tax return. The income must be reported on the owner’s return if the single member LLC is owned, directly or indirectly, by a corporation. The corporation must file Florida Form F-1120, reporting its own income and the income of the single member LLC, even if the only activity of the corporation is ownership of the single member LLC.

Homeowner and condominium associations that file federal Form 1120 (U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return) must file Florida Forms F-1120 or F-1120A regardless of whether any tax may be due. If you file federal Form 1120-H (U.S. Income Tax Return for Homeowners Associations), you are not required to file a Florida return.

Political organizations that file federal Form 1120-POL.

S corporations that pay federal income tax on Line 22c of federal Form 1120S.

Tax-exempt organizations that have “unrelated trade or business income” for federal income tax purposes are subject to Florida corporate income tax and must file either Florida Form F-1120 or F-1120A.

Filing a Corporate Short Form (F-1120A)

A corporation that has zero tax due or owes less than $2,500 in tax may file Form F-1120A if certain criteria are met. You may file Form F-1120A electronically. Criteria for Filing Form F-1120A It has Florida net income of $45,000 or less. It conducts 100 percent of its business in Florida. It does not report any additions to and/or subtractions from federal taxable income other than a net operating loss deduction and/or state income taxes, if any. It is not included in a Florida or federal consolidated corporate income tax return. It claims no tax credits other than tentative tax payments or estimated tax payments. It is not required to pay Federal Alternative Minimum Tax.

are met. You may file Form F-1120A electronically.

Tax Base and Rate

Florida corporate income tax liability is computed using federal taxable income, modified by certain Florida adjustments, to determine adjusted federal income.

A corporation doing business outside Florida may apportion its total income. Adjusted federal income is apportioned to Florida using a three-factor formula. The formula is a weighted average, designating 25 percent each to factors for property and payroll, and 50 percent to sales.

You should add nonbusiness income allocated to Florida to the Florida portion of adjusted federal income.

You should then subtract an exemption of up to $50,000 to arrive at Florida net income.

Finally, you should compute tax by multiplying Florida net income by 5.5 percent.

Filing and Paying Taxes

Corporations must file a Florida Corporate Income/Franchise Tax Return (Form F-1120) each year. The due date is based on the corporation's tax year. See “When Tax Is Due.” Corporations must file a return even if no tax is due.

Taxpayers who paid $20,000 or more in corporate income tax during the state’s prior fiscal year (July 1 — June 30) must file Florida corporate income tax returns and pay tax electronically. Form F-1120 must be filed through the Internal Revenue Service’s Modernized e-File (MeF) Program using approved software. Read more about electronic filing and payment of corporate income tax.

Using Software to Prepare Your Return

You may purchase "alternative" forms software and use it to prepare and file your paper return. The list of approved vendors is updated every January. Before using software, ask the vendor for proof that the forms in the software package have been approved by the Department of Revenue.

Changing Your Business Address or Account Status

If you move or close your business, you must notify the Department. You can submit the information online.

When Tax is Due

Generally, the Florida corporate income tax return is due:

On or before the first day of the fourth month following the close of the tax year, or

The 15 th day following the due date, without extension, for the filing of the related federal return, whichever is later. Any balance of tax owed must be paid in full by the due date of the Florida return. The Florida Partnership Information Return (Form F-1065) is due on or before the first day of the fifth month following the close of the tax year.

day following the due date, without extension, for the filing of the related federal return, whichever is later. Any balance of tax owed must be paid in full by the due date of the Florida return. The (Form F-1065) is due on or before the first day of the fifth month following the close of the tax year. Find due dates for the current year.

If you need an extension you must file a Florida Tentative Income/Franchise Tax Return and Application for Extension of Time to File Return (Form F-7004) must be filed with payment of tax by the original due date of the Florida return. You may file Form F-7004 electronically. Properly filing this form will automatically give corporations 6 months from the due date of the return to file the corporate return. For partnerships, the extension will give you 5 months from the due date of your return to file your return.

Estimated Tax

If your corporation owes more than $2,500 in Florida corporate income tax annually, you must make estimated tax payments on a Declaration/Installment of Florida Estimated Income/Franchise Tax (Form F-1120ES). You can file and pay estimated tax electronically.

Estimated tax payments are due on or before:



The last day of the 4 th month.

month. The last day of the 6 th month.

month. The last day of the 9 th month.

month. The last day of the tax year.

Find due dates for the current year.

Florida Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)

You must compute Florida alternative minimum tax (AMT) if you paid federal AMT for the same tax year. How to Compute Florida AMT Compute Florida AMT by multiplying Florida alternative minimum taxable income by 3.3 percent. The tax due is whichever amount is greater: the regular Florida corporate income tax or the Florida AMT. In later years, corporations that paid AMT are allowed a credit. The amount of the available credit carried over to later years is equal to the amount of Florida AMT paid over the amount of Florida “regular” tax that would have otherwise been due. The available Florida AMT credit that you may take in a tax year is limited to the amount of Florida “regular” tax that is due for that year over the Florida AMT calculated for that year.

if you paid federal AMT for the same tax year.

Corporate Tax Incentives

A business that donates cash, property, or goods to an approved community-based organization or government agency may take a community contribution tax credit against Florida corporate income tax.

A business that contributes to nonprofit scholarship funding organizations (SFOs) may receive tax credits. You can apply online.

A business that has qualified research expenses and meets Florida's definition of a target industry business may apply for a research and development tax credit.

Resources

Download a corporate income tax brochure.

Read Tax Information Publications about specific tax issues.

Get answers to frequently asked questions.