Wall Street's Steeply Increasing Republicanism
In fact, though, that has been true only recently -- at least when it comes to campaign contributions. For many years, the financial world had no clear allegiances.



Center for Responsive Politics data shows that historically, Wall Street would send more of its campaign cash to one party and then swing back the other way. The gaps between the giving to each side were always fairly narrow.



That has changed. According to the latest Center for Responsive Politics analysis, there has been a defined shift in campaign giving by

The world of high finance -- with its wealthy elites keeping a sharp eye on the bottom line and their tax liabilities -- is often presumed to be the domain of Republicans. In fact, though, that has been true only recently -- at least when it comes to campaign contributions. For many years, the financial world had no clear allegiances.Center for Responsive Politics data shows that historically, Wall Street would send more of its campaign cash to one party and then swing back the other way. The gaps between the giving to each side were always fairly narrow.That has changed. According to the latest Center for Responsive Politics analysis, there has been a defined shift in campaign giving by commercial banks and securities and investment firms , which now heavily favor Republican candidates.





As recently as 2009, Democrats were collecting more campaign cash from Wall Street than Republicans. Starting in early 2007, when Democrats took control of both houses of Congress, the financial world's campaign contributions shifted decisively to favor the Democrats; it's not uncommon for an industry's contributions to favor the party in power. Through the financial crisis, Wall Street contributions to Republicans totaled more than those to Democrats just once, but the gap was never startling. In President Barack Obama's first year in office, Wall Street sent Democrats $29.9 million, and Republicans $20.7 million.





That dynamic shifted at the end of 2009, with more money flowing to Republicans in 2010 -- again, not an unusual pattern as congressional Republicans were clearly on the rise. But starting in 2011, as the chart below shows, the gap widened and Wall Street's financial support for one party began to tip the scales.