A lack of political will
There are several possible reasons that could adequately explain why the Los Angeles Police Department could have such a large backlog on the lab work it needs to do on DNA samples from 7,100 rape victims.

But the one explanation police officials cite – a lack of funding – isn’t one of them.

That’s the time-tested response of every government agency when faced with a shortcoming: We just don’t have enough money to make our stated priority a true priority.

And that’s what LAPD officials are saying now about the fact that there are thousands of DNA samples – evidence in reported rape cases that could take numerous, dangerous rapists off our streets, if only someone would analyze it.

But there’s money available if police officials really need it. In fact, the LAPD hasn’t even spent $1.3 million in federal grant funds intended for that very purpose. And the department’s failure to use that grant money prompted the feds to significantly reduce the grant money this year.

Besides, the LAPD always had the trash fees to raid. City Hall raised the residential trash collection fee last year from $12 to $28 a month to hire more police officers. But it turned out that of the $137 million collected so far, only one-third was used to actually hire new officers. The rest went to raises for existing officers and equipment and general LAPD expenses. There was more than plenty to contract out DNA analysis for rape kits or hire more criminalists for the lab.

The money excuse is just a facile brush-off. What’s missing isn’t cash; it’s accountability and a lack of political will.

So even as LAPD Chief William Bratton talks up L.A.’s recent dip in violent crime, rapists who might have been identified with a simple test could be walking free, even picking out their next victim.

That’s scary – and a serious failure of public safety.

What’s worse is that with a little bit of effort, the LAPD could be at work easing that backlog, but instead, rape kits sometimes aren’t analyzed for months. City Hall has been saying for years there’s a backlog, but has never done much about it.

This issue needs more than just the occasional saber-rattling from headline-attentive politicians who use it as an excuse to beg more money from the public.

For example, City Councilman and former prosecutor Jack Weiss has been complaining about the backlog of criminal lab work for years, noting that it hasn’t been the priority it should.

Just last year, he called the backlog of criminal-case DNA the “public safety scandal of our era,” and asked Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa and Bratton to hire new criminalists. He said he would push the council for $10 million in funding for this problem this year. That funding has not materialized, and the backlog hasn’t gone away.

As chairman of the City Council’s Public Safety Committee (and a candidate for city attorney next year), Weiss has the bully pulpit to push the issue, but he hasn’t followed through. Last December, Weiss said he would “hold hearings every week on the backlog of DNA cases until every woman and man in this city is outraged.” Nice sound bite, but ultimately empty, or the public hearings would still be going on.

It’s up to Bratton and Villaraigosa to make it a real priority. And before they start begging for money, they should prove their credibility by spending the money the city already has – money that goes unspent while rapists roam free.