Timeline: The NFL’s Concussion Crisis – League of Denial: The NFL's Concussion Crisis - FRONTLINE
What did the NFL know and when did it know it? To help answer that question we’ve created a dual chronology, with growing scientific concern about the link between football and brain disease on the left-hand column, and the NFL’s public statements on the right. Click on a year to learn more.

19941995199719992000200120022003200420052006200720092010201120122013

“On concussions, I think is one of these pack journalism issues, frankly… There is no increase in concussions, the number is relatively small… The problem is a journalist issue. “

NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue describes concussions as a “pack journalism issue” during a panel on the future of sports:

Citing the dangers of returning to football after sustaining several concussions, Chicago Bears fullback Merrill Hoge announces his retirement from the NFL. Two weeks earlier, he had taken a knee to the head, leaving him briefly unable to recognize his wife or brother.

Aikman’s agent, Leigh Steinberg, visited him in the hospital that night and recalled the story to FRONTLINE.

“I didn’t know what planet I was on. I still to this day have no recollection of ever having played in that game. So whenever I see footage of that game, it’s like somebody else is out there doing it.”

Aikman later tells the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel that he can’t remember the game:

Dallas Cowboys quarterback Troy Aikman takes a knee to the head during the 1993 season NFC Championship game, landing him in the hospital that night.

Pellman also tells Sports Illustrated that “concussions are part of the profession, an occupational risk.”

“‘We discuss it on the list of things every time we have a league meeting … We think the issue of knees, of drugs and steroids and drinking is a far greater problem, according to the number of incidents.”

When asked about the issue of concussions in 1994, Pellman tells Newsday:

NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue creates the Mild Traumatic Brain Injury committee, and appoints New York Jets team doctor and rheumatologist Dr. Elliot Pellman as chair, despite lacking any previous experience in brain science.

With growing concern for the health of his clients, Leigh Steinberg , agent to star quarterbacks Troy Aikman and Steve Young, holds a seminar on the effects of concussions in Newport Beach, Calif. Players listen to a panel of medical experts describe the symptoms and dangers of concussions.

“Repeated concussions can cause cumulative brain injury in an individual over months or years,” the report warns.

The guidelines from the American Academy of Neurology say that repetitive concussions can cause brain damage, and suggest that players be removed from the game if they lose consciousness or exhibit any concussion symptoms 15 minutes post-injury.

“After four years of keeping close track of head injuries, Pellman claims the numbers have remained ‘remarkably the same’ throughout the league. He said there are about 180 ‘incidents’ per year of mild traumatic brain injury. ‘We’re talking the majority are minor injuries,’ Pellman said.”

Dr. Pellman tells The Chicago Tribune that the MTBI committee’s studies have found that brain injuries in football are relatively uncommon and minor. The paper reports:

MTBI chair says serious brain injuries are a rarity in the NFL

“It’s pretty devastating evidence,” he said. “If the NFL takes the position that they didn’t know or weren’t armed with evidence that concussions can cause total disability — permanent disability, permanent brain injury — in 1999, that evidence trumps anything they say.”

Webster’s attorney, Bob Fitzsimmons, says the ruling shows that the league should’ve known there was a link between football and brain damage.

The NFL Retirement Board rules that Mike Webster’s head injuries from his years playing for the Pittsburgh Steelers and Kansas City Chiefs left him “totally and permanently” disabled as “the result of head injuries he suffered as a football player.” The ruling isn’t made public until it’s uncovered by FRONTLINE/ESPN reporters Steve Fainaru and Mark Fainaru-Wada.

49ers quarterback Steve Young is knocked out for 30 seconds during a game against the Arizona Cardinals. It would be Young’s last NFL game.

After years of struggling with cognitive problems, Mike Webster files a disability application with the NFL Retirement Board, claiming his NFL football career caused him to have dementia.

Dallas Cowboys’ owner Jerry Jones tells ESPN that he’d push Aikman to ignore concussion concerns if it was a key game “since all data that we have so far don’t point to lasting effects, long-term effects from the head trauma.”

“We don’t know whether being knocked out briefly is any more dangerous than having amnesia and not being knocked out,” committee member and neurologist Dr. Mark R. Lovell tells the Times. ”We see people all the time that get knocked out briefly and have no symptoms,” he added. ”Others get elbowed, go back to the bench and say, ‘Where am I?'”

The New York Times reports that MTBI committee members, along with many NFL doctors, are criticizing the American Academy of Neurology’s 1997 return-to-play guidelines, citing a lack of research to support them.

“When compared to players who did not report any concussions, the group with one or more concussions reported significantly more neurological symptoms. These included problems with memory and concentration, confusion, speech or hearing difficulties, numbness or tingling in extremities, and headaches.”

While cautioning that their study was based solely on surveys, Dr. Barry Jordan and Dr. Julian Bailes present startling results at an annual meeting for the American Academy of Neurology. Science Daily summarized their findings:

Quarterback for the Dallas Cowboys Troy Aikman announces his retirement, citing his concussions and back problems.

Because Webster was suffering from mental problems, Allegheny County medical examiner Dr. Bennet Omalu decides to take a closer look at Webster’s brain, eventually discovering the first evidence of a brain disease that had never been previously identified in football players, Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy, or CTE.

“We salute our Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Committee for its leadership and the individuals involved in this project who put in so many hours of work. We are confident that this important new information will continue to advance the cause of improving the safety of profession and amateur athletes on all levels.”

The first of 16 scientific papers by the MTBI Committee, is published in the journal Neurosurgery along with a guest editorial by NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue. Tagliabue writes:

According to a report by ESPN , New York Jets receiver Wayne Chrebet gets knocked out cold during a game against the New York Giants. Dr. Elliot Pellman, the Jets’ team doctor, who is also head of the NFL’s Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Committee, examines him, and sends him back into the game.

“Our study suggests that players with a history of previous concussions are more likely to have future concussive injuries than those with no history; 1 in 15 players with a concussion may have additional concussions in the same playing season; and previous concussions may be associated with slower recovery of neurological function.”

Dr. Kevin Guskiewicz, a sports medicine researcher at the University of North Carolina, publishes a paper suggesting that repeat concussions may lead to slower recovery of neurological functioning:

“One of the other processes that may account for some of these differences between NFL players and the general population might be deemed to be a type of artificial selection. Most NFL players have been involved with organized football since junior or senior high school and on through college. It is well known that MTBIs occur at all these levels of the sport. For whatever reasons, certain individuals undoubtedly are more prone to MTBI than others. Some individuals are more prone to delayed or poor recovery after MTBI. These groups may overlap. It is likely that many of these individuals will stop playing organized football before reaching the professional level. They are ‘selected out’ either of their own volition or because their head injuries prevent them from continuing to participate in the sport. As a result of this winnowing process, those players who ultimately play in the NFL are probably less susceptible to MTBI and prolonged post-concussion syndrome than the general population.”

The MTBI committee’s fifth paper in Neurosurgery stirs controversy. It suggests that NFL players have evolved to a state where their brains are less susceptible to injury:

The committee also notes that although brain disease from heads hits is seen in other athletes, such as boxers, there’s no sign of such disease in pro football players.

“They [Guskiewicz et. al.] concluded that there may be an increased risk of repeat concussive injuries and there may be a slower recovery of neurological function after repeat concussions in those have a history of previous concussions. The results of this present NFL study do not support those conclusions.”

The MTBI committee publishes a paper in Neurosurgery disputing Guskiewicz’s findings. According to the committee :

After complaining of depression and behaving erratically, former Pittsburgh Steeler Justin Strzelczyk dies in a fiery car crash at age 36. Dr. Omalu later examines Strzelczyk’s brain and finds CTE.

“A total of 92% of concussed players returned to practice in less than seven days … More than one-half of the players returned to play within one day, and symptoms resolved in a short time in the vast majority of cases.”

The MTBI committee publishes a paper in Neurosurgery emphasizing that the NFL’s concussion problem is relatively small:

Dr. Kevin Guskiewicz and Dr. Julian Bailes publish a study in Neurosurgery concluding “that the onset of dementia-related syndromes may be initiated by repetitive cerebral concussions in professional football players.”

Dr. Bennet Omalu publishes his findings of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) in Mike Webster’s brain in the journal Neurosurgery .

“Under the right circumstances, specifically with regard to final decision making on return to play being solely at the clinical discretion of a knowledgeable team physician, it might be safe for college/high school football players to be cleared to return to play on the same day as their injury. The authors suggest that, rather than blindly adhering to arbitrary, rigid guidelines, physicians keep an open mind to the possibility that the present analysis of professional football players may have relevance to college and high school players.”

The committee goes on to argue that its findings might apply to younger athletes.

“Players who are concussed and return to the same game have fewer initial signs and symptoms than those removed from play. Return to play does not involve a significant risk of a second injury either in the same game or during the season.”

Former Philadelphia Eagles player Andre Waters commits suicide at the age of 44. Dr. Omalu later examines his brain and finds CTE.

“Our first and second cases both had long careers without multiple recorded concussions. Both manifested Major Depressive Disorder after retirement.”

Dr. Omalu publishes his second paper after finding the disease in the brain of former Steelers player Terry Long. As with Mike Webster, he links Long’s NFL career to his brain damage:

“Omalu et al’s description of chronic traumatic encephalopathy is completely wrong,” they write. “The diagnosis of a chronic condition requires a medical history indicating a long-standing nature of the illness … Such a history is completely lacking in Omalu et al.s’ report.”

“To go back and say that he was depressed from playing in the NFL and that led to his death 14 years later, I think is purely speculative,” Maroon told the paper . He added:”He could have had a head injury that wasn’t reported before football. He could have had a fight, he could have had a head injury … And that’s why I’m saying it’s so speculative.”

Steelers team doctor and future member of the MTBI Committee, Dr. Joseph Maroon , tells the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette that Omalu’s conclusion that Terry Long’s suicide may have been the result of depression caused by head injuries during his career in football was “fallacious reasoning.”

“Current research with professional athletes has not shown that having more than one or two concussions leads to permanent problems if each injury is managed properly. It is important to understand that there is no magic number for how many concussions is too many. Research is currently underway to determine if there are any long-term effects of concussions in NFL athletes.”

The pamphlet says that current research on the long-term impact of concussions is inconclusive:

“In my opinion, the only scientifically valid evidence of a chronic encephalopathy in athletes is in boxers and in some Steeplechase jockeys. It’s never been scientifically validly documented in any other athletes… Anecdotes do not make scientifically valid evidence. I am a man of science. I believe in empirically determined scientifically valid data. And that is not scientifically valid data.”

“And I think one thing that troubles me sometimes, when I see media reports, is that this is something that, all of a sudden, we’ve started to focus on,” says Goodell. “We’ve had this committee for 14 years. We have done terrific work. And our doctors, our scientists have been working at this diligently. So this is not something that’s come to us new.

During a press conference following the summit, Goodell touts the accomplishments of NFL doctors and champions the conference as an example of the league’s continued steps towards a better understanding of the science behind head injury.

A number of outside researchers, including Dr. Bailes and Dr. Guskiewicz, present their findings on the dangers of concussions. Dr. Bailes says his research was dismissed by MBTI committee members.

New NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell calls the first league-wide Concussion Summit; attendees include the NFL’s own doctors as well as outside scientists.

During an interview on HBO Real Sports , Dr. Casson adamantly denies any evidence of a link between head injuries in NFL players and depression, dementia or any other long-term problem resulting in brain damage. The interview earns him the nickname “Dr. No.”

Members of the MTBI committee criticize the paper by Bailes and Guskiewicz for relying on surveys. “Survey studies are the weakest type of research study — they’re subject to all kinds of error and misinterpretation and miscalculation.” Committee chair Dr. Ira Casson told The New York Times . And Dr. Henry Feuer, MTBI committee member and a medical consultant for the Indianapolis Colts, told the Times that the study was “virtually worthless.”

“… Professional football players with a history of three of more concussions are at a significantly greater risk for having depressive episodes later in life compared with those players with no history of concussion.”

Dr. Julian Bailes and Dr. Kevin Guskiewicz release a study on the risk of depression in retired NFL players based on a survey of more than 2500 former players. The paper, published in the Official Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine , concludes:

Dr. Pellman steps down from his position as head of the MTBI Committee and is replaced by two co-chairs: Dr. Ira Casson, a neurologist, and Dr. David Viano, the director of the Sports Biomechanics Lab at Wayne State University.

Goodell also points to the MTBI committee as proof of the league’s commitment to concussion research and player safety.

The league’s new commissioner, Roger Goodell, discusses the Ted Johnson story during his annual “State of the League” address, stating: “I don’t accept the premise that [returning from concussions] was common practice, but it does concern me.”

Former New England Patriots player Ted Johnson tells The New York Times that in the wake of his retirement, he suffers from memory loss, an addiction to amphetamines and agoraphobia. He dates his problems to two concussions he suffered within a week in August 2002 and says that Coach Bill Belichick sent him back on the field for regular contact play four days later, against the advice of the team’s trainer. Belicheck later told The Boston Globe that Johnson should have told him if he wasn’t able to practice. “If Ted felt so strongly that he didn’t feel he was ready to practice with us, he should have told me,” Belichick said.

2009

January 2009 Scientists crash the Super Bowl Dr. Ann McKee, Chris Nowinski and a team of scientists from the newly formed Center for the Study of Traumatic Encephalopathy hold a press conference in Tampa, where the world’s sports media is gathered for the Super Bowl. At the press conference, they announce several new cases of CTE, including in Tom McHale, who died of a drug overdose at age 45, as well as in the brain of an 18-year-old high school student who died 10 days after suffering his fourth concussion.

May 2009 McKee meets with MTBI Committee Dr. McKee presents her findings to Dr. Ira Casson and members of the MTBI committee at NFL headquarters in New York. Dr. McKee says that the panel was dismissive of her and her research. “It was like, ‘Oh, the girl talked. Now we can get back to some serious business,'” she told FRONTLINE. Committee member Dr. Henry Feuer told FRONTLINE that Dr. McKee’s research did not indicate a specific cause for CTE and could not show the prevalence of the disease, given that her findings were based solely on case studies. “I just have a problem. Ann McKee, she cannot tell me where it’s starting. We don’t know the cause and effect. We don’t know that right now. We don’t know the incidence,” Feuer said. “She was seeing only those that were in trouble. And we know that there are thousands roaming around that are not having problems. So, I think, that’s where we may have had an issue.

September 2009 Study finds former players are 19 times more likely to get dementia In a front-page article, The New York Times reports that an NFL-funded study of retired players has found that former players are 19 times more likely than the general population to have dementia, Alzheimer’s or other memory-related diseases. September 2009 NFL says study is flawed NFL spokesman Greg Aiello criticizes the NFL-funded study. As The New York Times reports: “An N.F.L. spokesman, Greg Aiello, said in an e-mail message that the study did not formally diagnose dementia, that it was subject to shortcomings of telephone surveys and that ‘there are thousands of retired players who do not have memory problems … Memory disorders affect many people who never played football or other sports,’ Mr. Aiello said. ‘We are trying to understand it as it relates to our retired players.'”

October 2009 On Capitol Hill, the outside scientists present their case Dr. Ann McKee and others present evidence of CTE in football players during a Congressional hearing. Rep. Linda Sanchez (D-Calif.) tells Goodell that the league’s response to the problem reminds her of the tobacco industry’s handling of the link between smoking and health problems in the 1990s. Rep. Maxine Waters (D-Calif.) tells Goodell: “We have heard from the NFL time and time again. You are always studying, you are always trying, you are hopeful. I want to know, what are you doing now?” October 2009 Commissioner Goodell insists the NFL is studying the problem Goodell is asked during his congressional testimony if there is a link between football and brain damage. He responds that he isn’t best suited to answer the question, but that the NFL is committed to continuing to research the problem and is currently taking step to improve player safety.

November 2009 Shake Up on the MTBI Committee Dr. Ira Casson and Dr. David Viano resign from the MTBI committee. In a memo obtained by the Associated Press following their resignation, Commissioner Goodell said that he wanted to find new members “who will bring to the committee independent sources of expertise and experience in the field of head injuries.” In March 2010, the league installs neurological surgeons Dr. H. Hunt Batjer and Dr. Richard G. Ellenbogen as co-chairs of the renamed “Head, Neck and Spine Committee” and appoints Dr. Kevin Guskiewicz as a member.