President Trump, we're the 'fake news' that panned the Gettysburg Address. But we apologized.
So you might have heard by now that President Donald Trump said the media "excoriated" President Abraham Lincoln when he delivered the Gettysburg Address in 1863.

Wait? What? Uh-oh. This sounds familiar.

"You know when Abraham Lincoln made that Gettysburg Address speech, the great speech, you know he was ridiculed?" Trump said during a rally in Billings, Mont., on Thursday night, The Hill, and other outlets reported. "And he was excoriated by the fake news. They had fake news then. They said it was a terrible, terrible speech."

Ohhhh ... boyyyy ...

Trump went on to tell the crowd that Lincoln's 272-word address, a model of economy and rhetorical perfection, only became widely revered a half-century after his last words echoed on that Pennsylvania battlefield.

"Fifty years after his death they said it may have been the greatest speech ever made in America," Trump said. "I have a feeling that's going to happen with us. In different ways, that's going to happen with us."

News outlets scratched their heads over the subject of Trump's ire. What cockamamie, fly-by-night, amateurish, tone-deaf, fish-wrapping news outlet could possibly have been daft enough to pan ...

... The Gettysburg Address?

The coverage of President Lincoln's address in the New York Times was quite favorable, actually:https://t.co/ipsgvOusbghttps://t.co/5umCU6yq1I https://t.co/8DmK3LphWN -- George Conway (@gtconway3d) September 7, 2018

Mr. President, to borrow from one of your predecessors, we cannot tell a lie.

'Twas us.

Or, rather, it was our journalistic forerunner, the Harrisburg Patriot & Union, that gave its official thumbs-down to Lincoln, dismissing his now immortal speech as mere "silly remarks."

"We pass over the silly remarks of the President. For the credit of the nation we are willing that the veil of oblivion shall be dropped over them and that they shall be no more repeated or thought of," The Patriot and Union's reviewer observed."

Talk about your Days that Live in Infamy .. wait ... that was the other guy

But in 2013, as the 150th anniversary of Lincoln's remarks closed in, we did the right thing, we owned up and apologized in an editorial that .... well ... got us a bit of attention.

MORE:

For the good of the country, for our colleagues in the news media, and for our posterity, here, once again, is the full text of our retraction:

"Seven score and ten years ago, the forefathers of this media institution brought forth to its audience a judgment so flawed, so tainted by hubris, so lacking in the perspective history would bring, that it cannot remain unaddressed in our archives. We write today in reconsideration of "The Gettysburg Address," delivered by then-President Abraham Lincoln in the midst of the greatest conflict seen on American soil. Our predecessors, perhaps under the influence of partisanship, or of strong drink, as was common in the profession at the time, called President Lincoln's words "silly remarks," deserving "a veil of oblivion," apparently believing it an indifferent and altogether ordinary message, unremarkable in eloquence and uninspiring in its brevity. In the fullness of time, we have come to a different conclusion. No mere utterance, then or now, could do justice to the soaring heights of language Mr. Lincoln reached that day. By today's words alone, we cannot exalt, we cannot hallow, we cannot venerate this sacred text, for a grateful nation long ago came to view those words with reverence, without guidance from this chagrined member of the mainstream media. The world will little note nor long remember our emendation of this institution's record - but we must do as conscience demands: In the editorial about President Abraham Lincoln's speech delivered Nov. 19, 1863, in Gettysburg, the Patriot & Union failed to recognize its momentous importance, timeless eloquence, and lasting significance. The Patriot-News regrets the error."



So, Mr. President, on behalf of our ancestors, we're sorry for panning the Gettysburg Address.

It seriously won't happen again.