Obama Administration Protects Access to Health Care for Millions of People For Immediate Release: Dec. 14, 2016 Share This Twitter Facebook Tumblr Pinterest Google Plus

Washington, D.C. – Today the Obama Administration finalized a new rule that protects birth control, cancer screenings, and other basic health care for more than 4 million people. The rule ensures patients can access care at qualified health care providers, including Planned Parenthood and other reproductive health care providers. The Obama Administration’s rule makes it clear that it is against the law for states to block people from accessing care at a health center because the organization also provides safe, legal abortion. The rule garnered widespread support in the call for public comment with 91% of the roughly 145,000 responses in favor of the rule.

Title X, the nation’s family planning program, is meant to ensure that every person, regardless of where they live, how much money they make, or whether or not they have health insurance, has access to basic, preventive reproductive health care. The rule ensures those most in need – those who have very low incomes or lack health insurance – still have access to lifesaving care, such as cancer screenings, birth control, STI testing and treatment, and well-woman exams.

While the rule provides strong protections, it could face attacks in Congress or by a Health and Human Services secretary determined to undo these common-sense protections. It comes amid mounting concerns over the future of reproductive health and rights with extremists like Vice President-elect Mike Pence and and anticipated HHS Secretary nominee Tom Price joining the Trump administration.

Statement from Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America:

“President Obama has cemented his legacy as a champion for women’s health. This rule protects birth control, cancer screenings, STI testing and treatment, and other health care for millions of people. Yet this fight is not over. We are deeply concerned about the future of health care access in this country with extremists like Mike Pence and and Tom Price at the helm.

“We will not back down, and we will continue to fight for our patients’ access to care. Every person deserves the right to control their own bodies, their own health, and their own well-being without politicians getting in the way.”

Planned Parenthood health centers care for approximately 1.5 million patients through Title X – roughly one third of the more than 4 million people served by the program. Six in 10 women who access care from a family planning health center consider it their main source of health care. For many patients across the country, Planned Parenthood health centers are the only places they can turn to for reproductive health care. More than half of Planned Parenthood's health centers are in rural and underserved communities.

People with low incomes and communities of color are two groups that have historically faced systemic barriers in accessing quality health care, and who benefit most from these protections. In 2014, 15 percent of Planned Parenthood patients were Black, more than 360,000 people, and 23 percent of Planned Parenthood patients were Latinos, more than 575,000 people. Seventy-five percent of Planned Parenthood patients have incomes at or below 150 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL).The idea that other providers could absorb Planned Parenthood’s patients has been resoundingly dismissed by experts – in fact the American Public Health Association called the idea “ludicrous.”

Background on Title X:

Simply put, Title X helps ensure more than 4 million people have health care in this country. The nation’s family planning program offers preventive health care services to those most in need. This is the only way that millions of women who have low incomes or are uninsured have access to birth control, cancer screenings, STI tests, and other basic care.

Eighty-five percent of the people served by our nation’s family planning program have incomes below 200 percent of the federal poverty level, and 48 percent are uninsured.



In 2015 alone, Title X provided nearly 800,000 Pap tests, breast exams to 1 million women, nearly 5 million tests for STIs, and 1 million HIV tests.

In fact, 6 in 10 women who access care from a family planning health center consider it their main source of health care. For 4 in 10, it’s their only source of care (source: Guttmacher).

Approximately 1.5 million Planned Parenthood patients benefit from the nation’s family planning program, 78 percent of whom live with incomes of 150 percent of the federal poverty level or less, the equivalent of $35,775 a year for a family of four in 2014. Approximately 20 percent of these patients identify as Latino/a; and approximately 15 percent identify as Black.

Planned Parenthood’s critical role

Planned Parenthood health centers provide preventive care to approximately 1.5 million patients served by the nation’s family planning program. We serve roughly one-third of the program’s clients, although Planned Parenthood health centers comprise 10 percent of publicly supported safety net family planning centers.



Planned Parenthood health centers are located in the communities where access to care is most needed. More than half of Planned Parenthood's health centers across the U.S. are in rural and underserved communities with limited access to health care. Seventy-five percent of Planned Parenthood patients have incomes at or below 150 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL).



The idea that other providers could absorb Planned Parenthood’s patients has been resoundingly dismissed by experts. In fact, the American Public Health Association called the idea “ludicrous."

Planned Parenthood health centers are also considerably more likely to offer Title X patients a broader range of contraceptive methods than other providers. In a study of Community Health Centers (CHCs), 69 percent reported referring their patients to family planning providers, like Planned Parenthood health centers, for family planning care.

Public health experts agree

“For many women in America, Planned Parenthood is the only place where they are able to get needed quality care." – Mark S. DeFrancesco, MD, MBA, FACOG, immediate past president of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists

"Put simply, it takes the entire spectrum of providers, including Planned Parenthood, to meet the needs of the growing population of low-income people without access to reproductive and other basic health care services. We work in conjunction with Planned Parenthood for family-planning and HIV services. We do referrals back and forth, so that people can receive services in the setting that they're most comfortable.” – Randall Ellis, senior director of government relations for Houston, TX FQHC Legacy Com­munity Health Services

“The assertion that community health centers could step into a breach of this magnitude is simply wrong and displays a fundamental misunderstanding of how the health care system works.” - Sara Rosenbaum, J.D., Founding Chair of the Department of Health Policy at George Washington University Milken Institute School of Public Health

“You can’t just cut Planned Parenthood off one day and expect everyone across the city to absorb the patients.” – said Stephanie Taylor, Louisiana State Office of Public Health

Blocking care at Planned Parenthood has devastating consequences

After Kansas defunded Planned Parenthood, the number of people accessing birth control, cancer screenings, STI tests, well-woman exams, and other care through the Title X program fell by more than 14,000.



A recent study in the New England Journal of Medicine showed that blocking patients from going to Planned Parenthood in Texas was associated with a 35% decline in women in publicly funded programs using the most effective methods of birth control and a dramatic 27% increase in births among women who had previously accessed injectable contraception through those programs.

Blocking patients from care at health centers has a disproportionate impact on communities of color, who already face systemic barriers in accessing quality health care. For example, in Texas, researchers found that more than half of women reported at least one barrier to reproductive health care. Spanish-speaking women from Mexico were more likely to report three or more barriers.



###

Planned Parenthood is the nation's leading provider and advocate of high-quality, affordable health care for women, men, and young people, as well as the nation's largest provider of sex education. With approximately 700 health centers across the country, Planned Parenthood organizations serve all patients with care and compassion, with respect and without judgment. Through health centers, programs in schools and communities, and online resources, Planned Parenthood is a trusted source of reliable health information that allows people to make informed health decisions. We do all this because we care passionately about helping people lead healthier lives.