Christina L. Corl, Plunkett Cooney Columbus litigation attorney: Plunkett Cooney
The managing partner of the firm's Columbus, Ohio office, Christina L. Corl serves as Co-Leader of Plunkett Cooney's Labor & Employment Law Practice Group. She has extensive litigation and trial experience defending clients in state and federal court disputes involving employment issues, commercial law, product liability, premises liability, professional liability and municipal law.

Ms. Corl represents national retail and commercial companies, governmental entities, nonprofit organizations and law enforcement. She serves as Special Counsel to the Ohio Attorney General’s Office, handling employment matters for The Ohio State University, Miami University, Ohio University and the University of Cincinnati on administrative complaints with the Ohio Civil Rights Commission and Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, employment discrimination litigation in federal court and breach of employment contract cases.

In addition, Ms. Corl serves as Associate General Counsel to the National Fraternal Order of Police and the USA Track & Field Association. She has also served as Special Counsel to the Ohio Department of Insurance, the Department of Corrections and Secretary of State on Elections and Civil Rights matters.

Ms. Corl also has the distinction of having represented over a dozen athletes at The Ohio State University in a 2011 investigation by the NCAA. Ms. Corl also advises colleges and universities with respect to Title IX issues, and she has represented The Ohio State University in Title IX litigation in federal court.

Representative Client Work

Successfully negotiated settlements with the Ohio Department of Commerce and the U.S. Department of Labor on wage and hour and OSHA claims

Routinely advises clients on employment matters, drafts employee practice and procedure manuals and policies and provides legal guidance regarding background checks, drug testing, social media and workplace privacy issues

Advises clients on non-competition agreements, hiring and termination of high level executives and severance packages

Published/Notable U.S. Supreme Court Cases

Friedrichs v California Teachers Association, (2015) Case no. 14-915

Fisher v University of Texas, (2015) Case no. 14-981

Borough of Duryea, Pennsylvania v Guarnieri, (2009) Case no. 09-1476

Engquist v Oregon Department of Agriculture, (2007) Case no. 07-474

U.S. Department of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms v City of Chicago, (2002) Case no. 02-322

Professional Appointments

National Fraternal Order of Police (Associate General Counsel, 2001 - 2017)

USA Track and Field Association (Associate General Counsel to Board of Directors, 2010 - Present)

Columbus Urban League (Counsel, 2010 - Present)

Special Counsel to Ohio Attorney General’s Office for Ohio Department of Insurance, Department of Corrections, Secretary of State of Ohio, The Ohio State University, University of Cincinnati, Ohio University, Youngstown State University and Miami University (2008 - Present)

Commission on the Rules of Superintendence for Ohio Courts (Appointed by Ohio Supreme Court, 2011 - Present)

Professional Affiliations

Columbus Bar Association (Judicial Screening Committee, 2010 - Present)

Ohio Supreme Court Commission On Rules Of Superintendence For Ohio Courts (2011 - Present)

Community Involvement

The Harmony Project (President, Board of Directors, 2009 - Present; General Counsel, Board of Directors, 2014 - Present)

Columbus Jazz Orchestra (Board of Directors, 2005 - 2009)

Articles and Lectures

"FMLA/Pregnancy Discrimination Issues," Ohio Women in Law Enforcement Leadership Conference, Presenter, State of Ohio Fraternal Order of Police, Nov. 2, 2017

"Turning Stones ... Solidifying Your Workplace Investigations," Plunkett Cooney Labor & Employment Law Webinar, Presenter, June 1, 2016

Trial Skills Institute: Opening Statement Presenter, Columbus Bar Association, November 2015

Drug Testing in the Workplace, Ohio State Bar Association Midwest Labor and Employment Seminar, Presenter, October 2015

What the General Practitioner Should Know About Employment Law, Ohio State Bar Association Annual Conference, Presenter, May 2014

"Let’s Put the Counselor Back in “Attorney and Counselor at Law,”" Columbus Bar Association Lawyers Quarterly, Fall 2013

Public Records and the Right to Privacy, FOP Legal Counselors Seminar, February 2013

"The Pitfalls of Social Media," FOP Journal, January 2013

"The Demise of Civility?," Columbus Lawyers Quarterly, Summer 2012

"GINA: The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act," FOP Journal, April 2012

The Pitfalls of Social Media, FOP New Jersey State Conference, Presenter, May 2012

Recent Developments in the U.S. Supreme Court, FOP Legal Counselors Seminar, Presenter, February 2012

Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act, FOP Labor Forum, Presenter, February 2012

"U.S. Supreme Court Issues Decision in Guarnieri Case," FOP Journal, October 2011

Employment Law Including Hostile Work Environment, Employment Discrimination, Exhausting Administrative Remedies and Permitted Practices, FOP Legal Counselors Seminar, Presenter, February 2011

Off Duty Contact/Facebook/Social Networking Issues, FOP Labor Council Forum, Presenter, February 2011

Legal Updates, FOP Legal Counselors Seminary, Presenter, February 2009

What You Need to Know About the Hatch Act, FOP Legal Counselors Seminar, Presenter, February 2008

"Pearson v. Callahan: Favorable Decision for Law Enforcement," FOP Journal, April 2009

"Things to Know About Ohio’s “Little” Hatch Act," Columbus Lawyers Quarterly, Summer 2008

Covenants Not to Compete, Lorman Education Services, Presenter, July 2007

Legal Issues and Health, Celebrate Women 2007, Ohio University, Presenter, March 2007

Employment Recordkeeping Requirements and Effective Documentation in Ohio, Lorman Education Services, Presenter, August 2006

"Premises Liability," Columbus Bar Briefs, Spring 2005

Ohio Tort Reform, The Columbus Bar Association, Presenter, January 2005

Premises Liability in Ohio, Lorman Education Services, Presenter, November 2003

Event Links

News Links