Trump hails cancellation of two major military exercises with South Korea

With Jacqueline Klimas and Connor O’Brien

Editor's Note: This edition of Morning Defense is published weekdays at 10 a.m. POLITICO Pro Defense subscribers hold exclusive early access to the newsletter each morning at 5:30 a.m. To learn more about POLITICO Pro's comprehensive policy intelligence coverage, policy tools and services, click here.

QUICK FIX

Story Continued Below

— President Donald Trump heralded the end of two large-scale military exercises with South Korea on Sunday, saying it’s being done to save money and reduce tensions.

— Sen. Rand Paul plans to vote with Democrats to disapprove of Trump’s plan to use an emergency declaration to secure border wall funding, giving Democrats enough votes for passage. But they lack the votes to override a veto.

— Trump told a wild tale on Saturday about a general known as “Razin” Caine, who he claims told him of a plan to wipe out ISIS in a week.

HAPPY MONDAY AND WELCOME TO MORNING DEFENSE, where we're always on the lookout for tips, pitches and feedback. Email us at dbrown@politico.com, and follow on Twitter @dave_brown24, @morningdefense and @politicopro.

KOREA REPORT

CANCELED DRILLS: “South Korea and the U.S. are eliminating their massive springtime military drills and replacing them with smaller exercises in what they call an effort to support diplomacy aimed at resolving the North Korean nuclear crisis,” writes The Associated Press.

Trump tweeted Sunday: “The reason I do not want military drills with South Korea is to save hundreds of millions of dollars for the U.S. for which we are not reimbursed. That was my position long before I became President. Also, reducing tensions with North Korea at this time is a good thing!”

BOLTON ON NORTH KOREA SUMMIT ‘SUCCESS’: “‘I think it was unquestionably a success for the United States because the president protected, defended American interests,’ national security adviser John Bolton said on CNN Sunday, writes POLITICO’s Kelsey Tamborrino.

“I think he made a very important point to North Korea and to other countries around the world about negotiating with him,” Bolton said on Fox, also on Sunday. “He’s not desperate for a deal — not with North Korea, not with anybody — if it’s contrary to American national interests.”

Moon weighs in: “South Korean President Moon Jae-in said Monday that Seoul will actively try to get the nuclear negotiations between Washington and Pyongyang quickly back on track,” per AP.

Meanwhile, Trump seemed to blame last week’s congressional testimony of his former lawyer Michael Cohen as one of the reasons behind the summit’s abrupt end, saying it “may have contributed to the ‘walk.’”

The 2020 Election. The new Congress. The Mueller investigation. … Keep up with POLITICO Playbook. Be in the know. Sign up today here.

CHINA

BUDGET HIKE: “China will keep up a ‘reasonable and appropriate’ increase in defense spending to satisfy its national security and military reforms, a government spokesman said on Monday, ahead of the release of its defense budget,” Reuters writes.

HOMELAND SECURITY

SENATE TIPPING POINT: “Sen. Rand Paul will vote to disapprove of President Donald Trump’s national emergency declaration to secure billions for his border wall, clinching a bipartisan majority in opposition of the president’s move,” reports POLITICO’s Burgess Everett.

“Paul becomes the fourth Republican senator to pledge to vote for the disapproval resolution when it comes up for a vote in the Senate this month, meaning the resolution will pass if Trump doesn’t withdraw the emergency.” The chambers lack the votes to override a veto.

ON THE HILL

THIS WEEK: The House Armed Services Committee hears from outside experts on U.S. nuclear posture on Wednesday and from the commanders of the U.S. Central and Africa Commands on Thursday. The House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee also hears from the heads of CENTCOM and U.S. European Command behind closed doors on Wednesday and Thursday, respectively.

On the other side of the Capitol, Senate Armed Services hears testimony on Tuesday from the leaders of EUCOM and the U.S. Transportation Command. And on Thursday, the panel holds a hearing with the civilian secretaries and uniformed chiefs of the military services on the chain of command’s accountability in providing safe housing to troops and military families.

TURKEY

PATRIOT DEAL STILL POSSIBLE: “Ankara and Washington began negotiating Turkey’s purchase of Patriot missile defense systems from the U.S., Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu said on March 1,” per Hurriyet Daily News.

PENTAGON

DUNFORD IN VIENNA: Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen. Joe Dunford is in Vienna today, where he’ll meet with his Russian counterpart, Gen. Valery Gerasimov, Dunford’s office announced Sunday.

“The two military leaders will discuss the deconfliction of Coalition and Russian operations in Syria, plus exchange views on the state of U.S.-Russia military relations and the current international security situation in Europe and other key topics,” spokesman Col. Pat Ryder said. Dunford will also meet with top Austrian defense officials during his visit.

WAR REPORT

CAINE IS ABLE: Trump, during a wild and rambling two-hour speech to a conservative conference on Saturday, referred to a meeting he had with a general he called “Razin Caine” when he traveled to Iraq in December. As the crowd roared, Trump said Caine told him he could defeat ISIS in a week.

“‘We’re only hitting them from a temporary base in Syria, but if you gave us permission, we could hit them from the back, from the side, from all over, from the base you're right on right now, sir. They won't know what the hell hit them,’” Trump quoted Caine as saying.

Trump then said Caine said, “you’re the first one to ask us our opinion.”

While Trump is known to tell apocryphal tales, there is an Air Force Brig. Gen. J. Daniel Caine who is deputy commanding general (forward) for Operation Inherent Resolve in Iraq. A C-SPAN video from 2010 shows the same officer, then a lieutenant colonel, referred to as “Razin.”

You can see video of Trump’s tale here and here.

INDUSTRY INTEL

HYPERSONIC WINS: “Lockheed Martin has won $2.5 billion worth of contracts in the past year for hypersonic missiles, weapons at the heart of a conventional arms race between the U.S., China, and Russia that the military may seek to adapt for nuclear weapons,” the Washington Examiner writes.

NAVY

INSIDE THE CARRIER CUT: The debate behind a Defense Department decision to defer the mid-life refueling for the carrier USS Harry S. Truman is coming into view. Per Foreign Policy, then-Defense Secretary Jim Mattis ordered that funding be withheld from the fiscal 2020 budget proposal in exchange for an agreement to purchase two aircraft carriers through a block buy.

“‘Mattis essentially told everybody they had to ‘shut up and color,’ said a former U.S. defense official with direct knowledge of the discussions, using a common military term to tell people to get on with the task at hand.”

Add two gator freighters to the cutting room floor: “Wary of bringing big, expensive warships full of sailors and Marines in missile range of hostile coastlines, the Pentagon plans to cut two new amphibious warships out of the 2020-2024 budget plan to be released later this month, defense officials confirmed,” reports Breaking Defense.

And the draft RFP for the next frigate is out, via USNI News.

AIR FORCE

TANKERS ON HOLD INDEFINITELY: “The Air Force will not accept any more KC-46 tankers ‘until further notice,’ the service’s acquisition chief told Air Force Magazine on Friday.”

Why? “The Air Force began finding foreign object debris, such as tools and trash, on tankers it had already accepted on Feb. 20 ....”

Space

THREE YEARS TO FILL: “The Pentagon is asking Congress to phase in over three years a new Space Force of about 15,000 personnel drawn mostly from other branches of the military, senior defense officials said Friday,” writes our colleague Jacqueline Klimas.

MAKING MOVES

Megan Reiss is Sen. Mitt Romney’s new national security policy adviser. She was a senior fellow at the R Street Institute.

SPEED READ

— ‘Strictly trainer’ T-X now a candidate for lead-in fighter, aggressor, light strike: Air Force Magazine

— Inside the chaotic early days of Trump’s foreign policy: POLITICO Magazine

— Sanders proposes deep cuts to military funding at campaign launch: Washington Examiner

— DoD is rethinking what defines a major aviation accident: Military Times

— Mystery Navy tweeter unmasked in court filings alleging unlawful command influence: Navy Times