Rubio spreads ‘lie’ about Gillum's hurricane record
The attack from Rubio comes just as residents of Tallahassee are coming out of the dark from yet another storm, Hurricane Michael, which decimated parts of the Panhandle when it touched down Oct. 10. | Carolyn Kaster/AP Photo Rubio spreads ‘lie’ about Gillum's hurricane record

WEST MIAMI — Sen. Marco Rubio told a hometown crowd Monday that Tallahassee Mayor Andrew Gillum mishandled the Hurricane Hermine response in 2016 — making him the latest Florida Republican to try discrediting the Democratic gubernatorial nominee by invoking the two-year-old storm.

But in this case, the senator was the one blowing hot air.

Story Continued Below

“When they had a hurricane up there, they didn’t have power for weeks because he stood in the way of crews being able to come in and restore power, because they weren’t members of the right union or something,” Rubio told a West Miami gathering of supporters of Gillum’s rival in the governor’s race, Republican Ron DeSantis.

Rubio got two things clearly wrong in that sentence. First, Gillum lacked the authority to order the city’s electric utility director to hire work crews — and he didn’t try to — officials say.

Secondly, Rubio’s claim about union workers was debunked two years ago, only to see it reemerge among conservatives on social media after Gillum won the Aug. 28 Democratic primary.

In addition, Rubio’s claim that the city lacked power “for weeks” isn’t supported by post-hurricane power outage records disseminated by the state.

“Crews were turned down because they were non-union, is that still the claim? Yeah. How strongly can I say this? That's a lie. That's bogus. That's not true,” said Barry Moline, the former executive director of the Florida Municipal Electric Association who acted as a middle man between power companies and Tallahassee’s city-owned utility extra workers after Hermine.

“I was supplying the line workers from outside of Tallahassee to Tallahassee,” Moline said. “Tallahassee would say they need, say, 150 or 200 line workers and I would fill up the line with line workers. There was no consideration, no discussion, no thought about unions. It just wasn’t part of the request.”

Also, the city of Tallahassee’s line workers weren’t unionized during Hermine. Florida Power & Light’s line workers were unionized, according to a company spokesman.

So refusing FPL workers would actually be rejecting union workers in a non-union work environment — not the other way around.

Rubio’s office did not return calls or emails for comment.

But even DeSantis’ team had discussed whether to accuse Gillum of rejecting the offer of help over the union issue, and opted not to push the claim — later echoed by Rubio — because it was false.

The attack from Rubio comes just as residents of Tallahassee are coming out of the dark from yet another storm, Hurricane Michael, which decimated parts of the Panhandle when it touched down Oct. 10. Some in the city, especially Republicans, say Gillum isn’t doing enough to restore power, and social media is abuzz with rumors that the city is lying about the pace of restoring power to 90 percent of the city.

“I find it extremely interesting and suspicious after ‘meeting’ that 90% goal only 400~ people have gotten power all day today? With all those crews it seems like that should be much faster or maybe the numbers were not what was claimed,” Evan Power, the chair of the Leon County Republican Party and a longtime Rubio supporter, said on Twitter.

Gillum’s campaign has dismissed the critics as partisan. For his part, Gillum is taking a more high-profile role in talking about storm recovery and even helped chainsaw a fallen tree while helping work crews clear debris.

But the politics of storm recovery were already playing out in the races for Florida governor and U.S. Senate before the hurricane had even made landfall.

In an ad playing in heavy rotation, Gov. Rick Scott’s Senate campaign boasted of his leadership during hurricanes. And the Republican Party of Florida, on behalf of DeSantis, cut two TV ads accusing Gillum of refusing to accept help to restore power after Hermine.

The fact-checking website PolitiFact rated the Republican ad mostly false because it ignored the fact that the position of Tallahassee mayor is institutionally "weak" and that the decision to accept FPL’s offer of help was made by the utility director. The Republican Party stood by its ad and faulted Gillum for not showing enough leadership.

Rubio’s other claim, that Tallahassee “didn’t have power for weeks,” also doesn’t match Moline’s memory or records released by the Florida Division of Emergency Management.

About 13 hours after Hurricane Hermine touched down early on Sept. 2, 2016, 65 percent of Tallahassee customers were left without power, according to the first State Power Outage report released after the storm hit. Four days later, 12 percent were without power, according to another report. Six days after the storm, 2 percent — 1,988 customers in Tallahassee — lacked power in the final state outage report, which was issued on Twitter because the numbers were so minuscule.

Still, some went powerless for as many as 10 days, and many without power believed the city should have done more.

As a capital city dominated by a Republican Legislature and executive branch, Tallahassee also is home to a broad network of powerful GOP insiders who already disliked the Democratic mayor. The night after the storm, Gillum met with Scott, the head of FPL and other officials. FPL offered to supply 575 workers to help restore power. Gillum didn’t respond.

According to Moline and a Miami Herald report at the time, the decision not to accept help from FPL was made by Rob McGarrah, the general manager of the city’s electric utility, because Tallahassee had all the work crews it needed and couldn’t handle all of the extra workers safely and efficiently.

However, the city has also eyed FPL with some reservations and, in a lawsuit deposition, McGarrah acknowledged concerns that FPL might make a play to buy the public utility. Tallahassee also used line workers from private companies such as Gulf Power.

McGarrah couldn't be reached for comment.

When asked about the controversy concerning union labor and the city’s decision not to use FPL resources, the power company said in a written statement that, “after fully restoring power to the more than 110,000 FPL customers impacted by Hurricane Hermine in 2016, we offered the city of Tallahassee assistance in the form of 575 FPL employees and contractors. FPL was at the ready to help our fellow Floridians in need, just as we’ve assisted restoration efforts in other parts of the country, such as earlier this year in North Carolina and Puerto Rico. However, Tallahassee’s utility informed us it had the necessary resources and declined our offer.”

Moline said Gillum “never” spoke to him about power restoration, which he left in McGarrah’s hands because he was the expert. Instead, the mayor was more interested in supply water, ice and other services to residents in need, Moline said, adding that he’s now the executive director of the California Municipal Utilities Association and that “I don’t care who becomes governor in Florida.”

Gillum’s administration blamed Scott — who has been closely allied with FPL for years — for helping fuel the outrage when the governor began calling out the city for not acting quickly enough. Scott even falsely accused the city of refusing help from the Florida Department of Transportation.

Press reports at the time show Rubio, who was running for Senate, expressed no concerns about power problems in Tallahassee. He visited two days after the storm hit, according to local media. Yet on Monday, Rubio indicated he spent more time in Tallahassee after Hermine, saying of Gillum and the storm, “he was a complete disaster. I witnessed it firsthand.”

Jamie Van Pelt, Gillum’s chief of staff, notes that Hermine struck in the middle of a presidential campaign in the largest swing state. Scott was chairing a super PAC supporting President Trump. And Gillum had just scored a speaking slot at the Democratic National Convention at Hillary Clinton’s invitation.

“The Republican Party saw he was a rising star and tried to do what they could,” Van Pelt said. “We’ve been trying to bat back these rumors since 2016.”