New Yorkers saved SALT years ago, but this time, they're falling short
The legislation was aired over months, with the Ways and Means Committee holding hearings and voting on amendments regarding various deductions and proposals. | AP Photo | AP Photo New Yorkers saved SALT years ago, but this time, they're falling short

ALBANY — Gov. Cuomo traveled to Washington, rallied members of the New York delegation and delivered a passionate plea to keep the state and local tax deduction. Business leaders lobbied representatives from both parties, and even paid for an ad campaign. Chuck Schumer leaned on his Capitol Hill roommate, a fellow from Illinois, to join the cause.

It was 1985, and a broad, bipartisan coalition led by New Yorkers successfully pressured Rep. Dan Rostenkowski (D-Ill.), the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, to preserve a deduction critical for high-tax states like New York that was on the chopping block in a bill that passed a year later.

Story Continued Below

“Democrats were pushing tax reform, and I went against my own party,” Schumer, now the Senate minority leader, said recently. “I led a campaign of other New Yorkers and others to say we wouldn’t vote for such a bill unless they kept the state and local deduction. We succeeded, and tax reform succeeded.”

Thirty-two years later, Schumer is heading for defeat.

The full House of Representatives is set to consider tax legislation Thursday that would eliminate most of the SALT deduction — which is worth $17.3 billion to 3.3 million New Yorkers, according to Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s budget office — but keep a property tax deduction of up to $10,000. A parallel bill in the Senate would fully do away with the SALT deduction.

It’s the main reason Democrats and some Republicans from the Empire State oppose the bill, whose supporters say will help jump-start the economy and improve lives for middle-class families who will see wage growth.

Unlike in the 1980s, New Yorkers are not speaking unanimously: President Donald Trump, a resident of Manhattan and son of Queens, supports tax reform. As do Reps. Chris Collins, John Katko and Tom Reed, who sits on the Ways and Means Committee.

Five of the state’s nine Republican House members — Reps. Lee Zeldin and Pete King of Long Island, Dan Donovan of Staten Island, John J. Faso of the Hudson Valley and Elise Stefanik of the North Country — will buck party lines and vote against the measure. Rep. Claudia Tenney has not stated her position, and no Democrats are expected to vote for the bill.

“I find that really unfathomable,” Rep. Tom Suozzi said on a Wednesday conference call. “I can’t understand how they can be for this bill.”

Veterans of the 1986 effort say that differences in partisanship and process have led to a different outcome.

New York’s House delegation is smaller and bluer than it was in 1985, when Ronald Reagan stood beside Rostenkowski on national television to unveil the bill. There were 34 New York members then — it’s down to 27 — including 15 Republicans. Democrats controlled the House; Republicans had a six-seat majority in the Senate.

The legislation was aired over the course of months, with the Ways and Means Committee holding hearings all summer and voting on amendments regarding various deductions and proposals.

As Jeffrey Birnbaum and Alan Murray recount in a book about the effort, “Showdown at Gucci Gulch,” the push for tax reform was hatched as various loopholes in the tax code led to a pervading sense of unfairness among Americans. An early champion was former Sen. Bill Bradley (D-N.J.), who sought to make the tax code fairer and hoped any reforms would be deficit neutral by eliminating deductions and decreasing marginal rates.

His original plan included the elimination of SALT, which then, as now, is most acutely felt in high-tax states like New York, California and Bradley's own state of New Jersey. Lawmakers in those states immediately resisted.

Former Sen. Alfonse D’Amato (R-N.Y.) lassoed major business leaders in Manhattan, including the late David Rockefeller and developer Lew Rudin. They tasked Jay Kriegel, who had been Mayor John Lindsay’s chief of staff, to lobby on the issue full-time.

“We overcame partisanship by proving that this wasn’t a New York issue,” Kriegel recalled. That meant making the case that suburbs in Republican states would also be hurt, and that normally safe representatives might feel political pain if they supported elimination of the deductions.

The White House made the opposite calculation, Birnbaum and Murray write. “If tax reform ended up as a fight between New York and the rest of the country, the administration strategists, thought, New York would surely lose. To some GOP political analysts, a loss for Cuomo would be especially welcome, because he was a potential contender for the Democratic nomination for president in 1988.”

That was Mario Cuomo, of course, who traveled to Washington to address the Ways and Means Committee at a July breakfast. Cuomo said eliminating the deductions might prompt high-income taxpayers to relocate to other states — his son, Andrew, said exactly as much last week — prompting Rep. John Duncan of Knoxville, Tenn., to say, “I’ve never met anyone from Tennessee who retired to New York.”

“Maybe after they retired they denied they were from Tennessee,” Cuomo retorted.

Rep. Louise Slaughter (D-N.Y.) remembers the appearance, and wished there had been more hearings this year.

“We don’t follow the same procedure we did in ’86,” she said recently. “We’ve been very upset about that on the minority side.”

Kriegel also noted the compressed schedule: A framework of the bill was released on Sept. 27, and the full text on Nov. 2.

“We had time to organize and get the message out,” he said, noting television and mail ad campaigns conducted throughout 1985. “I think the biggest difference is the unconscionable haste with which this is being done.”

The final maneuver, engineered by Kriegel, involved Schumer. The senator, then a relatively new member of the House, shared quarters near the Capitol with three other congressman — including former Rep. Marty Russo of Illinois, a protégé of Rostenkowski.

Schumer persuaded Russo that yielding on SALT was the only way forward for Rostenkowski. The bill drafters found more revenue by undoing a carve-out for banks, and eventually increasing the top rate beyond what Reagan had wanted.

Former Rep. Charles Rangel was a member of the Ways and Means at the time, and eventually rose to chair. He remembers that New York City “unloaded” on lobbyists, but said he sees a different dynamic at work.

“When I was around, you do what you want but you had to say how you were going to pay for it. … Now I don’t think the debt means anything,” he said, noting the current House bill will increase the deficit by $1.5 trillion over the next decade. “Ways and Means members really believe that they constitutionally have the power, but goddamn, the shots are really being called by the party in this one. The partisanship is so heavy.”