Giffords's future is up in the air
One year ago a would-be assassin’s bullet ripped through the left side of Giffords' brain. Giffords's future is up in the air

By all rights, Gabrielle Giffords should be running for an Arizona Senate seat now.

Instead, it’s a miracle that the congresswoman can even walk — and whether she wants to campaign for a fourth House term remains an open question even as her team plans the logistics.

Story Continued Below

“I’ve thought about it enough to feel 100 percent confident that we could do whatever she needs done, and I’ve told her that,” Giffords’s chief of staff, Pia Carusone, said in an interview with POLITICO this week. “There should be not a concern in her mind about what that looks like. We can make that happen.”

Almost a year after a would-be assassin’s bullet ripped through the left side of her brain, Giffords’ methodical personal recovery mirrors that of her home of Tucson, a close-knit community still scarred by, and struggling to cope with, the horror of an inexplicable shooting spree. But the political world, never much for enduring sentiment, paused only briefly last January to honor the dead and recognize the courage of public servants.

To the extent that there’s been a change in the way official Washington goes about its business, it’s nearly imperceptible. A year ago, that would have been harder to imagine, as members of Congress worried aloud about their safety at public events and political activists, unencumbered by hard information, accused opponents of creating an environment for the shooting through the use of target-themed images and rowdy behavior at public events.

But, in a manner reassuring to public officials, it quickly became evident that Giffords and others were the victims of something other than political extremism.

“The act is about that individual more than anything,” said Rep. Adam Smith (D-Wash.), a close friend of Giffords. “I have not at all dialed back my public appearances.”

On Jan. 8, 2011, a Saturday morning, a gunman obsessed with Giffords blasted away at a “Congress on Your Corner” constituent-service event in a grocery-store parking lot, killing six people, including federal Judge John Roll, Giffords aide Gabriel Zimmerman and 9-year-old Christina-Taylor Green, who was born on Sept. 11, 2001. Within two weeks, Jared Loughner had been charged in the rampage, the dead had been buried, President Barack Obama had spoken at a memorial service — an address that some believe is the finest he’s given as president — and Giffords, having survived emergency brain surgery, had been flown to a hospital in Houston to begin her long recuperation.

There have been occasional bursts of news: Obama announcing that “Gabby opened her eyes,” her cognitive and speaking capabilities growing strong enough to ask for “toast” instead of a breakfast she was served, and her emotional appearance on the House floor in early August to cast votes for the first and only time since the shooting. Mark Kelly’s space shuttle flight earlier this year, and the occasional court hearing for Loughner also put Giffords back into the national news.

But for the most part, the Tucson tragedy has been in the back of the national political consciousness for most of a year.

The feelings will re-emerge, albeit briefly, this weekend in a series of anniversary events in Tucson, including a vigil at the University of Arizona that Giffords plans to attend. For those closest to the tragedy, everything has changed. The families of the dead and wounded have had to cope directly with the aftermath, either in burying a loved one or assisting in the physical and psychological recovery for those who, like Giffords, survived being shot. The city of Tucson has worked for a year to “show the world we are something different” than the burst of violence might suggest, says Tucson Mayor Jonathan Rothschild.

“I think you can feel it every day,” Rothschild says, adding that the shooting prompted a “redirection of the community toward civility and tolerance and respect at all different levels.”

But more than 2,000 miles away in Washington, where Giffords worked during the week, not much has changed.