Waters ethics case debacle detailed
Waters and her aide denied wrongdoing throughout the seemingly endless probe. Waters ethics case debacle detailed

The long saga of the Maxine Waters ethics investigation is a chronicle of mistakes, partisan and intraparty squabbles, allegations of racism, bitter personal rivalries and failed attempts to bring the investigation to a close months and even years before it ended.

The Ethics Committee’s probe of the California congresswoman’s dealings with a minority-owned bank in which her husband held stock dragged on 38 months and consumed probably millions in legal fees — far more than the roughly $350,000 investment that Waters’s husband, Sidney Williams, was in danger of losing if OneUnited Bank collapsed during the 2008 U.S. financial crisis.

Story Continued Below

In the end, Waters emerged unscathed. The only person found to have committed any wrongdoing was her top aide.

On Tuesday, the House Ethics Committee issued its final report in the case. Waters will not be charged with any violations of House ethics rules. That decision is a big win for the California Democrat and clears the way for her to seek the ranking member post on the Financial Services Committee next year.

Her chief of staff, Mikael Moore, was issued a letter of reproval from the Ethics Committee. The committee ruled that Moore knew “or should have known” of Waters’s financial ties to OneUnited, and should have followed his boss’s direction not to help the bank even after top OneUnited officials turned to Waters — a political ally — for help.

Moore was charged with three ethics violations, but since the letter of reproval is the lightest sanction that can be imposed by the Ethics Committee, it has no immediate impact on his position in Waters’s office.

“Your actions on behalf of OneUnited Bank’s private efforts to obtain assistance and avoid collapse created dramatic appearances of conflict with your employing Member’s personal financial interests,” Reps. Bob Goodlatte (R-Va.) and John Yarmuth (D-Ky.), the acting chairman and ranking member of the Ethics Committee, wrote in their letter to Moore. “Your actions blurred an already difficult and close line of permissible conduct due to OneUnited’s prominent role in responding to a significant crisis affecting unknown number of banks.”

Waters declined to comment on the Ethics Committee report or the letter of reproval against Moore.

But Goodlatte and Yarmuth also issued a surprising number of recommendations for both lawmakers and the Ethics Committee going forward, stemming directly from the problems that arose during the Waters probe.

Goodlatte and Yarmuth were brought in to handle the case after six members of the secretive panel, including all five Republicans, recused themselves — an unprecedented move in the 45-year history of the Ethics Committee. They urged members to ensure they act in a nonpartisan manner when selected for the unpopular ethics duty. Committee staff should do the same, they said.

Goodlatte and Yarmuth also asked House leaders to pass new rules spelling out what constitutes a personal conflict of interest for lawmakers and aides when dealing with issues that affect a member’s own finances.

In addition, they said House rules should be revised so lawmakers cannot hire their grandchildren. Moore is Waters’s grandson.

Booth Moore and Waters denied wrongdoing throughout the seemingly endless probe. In an extraordinary appearance before Ethics Committee members Friday, Moore noted that the outside counsel hired to get the panel out of its Waters-related quagmire did not find “clear and convincing evidence” that he had broken any rules.

However, the 10-member panel ignored Moore’s arguments and voted unanimously to issue the letter of reproval.