Dunwoody's Nancy Jester Resigns from DeKalb School Board
Nancy Jester, one of six suspended DeKalb school board members, has resigned from the DeKalb Board of Education.

Jester, whose district included several Dunwoody schools, made the announcement on her blog.

"I wanted to resign from the board in advance of the hearing in February, but refrained from doing so because of the pending court case," Jester said. "If the ruling had gone the other way, the remaining board members would have remained on the board and they would select my successor.

"I am more comfortable with the Governor and his team selecting my replacement."

Jester was one of six DeKalb school board members that the State Board of Education recommended for suspension.

However, the suspended members - Jester, Sarah Wood, Jay Cunningham, Eugene Walker, Pamela Speaks and Donna Edler - had filed a motion arguing that Gov. Nathan Deal's suspension was unconstitutional.

Jester said she voted against the suspended DeKalb school board members hiring an attorney to pursue the board's legal challenges in the first place.

"I did not support in any way, the filing of legal action and I expressed my opposition in board meetings," Jester said.

U.S. District Judge Richard Story ruled against the six members on Monday afternoon, which allows Deal to proceed with finding new board members.

"I hope that the next chapter for DeKalb schools brings about a reformation that begins to fulfill our obligation to our children," Jester said. "I hope this next chapter offers the taxpayers a product worthy of their investment."

See Also:

Federal Judge Denies Motion by DeKalb School Board Members

New Schools Could Form Their Own Local School Systems Under Proposed Law

State Rep. Taylor Talks About a Dunwoody School System

Gov. Deal Suspends Six DeKalb School Board Members

Judge Grants Restraining Order Against Suspension of DeKalb School Board

School Board Files Emergency Motion Motion to Stop Possible Suspension

Replay Patch's Live Coverage of the State Board of Education Hearing With the DeKalb School Board