Trump: We’re delaying California border wall until entire project is approved
President Donald Trump’s tweet seemed an apparent reference to his administration’s efforts to build prototype walls in California and replace sections of fencing along the California-Mexico border. | Andrew Harnik/AP Photo Trump: We’re delaying California border wall until entire project is approved

President Donald Trump declared online Wednesday that his administration would not push forward with plans to build the California section of his promised wall along the U.S.-Mexico border until the entire project is approved.

“I have decided that sections of the Wall that California wants built NOW will not be built until the whole Wall is approved,” the president wrote on Twitter. “Big victory yesterday with ruling from the courts that allows us to proceed. OUR COUNTRY MUST HAVE BORDER SECURITY!”

Story Continued Below

Trump’s tweet seemed an apparent reference to his administration’s efforts to build prototype walls in California and replace sections of fencing along the California-Mexico border. U.S. District Court Judge Gonzalo Curiel, whom Trump once said was incapable of fairly presiding over a case in which he was a defendant because of his Mexican ancestry, rejected on Tuesday lawsuits brought by the state of California and environmentalists over the government’s prototype and fence-replacement efforts.

It was not clear what Trump meant in suggesting that “California wants” a border wall “now,” since the state opposed his administration’s efforts. White House spokespeople did not immediately return emails seeking further clarity regarding the president’s post and whether the administration intends to delay work in California even after securing a judicial victory.

POLITICO Playbook newsletter Sign up today to receive the #1-rated newsletter in politics Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

The press office for California Attorney General Xavier Becerra did not immediately return a request for comment.

Josh Gerstein and Ted Hesson contributed to this report.