GOP’s midterm peril: What if they win on killing Obamacare?
MISHAWAKA, Ind. — Republican candidates are trying to have it both ways on Obamacare.

On one hand, Republicans are still campaigning against the law, arguing a strong election result will allow them one more shot at repealing the Affordable Care Act with GOP majorities in both chambers. And many high-profile Senate GOP candidates support a lawsuit that would scuttle Obamacare if successful in the nation’s courts, a case that will be heard by a federal judge in September.

Story Continued Below

Yet at the same time, Republicans are still touting the law’s most popular provisions, arguing that after it is struck down, they will be able to preserve protections for pre-existing conditions by passing a new bill. GOP challengers in four of the most competitive Senate races support the lawsuit.

“Sure, anything that’s going to actually get rid of it, yes,” said Indiana GOP Senate nominee Mike Braun of the GOP lawsuit to gut the law in an interview in Mishawaka. “And then be ready to come back and talk about what you’re ready to do about pre-existing conditions and no limits on coverage. That’s where you don’t hear much conservative talk.”

The problem? Congress has shown no ability to pass new health care legislation under Republican rule or work across party lines, raising severe doubts that the GOP would be able to fulfill its promises to kill the law and yet maintain its popular provisions.

Sign up here for POLITICO Huddle A daily play-by-play of congressional news in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

In interviews, several GOP senators said the party is unprepared to act if the GOP lawsuit, which is supported by the Trump administration, is successful. Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas) said, “It may be good to have an exit strategy and I’m not sure there’s one in place.”

“I do not have confidence that Congress could put together a bipartisan bill and get it done,” said Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine), who is criticizing the Justice Department for not defending the health care law.

The lawsuit is animating Democratic campaigns, with vulnerable incumbent senators calling out Republicans as defending pieces of Obamacare while effectively rooting for its failure. Braun’s opponent, Sen. Joe Donnelly (D-Ind.), says there’s a “big difference on health care” between the two candidates and is running much of his campaign behind his defense of Obamacare’s most popular provisions.

On Thursday, Democrats announced two ads aimed at GOP candidates in North Dakota and Missouri attacking them as enemies of popular health care protections given their voting records and support for the lawsuit. Both Missouri Attorney General Josh Hawley and Rep. Kevin Cramer (R-N.D.) say they support protecting pre-existing conditions, though Hawley is a party to the lawsuit and Cramer supports it, saying: “Who doesn’t want the constitutionality of something reviewed?”

And though Senate Democrats are fractured on immigration and the Supreme Court, the party is unified around protecting Obamacare as an electoral strategy, and they view the lawsuit as the law’s biggest threat.

“It’s totally bogus,” said Sen. Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.), Hawley’s opponent. The lawsuit “not only will do away with pre-existing conditions, it does away with all of the consumer protections.”

“You can’t make the argument that Congress should invalidate the Affordable Care Act and then come back and have Congress put in those protections. Congress already has,” said Brad Woodhouse, a Democratic operative who works for Protect Our Care, a group fighting Obamacare repeal.

The dissonant messaging comes at a time of political paralysis for Republicans who have been fighting the law for a decade. President Donald Trump keeps bringing Obamacare up and zinging Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) for voting no on its repeal measure, but there's been no real movement to gut the law since the GOP Congress dispatched the individual mandate late last year.

But in Senate races in deeply conservative states, it’s impossible for Republicans to avoid the topic of Obamacare, given the Senate’s high-profile failure to repeal the law last year. And some Republicans contend that there may be another repeal opportunity if Republicans beef up the party's 51-seat majority this fall. Plus two high-profile GOP candidates, Hawley and West Virginia Attorney General Patrick Morrisey of West Virginia have signed on to the lawsuit.

Hawley says he supports protecting pre-existing conditions as well as allowing children to stay on their parents’ plans until their 26th birthday. And he says if the lawsuit is successful and Obamacare is scuttled, the Senate must act to keep those provisions and rewrite health care laws.

“The Senate is not doing its job. There’s no doubt about that. Claire McCaskill is a huge part of the problem,” said Hawley. Next year, Hawley says replacing Obamacare “has got to be a top priority.”

Similarly, Morrisey said he supports pre-existing protection coverage despite being party to the lawsuit that would eliminate the law providing those protections.

“You can believe that some of the pieces, helping those who need it most, are good but still have a lawsuit to get rid of the awful policy of Obamacare,” Morrisey said.

Manchin fired back that Morrisey is taking a “position against the people of West Virginia” and suggested that Morrisey is unfamiliar with the GOP’s flailing on Obamacare repeal and health care as whole.

“How come in eight years [Republicans] haven’t done diddly squat? How comes there’s no fallback position?” Manchin said.

Even under the best circumstances in which the GOP maintains control of Congress and gains Senate seats, House Republicans are set to lose ground this year. That would make passing a new partisan health care law nearly impossible given the large number of moderate GOP defections last year in the House.

And House and Senate Democrats uniformly oppose any rollback of the law. That won’t change regardless of the election result. And Democrats argue that Republicans will finally feel ownership of the U.S. health care system during this election.

Republicans are “trying to pull the wool over the eyes of voters and try to avoid responsibility for leading the charge to take away protections for people with pre-existing conditions,” said Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.).

Several GOP candidates have not addressed the issue directly, wary that supporting the lawsuit will undermine Republicans’ stance that they stand to protect pre-existing conditions. Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.) said she still supports getting “the whole [Obamacare] thing off the books” but declined to weigh in on the lawsuit.

And vulnerable incumbent Sen. Dean Heller (R-Nev.) refused to talk about the lawsuit on Thursday, though his office said he support pre-existing condition protections.

But Heller’s state is more purple, his governor sought to protect Obamacare and the state has not joined the lawsuit. A number of other Republicans in red states have to channel far more outrage at the law.

Braun is trying to come off as a breath of fresh air on health care, touting his business record of providing affordable insurance for his employees. But he made clear that Obamacare is still a big political target for the GOP, complaining the law was written for a “greedy insurance industry” and said the people that wrote it “were more concerned about coverage and results and not cost.”

Then he leveled a diss at Donnelly that’s resonated in past midterm campaigns — but Democrats say won’t work this time.

“He’s a defender of Obamacare,” Braun said of Donnelly. It might be the one thing they agree on.

James Arkin contributed reporting from Beckley, W.Va., and Elana Schor contributed reporting from Bismarck, N.D.