O'Rourke to decide on 2020 bid by end of February
Beto O'Rourke and Oprah Winfrey speak in an interview that will air Feb. 16. The former congressman has not decided on a 2020 presidential bid. | Jamie McCarthy/Getty Images 2020 ELECTIONS O'Rourke to decide on 2020 bid by end of February

Beto O’Rourke said Tuesday that he will decide whether to run for president before the end of February, according to reporters present for an interview taping in New York.

His remarks, in a highly anticipated interview with Oprah Winfrey, come as O’Rourke edges closer to a presidential campaign. The former Texas congressman declined to say if he would run for president, citing family considerations . He had said he had no timetable for deciding on a run.

Story Continued Below

Asked Tuesday about his timing, O'Rourke said, “The serious answer is really soon. ... Before the end of this month.”

O’Rourke has slipped in some 2020 polls from the highs he registered just after his closer-than-expected Texas Senate race against Republican Ted Cruz. But he would still enter the Democratic primary in the top tier.

O’Rourke’s supporters took the interview as another sign of a presidential bid.

Jay Surdukowski, a New Hampshire Democratic activist who hosted a “Draft Beto” event at his home, said he was “elated about the signals Beto is sending tonight.”

Surdukowski, who co-chaired Martin O’Malley’s 2016 presidential campaign in New Hampshire, said he is “willing to get on a plane to Texas ASAP to talk New Hampshire primary.”

The Oprah interview, while not airing until Feb. 16, offered O’Rourke a large stage on which re-introduce himself to Democratic voters. Before appearing at Winfrey’s “Oprah’s SuperSoul Conversations from Times Square” event, O’Rourke had kept a low profile, traveling throughout the Southwest on a solo road trip and making appearances with little or no advance notice.

Late last month, O’Rourke told POLITICO that he has no timetable for making a decision about 2020, a process that he said could take months. Private conversations that his former advisers have been having with campaign operatives about a potential 2020 campaign, he said, are not being conducted at his direction.

In an appearance at Columbia College, his alma mater, on Monday, O’Rourke called President Donald Trump’s proposed border wall “fucking ludicrous,” praised Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-N.Y.) and lamented the mean-spiritedness of much of the content he finds on Twitter, according to a Texas Tribune reporter who tweeted his remarks.

Winfrey herself was the subject of presidential speculation last year, after a politically charged Golden Globes speech that drew widespread attention. She has said she has no interest in running.