Trump-O-Meter: Repeal Obamacare
Trump-O-Meter Repeal Obamacare “Real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing the disaster known as Obamacare."

Repeal Obamacare

PolitiFact is tracking the promises of President Donald Trump. See them all at PolitiFact.com.

Updates

Long odds against repeal with Democrats running the House

The Republican-controlled U.S. House of Representatives gave final approval on Wednesday to the biggest overhaul of the U.S. tax code in 30 years, sending a sweeping $1.5 trillion bill to President Donald Trump for his signature. (Reuters)

Mandate rollback not a repeal of Obamacare, but it may undermine it

Directive ending key subsidy threatens Obamacare's viability

After failing in several attempts to pass legislation overturning the Affordable Care Act, the Trump administration took a big step toward undercutting the law Oct. 12 when it said it would no longer continue funding a class of widely used subsidies without congressional appropriations. The payments in question are known as "cost-sharing reductions." They were intended to ease copayments and deductible costs for millions of low-income Americans who have purchased insurance coverage on the Affordable Care Act online marketplaces. The estimated cost of the payments was $9 billion next year and nearly $100 billion over the next decade. The payments have been subject to a legal dispute since House Republicans sued in 2014, arguing that the Obama administration was improperly paying the subsidies when no money had been appropriated for that purpose by Congress. The House Republicans' lawsuit was initially upheld in federal district court, but the case has continued to work its way through the courts. In its announcement, the White House specifically cited the legal case as the reason for ending the payments. Insurers had been expecting a new round of payments on Oct. 18. "Based on guidance from the Department of Justice, the Department of Health and Human Services has concluded that there is no appropriation for cost-sharing reduction payments to insurance companies under Obamacare," said a statement from the White House press secretary's office. "In light of this analysis, the Government cannot lawfully make the cost-sharing reduction payments. … Congress needs to repeal and replace the disastrous Obamacare law and provide real relief to the American people." Health policy specialists agreed that the impact could be serious. What the president is doing "is a haphazard chipping away" of the parts of the law he can reach, said Linda Blumberg, a senior fellow at the Urban Institute. "It's a very reckless way to make policy because its effects vary considerably across the country and in some cases will destabilize insurance markets with no strategy or policy for fixing them." Experts said that lower-income Americans would be hurt the most by the change. "The people in the exchanges are disproportionately low income, most below 225 percent of poverty level, and therefore get support from the cost-sharing reductions," said Gail Wilensky, who headed Medicare and Medicaid under President George H.W. Bush. Stopping those payments is "a big deal," she said. But ending the subsidies could have other indirect impacts, experts said. Some states anticipated the possibility that the Trump administration would stop paying cost-sharing reductions and had the insurers they regulate factor this into their proposed premiums for 2018. But other states did not. In those states that didn't plan for this scenario, the non-group market -- that is, the market for insurance purchased individually by consumers rather than collectively by employers for their workers -- could face the most significant impacts. "This would mean insurance costs for nongroup coverage becoming substantially higher," Blumberg said. "This scenario still leaves the nongroup market regulations in place, but it hurts everyone because those eligible for subsidies who can't afford coverage on their own would have to drop out and become uninsured. Since many of these people are healthy, the premiums for all that remain in the insurance system would go up." Ending the subsidies will not necessarily be tantamount to repealing the law, as Trump promised to do. For starters, the cost-sharing reductions are one part of the law; eliminating them would not directly affect other parts. "Obamacare is many things -- Medicaid expansion, insurance regulations, consumer protections, the health insurance exchanges, Medicare benefit improvements, the individual and employer mandates, cost control and delivery system reforms, and much more," said Jonathan Oberlander, a professor in the Department of Health Policy & Management at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill. Trump's move "is a big deal, and could further destabilize the ACA's insurance marketplaces. But … it doesn't impact the other components of Obamacare." Trump's decision to end cost-sharing reduction payments puts the Affordable Care Act in some degree of peril. We rate this promise In the Works. Sources: White House, statement from the press secretary on cost-sharing reductions, Oct. 12, 2017 New York Times, "Trump to Scrap Critical Health Care Subsidies, Hitting Obamacare Again," Oct. 12, 2017 Washington Post, "White House tells court it is immediately stopping ACA cost-sharing subsidies," Oct. 13, 2017 Email interview with Joseph R. Antos, health policy specialist at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, Oct. 13, 2017 Email interview with Jonathan Oberlander, professor in the Department of Health Policy & Management at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Oct. 13, 2017 Email interview with Gail Wilensky, head of Medicare and Medicaid under President George H.W. Bush, Oct. 13, 2017 Email interview with Linda Blumberg, senior fellow at the Urban Institute, Oct. 13, 2017

Trump’s executive action could erode marketplace built under Obamacare

Latest partial repeal effort dies before deadline

GOP senators announce ‘final’ chance for Obamacare repeal

President Donald Trump called Obamacare a "nightmare" at a rally in Youngstown, Ohio days before the Senate rejected repeal. (AP)

Senate delivers blow to Trump's promise to repeal Obamacare

Trump’s promise to repeal Obamacare is now in limbo

President Donald Trump expressed disappointment after Republican lawmakers' failure to muster enough votes to repeal Obamacare placed one of his loftiest campaign promises in limbo. A series of defections by Senate Republicans scuttled two separate efforts to dismantle the sweeping U.S. health care law put in place by Trump's predecessor, President Barack Obama. "We've had a lot of victories, but we haven't had a victory on health care," Trump told reporters July 18, as it became clear the latest Republican legislative efforts would fail. "We're disappointed." A slim margin of error constrained GOP efforts to repeal and replace Obamacare and forced a delicate balancing act between the party's conservative and moderate members. But defections by Sens. Jerry Moran of Kansas and Mike Lee of Utah on July 17 brought to four the number of Republican senators to publicly oppose the bill (along with Susan Collins of Maine and Rand Paul of Kentucky), effectively killing the repeal-and-replace plan. Senate leadership could only afford to lose two Republican votes for passage. Senate Republicans then turned their attention to a measure that would repeal major parts of Obamacare over two years, in theory buying lawmakers enough time to agree on a replacement plan before the Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, was largely dismantled. That too failed after three Republican senators ― Collins, Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska ― said they could not vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act without a replacement plan agreed to in advance. "I did not come to Washington to hurt people," Capito said in a statement. "I cannot vote to repeal Obamacare without a replacement plan that addresses my concerns and the needs of West Virginians." Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., conceded he did not have the votes to pass the replacement bill. But he promised there would be a vote on repeal "in the very near future." However, it remains to be seen whether Republicans will be able to generate the necessary support to repeal the law. For that reason, we're moving our rating of Trump's promise to repeal Obamacare to Stalled. Sources: New York Times, "'Plan C' on Obamacare, Repeal Now and Replace Later, Has Collapsed," July 18, 2017 CNN, "Mitch McConnell's Obamacare repeal plan stalled," July 18, 2017

The final vote on the Republicans health care bill is displayed over a feed of the House floor on May 4, 2017. (House Television via AP)

Passage of House bill revives effort to supplant Obamacare

Just six weeks after House Republicans pulled a bill to substantially overhaul the the nation's health care system, they successfully -- if narrowly -- passed a revised version of the measure. On May 4, 2017, the House passed a the bill by a 217-213 margin. Republican leaders adjusted the bill following negotiations with both the conservative and moderate wings of the party. The revised bill would do several things. It would end subsidies provided to people who buy health insurance on the Affordable Care Act's online marketplaces, replacing them instead with tax credits. It would repeal several taxes imposed under the ACA that primarily hit high-income taxpayers. It would allow states to obtain waivers to some requirements of the Affordable Care Act, including the "essential health benefits" provision that requires maternity care or mental health services. And it would curb further expansion of Medicaid that had been allowed under the Affordable Care Act, as well as eventually capping Medicaid expenditures in ways that would effectively end its status as an entitlement. According to the Congressional Budget Office, the original version of the bill would have increased the number of uninsured people by 24 million by 2026. The changes made before passage might change that number, but the specific impact awaits a new score by CBO, which is expected in the coming days. The bill now moves to the Senate, where it faces an even bigger challenge than it did in the House. If the bill is deemed to require 60 Senate votes for passage -- as many experts expect it will be -- then it may stumble in its present form, since its provisions may not pass muster with a range of moderate Democrats and Republicans whose votes would be needed for passage. For now, though, Trump's push to pass legislation that would supplant the Affordable Care Act has sprung back to life. We rate it In the Works. Sources: Washington Post, "House Republicans narrowly pass controversial bill to revise Affordable Care Act, claiming fulfillment of a major campaign promise," May 4, 2017 PolitiFact, "PolitiFact's guide to the GOP amendment to health care bill," April 28, 2017 PolitiFact, "Did Paul Ryan flip-flop on how to pass a big health care bill?" May 4, 2017

House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., addresses reporters after announcing that he was pulling the American Health Care Act before it went to a vote on March 24, 2017.

Gridlock in House stalls Trump's pledge to repeal Obamacare

As a candidate for president, Donald Trump said that "real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing the disaster known as Obamacare." On March 24, the nation learned that it's not happening immediately. And the road forward isn't clear either. Capping a frenzied week of negotiations between three House Republican factions -- the party leadership, the hardline conservative House Freedom Caucus, and members of the more moderate, pragmatic wing of the party -- House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., announced that he would not bring the American Health Care Act to the floor for a vote, as he had planned. That March 24 announcement came one day after the floor vote had been pushed back to allow for last-minute changes and arm-twisting, and half a day after Trump had issued an ultimatum to House Republicans -- pass the bill or he'll move on. In the run-up to Ryan's announcement, vote counting by media outlets had concluded that the House GOP would lose too many votes to pass the bill if it tried. "We came really close today, but we came up short," Ryan said at a press conference. "I will not sugarcoat this. This was a disappointing day for us." For members on the party's right flank, the American Health Care Act left in place too much of the infrastructure of the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama's signature health care law and the target of intense Republican opposition for seven years. But more moderate Republicans -- especially those serving in Democratic-leaning states and districts -- feared the bill would have taken away insurance from too many Americans. The Congressional Budget Office projected that 24 million more people would be uninsured by 2026 as a result of the bill. Reconciling the concerns of those two groups proved impossible for Ryan and his team of whips. Even if the bill had passed the House, it faced rough sledding in the Senate, where several senators were already voicing opposition similar to the House factions. The GOP has only 52 votes in the Senate, meaning that the party could not afford to lose more than two votes either from the right or the center. It was not immediately clear how congressional Republicans would proceed with efforts to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act. There is no legislative reason that they could not produce a new bill, but that bill would have to compete with other legislative priorities, such as a tax overhaul or an infrastructure package, for congressional time and attention. House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., called the Republican decision to pull the bill "a victory for the American people." Pelosi was a key player in passing the Affordable Care Act when she served as House Speaker in 2009 and 2010, and her ability to keep a united front among Democrats forced the Republican majority to find enough votes to pass the measure only within its own conference. As for Trump, he used the bully pulpit to push for the bill, and Ryan thanked him for his efforts as he announced the bill's failure. "The president gave his all in this effort, he did everything he possibly could to help people see the opportunity we had with this bill," Ryan said. After Ryan's announcement, Trump said from the Oval Office that Obamacare is "exploding now" and he urged Democrats to "get together with us and get a real health care bill." He added that he wants to focus next on tax reform. Our long-standing policy is to rate promises based on outcomes, not presidential intention. Trump won't be able to repeal Obamacare without direct action from Congress. With no clear path forward after this major setback, we are moving this promise to Stalled. Sources: Paul Ryan, remarks at a press conference, March 24, 2017 Nancy Pelosi, remarks at a press conference, March 24, 2017 Donald Trump, remarks from the Oval Office, March 24, 2017

Trump signs executive order on Obamacare; impact unclear

On his first day in office, President Donald Trump signed an executive order that gave federal agencies broad authority to defer or delay any part of the Affordable Care Act that costs anybody any money. More formally, the order tells agencies they can "waive, defer, grant exemptions from, or delay the implementation of any provision or requirement of the Act that would impose a fiscal burden on any State or a cost, fee, tax, penalty, or regulatory burden on individuals, families, healthcare providers, health insurers, patients, recipients of healthcare services, purchasers of health insurance, or makers of medical devices, products, or medications." That's a mouthful, but what does it mean, and how far does it go to repeal Obamacare? Larry Levitt, senior vice-president at the respected and neutral Kaiser Family Foundation, said in a series of tweets that while the impacts are unclear, it shows the administration is "moving to unwind the Affordable Care Act, but it won't be immediate." Levitt added, "One sure outcome is it creates uncertainty for insurers at a critical time." Health care analyst Sabrina Corlette at Georgetown University echoed Levitt's point. "For insurers already uncertain about their future in the Affordable Care markets, the uncertainty this executive order generates doesn't help," Corlette said. "At a minimum they'll have to factor it into their 2018 premiums, which are due to be filed by May 3 in most states." Robert Laszewski, a health care policy consultant who takes a dim view of Obamacare, said the action raises a host of questions and gives little guidance. "How will they expect the new Secretary of Health and Human Services and the IRS commissioner, for example, to interpret this?" Laszewski asked. "Just exactly what are they trying to accomplish? Do they only want to make things easier for those in the market, or are they out to just plain blow up Obamacare as soon as possible?" The reaction from the insurance industry trade group America's Health Insurance Plans has been subdued. The group issued a short statement saying, "We have been meeting with policymakers to offer our recommendations for a better marketplace, and we have found them to be highly engaged and focused on finding real solutions." Some analysts, including Joe Antos at the market-oriented American Enterprise Institute, see more symbolism than substance in Trump's action. Antos told us that practically speaking, the order doesn't move the ball forward at all toward the goal of repealing the Affordable Care Act. Agencies already had wide latitude on enforcing the law that everyone have insurance or granting states exemptions to Medicaid rules. "It doesn't create any new authority for any executive branch agency," Antos said. "It basically gives them the instruction to do your job." The executive order itself only affirms the general policy thrust that everyone understood from Trump's campaign, Antos argued. As far as real change goes, he said, the White House lacks the people to actually green light any specific move. "They won't have a full team of people until the end of February or even later," Antos said. "When you're operating without a full team, you won't waste time with small stuff anyway. You will focus on what matters most because that is where the money is." Nicholas Bagley, a law professor at the University of Michigan, posted an assessment that largely agrees with Antos. "For now, the executive order hasn't changed anything," he wrote. But one element in particular has Bagley worried. The IRS enforces the individual mandate. If the agency plainly states that it won't, insurance mayhem could follow. "The insurance markets in many states could go into a tailspin," Bagley wrote. "Rates for 2018 will skyrocket, and some insurers could fold." But that hasn't happened yet. We continue to rate this promise In the Works. Sources: White House, Executive order on ACA regulations, Jan. 20, 2017 Incidental Economist Blog, Trump's executive order on Obamacare, Jan. 21, 2017 Incidental Economist Blog, Executive actions Trump could take to change the ACA, Jan. 23, 2017 New York Times, What Does Trump's Executive Order Against Obamacare Actually Do?, Jan. 21, 2017 Larry Levitt, tweets, Kaiser Family Foundation, Jan. 21, 2017 Email interview, Sabrina Corlette, program director, Center on Health Insurance Reforms, Georgetown University, Jan. 23, 2017 Email interview, Robert Laszewski, CEO Health Policy and Strategy Associates, Jan. 23, 2017 Email interview, Melinda Buntin, Chair, Department of Health Policy, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Jan. 23, 2017

First steps to a repeal are under way in Congress

Trump wants to 'repeal and replace' the Affordable Care Act, quickly