Trump-O-Meter: Terminate Barack Obama's immigration executive orders 'immediately'
Trump-O-Meter Terminate Barack Obama's immigration executive orders 'immediately' "Immediately terminate President Obama’s two illegal executive amnesties (Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents and Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals). All immigration laws will be enforced -- we will triple the number of ICE agents. Anyone who enters the U.S. illegally is subject to deportation. That is what it means to have laws and to have a country."

Updates

DACA remains, but Trump administration eliminated DAPA

The Trump administration successfully revoked a deportation-reprieve program for parents but has not found similar success in getting rid of the program that benefits immigrants that came to the United States as minors. During President Donald Trump's first year in office, the Department of Homeland Security rescinded the Obama-era memo that created Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents, better known as DAPA. DAPA, however, never went into effect because it was challenged in court by Texas and 25 other states that argued that it was an overreach of executive powers by then-president Barack Obama. The case rose to the U.S. Supreme Court in 2016 but ended in a 4-4 deadlock, when the late Justice Antonin Scalia had not been replaced in the court at that point. The Supreme Court outcome left a lower court's ruling in place, halting the program. The Trump administration also attempted to get rid of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA, the program that prevents the deportation of immigrants who came to the United States as children and live here illegally. But legal challenges to the administration's efforts have left that program in place, with some caveats. The administration is required to continue processing renewal applications for immigrants who have been granted DACA and want to renew that protection. However, immigrants who have never had DACA are not allowed to file an application seeking the protection for the first time. A federal judge who ruled against the Trump administration in August 2018 said he was not siding with the administration, not because the administration lacked the statutory or constitutional authority to revoke the program, but because it had not given a rational explanation for the termination. In a separate case, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals in November 2018 also agreed with a lower court's ruling to keep DACA in place. The Trump administration has asked the U.S. Supreme Court to consider the multiple cases against its decision to end DACA. Trump promised to end both DACA and DAPA. One of those programs, DAPA, is eliminated (even though it never went into effect). DACA remains in effect, but with limitations. Trump has made progress on one aspect of his promise but hasn't fulfilled entirely. Given the actions taken so far, we rate this a Compromise. Sources: 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, DACA ruling, November 2018 SCOTUS blog, After federal government filing, 9th Circuit rules in DACA dispute, Nov. 8, 2018

Federal judge says Trump administration failed to justify DACA rescission

President Donald Trump's administration failed to convince a federal judge of its reasoning for ending Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA. As a result, the program will be restored in full later this month, unless the administration appeals the case. In April, U.S. District Judge John D. Bates said the Trump administration had not adequately explained its assessment that the Obama-era program was unlawful, and gave it 90 days to issue a new memo better explaining its justification. But the administration's latest effort didn't deliver, Bates said in an Aug. 3 ruling. DACA prevents the deportation of young immigrants in the country illegally and who meet specific criteria. A new memo from Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen "fails to elaborate meaningfully" the administration's primary rationale, that DACA was unlawful and unconstitutional, and "additional 'policy' grounds … simply repackage legal arguments previously made," Bates wrote. Nielsen's memo doesn't provide reason to revise earlier determinations that DACA's rescission was "arbitrary and capricious," the judge said. Bates said that neither his August nor April decisions held that DHS lacks the statutory or constitutional authority to rescind DACA. "Rather, the court simply holds that if DHS wishes to rescind the program — or to take any other action, for that matter — it must give a rational explanation for its decision," Bates wrote. "A conclusory assertion that a prior policy is illegal, accompanied by a hodgepodge of illogical or post hoc policy assertions, simply will not do." Bates gave the Trump administration until Aug. 23 to decide whether to appeal his decision, and if so, to seek a stay pending appeal. Without an appeal and stay of the order, DACA will be restored in full. The Trump administration has been accepting applications to renew current DACA benefits, but not new applications from individuals who never had DACA. Pending appeal, we continue to rate this promise as In the Works. Sources: District Judge John D. Bates decision on DACA, new DHS memo, Aug. 3, 2018

Federal judge orders Trump admin. to accept new DACA requests, but stays order for 90 days

A federal judge said the Trump administration's rescission of a program deferring the deportation of young immigrants was "arbitrary and capricious" because it "failed adequately to explain its conclusion that the program was unlawful." U.S. District Judge John D. Bates on April 24 gave the administration 90 days to issue a new memo rescinding Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (or DACA) that gives a "fuller explanation" on why the program lacks statutory and constitutional authority. Without a new memo, the initial September directive rescinding DACA will be vacated, and the original program will be restored, Bates wrote. That means the administration would have to resume accepting and processing new applications for DACA, in addition to renewal requests. Earlier this year, and in separate cases, federal judges in California and New York ordered the Trump administration to continue the program and accept renewal applications. The September memo said no new renewal applications would be accepted after Oct. 5, 2017. The administration in those previous cases had not been ordered to accept new applications. "We believe the judge's ruling is extraordinarily broad and wrong on the law," White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said at an April 25 briefing. The case before Bates, in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, was brought by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the Trustees of Princeton University. Bates said the Trump administration had not cited any statutory provision with which DACA was in conflict. The Justice Department said the ruling did not change its stance challenging DACA's constitutionality. "DACA was implemented unilaterally after Congress declined to extend benefits to this same group of illegal aliens," said Justice Department spokesman Devin O'Malley. O'Malley said DACA "was an unlawful circumvention of Congress" and susceptible to the same legal challenges that "effectively ended" another Obama-era program, Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents. Pending a new memo and the judge's evaluation of its merits, we continue to rate this promise as In the Works. Sources: U.S. District Judge John D. Bates ruling, April 24, 2018 CQ, Transcript White House press briefing, April 25, 2018 Department of Homeland Security, Memorandum on Rescission Of Deferred Action For Childhood Arrivals (DACA), Sept. 5, 2017 The New York Times, Second Federal Judge Issues Injunction to Keep DACA in Place, Feb. 13, 2018 Email interview, U.S. Department of Justice press office, April 25, 2018

Federal judge orders Trump administration to continue renewing DACA applications

Trump administration rescinds DACA

Trump administration rescinds memo for DAPA, keeps DACA

President Donald Trump addresses a joint session of Congress on Feb. 28 in the House chamber of the U.S. Capitol. (Photo by Jim Lo Scalzo - Pool/Getty Images)

DHS memo spares 'Dreamers' granted protection from deportation, Trump presents flexible tone