Time Running out for Voters to Return Absentee Ballots
MADISON, WI – The Wisconsin Elections Commission reminds voters that if they have an absentee ballot, it should be mailed or returned directly to their municipal clerk’s office right away.

“The law has changed and absentee ballots must be delivered to the municipal clerk’s office by Election Day or they will not be counted,” said Michael Haas, administrator of the Wisconsin Elections Commission. “To give USPS enough time to do its job, we are urging absentee voters to put their ballots in the mail one week before Election Day.”

“If you are not sure if your ballot will arrive in time, you can still deliver your absentee ballot to your municipal clerk’s office or the polling place on Election Day,” said Haas, Wisconsin’s chief elections official.

Thursday, November 3 is technically the last day for most people to request to have an absentee ballot sent by mail, email or fax from their municipal clerk’s office. But because of the change in the law that requires absentee ballots be returned to the municipal clerk by Election Day, anyone who cannot get to the polls on Election Day should consider voting absentee in the clerk’s office instead of requesting a ballot to be sent to them. Absentee voters who are in the military, hospitalized or serving jury duty have later deadlines, and should contact their municipal clerk for details.

Most municipal clerks have in-person absentee voting in their offices through Friday, November 4, and a few may have office hours over the weekend. Voters must be registered before they can request an absentee ballot. The last day to register to vote in the municipal clerk’s office is Friday, November 4. There is no voter registration on the Saturday, Sunday, or Monday before the Election. Voters may also register to vote at their polling place on Election Day. For help finding your municipal clerk, visit www.myvote.wi.gov or call 1-866-VOTE-WIS.

Several media outlets have published stories this year about the ability of Wisconsin voters to change their absentee ballot before the election. Haas said that despite the media interest in this angle, it is something that very few voters actually do. In an effort to clear up any misinformation, Haas outlined the steps a voter can take to spoil his or her ballot: