END CITIZENS UNITED
The Problem

The Supreme Court’s 2010 decision in Citizens United v. F.E.C. has completely changed the landscape of American elections. It further established the legal basis for the idea that “corporations are people” and opened the door for billionaires and special interests to spend unlimited, untraceable money in America’s elections. Now, there’s no accountability at all. No transparency. We know that billionaires (like the Koch Brothers) and corporations are trying to tip the balance of political power in their favor, but it doesn’t stop there.

It’s time to fight back.

Established March 1st, 2015, End Citizens United is a Political Action Committee funded by grassroots donors. We are dedicated to countering the disastrous effects of Citizens United and reforming our campaign finance system.

We’ll show elected officials, candidates, voters, and the press that the grassroots are fighting back with force against the increasing brazenness of billionaires trying to buy our elections. This will be key to building a broad coalition working towards campaign finance reform and pressuring lawmakers to take action.

Our Mission

To end Big Money in politics and fix our rigged political system by electing campaign finance reform champions, passing state ballot measures, and elevating this issue in the national conversation. We will work in partnership with these champions to overturn Citizens United and end the unlimited and undisclosed money in politics.

We’ll work towards the mission by:

-Electing pro-reform candidates

-Raising the issue of money in politics as a national priority

-Working with ballot measure campaigns to pass pro-reform laws in the states

-Using grassroots membership to demonstrate political power on the issue of money in politics

Citizens United tore down a century’s worth of law aimed at reducing the amount of corruption in our electoral system. It will go down as one of the most naive decisions ever rendered by the court. – E.J. Dionne, The Washington Post

Our Finances

Our greatest strength is the power of grassroots activists. We believe in the power of transparency in political spending — and we practice what we preach. Our latest filing with the Federal Elections Commission was submitted on October 25, 2018.

We couldn’t be more proud to be funded by thousands of grassroots supporters from around the country. And we’re just getting warmed up! As we grow, we’ll continue to make public our FEC filings. Our donors are investors in a movement to take back our democracy, so we’ll always be transparent and open.

View Our Latest FEC Report

Issue Ad Transparency

Meet our Team

We have assembled a team of veteran Democratic operatives to help get our message out about the influence of money in politics and how we’ll stop it.

Meet the staff

Board of Directors

Our board is comprised of top leaders who are committed to helping overturn Citizens United and electing Democratic champions who will fight to get Big Money out of our politics and restore the power to every day Americans.

Meet the board

READY TO JOIN US?

View open positions