Fact-checking under pressure: How Vera Files has dealt with the Duterte regime – Poynter
When Facebook rolled out its third-party fact-checking program in the Philippines on April 12, its initiative to scale up the fight against disinformation quickly ran into a firestorm of protest, including from the government of Rodrigo Duterte.

Controversy erupted as soon as Facebook named Rappler IQ and VERA Files as its third-party fact-checking partners. Diehard Duterte supporters, digital influencers and trolls launched a fresh round of attacks on the two organizations, which by then were no strangers to the stream of invectives, threats and unfounded accusations of political bias, corruption and unpatriotism.

Rappler and VERA Files have been fact-checking on a regular basis since the 2016 presidential election, a year that saw an escalation of disinformation in both traditional and online platforms. In 2017, they qualified as signatories of the International Fact-Checking Network’s code of principles, a selection filter the social media giant adopted for its fact-checking program.

This time, though, their detractors added a new charge against them: partisan censorship. An online petition and an open letter urging Facebook and its founder, Mark Zuckerberg, to cancel the partnership with Rappler and VERA Files — “a mistake,” they said — were initiated. This was accompanied by a call to boycott Facebook and move to its Russian counterpart, VK, which did not quite prosper.

The government then stepped into the picture. Through the presidential spokesperson and the Presidential Communications and Operations Office, it protested what it described as Facebook’s “unacceptable” partnership with Rappler and VERA Files, and demanded a meeting with Facebook executives over their choice of “partisan” and “anti-administration” fact-checkers.

This government’s opposition to fact-checkers should come as no surprise. Rappler and VERA Files are news organizations that also undertake investigative reporting, a journalism genre guaranteed to get on the bad side of a government that is openly hostile to journalists. The two are members of the Global Investigative Journalism Network. As fact-checkers, Rappler and VERA Files not only verify online disinformation; they also engage in more contentious political fact-checking.