(PDF) Future flood losses in major coastal cities
LETTERS

PUBLISHED ONLINE: 18 AUGUST 2013 | DOI: 10.1038/NCLIMA TE1979

F uture ﬂood losses in major coastal cities

Stephane Hallegatte 1,2 * , Colin Green 3 , Robert J. Nicholls 4 and Jan Corfee-Morlot 5

Flood exposure is increasing in coastal cities 1,2 owing to

growing populations and assets, the changing climate 3 , and

subsidence 4–6 . Here we provide a quantiﬁcation of present and

future ﬂood losses in the 136 largest coastal cities. Using a

new database of urban protection and different assumptions

on adaptation, we account for existing and future ﬂood

defences. Aver age global ﬂood losses in 2005 are estimated

to be approximately US$6 billion per year, increasing to

US$52 billion by 2050 with projected socio-economic change

alone. With climate change and subsidence, present protection

will need to be upgraded to avoid unacceptable losses of

US$1 trillion or more per year. Ev en if adaptation investments

maintain constant ﬂood probability, subsidence and sea-le vel

rise will increase global ﬂood losses to US$60–63 billion per

year in 2050. T o maintain present ﬂood risk, adaptation will

need to reduce ﬂood probabilities below present values. In

this case, the magnitude of losses when ﬂoods do occur

would increase, often by more than 50%, making it critical

to also prepare for larger disasters than we experience

today. The analy sis identiﬁes the cities that seem most

vulnerable to these trends, that is, where the largest increase

in losses can be expected.

A first screening study 1 provided a global overview of flood

exposure in world coastal cities. The exposure metric can be

viewed as a worst case scenario, but it does not estimate

average annual losses, which is a standard metric in disaster

risk management planning. To do so, it is necessary to take

into account infrastructure-based adaptation (for example, dykes)

and the vulnerability of populations and assets. Here, we assess

economic average annual losses (AAL) in 136 coastal port cities,

using a method developed for assessing city-level flood risk 7 and a

new database of urban coastal protection (Methods).

Present aggregated average annual flood losses in the 136 cities

are estimated at approximately US$6 billion per year. Table 1

ranks the most vulnerable cities in 2005 using two different

metrics of vulnerability. In the left column, the table shows a

ranking in terms of AAL, taking into account all potential floods

and existing protection. The AAL estimates can be compared

to more sophisticated approaches. For instance, the annual

losses in New Orleans are estimated at US$600 million, close to

the US$650 million estimates from the Interagency Performance

Evaluation Taskforce 8 . In the right column, cities are ranked

according to relative vulnerability, namely the ratio of AAL to the

city’s gross domestic product (GDP). This value can be understood

as the share of the city’s economic output that should be saved

annually to pay for future flood losses. The 20 cities most vulnerable

according to this last indicator are also presented in Fig. 1.

The ranking in terms of exposure includes mainly rich-country

cities (Supplementary Table S4). On average, however, rich cities

1 The World Bank, Sustainable Dev elopment Network, Washington DC 20433, USA, 2 Centre International de Recher che sur l’Environnement et le

Développement (CIRED ), Nogent-sur-Marne 94736, France, 3 Flood Haz ard Research Centre, Middlesex University , London NW4 4BT, UK, 4 F aculty of

Engineering and the Environment, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK, 5 Organisation f or Economic Co-operation and Development,

Paris 75775, F rance. *e-mail: shallegatte@worldbank.org

are better protected than poorer ones, and the ranking in terms

of absolute flood losses contains more cities from developing

countries. In relative terms, developing-country cities are even

more vulnerable, with only three cities from developed countries in

the top 20 (New Orleans, Miami and Tampa—Saint-Petersburg).

Moreover the ranking in absolute terms (left column) includes

mainly capital cities, whereas secondary cities are more often

represented in the ranking in relative terms (right column). This

difference suggests that risk management efforts may be lower

in secondary cities.

Table 1 shows the importance of existing flood defences: in a

city such as Amsterdam, exposure is extremely high (US$83 billion

of assets exposed to the 100-year flood), but AAL do not exceed

US$3 million, because estimated defence standards are the highest

that exist globally. On the other hand, a city such as Ho Chi Minh,

in Vietnam, has a 100 year exposure of only US$18 billion, but the

lower level of protection means that the city is affected by small

floods on a frequent basis, resulting in large estimated average

costs. In relative terms, Ho Chi Minh City has one of the largest

vulnerabilities, with AAL reaching 0.74% of local GDP. The ratio

of AAL to local GDP exceeds 1% for two cities, Guangzhou and

New Orleans. The vulnerability of New Orleans has been reduced

however by recent post-Hurricane Katrina investments and is likely

to be reduced further in the near future 9 .

Another conclusion from Table 1 is the concentration of losses

in only a few cities. Only 13 cities have average losses in excess

of US$100 million, and three American cities (Miami, New York

City and New Orleans) explain 31% of the global aggregate losses

in the 136 cities, because of their high wealth and low protection

level. Adding Guangzhou, the four top cities explain 43% of global

losses. Also, the US seems particularly vulnerable, with 6 American

cities in exposure ranking, 8 in the ranking by absolute AAL, and

3 in the ranking by relative AAL. As coastal flood risks are highly

concentrated, flood reduction actions in a few locations could

be very cost-effective.

To develop possible future patterns of drivers of risk to 2070,

our analysis introduces three scenarios for socio-economic changes

and six for environmental change. From there, we retain four main

scenarios: SEC assumes only socio-economic changes, derived from

OECD and UN scenarios; SEC-S adds subsidence to scenario SEC

(40 cm in 2050 in the cities subjected to subsidence); and SLR-1

and SLR-2 add optimistic and pessimistic sea-level rise scenarios

to SEC-S, respectively (with 20 cm and 40 cm in 2050). Here, we

report results for 2050, but results for 2030 and 2070 are available

in the Supplementary Information.

With no adaptation, the projected increase in average losses

by 2050 is huge, with aggregate losses increasing to more

than US$1 trillion per year in scenarios SLR-1 and SLR-2

(Supplementary Table S6). All cities experience a similar increase