(PDF) Distribution, spread and habitat...
temperatures ranged from 8 to 10 ° C daily, whereas

outside temperatures ranged from - 4t o2 4 ° C.

Artiﬁcial levee materials, such as impermeable riprap

walls and concrete structures, are likely to prevent

burrowing behaviour.

In addition to habitat characteristics, we examined

how different climatic factors inﬂuenced nutria occur-

rence using logistic regression models. The results

indicate that temperature is the most important factor

that determines nutria occurrence. A lower probability

of nutria occupancy was observed in areas where the

winter temperatures were lower, which suggests that

temperature may act as a limiting factor of nutria

dispersal. Freezing temperatures play an important

role in nutria behaviour and population dynamics

(Aliev 1973 ; Gosling et al. 1980 ; Gosling 1981b ). In

Europe, the nutria population was signiﬁcantly

reduced by consecutive below-average cold winters

(Wilson et al. 1966 ; Aliev 1973 ; Carter and Leonard

2002 ). Reggiani et al. ( 1995 ) reported the nutria

population decreased 44–64 % in Italy. However,

Doncaster and Micol ( 1990 ), demonstrated that severe

cold weather conditions can accelerate the reproduc-

tive rate of the population; thereby, enabling nutria to

maximize population recovery and re-colonization of

vacant habitats. The results of our study indicate that

the D

- 4

climatic factor was the most sensitive to nutria

occurrence. Given this relationship, we estimated the

maximum number of D

- 4

days that would allow

observable nutria populations, and calculated approx-

imately 17 days of temper atures \ - 4 ° C using the

spatial analysis (see Fig. 4 ).

To recap, slow stream ﬂow, aquatic plant domi-

nance, favourable sheltering conditions, and warmer

temperatures seem to provide optimal conditions for

nutria to spread and stabilize. Therefore, the lower part

of Nakdong River basin provides favourable condi-

tions for nutria inhabitation. Opdam ( 1991 ) suggests

that ideal, prosperous habitats are capable of creating

new contiguous habitats by facilitating the establish-

ment of subpopulations, and this is true even if the

habitat is not suited for the new population. In this

regard, the lower part of the Nakdong River may play a

signiﬁcant role in facilitating the establishment of new

nutria populations. Albeit, we also believe that the

spread of nutria populations will be suppressed by

lower temperatures (Fig. 4 ). In this study, nutria

occurrence was rarely reported and observed in the

upper part of Nakdong River basin. Considering that

the average dispersal distance of a nutria population is

31.2 km year

- 1

(Fig. 2 ) and that the total length of the

river is approximately 520 km, the past 20 years is a

sufﬁcient timeframe for nutria to inhabit the entire

Nakdong River basin. Therefore, many animal experts

and scientists give more weight to stabilization than to

the dissemination of the nutria population in South

Korea, and there is other evidence to support our

assumptions. The original nutria farming sites were

distributed across the four major river basins through-

out the country, and feral nutria were observed

everywhere during the early period (Fig. 1 ); however,

nutria are currently only observed in the Nakdong

River basin (Fig. 2 ). Although habitat characteristics

seem to inﬂuence nutria habitation in the Youngsan

River, we would also like to determine why nutria

stabilization is subject to temperature conditions. The

temperature is signiﬁcantly lower in the Han and

Geum Rivers, and therefore nutria might not survive in

these areas. In the Nakdong River basin in 2008, nutria

were observed in the middle part of the river, but the

dispersal no longer expanded to the north. Instead,

populations began to move towards the tributaries.

The longitudinal shape (north to south) of the

Nakdong River differs from that of other rivers, and

the nutria occurrence pattern is clearly separated into

northern and southern parts of the river basin.

However, given the increase in temperatures during

the last 15 years, this pattern may vary slight ly in the

future (Fig. 5 ). As temperatures increase, the nutria-

occupied sites may also expand, and the southern part

of the river would provide more suitable nutria habitat

characteristics. In particular, the connectivity between

rivers and wetlands may have facilitated nutria range

expansion because the species prefers wetlands with

emergent vegetation and areas with succulent vegeta-

tion (LeBlanc 1983 ; Corriale et al. 2006 ; Do et al.

2012 ).

Despite its national designation as an invasive

species, nutria eradication programmes have not been

implemented at a national level. Rather, some local

governments have independently implemented and

supported nutria trapping since 2005. However, this

trapping has had little impact on the nutria population

or on the control of population dispersal because no

speciﬁc targets or goals were established at the outset.

Trapping has not been conducted over the entire nutria

distribution, and trappers have mostly only operated

during winter when nutria are more easily trapped.

Distribution and habitat preference of nutria

123