Report: NFL teams' revenue share topped $8 billion in 2017
A glimpse into the Green Bay Packers’ books shows that NFL teams raked in about $255 million each in 2017, according to ESPN’s Darren Rovell.

FILE PHOTO: Green Bay Packers team president Mark Murphy watches his team warm up before playing the Carolina Panthers in an NFL football game in Charlotte, North Carolina, September 18, 2011. REUTERS/Chris Keane

As a public company, the Green Bay Packers must share their financial information. And the information the Packers released Monday showed the amount the teams received in revenue sharing, representing a total of more than $8 billion to the league’s 32 teams.

The money primarily came from revenue from the league’s television packages, Rovell reported. That is an increase of 4.9 percent, due in part to the rising value of the NFL Thursday Night Football franchise.

Packers president Mark Murphy said the lingering effect of some NFL issues, including the national anthem controversy, did not harm to bottom line.

The Packers also took in nearly $200 million from local revenue sources, although Murphy said that missing the playoffs for the first time in a decade did significantly impact revenue. The Packers reported a profit from operations of $34.1 million - down from $65.4 million the previous season. Expenses also rose 11.9 percent.

“This is the first year since 2008 that we were not in the playoffs, and I think that had an impact on us,” Murphy said. “We didn’t have a home playoff game and some of our visitation numbers were down a little bit. We don’t see that as a negative trend.”

Since the end of last season, Brian Gutekunst has taken over for Ted Thompson as general manager and both coordinators have been changed - to Mike Pettine on defense and Joe Philbin on offense. Most important, quarterback Aaron Rodgers will be back to 100 percent entering training camp.

“Certainly, having Aaron healthy is a part of that, but I think some of the changes we’ve made coaching staff as well as the draft and players we’ve added ... I think people are excited for the season,” Murphy said. “You add on top of that the 100 seasons, it should, knock on wood, be a good year.”

—Field Level Media