UPDATE: Sandoval urges against 'skinny repeal,' calls for bipartisan health care reform
CLOSE Vice President Mike Pence was the tie-breaking vote as the Senate voted to advance the GOP health care bill that aims to repeal and replace Obamacare. USA TODAY

Buy Photo Nev. Gov. Brian Sandoval, waves to well-wishers at the Reno Tahoe International Airport Friday Oct. 31, 2014 to celebrate the state's 150th birthday. Behind him is Nev. U.S. Sen. Dean Heller. (Photo: Marilyn Newton/RGJ)Buy Photo

5:50 p.m. update: Nevada Gov. Brian Sandoval has come out against the Senate's plan for a "skinny repeal" of the Affordable Care Act.

Sandoval is one of ten gubernatorial signatories on a letter to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Kentucky) and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-New York). The letter urges McConnell and Schumer to "set aside this flawed bill and work with governors, both Democrats and Republicans, on solutions that will make health care more available and affordable for every American."

"This bill still threatens coverage for millions of hardworking, middle class Americans," the letter reads in part. "The bill's Medicaid provisions shift costs to states and fail to provide the necessary resources to ensure that no one is left out, including the working poor or those suffering from mental illness or addiction.

"The Senate should also reject efforts to amend the bill into a 'skinny repeal,' which is expected to accelerate health plans leaving the individual market, increase premiums, and result in fewer Americans having access to coverage."

In addition to Sandoval, the letter was co-signed by governors Charlie Baker (R-Massachusetts), Steve Bullock (D-Montana), John Bel Edwards (D-Louisiana), Larry Hogan (R-Maryland), John Hickenlooper (D-Colorado), John Kasich (R-Ohio), Phil Scott (D-Vermont), Terry McAuliffe (D-Virginia) and Gov. Tom Wolf (D-Pennsylvania).

4:15 p.m. update: An amendment proposed by Nevada Sen. Dean Heller to request protection of the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid expansion was defeated Wednedsay evening by a 90-10 vote.

The language in Heller's amendment asked the conference committee not to consider cutting Medicaid or shifting costs to states, but would not have imposed any binding requirements on the committee.

If the Senate is able to pass a repeal bill, an ad hoc panel of members from the Senate and House of Representatives will meet in a conference committee to resolve differences between the Senate's bill and the House's bill, which passed in May.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-970-7366. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

2:50 p.m. update: Nevada Sen. Dean Heller submitted an amendment Wednesday afternoon stating that the conference committee "should not consider legislation that reduces or eliminates benefits or coverage for individuals who are currently eligible for Medicaid" and "should not consider legislation that shifts costs to States to cover such care."

Heller has voiced concern that the GOP's replacement would reduce Medicaid benefits which were expanded under the ACA. In June, he refused to support a bill that would have eliminated Medicaid benefits, which would have meant the Nevada would have to cover the shortfall or cut the number of Medicaid beneficiaries in the state.

Original story: Nevada Sen. Dean Heller says he backs the "skinny repeal" of the Affordable Care Act, which would likely end the law's mandate for individuals to buy health insurance and large employers to provide coverage for their workers.

ON THE SENATE FLOOR: Live: Senators vote on health care bill

"We'll see at the end of the day what's in it but overall I think I'd support it," Heller told Politico. Heller had been a question mark on several of the GOP's plans to repeal the ACA.

GOP leaders are looking to pass a "skinny repeal" bill that would make limited changes to Obamacare.

If that plan passes the Senate, it would most likely go to a conference committee of House and Senate negotiators who would try to work out a final compromise.

The Democratic National Committee named Heller "Coward of the Day" following his statement of support. Democrats say Senate leaders just want to pass anything they can take to this conference committee, where the real bill will be crafted.

"In addition to his vote yesterday to advance health care repeal, today Senator Heller said he would also support a vote that would allow Congressional Republicans to craft a final repeal package behind closed doors and strip health care away from millions of Americans," the organization's statement read.

"It's becoming clearer that, in the end, the majority leader might push a much scaled-back version of repeal in the hopes of passing something, so-called skinny repeal, just to get to conference," Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., said in a speech on the Senate floor Wednesday. "But my colleagues, make no mistake about it, skinny repeal is equal to full repeal. It's a Trojan horse designed to get the House and Senate into conference where the hard-right flank of the Republican Caucus, the (House) Freedom Caucus, will demand full repeal or something very close to it."

The proposal is expected to fail as Republican leaders scramble to win enough votes from their own members to pass something to replace the Affordable Care Act.

The vote comes on the second day of a 20-hour Senate debate on health care. The Senate started Wednesday with about 17 hours left in the debate.

Earlier Wednesday, the Senate defeated a bill known as "clean repeal", which would have repealed Obamacare within two years without any immediate plan to replace the sweeping health care law. Heller, along with six other Republican senators, voted "no." Heller voted "yes" on a bill with the same language in 2015, a bill which was vetoed by then-President Obama.

Here's a look at where things stand now:

What are they voting on today?

The big vote will be Wednesday afternoon on an amendment by Sen. Mike Enzi, R-Wyo., to repeal the Affordable Care Act within two years, which would give lawmakers time to come up with a replacement plan before the law expires. The proposal is essentially the same as one passed by Congress in 2015, which was vetoed by former president Barack Obama.

With a Republican president in the White House, GOP leaders are trying again. Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., and other conservatives have led the push for a complete repeal of Obamacare. But there has been a lot of hesitation among Republicans for "repeal" without a plan for "replace," so the Enzi amendment is likely to fail.

What have they already voted on?

On Tuesday, senators voted 50-50 to begin debate on a health care bill. Vice President Pence had to come to the Senate chamber to break the tie and allow debate to start.

After that, the biggest news came Tuesday night when senators defeated a Republican bill, on a vote of 43-57, to replace Obamacare. Nine Republican senators voted against the legislation, which was drafted by Senate Republican leaders.

It included a proposal by Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, to allow insurers to sell bare-bones health care plans that don't cover maternity care and other major benefits as long as the companies also sell plans that include a full range of benefits.

The defeated plan also included a proposal by Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, to provide $100 billion in aid to help low-income Americans pay their medical bills after they lose Medicaid coverage as a result of the Senate health care bill.

What are Democrats doing?

The Democrats have been voting against the Republican bills to repeal and replace Obamacare. They also are using procedural tactics to try to slow down the debate process.

For example, Sen. Joe Donnelly, D-Ind., will offer a motion Wednesday to send health care legislation back to the Finance Committee for consideration. On Tuesday, they objected to the usual Senate practice of waiving the reading of the bill, so Senate clerks had to spend several hours reading the leadership replacement bill aloud.

What happens after the 20 hours of debate are over?

A vote-o-rama will begin on dozens of amendments offered by senators of both parties. That is expected to start Thursday.

Why has it been so difficult for the Senate to reach agreement?

Republican leaders have been trying to please the conservative and moderate wings of their party, and they have so far failed to win the support of both groups.

Conservatives generally want a complete repeal of Obamacare's taxes and regulations while moderates worry that ending the law's Medicaid expansion will leave struggling Americans with no way to afford medical coverage.

"Ultimately, we want to get legislation to finally end the failed Obamacare status quo through Congress and to the president’s desk for his signature," Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said Wednesday in a speech on the Senate floor. "This certainly won’t be easy. Hardly anything in this process has been."

Read more:

Senate Republicans clear key hurdle on Obamacare repeal, but the hard part is still ahead

The Senate agreed to debate a health care bill. Now what?

Takeaways from Tuesday's Senate vote: Obamacare repeal roller coaster lurches out of the station

Read or Share this story: https://www.rgj.com/story/news/politics/2017/07/26/heller-says-he-backs-skinny-repeal-obamacare/513593001/