S and K Gunstocks bought by Remington...
I ordered an S&K Anchutz thumbhole stock from StockysStocks in Solid Claro Walnut a couple of months ago.

SS just a few days ago got in a large order of all the Anchutz thumbholes in every color EXCEPT the Claro Walnut, and when I called, I was told that it was because SS had made a "large" special order of that color so they were being done seperately and would come a couple of weeks later.



When I originally ordered, I really wanted the Claro Walnut, but I have to admit that the Tawny Brown looked nice as well.

So I changed my order to the Tawny and got my stock a couple of days later (early last week).



I have to say that it's a beautiful stock; perfect in fit and with a glossy finish that's really unbelievably, well, exciting.



Anyway, the reason that the announcement might have been made on the S&K site might be because the stocks might hereafter be "Remington" stocks rather than S&K stocks.



On the other hand, if they really did quit making them, it's a **** shame because it's a really beautiful stock. And if that's the case, I guess I might have me one of them there "collectables".



Here's where they are showing all the colors except the one (Claro Walnut) in stock:

http://www.stockysstocks.com/servlet...umbhole/Detail That doesn't make a lot of sense. Why would Remington buy a company that makes gunstocks and then shut it down from making gunstocks?I ordered an S&K Anchutz thumbhole stock from StockysStocks in Solid Claro Walnut a couple of months ago.SS just a few days ago got in a large order of all the Anchutz thumbholes in every color EXCEPT the Claro Walnut, and when I called, I was told that it was because SS had made a "large" special order of that color so they were being done seperately and would come a couple of weeks later.When I originally ordered, I really wanted the Claro Walnut, but I have to admit that the Tawny Brown looked nice as well.So I changed my order to the Tawny and got my stock a couple of days later (early last week).I have to say that it's a beautiful stock; perfect in fit and with a glossy finish that's really unbelievably, well, exciting.Anyway, the reason that the announcement might have been made on the S&K site might be because the stocks might hereafter be "Remington" stocks rather than S&K stocks.On the other hand, if they really did quit making them, it's a **** shame because it's a really beautiful stock. And if that's the case, I guess I might have me one of them there "collectables".Here's where they are showing all the colors except the one (Claro Walnut) in stock: