The Royal wedding 2018
About On Monday 27 November 2017 The Prince of Wales announced the engagement of his son Prince Harry to Ms. Meghan Markle.



View this post on Instagram

Prince Harry and Ms. Meghan Markle have chosen to release this official portrait photograph to mark their engagement. The photograph was taken by photographer @alexilubomirski earlier this week at Frogmore House, Windsor. A post shared by Kensington Palace (@kensingtonroyal) on Dec 21, 2017 at 3:59am PST The wedding will take place at St George's Chapel, Windsor on Saturday 19 May. The service will begin at St George's Chapel at midday and will be conducted by the Dean of Windsor, The Rt Revd. David Conner. The Most Revd. and Rt Hon. Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, will officiate as the couple make their marriage vows. At 1pm, following the service, the couple will travel around Windsor in a horse-drawn carriage, providing an opportunity for members of the public to see them and join in with the celebrations.

Engagement The Prince of Wales announced the engagement of Prince Harry to Ms. Meghan Markle on 27 November 2017. Prince Harry informed Her Majesty The Queen and other members of his family. He also sought and received the blessing of Ms. Markle's parents. The couple will live in Nottingham Cottage at Kensington Palace. On the afternoon that their engagement was announced, Prince Harry and Ms. Meghan Markle appeared for a photo call in the gardens of Kensington Palace. The couple took part in a broadcast interview which was aired on the evening of the announcement

Charity Gift Fund Prince Harry and Ms. Meghan Markle are incredibly grateful for the goodwill shown to them since the announcement of their engagement and are keen that as many people as possible benefit from this generosity of spirit. The couple have therefore asked that anyone who might wish to mark the occasion considers making a donation to one of seven organisations they would like to support, reflecting their shared values. Find out more about these seven charities.

Wedding details Kensington Palace have announced which suppliers have been chosen for some of the key elements of the wedding day: The cake Claire Ptak, an American pastry chef who is based in London has been chosen to create a lemon elderflower wedding cake for Prince Harry and Ms. Meghan Markle. Find out more. The invitations The wedding invitations have been produced by Barnard & Westwood. The company has held a Royal Warrant for Printing & Bookbinding by Appointment to Her Majesty The Queen since 1985. Find out more. The flowers Prince Harry and Ms. Meghan Markle have chosen floral designer Philippa Craddock to create the church flowers for their wedding. Philippa will direct a team, including florists from St George's Chapel and Buckingham Palace, to create the displays at St George's Chapel and for St George's Hall. Find out more.

Coming to Windsor? On the day of the wedding, members of the public will be able to watch live footage of the wedding and the carriage procession on big screens located on the Long Walk and in Alexandra Gardens. Food stalls and other facilities will be available. If you are planning to come along and join in the celebrations, make sure you plan ahead!



Rail operators will be putting on extra trains and there will be park and walk and park and ride services to help people get into town. A 6,000 space pre-booked car parking area will be at the Review Ground, just off the Long Walk. Visitors are encouraged to book all travel arrangements early so they can make the most of their trip. Visit the Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead’s website for the latest information on visiting Windsor for the Royal Wedding. Visit the South Western Railway and Great Western Railway websites to plan your journey to Windsor.