Prince William appointed President-Designate of the Football Association
Prince William has been appointed the President-Designate of The Football Association, and will take over from his uncle, HRH The Duke of York, as President of the governing body of English football in May 2006.

Announcing the appointment after meeting Prince William at Clarence House today, Geoff Thompson, chairman of The FA, said: “Everyone at The FA is delighted that Prince William has agreed to be our next President. In 2000 we asked The Duke of York to take on the role for five years and he has done a terrific job, particularly behind the scenes, for which we are enormously grateful.

“The appointment of Prince William initially as President-Designate means that over the next few months The Duke can introduce him to The FA, its staff and its many programmes and initiatives. Prince William’s enthusiasm for football, both as a player and a fan, is well known and we believe his Presidency will prove a great asset to the national game.”

HRH The Duke of York said: “I am delighted that Prince William will be taking over the Presidency of The FA, a position I have enjoyed holding for the past five years. It has been a pleasure to support The FA in promoting the game nationally and internationally. I am certain Prince William will be a real asset to the organisation, particularly in his ability to demonstrate the benefits of participation in football to young players.”

Prince William said: “I am really excited to be taking up this role. Football is a game I love playing and watching. It is also the national sport and generates extraordinary passions among millions of people. It certainly did last year for me when I followed England with my friends during Euro 2004, and will no doubt do so again next summer during the World Cup in Germany. Over the next few months I look forward to getting to know The FA well with the help of my uncle, and to understanding better the role the organisation plays in promoting the game at all levels.”