Steele Additional Filing in London Action
Migrants Suffering Violence While in Transit Through Mexico: Factors Associated with the Decision to Continue or Turn Back

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE Claim no.

HQ17D00413

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

BETWEEN

(1} ALEKSEJ GUBAREV

{2} WEBZILLA B.V.

(3) WEBZILLA LIMITED

(4) XBT HOLDINGS.A

Claimants

and

(1) ORBIS BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE LIMITED

(2) CHRISTOPHER STEELEDefendants

DEFENDANTS' RESPONSE TO CLAIMANTS' REQUEST FOR FURTHER

INFORMATION PURSUANT TO CPR PART 18

Under paragraphs 7 and 8

Of: "At all material times Fusion was subject to an obligation not to disclose to third

parties confidential intelligence material provided to it by the Defendants in the course

of that working relationship without the agreement of the Defendants."

REQUESTS

1. Whether the alleged duty of confidentiality is said to arise by contract or in

equity.

2. If by contract, state whether the duty arose under (a) a general contract of

retainer; or (b) specific contracts relating to the specific work.

3. In either event state whether any contract(s) relied on were written or oral; if

oral, stating when and between whom they were made.

RESPONSE

The duty arose both by contract and in equity. A written non-disclosure

agreement was concluded between the First Defendant and a representative ofFusion in January 2010 in relation to work conducted by Fusion for the FirstDefendant. Furthermore, Fusion was aware of the confidentiality of intelligencereports through the course of business with the Defendants and, in relation tothe disclosure of the memoranda to Mr Kramer, the Second Defendant andFusion had had specific discussions in which the confidentiality of thememoranda had been emphasised and Fusion was instructed to inform MrKramer of their confidentiality.

REQUEST

-1- RPC

4. State whether the alleged duty not to disclose such intelligence to 'third parties'

without the prior agreement of the Defendants in the course of the working

relationship extended to disclosure by Fusion to their own clients (ie the clients

who had commissioned the intelligence material: see paragraph 6 of the

Defence).

RESPONSE

In relation to the pre-election memoranda the duty not to disclose intelligence to

third parties without the prior agreement of the Defendants did not extend to

disclosure by Fusion to its client(s), although the Defendants understand that

copies of the memoranda were not disclosed by Fusion to its client( s ).

In relation to the December memorandum, this was not prepared pursuant to

any contract as stated at paragraph 18 of the Defence. The duty not to disclosethis intelligence report to third parties without the prior agreement of theDefendants therefore did extend to disclosure by Fusion to its client(s).

REQUEST

5. State whether the Defendants owed any reciprocal duty of confidence to Fusion

and/or Fusion's clients in relation to the intelligence they provided.

RESPONSE

Since it was not produced pursuant to the engagement with Fusion described at

paragraph 9 of the Defence, the Defendants did not owe any obligation of

confidence to Fusion and/or Fusion's client(s) in relation to the intelligence

contained in the December memorandum.

REQUEST

1

6. State whether Fusion s clients, insofar as disclosure to them was permitted (see

Request 4), were under any duty to the Defendants and/or Fusion not to (a) use

and/or (b) disclose the intelligence, and, if so, give like particulars as to how that

duty is alleged to arise.

RESPONSE

The response to question 4 above is repeated. The Defendants understood that

the arrangement between Fusion and its client(s) was that intelligence would

not be disclosed. As explained above, the December memorandum was not

produced pursuant to the engagement referred to at paragraph 9 of the

Defence and therefore disclosure of the December memorandum to their

client(s) was not permitted.

Under paragraphs 9 and 10

Of "Between June and early November 2016 Orbis was engaged by Fusion to prepare

. a series of confidential memoranda based on intelligence concerning Russian efforts to

influence the US Presidential election process and links between Russia and Donald

Trump".

REQUEST

-2- RPC

7. Please identify (see paragraph 6 of the Defence) Fusion's client(s) in relation to this

particular engagement.

RESPONSE

This request is neither reasonably necessary nor proportionate to enable the

Claimants to prepare their own case nor to understand the case they have to meet.

Of "The Defendants produced sixteen such memoranda. These will be referred to for

convenience as 'the pre-election memoranda', having been prepared before the 2016

US Presidential election. The last one was produced in the latter part of October 2016.

None were produced in November 2016. None of the pre-election memoranda

contained any reference to, or intelligence about, the Claimants".

REQUEST

8. In view of the assertion that no memoranda were produced in November 2016,

please state the nature of the engagement in early November 2016 as referredto in paragraph 9, and whether this engagement was performed and whatintelligence it related to.

RESPONSE

The nature of the Defendants' engagement by Fusion did not change during the

period between the preparation of the last pre-election memorandum on 20

October 2016 and the date of the US Presidential election. However since the

Defendants did not receive any relevant intelligence concerning Russian efforts

to influence the US Presidential election process and links between Russia and

Donald Trump during this period, no memoranda were produced pursuant to

the engagement after 20 October 2016.

Under paragraphs 12 and 13

Of "Senator John McCain is the Chair of the US Senate Armed Services Committee

and a member of the Us Senate Commiftge on HomgJ::;md SGcurity and Govgrnmgntal

Affairs" and "David Kramer is a former US State Department civil servant and was US

Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor from 2008 to

2009. He is the Senior Director for Human Rights and Human Freedoms at Senator

McCain's Institute for International Leadership".

REQUEST

9. Please confirm (as paragraph 29b(i) of the Defence suggests) that Senator

McCain and Mr Kramer are alleged (a) to have been acting in these official

capacities; and (b) only in relation to those capacities in the course of the

matters pleaded in paragraphs 14 to 17 and 21 b; and, if not, identify any other

capacity in which they were acting and when and for what purpose(s).

RESPONSE

-3- RPC

The Defendants believed that Senator McCain and Mr Kramer were acting only

in their official capacities and were not informed of any other capacity or

purpose in which they were acting. There were no grounds that led the

Defendants to suspect that Senator McCain and Mr Kramer were not acting in

their official capacities at any time up to and including the publication of the

December memorandum to Mr Kramer.

Under paragraph 14

Of ':As a result of these discussions Sir Andrew arranged for the Second Defendant to

meet Mr Kramer, as the representative of Senator McCain, in order to show him the

pre-election memoranda on a confidential basis".

REQUEST

10. State what is meant by 'on a confidential basis', indicating precisely what use or

uses Senator McCain was/were permitted to make of the pre-election

memoranda and whether these uses were specified to Senator McCain and Mr

Kramer.

RESPONSE

·The Defendants understood that the contents of the memoranda would be

treated in the strictest confidence and would only be used by Senator McCain in

his official capacity for the sole purpose of analysing, investigating and verifying

their contents to enable such action to be taken as necessary for the purposes

of protecting US national security. The Second Defendant expressly informed

Mr Kramer that the pre-election memoranda were only to be used for this

exclusive purpose before he showed Mr Kramer any of the memoranda. Mr

Kramer was not at this time provided with copies of the memoranda that had

been prepared as at that date, but was shown copies.

Under paragraph 18

Of "The Defendants continued to receive unsolicited intelligence on the matters

covered by the pre-election memoranda after the US Presidential election and theconclusion of the assignment for Fusion".

REQUEST

11. Please state whether such intelligence was actively sought by the Second

Defendant or merely received (as presently pleaded).

RESPONSE

Such intelligence was not actively sought; it was merely received.

Under paragraph 19

-4- RPC

Of ''After receiving some such intelligence the Second Defendant prepared the

confidential December memorandum, referred to at paragraph 8.1, on his own initiative

on or around 13 December 2016".

REQUEST

12. Please state whether the words 'on his own initiative' mean that the December

memorandum was not (a) created; or (b) provided to Fusion pursuant to any

contract. If not, please specify the contract in question.

RESPONSE

The December memorandum was not created or provided to Fusion pursuant to

any contract.

Under paragraph 20

Of "The Defendants considered, correctly, that the raw intelligence in the December

memorandum: a. was of considerable importance in relation to alleged Russian

interference in the US Presidential election; b. had implications for the national security

of the US and the UK; and c. needed to be analysed and further investigated/verified".

REQUEST

13. Please state whether the Second Defendant only reached this conclusion on

behalf of the First Defendant or whether Christopher Burrows and/or Sir Andrew

were party to his assessment.

RESPONSE

The Defendants' assessment that the pre-election memoranda and any

subsequent related intelligence which they received should be disclosed to the

individuals referred to at paragraph 21 of the Defence was reached following

separate discussions between the Second Defendant and (i) Christopher

Burrows of the First Defendant; (ii) Sir Andrew Wood {who had spoken with

Senator McCain); (iii) David Kramer (who was acting on behalf of Senator

McCain) and (iv) the UK national security official referred to at paragraph 21 (b)

of the Defence. Mr Burrows shared the Second Defendant's assessment at the

relevant time. The Defendants considered that the issues were self-evidently

relevant to the national security of the US, UK and their allies and that

subsequent intelligence relating to these issues ought to be disclosed to the

individuals referred to at paragraph 21 of the Defence. Each of the individuals

with whom the Second Defendant discussed the issue shared this view at the

time and, to the Second Defendant's knowledge and belief, continue to hold

that view.

-5- RPC

Under paragraph 20c and 21

REQUEST

14. Please state whether the December memorandum was provided to (a) the UK

national security official; and/or (b) Fusion; and/or (c) Mr Kramer and Senator

McCain with the source of the allegations against the Claimants redacted or

not.

RESPONSE

Information pertaining to the status of the source(s) of the intelligence contained

within the December memorandum was not redacted when it was provided toeither the UK national security official and/or Fusion and/or Mr Kramer andSenator McCain. The information contained within the intelligence reportspertaining to the status of the source( s) was consistent with the Defendants'conscious efforts to protect the identity of the source(s).

REQUEST

15. Please state whether the instruction to Fusion contained any express reference

to confidentiality (contrast paragraph 21 a which expressly refers to 'on a

. confidential basis').

RESPONSE

In the Second Defendant's communications with Fusion surrounding the

provision of the instruction by enciphered email, it was explicitly stated that thememoranda were only to be provided to Mr Kramer for the purpose of passingthem on to Senator McCain. Substantive conversations between the SecondDefendant and Fusion relating to this matter were conducted using securetelephone communications. During those secure communications, the SecondDefendant expressly emphasised that the December memorandum was subjectto the same strict restrictions on disclosure to third parties as were contained inthe written agreement described in the response to requests 1 to 3 above.

Under paragraph 21 a and b

Of "Accordingly the Second Defendant provided a copy of the December memorandum

to: a. a senior UK government national security official acting in his official capacity, ona confidential basis in hard copy form; and b. Fusion, by enciphered email with aninstruction to Fusion to provide a hard copy to Sen. McCain via Mr Kramer".

REQUEST

16. Please state whether intelligence provided by the Defendants to Fusion was

generally provided in enciphered form.

-6· RPC

RESPONSE

Intelligence provided by the Defendants to Fusion was provided securelyand

where provided electronically it was provided in enciphered form.

Under paragraphs 23 and 24

Of "It is denied that in their natural and ordinary meaning, in their proper context, the

words complained of bore or were capable of bearing the meaning pleaded at

paragraph 7" and "Read in context the natural and ordinary meaning of the words

complained of was that there were grounds to investigate whether the Claimants had

been coerced by Russia into hacking the computers used by the US Democratic Party

leadership, transmitting viruses, planting bugs, stealing data and conducting altering

operations".

REQUEST

17. Please identify the context relied on and the reader(s) to whom it was allegedly

known.

RESPONSE

The readers referred to are the readers of the December memorandum who

accessed and read the words complained of via the article that was published

on the BuzzFeed website on 10 January 2017. ·

The December memorandum was a raw intelligence report which contained

information gathered from a confidential source(s) about various nationalsecurity issues that warranted further investigation.

Further, the words complained of were published by BuzzFeed as part of an

article which stressed that the contents of the dossier (which included theDecember memorandum) were "unverified', "unconfirmed' and contained"unverified, and potentially unverifiable a/legations". The article added that,"BuzzFeed News reporters in the US and Europe have been investigating thealleged facts in the dossier but have not verified or falsified them." The articlereported that the President-elect's attorney, Michael Cohen, had said thatallegations in the dossier "were absolutely false".

In these circumstances, readers of the words complained of were therefore

aware that (i) the contents of the December memorandum did not represent(and did not purport to represent) verified facts, but were raw intelligence whichhad identified a range of allegations that warranted investigation given theirpotential national security implications; (ii) persons mentioned in the Decembermemorandum were unlikely to have been approached for comment, andtherefore many of those persons were likely to deny the allegations contained inthe raw intelligence; and (iii) while the December memorandum was prepared ingood faith, its content must be critically viewed in light of the purpose for andcircumstances in which the information was collected.

-7- RPC

Under paragraph 32

Of "Save that it is admitted that the Second Defendant gave off the record briefings to a

small number of journalists about the pre~election memoranda in late summer/autumn

2016, sub-paragraph 8.2.6 is denied".

REQUEST

18. Please identify the journalists briefed by the Second Defendant and state when

and how the briefing was done in each case and the gist of what was conveyed.

RESPONSE

The journalists initially briefed at the end of September 2016 by the Second

Defendant and Fusion at Fusion's instruction were from the New York Times,

the Washington Post, Yahoo News, the New Yorker and CNN. The Second

Defendant subsequently participated in further meetings at Fusion's instruction

with Fusion and the New York Times, the Washington Post and Yahoo News,

which took place in mid-October 2016. In each of those cases the briefing was

conducted verbally in person. In addition, and again at Fusion's instruction, in

late October 2016 the Second Defendant briefed a journalist from Mother Jones

by Skype. No copies of the pre-election memoranda were ever shown or

provided to any journalists by, or with the authorisation of, the Defendants. The

briefings involved the disclosure of limited intelligence regarding indications of

Russian interference in the US election process and the possible co-ordination

of members of Trump's campaign team and Russian government officials.

REQUEST

19. Please state what is meant by 'off the record' and, in particular whether it

means:

(a) The information provided was not to be published (but might be used);

(b) The information might be published but not attributed to the Defendants in

anyway;

(c) As (b), but the Defendants could be generically described, but not by name.

RESPONSE

The Second Defendant understood that the information provided might be used for the

purpose of further research, but would not be published or attributed. The Defendants

repeat that no off the record briefing ever took place concerning the December

memorandum, and no copies of any of the pre-election memoranda or the December

memorandum were ever provided to journalists by, or with the authorisation of, the

Defendants.

REQUEST

20. Please state whether these terms were agreed to by the journalists concerned.

-8- RPC

RESPONSE

The Second Defendant was told by Fusion that the terms had been explained to

the relevant journalists in advance by them and the Second Defendant

reinforced the basis on which he was speaking to each of the journalists he met

in person. None of the journalists raised any objection.

Under paragraphs 36 to 39

REQUEST

21. Please state whether the defence of qualified privilege is relied on by the

Defendants if they are held to be liable for publication to the world at large as

distinct from the admitted publication to the individuals identified by the

Defendants in the Defence.

RESPONSE

Yes.

STATEMENT OF TRUTH

The Defendants believe that the facts stated in this Response are true.

Signed:

Nicola Cain

Position: Legal Director, RPC; Defendants' legal representative

Date: 18 May 2017

-9- RPC

Claim No. HQ17D00413

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

BETWEEN

(1) ALEKSEJ GUBAREV

(2) WEBZILLA B.V.

(3) WEBZILLA LIMITED

(4) XBT HOLDING S.A.

Claimants

and

(1) ORBIS BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE

LIMITED

(2) CHRISTOPHER STEELE

Defendants

DEFENDANTS' RESPONSE TO

PART 18 REQUEST

RPC

Tower Bridge House

St Katharine's Way

London

E1W 1AA

T: 020 3060 6000

Reference: ORB4.1

Solicitors for the Defendants

TBH23772701 v1