Nrc Vis Clo Sky Letter
June 19, 2015

The Honorable Peter J. Visclosky

United States House of Representatives

Washington, DC 20515

Dear Congressman Visclosky:

On behalf of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), I am responding to your letter of

May 13, 2015, forwarding correspondence from your constituent Richard Lenart. Mr. Lenart

expressed concern regarding the Russian purchase of U.S. uranium mines and possible

shipment of uranium from those mines to Russia or the Middle East.

In 2010, the NRC approved the transfer of control of the licenses from Uranium One USA, Inc.

and Uranium One America, Inc. to JSC Atomredmetsoloto (ARMZ), a Russian corporation. At

that time we determined that the U.S. subsidiaries of Uranium One, Inc. (the formerly Canadian,

now Russian-owned firm) would remain as the NRC-regulated licensees and continue to be

qualified to conduct the uranium recovery operations. As a condition of our approval, we

required the licensee to notify the NRC before ARMZ appoints, hires, or designates personnel to

perform NRC-licensed activities. The ARMZ licensees represent approximately 20 percent of

the currently licensed uranium in-situ recovery production capacity in the U.S.

At this time, neither Uranium One, Inc. nor ARMZ holds a specific NRC export license, which

would authorize them to export uranium to any other country. However, in 2012, RSB Logistics

Services, a shipping company, received from the NRC an amendment to its export license to

allow it to export uranium from various sources, including the Uranium One, Inc. Willow Creek

site in Wyoming, to the Blind River conversion plant in Canada, and then return the uranium to

the U.S. for further processing. That license stated that the Canadian Government needed to

obtain prior U.S. Government approval before any of the U.S. material could be transferred to

any country other than the U.S. Subsequently, the U.S. Department of Energy granted approval

for some re-transfers of U.S. uranium from the Canadian conversion facility to European

enrichment plants.

Before issuing this license amendment to RSB Logistics Services—or any other export license

or license amendment—the NRC must determine that the proposed export is not inimical to the

common defense and security of the United States. Under existing NRC regulations, this

means that any uranium proposed to be exported to any country for use in nuclear fuel would be

subject to the Atomic Energy Act Section 123 agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation

between the U.S. and that other country and confirmed in case-specific, government-to-

government assurances for each export license. The receiving country is required to commit to

use the material only for peaceful purposes (not for development of any nuclear explosive

device), to maintain adequate physical protection, and not to retransfer the material to a third

country or alter it in form or content without the prior consent of the U.S. The transfer of the

U.S.-supplied uranium from Canada to Europe noted above also was subject to applicable

Section 123 agreements.

P. Visclosky -2-

In addition, every application submitted to the NRC for a specific export or import license is

made available to the public on the NRC’s web site, and the NRC welcomes public comment on

such applications. Our regulations outline in detail procedures for public participation

concerning these license applications.

Please be assured that no Uranium One, Inc.-produced uranium has been shipped directly to

Russia and the U.S. Government has not authorized any country to re-transfer U.S. uranium to

Russia.

I hope this information is useful to you. If you need anything additional, please contact me or

Eugene Dacus, Director of the Office of Congressional Affairs, at (301) 415-1776.

Sincerely,

/RA Michael Weber Acting for/

Mark A. Satorius

Executive Director

For Operations

P. Visclosky -2-

In addition, every application submitted to the NRC for a specific export or import license is

made available to the public on the NRC’s web site, and the NRC welcomes public comment on

such applications. Our regulations outline in detail procedures for public participation

concerning these license applications.

Please be assured that no Uranium One, Inc.-produced uranium has been shipped directly to

Russia and the U.S. Government has not authorized any country to re-transfer U.S. uranium to

Russia.

I hope this information is useful to you. If you need anything additional, please contact me or

Eugene Dacus, Director of the Office of Congressional Affairs, at (301) 415-1776.

Sincerely,

/RA Michael Weber Acting for/

Mark A. Satorius

Executive Director

For Operations

DISTRIBUTION: LTR-15-02741-OEDO

RRihm EDO r/f RidsEdoMailCenter RidsSecyMailCenter

RidsOgcMailCenter RidsOcaMailCenter RidsOipMailCenter

RidsNmssMailCenter

ADAMS Accession Number: Package: ML15140A681; Letter: ML15168A230

OFFICE OEDO OGC OCA OIP NMSS EDO

NAME RRihm J Biggins D Decker B Smith C Glenn MSatorius

MWeber for

DATE 06/17/15 06/10/15 06/11/15 06/10/15 06/10/15 06/19/15

OFFICIAL RECORD COPY