Number of uninsured children soars Blame put on state policies and funding decisions

The number of uninsured children in Washington state has reached its highest level in more than 10 years, with 45,000 children dropping off state-funded health insurance programs in the last 16 months, according to a report released yesterday.

Children's advocates, pediatricians and the Washington State PTA criticized state policies and funding decisions they consider responsible for a 5 percent drop in Medicaid enrollments -- from 583,775 children in September 2002 to 554,872 enrollees in December 2003, the period covered by the report.

But some policy-makers, citing a need to control rising health care costs in Washington and balance the state budget, defended the policies, saying the rise in uninsured children reflects the success of welfare-to-work programs and does not necessarily mean children are being deprived of health care.

The report, "Wrong Target: Policies That Hurt Our Kids and Cost Us All More," was issued by the Working for Health Coalition, a statewide group that includes the American Academy of Pediatrics, the Washington State Medical Association, nurses, teachers, public and private health organizations and labor unions. Its findings, many say, are likely to sharpen the public debate about state health care policies for the poor.

Dr. Bob Crittenden, chief of family medicine at Harborview Medical Center in Seattle, said public debate on the issue is overdue and timely, particularly since the state is considering imposing insurance premiums on low-income families.

"It's a free fall in the number of uninsured kids in this state," Crittenden said, citing such health issues as asthma, diabetes and dental problems. The state, he said, is being "penny-wise and a ton foolish" by making policy changes the last few years that have affected tens of thousands of children, while reducing the state's Medicaid budget by less than 1 percent.

State Sen. Val Stevens, the Republican chairwoman of the Senate Children and Family Services and Corrections Committee, countered critics of the state's policies, saying lawmakers were obliged to control costs and balance the budget while serving a spectrum of needs, including often costly health care for the elderly.

"We've made this (health care issue) into such a hysterical situation, that people have equated health care with good health," Stevens said.

"Just because you have health care doesn't mean you have good health .... I know that there is a great concern that if people don't take their children in for various kinds of preventive health care situations, they'll have a tendency to be sick, but I don't believe that's true for all children."

For Stevens and other Republicans, the situation calls for increased personal responsibility on the part of parents and more jobs, not "socializing" of health care.

"There's been an effort the last 10 years to move us into socialized medicine," said Stevens, whose 39th Legislative District includes parts of Snohomish, Skagit, Whatcom and King counties.

"But it's more of a personal responsibility situation for the parents," Stevens said. "The real crux of the matter is this: We need to improve our jobs environment. With more jobs, you have employment for the parents, and if you improve that, you improve the health care situation in the state of Washington."

But children's advocates, while agreeing that employment is key, say they can't wait for an economic upturn.

Jon Gould, deputy director of the Children's Alliance, said the public "should be alarmed at the incredibly high percentage of our state's children who have no access to regular health care. ...

"It is even more outrageous that pushing children off public insurance was an intended consequence of these policy decisions."

Gould said that with the recent losses in medical assistance enrollment, the number of uninsured children in the state now totals more than 100,000.

In November, the Washington State Parent-Teacher Association made health care access its top legislative priority, citing problems being seen in school clinics across the state.

"All children need to be healthy in order to be ready to learn," said Jean Carpenter, executive director of the Washington State PTA. "Access to health care for all kids is as important as getting prepared for the WASL (Washington Assessment of Student Learning); in fact, they are interconnected."

Advocates also say that thousands of children without health care already have working parents. Lacking health care, and too poor to pay premiums, they wait until conditions get acute, then head to emergency rooms.

Kids often qualify for health care, advocates say, but because of transportation problems, employer demands, fear of job loss or other factors, parents do not enroll their kids. Crittenden and other children's advocates say new state requirements, such as the need to reapply for coverage and verify income every six months instead of once a year, pose "administrative barriers" that deter many working parents from enrolling eligible children.

Children's Medicaid enrollment dipped in Washington when new requirements or policies were put into place, the report states.

Crittenden cited some of his own patients, such as a 3-year-old with asthma and a 9-year-old with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder -- whose working, single moms repeatedly could not get off work to navigate Medicaid's new bureaucracy.

Lisa Podell, program manager for Kids Get Care, a health care outreach program for low-income people in King County, said the program has been able to "hold the line" on costs so far, but successful outreach means more patients.

"The (state) system is designed to kick people off the rolls," Podell said, "and it's doing exactly what it's designed to do."