Gov. Scott signs charter-friendly education bill HB 7069 into law
Gov. Rick Scott today signed into law a controversial education bill that shifts hundreds of millions of dollars from traditional public schools to charter schools, drawing protests from traditional educators and applause from school-choice advocates.

House Bill 7069, a sweeping 274-page education overhaul, redirects more than $400 million in state money and makes a host of changes to Florida’s public-school landscape, including eliminating a state math exam, requiring most public elementary schools to offer daily recess and providing more money for teacher bonuses and a school-voucher program for students with disabilities.

Teachers unions and school district leaders were enraged by provisions that they say give charter schools a greater competitive advantage over traditional schools: measures that force school districts to share construction money with charter schools and that create financial incentives for new charters to open and compete with low-performing public schools.

Those provisions prompted Palm Beach County’s school board to take the unusual step last month of asking the county’s more than 200,000 public school parents to pressure Scott to veto it. Schools Superintendent Robert Avossa took to social media to decry the bill and what he called the secretive way that it was passed.

Scott said he listened to the outpouring both for and against the bill, but he was ultimately unmoved by pressure from traditional school leaders.

The bill was a top priority of House Speaker Richard Corcoran, R-Land O’Lakes, with whom Scott had to negotiate for an education-spending boost and money for economic-incentives programs, both of which Corcoran originally opposed.

A breakthrough agreement on those and several unrelated issues at last week’s special legislative session prompted widespread speculation that Corcoran had secured Scott’s assurance in the negotiations that he would sign the bill.

At a bill-signing ceremony in Orlando, Scott said the bill “paves the way for every Florida student to receive a world-class education that every student deserves.”

“I think it’s going to help all of our students,” he said at the ceremony, which took place at a private Catholic school in Orlando.

Detractors criticized not just the substance of the bill but also the way it was crafted, calling it a secretive process. The bill was passed in the final days of the legislative session last month by hastily assembling components of several education bills behind closed doors, including several that had not received full hearings in both legislative chambers.

In a statement Thursday, Avossa called Scott’s decision “a sad day for students in Florida.”

“It is unfortunate that this bad legislation, crafted in a backroom deal in the last days of the legislative session, is now law,” Avossa said. “The outcry from thousands of parents, community members and educators from across the state fell on deaf ears. We need to remember House Bill 7069 and the lawmakers who helped to make it happen, and hold them accountable at election time.”

The provision that most angered Avossa and other school district leaders is one that allows the county’s charter schools to take a slice of the money that school districts raise for construction and maintenance through a local property tax.

In Palm Beach County, that provision will cost the school district an estimated $10 million next year, or about 2 percent of the district’s roughly $400 million capital budget. That figure is expected to rise as the number of charter schools grows.

Not only does the provision complicate the school district’s plans to build new schools, administrators say that it risks lowering the school district’s credit rating and raising the cost of borrowing money for future projects.

New charter school program to encourage ‘Schools of Hope’

Another controversial provision of the bill, the “Schools of Hope” program, sets up new rules and a new pot of money to encourage charter schools to move into areas where the nearest traditional public schools have persistently low ratings.

The bill allows the “schools of hope” to open up either in the attendance zone of, or within five miles of, a local traditional public school that has earned either an F or D for three straight years.

It sets aside $140 million that could be used to support and subsidize the “schools of hope.”

Democratic legislators and the state’s largest teachers union opposed the measure, saying that the program would weaken struggling schools even further by pulling students away from them, and that the money and effort would be better spent improving those schools.

“Our schools need to be able to meet the needs of our students,” Joanne McCall, president of the Florida Education Association, the state’s main teachers union, said in a statement. “That isn’t done with massive giveaways to charter schools while school districts try to scrape by to make ends meet.”

None of Palm Beach County’s public schools currently have three years of consecutive grades under C, meaning no “schools of hope” could open in the county currently.

Those two charter-friendly provisions were cast by supporters and opponents, respectively, as either leveling the playing field for charter schools or unfairly tipping the scale in favor of charter schools.

Ralph Arza, a former legislator who lobbies for the Florida Charter School Alliance and attended Thursday’s signing ceremony, called the legislation a victory for “equity in funding.”

He pointed out that until now charter schools were usually unable to get a share of the money that school districts raised for construction and maintenance through local property taxes, putting them at a financial disadvantage.

“The money does not belong to the school district, the money belongs to the parent and the child,” Arza said. “No matter where the kid goes to school, the money should follow the child.”

Recess guaranteed at all elementary schools – except charters

Among the bill’s provisions: a guarantee that all elementary schools at traditional public schools received at least 20 minutes of recess daily.

Florida’s public schools currently aren’t required to provide recess. The new requirement is hailed as a win by a group of self-dubbed “recess moms,” who say that guaranteeing elementary students unstructured play is better for their health and their ability to focus.

There’s a big loophole in the provision though: The requirement does not apply to charter schools, meaning they can continue to choose not to provide recess time.

That loophole has further angered traditional public school leaders, who say it created a double standard for the two types of schools.

The bill also provides an extra $30 million for the Gardiner Scholarship program, a voucher program for students with disabilities to pay for private school tuition and other special services.

On Thursday, Scott highlighted that portion of the bill by signing it at Orlando’s Morning Star Catholic School, which educates children who attend with help from the vouchers. Standing alongside him was former Senate President Andy Gardiner, the program’s namesake.

A mandatory state exam is eliminated

The bill makes several tweaks to Florida’s battery of standardized tests. The biggest one: the state’s Algebra 2 end-of-course exam is eliminated completely.

Passing the Algebra 2 exam was not a requirement for graduation, but students were required to take it. Under the bill, students will still have to pass the Algebra 1 exam or an equivalent test to receive a diploma.

The testing schedule would also be pushed back to the last four weeks of school.

The state’s education department is required to hire an independent expert to study whether the state should let students use SAT or ACT scores instead of passing scores on the state’s standardized 10th grade language arts exam and Algebra 1 exam, which are currently required for high school graduation. The report is due by Jan. 1, 2018.

That study could set the stage for state lawmakers to allow high school students to avoid taking and passing the two must-pass exams if they can show mastery through good scores on the SAT or ACT college-entrance exams.

More bonus money for teachers, principals

The bill also provides millions of dollars in new money for bonuses for teachers and principals.

The first portion works by expanding the state’s “Best and Brightest” bonus program, one in which teachers had to be rated “highly effective” by their school district and had to have scored in the 80th percentile on either the SAT or ACT college-entrance exams in order to qualify.

Last year, 7,118 teachers qualified statewide, earning an extra bonus of $6,816 each.

This year, the requirements have been relaxed, and the bonus program has been vastly expanded, from $49 million to $233 million.

The bill still determines teachers’ eligibility based on old college-exam scores, but it lowers the cutoff from 80th percentile to 77th percentile (with a lower cutoff for teacher who graduated from college with high grades) and expands the types of exam scores qualify, including tests taken to apply for law school, medical school or graduate school.

Teachers who qualify would receive a $6,000 bonus.

The bill also creates a secondary bonus program that the vast majority of Florida teachers will qualify for. No matter what their college test scores may have been, all teachers rated “highly effective” will receive a $1,200 bonus. All teachers rated “effective” will receive a bonus of up to $800.

That’s in addition to the “Best and Brightest” bonuses. So a teacher who gets both could receive an extra $7,200 next year.

Heather Knust, the Palm Beach County School District’s budget director, acknowledged that it’s “a significant amount of money” for teachers but said they would have been better off if the Legislature had simply given that money directly to school districts for teacher raises.

A raise, she said, is more beneficial to teachers because it is raises their base pay for the rest of their career and also can raise their pension payouts once they retire. In contrast, a bonus can be revoked from one year to another and could be revoked in future years if the Legislature cancels the program.

Principals whose teacher workforce includes a high percentage of teachers eligible for the ‘Best and Brightest’ bonus would now be eligible for bonuses of up to $5,000 themselves.

To win the bonus, a principal must have spent at least two years leading the school, and the number of teachers at that school qualifying for the bonus must rank in the 80th percentile of schools statewide in that school category (elementary, middle or high).

Principals who oversee schools with high concentrations of poverty would receive $5,000 bonuses. Principals at schools with fewer poorer students would receive $4,000.

Qualifying principals would also have more autonomy regarding spending and personnel decisions.