Exhibit 1.01

Conflict Minerals Report





Intel Corporation

in accord with Rule 13p-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934





This Conflict Minerals Report ("Report") of Intel Corporation ("Intel" or "we") for the year ended December 31, 2014 is presented to comply with Rule 13p-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended ("Rule"). Numerous terms in this Report are defined in the Rule and our Specialized Disclosure Report on Form SD and the reader is referred to those sources and to SEC Release No. 34-67716 issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 22, 2012 for such definitions.

Pursuant to the Rule, we undertook due diligence measures on the source and chain of custody of the necessary conflict minerals in our products which we had reason to believe may have originated from the Democratic Republic of the Congo ("DRC") or an adjoining country (collectively defined as the "Covered Countries") and which may not have come from recycled or scrap sources, to determine whether such products were "DRC conflict free". The term "conflict free" is used in this Report in a broader sense to refer to suppliers, supply chains, smelters and refiners whose sources of conflict minerals did not or do not directly or indirectly finance or benefit armed groups in the Covered Countries.

Design of Conflict Minerals Program

The design of our conflict minerals program is in conformity with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas, Second Edition, and related Supplements on Tin, Tantalum and Tungsten and on Gold (collectively, "OECD Guidance"), specifically as it relates to our position in the minerals supply chain as a "downstream" purchaser. Summarized below are the design components of our conflict minerals program as they relate to the five-step framework from the OECD Guidance:





1. Maintain strong company management systems :

● Operate an internal "Conflict Minerals" team led by our Global Supply Management organization to implement our Conflict Minerals Sourcing Policy, which policy is included in our Form SD. Regularly review such implementation efforts with our Chief Executive Officer ("CEO") and senior management of our Technology and Manufacturing Group ("TMG"). ● Employ a supply chain system of controls and transparency through the use of due diligence tools created by the Electronic Industry Citizenship Coalition (EICC) and the Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI)'s Conflict-Free Sourcing Initiative ("CFSI") which includes the Conflict Minerals Reporting Template ("CMRT"), a supply chain survey designed to identify the smelters and refiners that process the necessary conflict minerals contained in our products. ● Feature requirements related to conflict minerals in our standard template for supplier contracts and specifications so that current and future suppliers are obligated to comply with our policies on conflict minerals, including participation in a supply chain survey and related due diligence activities. ● Maintain records relating to our conflict minerals program in accordance with our record retention guidelines. ● Enable employees, suppliers and other stakeholders to report any concerns relating to our conflict minerals program through our online corporate responsibility reporting and grievance mechanism found on our conflict free website (www.intel.com/conflictfree).





1









2. Identify and assess risks in our supply chain :

● Identify direct suppliers that supply products to Intel that may contain conflict minerals. ● Conduct a supply chain survey using the CMRT, requesting direct suppliers to identify smelters and refiners and country of origin of the conflict minerals in products they supply to Intel. ● Contact direct suppliers that do not respond to the supply chain survey by a specified date, requesting their responses. ● Compare smelters and refiners identified by the supply chain survey against the list of facilities that have received a "conflict free" designation from the Conflict Free Smelter Program ("CFSP") or other independent third party audit program such as the London Bullion Market Association's Responsible Gold Programme and the Responsible Jewellery Council's Chain-of-Custody Certification program, which designations provide country of origin and/or due diligence information on the conflict minerals sourced by such facilities. ● Document country of origin information for the smelters and refiners identified by the supply chain survey as provided from multiple sources including the supply chain survey, independent third party audit programs and directly from smelters and refiners that Intel contacts.









3. Execute a strategy to respond to identified risks :

● Maintain a risk management plan that includes due diligence reviews of suppliers, smelters and refiners that may be sourcing or processing conflict minerals from the Covered Countries which may not be from recycled or scrap sources. Our due diligence measures are significantly based on multi-industry due diligence initiatives to evaluate the procurement practices of the smelters and refiners that process and provide those conflict minerals to our supply chain. ● Monitor and track suppliers, smelters and refiners identified as not meeting the requirements set forth in our Conflict Minerals Sourcing Policy or contractual requirements to determine their progress in meeting those requirements. ● Perform risk mitigation efforts to bring suppliers into conformity with our Conflict Minerals Sourcing Policy and contractual requirements, which efforts may include working with direct suppliers to consider an alternative source for the necessary conflict minerals. ● Contact select smelter and refiner facilities that have not received a "conflict free" designation from an independent third party audit program to encourage their participation in such a program and request country of origin and chain of custody information. ● Provide progress reports to our CEO and TMG senior management summarizing our risk mitigation efforts. ● As required by the Rule, obtain an independent private sector audit of this Report.





4. Support the development and implementation of independent third party audits of smelters' and refiners' sourcing :

● Support development and implementation of due diligence practices and tools such as the CMRT through our participation and leadership within the CFSI and CFSI sub-teams. ● Support development and implementation of the CFSP by writing the CFSP audit protocol and procedures in conjunction with CFSI member companies and other industry groups. ● Support independent third party audits of smelters and refiners such as the CFSP through our membership in and financial support of the CFSI.





5. Report on supply chain due diligence :

● Publicly communicate our Conflict Minerals Sourcing Policy on our company website at www.intel.com/conflictfree . ● Report annually on our supply chain due diligence activities in our white paper titled "Intel's Efforts to Achieve a 'Conflict Free' Supply Chain" and Corporate Social Responsibility Report available on our company website at www.intel.com/conflictfree .

The content of any website referred to in this Report is included for general information only and is not incorporated by reference in this Report.

2









Description of Due Diligence Measures Performed

Below is a description of the measures we performed for this reporting period to exercise due diligence on the source and chain of custody of the necessary conflict minerals contained in our products which we had reason to believe may have originated from the Covered Countries and may not have come from recycled or scrap sources:



● Conducted a supply-chain survey of suppliers which we identified may be supplying Intel with products that contain necessary conflict minerals using the CFSI's CMRT, requesting country of origin information regarding the necessary conflict minerals and identification of smelters and refiners that process such minerals. ● Received responses to the supply-chain survey request from approximately 99% of our surveyed suppliers. ● Contacted surveyed suppliers on responses to supply chain surveys that we identified contained incomplete or potentially inaccurate information to seek additional clarifying information. ● Compared smelters and refiners identified by the supply chain survey against the list of facilities that have received a "conflict free" designation from the CFSP or other independent third party audit program. ● Monitored and tracked suppliers, smelters and refiners identified as not meeting the requirements set forth in our Conflict Minerals Sourcing Policy or contractual requirements to determine their progress in meeting those requirements. ● Performed risk mitigation efforts with suppliers we identified to be not in conformity with our Conflict Minerals Sourcing Policy and contractual requirements by working with them to bring them into compliance. ● In 2014, visited eight smelters and refiners that had not received a "conflict free" designation to collect country of origin information and encourage and assist their participation in the CFSP or other independent third party audit program. ● Provided nine progress reports to TMG senior management and two progress reports to our CEO that summarized the status of our conflict minerals program including the compliance status of smelters and refiners in our supply chain. ● As required by the Rule, obtained an independent private sector audit of this Report, which is set forth as Exhibit A to this Report.

Products

During this reporting period, we identified the following products which we manufactured or contracted with others to manufacture that may contain necessary conflict minerals (defined as any tantalum, tin, tungsten or gold that is necessary to the functionality or production of our products):

● "Client Microprocessors and Chipsets": Desktop and mobile microprocessors and chipsets that are solely manufactured by Intel, which are comprised of the following: Celeron®, Pentium®, Intel® Core™ M, Intel® Core i3™, Intel® Core™ i5, Intel® Core™ i7, Intel® Quark™, and Intel® Atom™ processors (except Intel® Atom™ processors for servers, storage and communications).

● "All Other": All other Intel® products that may contain necessary conflict minerals that we manufactured or contracted with others to manufacture, which products are comprised of the following:





o Server : Enterprise branded microprocessors, chipsets, motherboards, server and micro-server systems which contain components manufactured by Intel and other components purchased by Intel including Intel® Xeon Phi™, Intel® Xeon®, Itanium® and Intel® Atom™ processors for servers and storage.

o Mobile : Wireless platforms including Intel® mobile phone platforms and mobile communications platforms such as Intel® XMM™ slim modems.

o Networking : Ethernet network adapters, controllers and wireless products which enable the computers and networks to exchange data including Thunderbolt™ technology, Intel® Centrino® technology, Intel® WiMAX and Intel® WiFi products.

o Boards and Other Components : Desktop printed circuit boards and other components including Intel® Desktop Boards, Intel® Galileo boards, Intel® Edison boards, and Intel® NUC (next unit of computing).

o Storage and Other : Memory products including Intel® Solid-State Drives (Intel® SSDs) and Intel® Atom™ processors for storage and communications.

3





Results of our Due Diligence Measures

Inherent Limitations on Due Diligence Measures:

As a downstream purchaser of products which contain conflict minerals, our due diligence measures can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance regarding the source and chain of custody of the necessary conflict minerals. Our due diligence processes are based on the necessity of seeking data from our direct suppliers and those suppliers seeking similar information within their supply chains to identify the original sources of the necessary conflict minerals. We also rely, to a large extent, on information collected and provided by independent third party audit programs. Such sources of information, as well as our smelters and refiner facility visits, may yield inaccurate or incomplete information and may be subject to fraud.

Another complicating factor is the unavailability of country of origin and chain of custody information from our suppliers on a continuous, real-time basis. Under the Dodd-Frank Act and the Rule, a product is "DRC conflict free" if it meets the required standard every day of the reporting year; conversely, a product would "not be found to be DRC conflict free" if it does not meet the required standard even one day of the reporting year. The supply chain of commodities such as conflict minerals is a multi-step process operating more or less on a daily basis, with ore being delivered to smelters and refiners, with smelters and refiners smelting or refining ores into metal containing derivatives such as ingots, with the derivatives being shipped, sold and stored in numerous market locations around the world and with distributors and purchasers holding varying amounts of the derivatives in inventory for use. Since we do not have direct contractual relationships with smelters and refiners, we rely on our direct suppliers and the entire supply-chain to gather and provide specific information about the date when the ore is smelted into a derivative and later shipped, stored, sold and first entered the stream of commerce. We directly seek sourcing data on a periodic basis from our direct suppliers as well as certain smelters and refiners. We ask that the data cover the entire reporting year, and we seek to use contract provisions requiring the suppliers to promptly update us in the event that the sourcing data changes.





Supply Chain Survey Responses





We conducted a supply-chain survey of the 324 direct suppliers that we identified may contribute necessary conflict minerals to our products. The overall response rate to this survey was approximately 99% compared to the 83% response rate attained in 2013; and 100% of our direct suppliers that contribute necessary conflict minerals to our Client Microprocessor and Chipset products responded to our 2014 supply chain survey. Our supplier requirements related to providing DRC conflict free products to Intel include:

1. publish a conflict mineral sourcing policy on the supplier's public website;

2. participate annually in our conflict minerals supply-chain survey using the CMRT;

3. accurately identify all smelters and refiners facilities which process the conflict minerals contained in the products provided to Intel; and

4. verify the smelters or refiners which process the conflict minerals contained in the products provided to Intel have received a "conflict free" designation from the CFSP or other independent third party audit program.





Smelter and Refiner Due Diligence Summary





In response to our supply-chain survey, our suppliers identified 229 operational smelter and refiner facilities which may process the necessary conflict minerals contained in the materials provided to Intel. Of those facilities, as of May 15, 2015:

● 155 have received a "conflict free" designation from an independent third party audit program; ● 42 have not yet received a "conflict free" designation but have begun participating in an independent third party audit program; ● the remaining facilities have not begun participating in an independent third party audit program; ● all tantalum smelters have received a "conflict free" designation from an independent third party audit program; and ● all smelters and refiners we believe may source conflict minerals from the Covered Countries have received a "conflict free" designation from an independent third party audit program.





To our knowledge, none of these 229 facilities directly or indirectly finance or benefit armed groups in the Covered Countries.





Additional information regarding such smelter and refiner facilities is available in Table 1 below.

4

Product Determination

On the basis of our due diligence measures as described in this Report, we have concluded in good faith that during this reporting period, the necessary conflict minerals contained in our products that originated or may have originated from the Covered Countries are either DRC conflict free or DRC conflict undeterminable as described below.

DRC conflict free

Our Client Microprocessor and Chipset products are DRC conflict free . Our suppliers have identified the smelters and refiners in the supply chain that are sources of the necessary conflict minerals for our Client Microprocessor and Chipset products. All of these smelters and refiners have received a "conflict free" designation from the CFSP or other independent third party audit program which resulted in our reasonable determination that our Client Microprocessor and Chipset products are DRC conflict free.

DRC conflict undeterminable

All Other products are DRC conflict undeterminable . We are making this determination because we have insufficient information from suppliers or other sources regarding all of the smelters and refiners that processed the necessary conflict minerals in All Other products to conclude whether those conflict minerals originated in the Covered Countries and, if so, whether those conflict minerals were from recycled or scrap sources or other conflict free sources.

Our efforts to determine the mine or location of origin of the necessary conflict minerals in our products that are DRC conflict undeterminable with the greatest possible specificity consisted of the due diligence measures described in this Report. In particular, because independent third party audit programs validate whether sufficient evidence exists regarding country, mine and/or location of origin of the conflict minerals that the audited smelter or refiner facilities have processed, we relied on the information made available by such programs for the smelters and refiners in our supply chain. For smelters or refiners in our supply chain that had not received a "conflict free" designation by any independent third party audit programs, we attempted to contact such facilities to request country, mine and/or location of origin of the conflict minerals processed by them, and in certain cases, visited the facilities to perform an on-site review of this information. We were unable to ascertain the country of origin and/or chain of custody of all necessary conflict minerals processed by facilities that contribute to All Other products because, for this reporting period, certain smelter and refiner facilities (1) had not yet received a "conflict free" designation from an independent third party audit program, (2) did not respond to our requests for country of origin or chain of custody information, (3) were unwilling to allow us to visit the facility to conduct an on-site review of such information, or (4) did not have contact details available to establish communication to request country of origin or chain of custody information.

Table 1 below lists the facilities which, to the extent known, processed the necessary conflict minerals in All Other products.





Metal Smelter or Refiner Facility Name † Location of Facility † Gold Aida Chemical Industries Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Allgemeine Gold-und Silberscheideanstalt A.G. * Germany Gold Almalyk Mining and Metallurgical Complex (AMMC) Uzbekistan Gold AngloGold Ashanti Córrego do Sítio Mineração * Brazil Gold Argor-Heraeus SA * Switzerland Gold Asahi Pretec Corporation * Japan Gold Asaka Riken Co., Ltd. Japan Gold Atasay Kuyumculuk Sanayi Ve Ticaret A.S. * Turkey Gold Aurubis AG * Germany Gold Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Central Bank of the Philippines) * Philippines Gold Bauer Walser AG Germany Gold Boliden AB * Sweden Gold C. Hafner GmbH + Co. KG * Germany Gold Caridad Mexico Gold CCR Refinery – Glencore Canada Corporation * Canada

5

Metal Smelter or Refiner Facility Name † Location of Facility † Gold Cendres + Métaux SA Switzerland Gold Chimet S.p.A. * Italy Gold Chugai Mining Japan Gold Daejin Indus Co., Ltd. South Korea Gold Daye Non-Ferrous Metals Mining Ltd. China Gold Do Sung Corporation South Korea Gold Doduco Germany Gold Dowa * Japan Gold Eco-System Recycling Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Gansu Seemine Material Hi-Tech Co., Ltd. China Gold Guangdong Jinding Gold Limited China Gold Hangzhou Fuchunjiang Smelting Co., Ltd. China Gold Heimerle + Meule GmbH * Germany Gold Heraeus Ltd. Hong Kong * Hong Kong Gold Heraeus Precious Metals GmbH & Co. KG * Germany Gold Hunan Chenzhou Mining Group Co., Ltd. China Gold Hwasung CJ Co., Ltd. South Korea Gold Inner Mongolia Qiankun Gold and Silver Refinery Share Company Limited China Gold Ishifuku Metal Industry Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Istanbul Gold Refinery * Turkey Gold Japan Mint * Japan Gold Jiangxi Copper Company Limited China Gold Johnson Matthey Inc. * United States Gold Johnson Matthey Limited * Canada Gold JSC Ekaterinburg Non-Ferrous Metal Processing Plant * Russian Federation Gold JSC Uralelectromed * Russian Federation Gold JX Nippon Mining & Metals Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Kazzinc * Kazakhstan Gold Kennecott Utah Copper LLC * United States Gold Kojima Chemicals Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Korea Metal Co., Ltd. South Korea Gold Kyrgyzaltyn JSC Kyrgyzstan Gold L' azurde Company For Jewelry * Saudi Arabia Gold Lingbao Gold Company Limited China Gold Lingbao Jinyuan Tonghui Refinery Co., Ltd. China Gold LS-NIKKO Copper Inc. * South Korea Gold Luoyang Zijin Yinhui Gold Refinery Co., Ltd. China Gold Materion * United States Gold Matsuda Sangyo Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Metalor Technologies (Hong Kong) Ltd. * Hong Kong Gold Metalor Technologies (Singapore) Pte., Ltd. * Singapore Gold Metalor Technologies SA * Switzerland Gold Metalor USA Refining Corporation * United States Gold METALÚRGICA MET-MEX PEÑOLES, S.A. DE C.V * Mexico Gold Mitsubishi Materials Corporation * Japan Gold Mitsui Mining and Smelting Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Moscow Special Alloys Processing Plant Russian Federation Gold Nadir Metal Rafineri San. Ve Tic. A.Ş. * Turkey Gold Navoi Mining and Metallurgical Combinat Uzbekistan Gold Nihon Material Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Ohio Precious Metals, LLC * United States Gold Ohura Precious Metal Industry Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold OJSC "The Gulidov Krasnoyarsk Non-Ferrous Metals Plant" (OJSC Krastvetmet) * Russian Federation Gold OJSC Kolyma Refinery Russian Federation Gold OJSC Novosibirsk Refinery Russian Federation Gold PAMP SA * Switzerland Gold Penglai Penggang Gold Industry Co., Ltd. China Gold Prioksky Plant of Non-Ferrous Metals Russian Federation Gold PT Aneka Tambang (Persero) Tbk * Indonesia Gold PX Précinox SA * Switzerland Gold Rand Refinery (Pty) Ltd. * South Africa Gold Royal Canadian Mint * Canada Gold Sabin Metal Corp. United States Gold SAMWON Metals Corp. South Korea Gold Schone Edelmetaal * Netherlands Gold SEMPSA Joyería Platería SA * Spain Gold Shandong Zhaojin Gold & Silver Refinery Co., Ltd. * China

6



Metal Smelter or Refiner Facility Name † Location of Facility † Gold So Accurate Group, Inc. United States Gold SOE Shyolkovsky Factory of Secondary Precious Metals Russian Federation Gold Solar Applied Materials Technology Corp. * Taiwan Gold Sumitomo Metal Mining Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Tanaka Kikinzoku Kogyo K.K. * Japan Gold The Great Wall Gold and Silver Refinery of China China Gold The Refinery of Shandong Gold Mining Co., Ltd. * China Gold Tokuriki Honten Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Tongling Nonferrous Metals Group Co., Ltd. China Gold Torecom South Korea Gold Umicore Brasil Ltda. * Brazil Gold Umicore Precious Metals Thailand * Thailand Gold Umicore SA Business Unit Precious Metals Refining * Belgium Gold United Precious Metal Refining, Inc. * United States Gold Valcambi SA * Switzerland Gold Western Australian Mint trading as The Perth Mint * Australia Gold Yamamoto Precious Metal Co., Ltd. * Japan Gold Yokohama Metal Co., Ltd. Japan Gold Yunnan Copper Industry Co., Ltd. China Gold Zhongyuan Gold Smelter of Zhongjin Gold Corporation * China Gold Zijin Mining Group Co., Ltd. Gold Refinery * China Tantalum Changsha South Tantalum Niobium Co., Ltd. * China Tantalum Conghua Tantalum and Niobium Smeltry * China Tantalum Duoluoshan * China Tantalum Exotech Inc. * United States Tantalum F&X Electro-Materials Ltd. * China Tantalum Global Advanced Metals Aizu * United States Tantalum Global Advanced Metals Boyertown * United States Tantalum Guangdong Zhiyuan New Material Co., Ltd. * China Tantalum Guizhou Zhenhua Xinyun Technology Ltd., Kaili branch * China Tantalum H.C. Starck Co., Ltd. * Thailand Tantalum H.C. Starck GmbH Goslar * Germany Tantalum H.C. Starck GmbH Laufenburg * Germany Tantalum H.C. Starck Hermsdorf GmbH * Germany Tantalum H.C. Starck Inc. * United States Tantalum H.C. Starck Ltd. * Japan Tantalum H.C. Starck Smelting GmbH & Co.KG * Germany Tantalum Hengyang King Xing Lifeng New Materials Co., Ltd. * China Tantalum Hi-Temp Specialty Metals, Inc. * United States Tantalum JiuJiang JinXin Nonferrous Metals Co., Ltd. * China Tantalum Jiujiang Tanbre Co., Ltd. * China Tantalum KEMET Blue Metals * Mexico Tantalum KEMET Blue Powder * United States Tantalum King-Tan Tantalum Industry Ltd. * China Tantalum LSM Brasil S.A. * Brazil Tantalum Metallurgical Products India Pvt., Ltd. * India Tantalum Mineração Taboca S.A. * Brazil Tantalum Mitsui Mining & Smelting * Japan Tantalum Molycorp Silmet A.S. * Estonia Tantalum Ningxia Orient Tantalum Industry Co., Ltd. * China Tantalum Plansee SE Liezen * Austria Tantalum Plansee SE Reutte * Austria Tantalum QuantumClean * United States Tantalum RFH Tantalum Smeltry Co., Ltd. * China Tantalum Solikamsk Magnesium Works OAO * Russian Federation Tantalum Taki Chemicals * Japan Tantalum Telex Metals * United States Tantalum Ulba Metallurgical Plant JSC * Kazakhstan Tantalum Yichun Jin Yang Rare Metal Co., Ltd. * China Tantalum Zhuzhou Cemented Carbide * China Tin Alpha * United States Tin China Tin Group Co., Ltd. China Tin CNMC (Guangxi) PGMA Co., Ltd. China Tin Cooperativa Metalurgica de Rondônia Ltda. * Brazil Tin CV Gita Pesona Indonesia Tin CV Serumpun Sebalai Indonesia Tin CV United Smelting * Indonesia Tin Dowa * Japan

7





Metal Smelter or Refiner Facility Name † Location of Facility † Tin EM Vinto * Bolivia Tin Estanho de Rondônia S.A. Brazil Tin Fenix Metals Poland Tin Gejiu Kai Meng Industry and Trade LLC China Tin Gejiu Non-Ferrous Metal Processing Co., Ltd. * China Tin Gejiu Zili Mining And Metallurgy Co., Ltd. China Tin Huichang Jinshunda Tin Co., Ltd. China Tin Jiangxi Ketai Advanced Material Co., Ltd. * China Tin Linwu Xianggui Ore Smelting Co., Ltd. China Tin Magnu's Minerais Metais e Ligas Ltda. * Brazil Tin Malaysia Smelting Corporation (MSC) * Malaysia Tin Melt Metais e Ligas S/A * Brazil Tin Metallo-Chimique N.V. * Belgium Tin Mineração Taboca S.A. * Brazil Tin Minsur * Peru Tin Mitsubishi Materials Corporation * Japan Tin Novosibirsk Processing Plant Ltd. Russian Federation Tin O.M. Manufacturing (Thailand) Co., Ltd. Thailand Tin O.M. Manufacturing Philippines, Inc. * Philippines Tin Operaciones Metalurgical S.A. * Bolivia Tin PT Aries Kencana Sejahtera Indonesia Tin PT Artha Cipta Langgeng * Indonesia Tin PT ATD Makmur Mandiri Jaya * Indonesia Tin PT Babel Inti Perkasa * Indonesia Tin PT Bangka Putra Karya * Indonesia Tin PT Bangka Tin Industry * Indonesia Tin PT Belitung Industri Sejahtera * Indonesia Tin PT BilliTin Makmur Lestari Indonesia Tin PT Bukit Timah * Indonesia Tin PT DS Jaya Abadi * Indonesia Tin PT Eunindo Usaha Mandiri * Indonesia Tin PT Inti Stania Prima * Indonesia Tin PT JusTindo Indonesia Tin PT Karimun Mining Indonesia Tin PT Mitra Stania Prima * Indonesia Tin PT Panca Mega Persada * Indonesia Tin PT Prima Timah Utama * Indonesia Tin PT Refined Bangka Tin * Indonesia Tin PT Sariwiguna Binasentosa * Indonesia Tin PT Seirama Tin Investment Indonesia Tin PT Stanindo Inti Perkasa * Indonesia Tin PT Sumber Jaya Indah Indonesia Tin PT Timah (Persero) Tbk Kundur * Indonesia Tin PT Timah (Persero) Tbk Mentok * Indonesia Tin PT Tinindo Inter Nusa * Indonesia Tin Rui Da Hung Taiwan Tin Soft Metais Ltda. * Brazil Tin Thaisarco * Thailand Tin White Solder Metalurgia e Mineração Ltda. * Brazil Tin Yunnan Chengfeng Non-ferrous Metals Co., Ltd. China Tin Yunnan Tin Group (Holding) Company Limited * China Tungsten A.L.M.T. TUNGSTEN Corp. Japan Tungsten Chenzhou Diamond Tungsten Products Co., Ltd. * China Tungsten Chongyi Zhangyuan Tungsten Co., Ltd. China Tungsten Dayu Weiliang Tungsten Co., Ltd. China Tungsten Fujian Jinxin Tungsten Co., Ltd. * China Tungsten Ganzhou Huaxing Tungsten Products Co., Ltd. * China Tungsten Ganzhou Non-ferrous Metals Smelting Co., Ltd. China Tungsten Ganzhou Seadragon W & Mo Co., Ltd. * China Tungsten Global Tungsten & Powders Corp. * United States Tungsten Guangdong Xianglu Tungsten Co., Ltd. China Tungsten H.C. Starck GmbH Germany Tungsten H.C. Starck Smelting GmbH & Co.KG Germany Tungsten Hunan Chenzhou Mining Group Co., Ltd. China Tungsten Hunan Chunchang Nonferrous Metals Co., Ltd. * China Tungsten Hydrometallurg, JSC Russian Federation Tungsten Japan New Metals Co., Ltd. * Japan Tungsten Jiangwu H.C. Starck Tungsten Products Co., Ltd. China

8



Metal Smelter or Refiner Facility Name † Location of Facility † Tungsten Jiangxi Gan Bei Tungsten Co., Ltd. * China Tungsten Jiangxi Tonggu Non-ferrous Metallurgical & Chemical Co., Ltd. China Tungsten Jiangxi Xinsheng Tungsten Industry Co., Ltd. China Tungsten Kennametal Huntsville United States Tungsten Malipo Haiyu Tungsten Co., Ltd. * China Tungsten Nui Phao H.C. Starck Tungsten Chemicals Manufacturing LLC Vietnam Tungsten Tejing (Vietnam) Tungsten Co., Ltd. Vietnam Tungsten Wolfram Bergbau und Hütten AG * Austria Tungsten Xiamen Tungsten (H.C.) Co., Ltd. * China Tungsten Xiamen Tungsten Co., Ltd. * China Tungsten Xinhai Rendan Shaoguan Tungsten Co., Ltd. China Countries of origin of the conflict minerals these facilities may process include : Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burundi, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Cote D'Ivoire, Czech Republic, Djibouti, DRC, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Laos People's Democratic Republic, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, Portugal, Republic of Congo, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, South Korea, South Africa, Spain, South Sudan, Suriname, Switzerland, Taiwan, United Republic of Tanzania, Thailand, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Vietnam, Zimbabwe





† Smelter and refiner facility names and locations as reported by the CFSI as of May 15, 2015. * Denotes smelters and refiners which have received a "conflict free" designation from an independent third party audit program as of May 15, 2015.





Future Due Diligence Measures

During the reporting period for the calendar year ending December 31, 2015, we are continuing to engage in the activities described above in "Design of Conflict Minerals Program" and "Description of Due Diligence Measures Performed." In our efforts to attain a conflict free supply chain for our products, we intend to continue to contact smelters and refiners identified in our supply chain survey process that have not yet received a "conflict free" designation and request their participation in the CFSP or other independent third party audit program in order for them to obtain such a "conflict free" designation.

Independent Private Sector Audit of this Report

We obtained an independent private sector audit of this Report by Ernst & Young LLP, which is set forth as Exhibit A to this Report.

____________________________

Intel and the Intel logo, Intel Atom, Intel Core, Intel Xeon, Intel Xeon Phi, Centrino, Celeron, Itanium, Pentium, Quark, Thunderbolt, and XMM are trademarks of Intel Corporation in the U.S. and/or other countries.





9





Exhibit A

Report of Independent Accountants

Board of Directors and Stockholders of Intel Corporation

We have examined whether the design of Intel Corporation's (the "Company") due diligence framework as set forth in the Design of Conflict Minerals Program section of the Conflict Minerals Report for the reporting period from January 1 to December 31, 2014, is in conformity, in all material respects, with the criteria set forth in the Organisation of Economic Co-Operation and Development Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas , Second Edition 2013 ("OECD Due Diligence Guidance"), and whether the Company's description of the due diligence measures it performed, as set forth in Description of Due Diligence Measures Performed section of the Conflict Minerals Report for the reporting period from January 1 to December 31, 2014, is consistent, in all material respects, with the due diligence process that the Company undertook.

Management is responsible for the design of the Company's due diligence framework and the description of the Company's due diligence measures set forth in the Conflict Minerals Report, and performance of the due diligence measures. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the design of the Company's due diligence framework and on the description of the due diligence measures the Company performed, based on our examination. Our examination was conducted in accordance with attestation standards established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the standards applicable to attestation engagements contained in Government Auditing Standards , issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, and, accordingly, included examining, on a test basis, evidence about the design of the Company's due diligence framework and the description of the due diligence measures the Company performed, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our examination provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.

Our examination was not conducted for the purpose of evaluating:

► The consistency of the due diligence measures that the Company performed with either the design of the Company's due diligence framework or the OECD Due Diligence Guidance

► The completeness of the Company's description of the due diligence measures performed

► The suitability of the design or operating effectiveness of the Company's due diligence process

► Whether a third party can determine from the Conflict Minerals Report if the due diligence measures the Company performed are consistent with the OECD Due Diligence Guidance

► The Company's reasonable country of origin inquiry (RCOI), including the suitability of the design of the RCOI, its operating effectiveness, or the results thereof

► The Company's conclusions about the source or chain of custody of its conflict minerals, those products subject to due diligence, or the DRC Conflict Free status of its products

Accordingly, we do not express an opinion or any other form of assurance on the aforementioned matters or any other matters included in any section of the Conflict Minerals Report other than the design of the Company's due diligence framework as set forth in the Design of Conflict Minerals Program section and the Company's description of the due diligence measures it performed, as set forth in the Description of Due Diligence Measures Performed section referenced in the first paragraph above.

In our opinion, the design of the Company's due diligence framework for the reporting period from January 1 to December 31, 2014, as set forth in the Design of Conflict Minerals Program section of the Conflict Minerals Report is in conformity, in all material respects, with the OECD Due Diligence Guidance, and the Company's description of the due diligence measures it performed as set forth in the Description of Due Diligence Measures Performed section of the Conflict Minerals Report for the reporting period from January 1 to December 31, 2014, is consistent, in all material respects, with the due diligence process that the Company undertook.

/s/ Ernst & Young LLP

San Jose, California

May 21, 2015