Newsom gets homeless off streets - problems linger SOCIAL SERVICES Mayor moves thousands off streets, but panhandling continues

Mayor Gavin Newsom looks out the window at the view looking east down Mission Street from the Edith Witt Senior housing complex which uses a quarter of the units for homeless people. San Francisco mayor Gavin Newsom looks back on his battles against homelessness as he visits some new housing units his policies have created Tuesday December 7, 2010. less Mayor Gavin Newsom looks out the window at the view looking east down Mission Street from the Edith Witt Senior housing complex which uses a quarter of the units for homeless people. San Francisco mayor Gavin ... more Photo: Brant Ward, The Chronicle

Formerly homeless man John Orr, left, is greeted by mayor Gavin Newsom at the Edith Witt senior housing complex. Orr got a room after living in Golden Gate Park for six years. San Francisco mayor Gavin Newsom looks back on his battles against homelessness as he visits some new housing units his policies have created Tuesday December 7, 2010. less Formerly homeless man John Orr, left, is greeted by mayor Gavin Newsom at the Edith Witt senior housing complex. Orr got a room after living in Golden Gate Park for six years. San Francisco mayor Gavin Newsom ... more Photo: Brant Ward, The Chronicle

File photo from 2004. Mayor Newsom (left in white shirt) walks the streets of the Tenderloin to talk with the homeless about his new Care Not Cash program. File photographs from 2004. Mayor Newsom begins his Care Not Cash program with a tour of the McAllister Hotel and the Tenderloin homeless situation. less File photo from 2004. Mayor Newsom (left in white shirt) walks the streets of the Tenderloin to talk with the homeless about his new Care Not Cash program. File photographs from 2004. Mayor Newsom begins his ... more Photo: Brant Ward, The Chronicle

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-4', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 4', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});



Photo: Brant Ward, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Newsom gets homeless off streets - problems linger 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

Outgoing San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom has moved more homeless people into supportive housing in his seven years in office than any other mayor in the city's history - and has one of the best track records of any mayor in the country on that score.

Yet many of San Francisco's neighborhoods remain plagued with panhandlers, and residents and tourists alike complain of feeling scared or just plain disgusted.

"In terms of housing homeless people, he probably has the best record of any mayor in the history of the United States," said Randy Shaw, who runs the Tenderloin Housing Clinic and operates many of Newsom's hotels for formerly homeless people. He is a frequent critic of Newsom but has come to support many of the mayor's homeless policies.

"For the average person who walks down Market Street or confronts things in Union Square or Fisherman's Wharf, they feel like, 'God, you have homeless people everywhere,' " Shaw said.

Spelling out successes

It's that juxtaposition that bothers Newsom as he prepares to leave City Hall's Room 200 for Sacramento in January to serve as lieutenant governor. He will attend his final Project Homeless Connect today, when he is to spell out what he views as his administration's success in tackling one of the city's most long-standing, tangled problems.

On Tuesday, Newsom toured a new affordable housing center on Mission Street where 135 low-income seniors live, 27 of them formerly homeless. One of those is John Orr, 63, who lived in Golden Gate Park for several years before moving into his new apartment in September.

"I was just too old to live outside - that's what the kids would tell me when they'd punch me out," he said, sporting a big smile with a few missing teeth. "It's nice and peaceful here - it's a good place."

Taking national spotlight

Those personal stories of the 12,210 homeless people who have moved off the streets of San Francisco during the past seven years have brought the most joy to Newsom of anything during his tenure, he said.

But he acknowledged it's frustrating to see the miserable street behavior that continues. He blames out-of-towners for coming to the city to beg, but said a regret of his is not having adequately tackled the city's panhandling problem.

While Newsom acknowledges that homelessness is a never-ending problem, "I will sleep much better knowing the foundation is much better than when I started. We've built a national reputation not as an embarrassment, but as a leader."

While many assume Newsom is best known for his early advocacy of same-sex marriage, among other mayors and housing advocates he is famous for his work on homelessness.

"He's been a leader nationally in just taking it on as a major issue," said Nan Roman, president of the National Alliance to End Homelessness.

Controversial policies

But homeless advocates in San Francisco say Newsom will be most remembered for promoting mean-spirited ballot measures - including barring aggressive panhandling and sitting or lying on sidewalks - that have done little to clean up the streets.

"He's promoted hatred against homeless people," said Jennifer Friedenbach, director of the Coalition on Homelessness. "It's an endless list of divisive policies."

Newsom took office in 2004 after Mayor Willie Brown, who famously declared that homelessness in San Francisco "may not be solvable." But even before he became mayor, his controversial ballot measure, called Care Not Cash and passed by voters in 2002, put the young, rich supervisor from the Marina in the spotlight.

The program slashed county welfare checks in exchange for housing and services. It has housed 3,296 people since its inception, but the participants are left with $59 a month, meaning many are still on the streets begging.

In his first year as mayor, Newsom also created the 10 Year Plan to End Chronic Homelessness. It prioritized housing with the idea that people's other issues, including unemployment, mental illness and alcohol and drug abuse, could be addressed once they were inside.

Housing chronic homeless

Barbara Poppe, executive director of the U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness, said that finding a way to house the most hard-core homeless - even in an incredibly expensive city - has been Newsom's top achievement.

Newsom found that chronic homeless made up 20 percent of the city's homeless population but consumed 80 percent of the city's homeless dollars, including pricey trips to the emergency room.

Outreach teams sent out daily have linked thousands of people with services, housing or cash assistance. The number of homeless people living in Golden Gate Park went from 300 in 2007 to 25 now.

Homeless Connect

Another Newsom creation was Project Homeless Connect, a bimonthly one-stop shop for homeless people to receive services that has been replicated in 226 cities. Newsom said Tuesday it will be made permanent and that a smaller, daily version will begin in January at 187 Golden Gate Ave.

A more controversial program of Newsom's has been Homeward Bound, which has paid for bus tickets home for 5,158 people so long as there's someone willing to receive them on the other end. Homeless advocates have criticized the program for merely moving the problem around.

Despite all the work, 6,514 homeless people still live in the city's streets, jails, hospitals and shelters as of the last homeless count in January 2009. The figure hasn't changed much since 2005.

The mayor's administration is working with other stakeholders in the justice system to improve the way infractions - the lowest-level crimes - are handled for homeless people. Almost no punishment is given now for quality-of-life crimes.

A new platform

Newsom said his new challenge is to use his "moral authority" as lieutenant governor to keep advocating for housing and services for the homeless - even though he's been warned not to.

"People said I couldn't do anything as mayor, and I proved them wrong," he said. "I look forward to proving them wrong as lieutenant governor."