Tough Assault-Weapons Ban Awaits Governor's Signature

1999-07-13 04:00:00 PDT Sacramento -- California will have one of the nation's toughest assault weapons bans under a bill passed by the Legislature yesterday and expected to be signed into law next week.

The bill by Alameda Democrat Don Perata would outlaw so-called "copycat weapons," which are designed with slight modifications to skirt the state's 10-year-old ban on assault weapons. It would also forbid the manufacture or sale of large-capacity ammunition magazines.

"The time is now to ban assault weapons," said Assembly Speaker Antonio Villaraigosa, D-Los Angeles. "It is time to use the power of the Legislature to say with one loud voice that we should all move beyond Columbine."

SB23 passed the Assembly 46 to 23, and then was passed by the Senate 26 to 13.

Gov. Gray Davis is expected to sign the bill into law on Monday at 101 California Street, the downtown San Francisco highrise where on July 1, 1993, Gian Luigi Ferri shot eight people dead and injured six others before turning his gun on himself.

The governor's spokesman, Michael Bustamante, said it is likely Davis will also sign another bill already on his desk that would limit gun purchases to one a month.

"He will sign a sensible package of legislation that will keep the streets safe while at the same time respect the right of individuals to bear arms," Bustamante said.

Under Perata's bill, a gun would need only one of several generic characteristics to be illegal in California. Those characteristics include a vertical handgrip, folding or telescoping stock, and a grenade or flame launcher.

The state's 1989 assault weapons ban outlawed specific gun models, but manufacturers avoided the ban by making weapons with minor design changes. Perata's bill would close that loophole by banning specific design features, rather than individual models.

For example, the bill would outlaw the TEC-DC9, one of the weapons used in the Littleton, Colo., massacre. That weapon is a slightly modified version of the TEC-9, which was banned under California's assault weapons law. But opponents argue that guns will still be able to be modified to avoid falling under the descriptions listed in the bill.

"Many guns that (will be) illegal can be modified quite simply to work in the exact same fashion," said Assemblyman Thomas Oller, R-San Andreas. "The bill targets appearance as much as performance. It has nothing to do with its use."

Assemblyman Jim Battin, R-La Quinta, said law-abiding owners would simply cut off illegal design features such as protruding stocks to keep their weapons legal.

"Do we think the people who are going to harm others care if they have legal weapons?" he said. "This bill is for show, not for public safety."

But Assemblyman Alan Lowenthal, D-Long Beach, said the Legislature would continue its attempts to keep high-powered weapons off the streets.

"If they find ways to bypass this, we will continue to pass laws," he said. "California is no place for weapons designed to kill large numbers of people."

Owners of guns that would fall under the ban would have one year to register their weapons with the state Department of Justice. The bill would prohibit owners from selling or giving away their weapons, thereby eliminating the guns over time.

The bill would also ban for the first time the importation and sale of ammunition magazines that hold more than 10 rounds.

"Gradually, not overnight, we will see the number of these weapons on the streets decline, and innocent people, especially parents, will be able to sleep a little easier," Perata said.

A similar bill passed the Legislature last year but was vetoed by then-Gov. Pete Wilson.

Perata's bill is designed to build on the state's original assault-weapons law, passed in 1989 after a man used an assault rifle to kill five children at a Stockton elementary school.

The law banned specific models of military-style semiautomatic weapons. It also gave the attorney general the ability to go to court to add copycat weapons to the list. But that authority was struck down by the state Court of Appeal.

DEFINING ASSAULT WEAPONS

Senate Bill 23, passed yesterday by the Assembly, would close a loophole in the state's existing assault weapons ban by prohibiting the weapons based on a generic description, rather than specific models. The bill would define any gun as an "assault weapon" if it has a fixed magazine that has the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds.

ASSAULT RIFLES

The bill defines a semiautomatic rifle as an "assault weapon" if it has a detachable magazine and at least one of the following:

1. A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the weapon.

2. A thumbhole in the stock.

3. A vertical handgrip.

4. A folding or telescoping stock.

5. A grenade or flare launcher.

6. A flash suppressor.

7. A forward handgrip.

ASSAULT PISTOLS

The bill defines a semiautomatic pistol as an "assault weapon" if it has a detachable magazine and at least one of the following:

1. A threaded barrel capable of accepting a flash suppressor, forward handgrip or silencer.

2. A second handgrip.

3. A shroud that allows the shooter to safely hold the barrel area during rapid fire.

4. A detachable magazine not located on the pistol grip.

Source: Legislative Counsel of California.