Sharpton leads rally at Capitol in support of Florida felon voting rights
CLOSE Rev. Al Sharpton joins civil rights leaders in a call to restore the voting rights of felons who have served their time and are out in the community in the state of Florida

Buy Photo Civil rights leaders, including Rev. Al Sharpton, joined a few hundred marchers in Tallahassee Thursday to support the restoration of voting rights for felons in the state of Florida. The demonstration was held in support of Amendment 4, representing a restoration of civil and voting rights to the 1.6 million felons who are currently denied those rights in the state. (Photo: Joe Rondone/Democrat)Buy Photo

Paula Hill has been in prison seven times.

“The last time I went, I made a decision that I want to change my life,” the 53-year-old Tallahassee woman said. “I was going nowhere. I was doing the same thing, and I was getting the same effect.”

For the past year, she’s been enrolled at Ready4Work, a local re-entry program at Bethel Baptist that helps felons rebuild their lives and reintegrate into society.

"I feel a lot better about society. I feel a lot better about myself," said Hill. "I’ve made a lot of changes. I get anger management, I get stress management, psychological help I need to help me do the right thing."

Hill joined hundreds of others Thursday in a march to the Capitol from Bethel Baptist Church to press other citizens to vote in November on an amendment that would restore felons' voting rights after completing their prison sentences.

As they marched, the emphatic crowd of about a couple hundred people chanted the familiar "No justice, no peace."

More: Faith leaders call on Scott, Cabinet to fix clemency system

The event came less than a day after a federal appeals court in Atlanta stayed U.S. District Judge Mark Walker's order demanding changes in the way Gov. Rick Scott and the Cabinet restore voting rights for felons.

Buy Photo Stanley Sims, center, joined a few hundred marchers in Tallahassee Thursday to support the restoration of voting rights for felons in the state of Florida. “I’m paying taxes, but I can’t vote. I call that taxation without representation. I call that discrimination,” said Sims who labeled himself a ‘proud ex-felon’. (Photo: Joe Rondone/Democrat)

Unlike many states, Florida doesn't automatically allow felons to vote upon their release from prison. The Brennan Center for Justice reports at least 1.4 million felons could register to vote if Amendment 4 passes this fall.

After the march, activist and TV host the Rev. Al Sharpton joined the Rev. R.B. Holmes, Jr., pastor of Tallahassee's historic Bethel Missionary Baptist Church, Mayor and gubernatorial candidate Andrew Gillum, and civil rights attorney Benjamin Crump at the Capitol urging changes in the system for felons to regain their voting rights after serving prison time.

“We ought to ban weapons of war and not ban former felons from voting,” said Holmes, president of the local chapter of the National Action Network, an organization headed by New York-based Sharpton.

“I came to support this because this is a question of America — living up to what America purports to stand for,” said Sharpton. “If you don’t want to restore their right to vote, why do you restore that they have to pay taxes?" he continued.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-999-2271. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

“It is taxation without representation and that’s what we fought in the American Revolution for. We’re just asking you (lawmakers) to live up to the creed you gave the world," Sharpton said to cheers and applause from the crowd.

At the rally, speakers called for stricter gun laws and racial equality, especially in the criminal justice system.

Buy Photo Brenda McNeal, center, of Winter Haven joined a few hundred marchers in Tallahassee Thursday to support the restoration of voting rights for felons in the state of Florida. The demonstration was held in support of Amendment 4, representing a restoration of civil and voting rights to the 1.6 million felons who are currently denied those rights in the state. (Photo: Joe Rondone/Democrat)

“When we stand up for the Trayvon Martins of the world, and more importantly — the unknown Trayvon Martins of the world... What we’re really doing is helping America live up to its creed," said Attorney Crump.

More: Rev. R.B. Holmes: 'We don’t want this great state to be tagged as a gun-shine state'

Among the crowd were family members with loved ones who'd been convicted, and are felons themselves.

In the late 1990s, Mark McMillan was convicted of several crimes — grand theft, possession of cocaine, aggravated battery.

Since then, he turned his life around, ministering in prisons. He was a pastor in New York and Texas, but things changed when he moved back to Florida.

“When I left, I had my rights. When I came back, they were gone,” he said.

With his wife, he started a Tallahassee-based organization called Divine Revelations Ministries, preaching to prisoners. The duo has been writing grants to seek funding for a transitional re-entry program for women convicts.

“I paid my price,” McMillan said. “I paid my price, in and out of jail in the ‘90s. But now I do prison ministry.”

He advocates for others like him who’ve served time in prison and are seeking to have their rights restored. On Thursday, he had the nationally-known Sharpton supporting his cause.

“We are going to take the shackles off the ex-felons,” Sharpton said.

Reach Nada Hassanein at nhassanein@tallahassee.com or on Twitter @nhassanein_.

Read or Share this story: https://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/2018/04/26/sharpton-leads-rally-capitol-support-florida-felon-voting-rights/554916002/