Hermine's aftermath prompts emergency meetings
CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share City of Tallahassee deputy city manager Reese Goad answers questions about Hermine recovery

Buy Photo A parked car sits sandwiched in between two fallen trees on Alachua Ave in the Old Town district of Tallahassee. Hurricane Hermine sparred no expense in the amount of damage caused to local residents' property. (Photo: Alvin McBean/Democrat)Buy Photo

The extent of the damage caused by Hurricane Hermine is still being assessed as nearly a quarter of Leon County’s power grid, most of it within Tallahassee city limits, remains offline.

On Tuesday, city and county officials will hear how much money has been spent and what areas are still experiencing hardships -- but, most importantly, they will decide what to do moving forward.

City commissioners will meet at City Hall at 8 a.m., while county commissioners will gather at the Leon County Emergency Operations Center at 10 a.m.

Some commissioners were without power for days and were unable to communicate clearly about the impacts of Hermine.

Tuesday is a chance to hear what resources were needed, get a damage assessment and to determine how recovery would be financed, said Leon County Commission Chairman Bill Proctor.

“We need to know who is hardest hit, who sustained the most damage and it is wise to allocate our resources to the right places,” Proctor said. “The sooner that we get into action, the sooner we can restore wellness to bring our community back.”

Crews from eight different municipalities are chipping in, cutting away the trees that have slowed power restoration and slowly bringing some semblance of normalcy back to the city.

County Commissioner Kristen Dozier said the most of the response has worked well, much better than other recent storms. The magnitude of power outages is unprecedented, though.

She was encouraged by the use of social media, both by elected officials and citizens, to disseminate information on power outages and restoration, road closures and just to check in on people’s safety. During the last storm to hit Florida 11 years ago, the internet was not as widely used. People didn’t have it at their fingertips.

“We’ve never experienced a storm like this when we had these types of resources in social media but also people are more prone to go look for information online,” Dozier said. “No matter where we are in the community, that’s a critical piece.”

The city's meeting comes amid a testy debate between Gov. Rick Scott and Mayor Andrew Gillum. Scott spent the weekend criticizing the slow pace of power restoration, blaming Gillum for not accepting more help from private power companies. Gillum refuted the claim and spent the weekend making public appearances where ice, water and other supplies were being handed out.

City Commissioner Gil Ziffer was in Tallahassee during Hurricane Kate in 1985. The response more than 30 years later has been much quicker and smoother, he said.

He has been trying to stay out of the way of those restoring power by not sending directives to already overworked crews.

Some residents are going into their fifth day without power.

“I’ve been impressed for the most part with the patience of most people,” Ziffer said. “Some are just frustrated and I get it. I understand.”

Communication between government officials could have been more seamless during the storm and in its aftermath, Ziffer said.

“It’s been fairly good, but recognizing the immediacy and opportunities that exist, we could do a better job,” he said.

City Commissioner Curtis Richardson said he is getting calls, texts and emails about widespread power outages.

His power is out. He is frustrated. But he is also thankful for the hard work of crews as they deal with the massive undertaking.

“I don’t know if we could have predicted the damage,” Richardson said. “But when 80 percent of your utility infrastructure is damaged, I don’t know that anyone could have predicted that.”

Richardson said there are lessons to be learned from Hermine. There is always room for improvement, but the main focus going into Tuesday was getting Tallahassee up and running again regardless of where people are experiencing trouble.

“The damage is extensive, and as I’ve explained to people, it’s not a northside, southside issue at all,” Richardson said. “There is power out all over the city and people, are suffering and that’s what we’ve got to focus on.”

Contact Karl Etters at ketters@tallahassee.com or @KarlEtters on Twitter.

CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 4-5) Deputy city manager Reese Goad answers questions about Hermine recovery | 28:50 City of Tallahassee deputy city manager Reese Goad answers questions about Hermine recovery 1 of 7 CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 4-5) Gillum: 'Tonight we will be at 90-plus percent' | 1:27 Gillum: 'Tonight we will be at 90-plus percent' 2 of 7 CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 4-5) Scott: 'It's not an issue of working hard, it's an issue of we've got to get results' | 2:29 Scott: 'It's not an issue of working hard, it's an issue of we've got to get results' 3 of 7 CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 4-5) Gov. Scott 's Monday update on Tallahassee power | 0:06 Gov. Scott update on Tallahassee power 4 of 7 CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 4-5) Blessed No One Injured | 2:13 Being blessed that no one was killed or injured when a tree fell on house Gregg Pachkowski/Pensacola News Journal 5 of 7 CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 4-5) Paying It Forward | 0:54 Good samaritan helps clear a fallen tree. Gregg Pachkowski/Pensacola News Journal 6 of 7 CLOSE Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HURRICANE HERMINE AFTERMATH (SEPT. 4-5) Church Al Fresco | 1:41 Church held Al Fresco due to Hurricane Hermine Gregg Pachkowski/Pensacola News Journal 7 of 7 Last VideoNext Video Deputy city manager Reese Goad answers questions about Hermine recovery

Gillum: 'Tonight we will be at 90-plus percent'

Scott: 'It's not an issue of working hard, it's an issue of we've got to get results'

Gov. Scott 's Monday update on Tallahassee power

Blessed No One Injured

Paying It Forward

Church Al Fresco

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/2cuD9v5