No action on Gillum's police ride-along
CLOSE Mayor Andrew Gillum before TPD ride along

Buy Photo Mayor Andrew Gillum joins the Tallahassee Police Department for a ride-along on Friday. (Photo: Joe Rondone/Democrat)Buy Photo

A week after pushing the Tallahassee police chief toward more accountability in the fight against crime, Mayor Andrew Gillum Friday looked to get a taste of what officers experience when they patrol city neighborhoods.

At high noon, Gillum and aide Jamie Van Pelt got into a TPD patrol SUV and headed out into the city. Since the release of annual data in June showing that for the third consecutive year Leon County’s crime rate topped the state, Gillum has taken a more visible tact trying to find solutions.

“I think we take for granted the difficulty of the job that law enforcement officers have to do every day,” Gillum said before departing on the ride-along. “We look at numbers and charts and stats, but these folks are really dealing with the unpredictability of every situation they encounter.”

Van Pelt said there were no active calls during the more than two-hour ride-along.

The crime rate in 2016 was driven by incidents — more than 80 percent— within the city limits. Property crime and violent crime were both down last year, but violent crime in the first six months of this year is up compared to the same period last year.

Related: Leon County's case clearance rate lowest in state

Related: Groups look to bolster crime-fighting efforts

In 2016, violent crime fell by nearly 15 percent compared to the year before.

A spate of fatal shootings and stabbings have followed the recent release of the dismal data.

For Gillum, news of continued violence is a cause for concern that prompts a look at better equipping TPD with the resources it needs.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-999-2271. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The ride-along through the northwest sector of the city, which includes Frenchtown, was a chance to see what officers face but also to get a sense of citizens' concerns.

“I think we have a relatively safe community by most measures, which is how people feel,” Gillum said. “If folks feel constrained that they can’t move or they can’t go a certain place, then that’s a real issue.”

At last week’s City Commission meeting, Gillum said he would like to see more collaboration between TPD, university police departments and the Leon County Sheriff’s Office. Some of that collaboration is already in place.

“We’re all in this together right. Each call these folks respond to regardless of what hour they have to do it, they’ve got to be alert and aware when they go into them. You come into these places and, by and large, the community is happy to see our officers when they show up. If we’ve got crime anywhere then it’s our job to take it to heal.”

Contact Karl Etters at ketters@tallahassee.com or KarlEtters on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/2017/07/07/no-action-gillums-police-ride-along/459641001/