Crime rate down, but Leon County still tops state
Buy Photo Leon County’s crime rate dipped 15 percent last year, according to annual date released by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement on Tuesday. (Photo: Karl Etters/Democrat)Buy Photo

Leon County’s crime rate decreased by 15 percent last year but remains the highest in the state, according to annual data released by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement on Tuesday.

The number of reported rapes, robberies, aggravated assaults, burglaries and larcenies all dropped in 2017 compared to 2016, according to the FBI's Uniform Crime Report. Only murders, of which there were 22, increased last year. In 2016 there were 12 murders reported in Leon County.

Leon County ranked first in property crime, which is a driver of the crime rate, and fifth in violent crime among Florida's 67 counties.

The data shows that for the fourth year in a row the capital city's crime rate has led the state. Overall, Florida's crime rate saw a 6 percent decrease in 2017.

Database: Leon County Crime Report

While the crime rate – the number of offenses per 100,000 people – remains stubbornly high, both the Leon County Sheriff’s Office and the Tallahassee Police Department saw fewer reported incidents.

TPD, which handles the bulk of the crime in the county, reported a 14 percent decrease in crime, a trend lauded by Mayor Andrew Gillum.

“Crime in Tallahassee is at its lowest level since 2013, and our city continues to get safer every day," Gillum said in a statement. "We will maintain a focus on investing in our human services, ensuring good jobs are available in our community, and providing our police officers with the resources they need to fight crime and continue this positive momentum.”

LCSO reported a more than 18 percent decrease in crime.

The FBI, which compiles the data annually, as well as other groups, warn against using it to make comparisons between different cities because specific conditions and community factors vary.

Sheriff Walt McNeil didn’t mince words on what last year’s data means.

“Crime is going down, but we are still the highest in the state of Florida,” McNeil said. “It’s not a time to celebrate. I’m happy crime is down, but we’ve got a lot of work to do.”

McNeil said the recent reduction in crime indicates initiatives such as a collaborative approach, specialized units and a focus on predictive policing are starting to make their mark.

McNeil was also pleased by his agency’s clearance rate — the number of cases closed per 100 reported offenses. LCSO cleared nearly 26 percent of its cases last year, higher than the state's 23 percent closing rate and the national average, he said. TPD cleared nearly 19 percent of its cases.

McNeil is looking to add more deputies to his force, to work more closely with the federal Drug Enforcement Agency and U.S. Marshal’s Office and clear out a backlog of warrants.

In addition, other pieces of the crime-fighting puzzle need to come together, such as paying more attention to the effects of poverty, improving education and vocational training and forging more partnerships.

“Our next hurdle is leveraging technology. And we’re still grappling to get and share data with the other law enforcement agencies,” McNeil said. “The Leon County Sheriff’s Office, our goal is not to be mediocre, it’s to be the best at what we do for the citizens of Leon County.”

TPD Chief Michael DeLeo said Tallahassee will always be the focus of crime-fighting efforts. A $34,000 audit completed last year showed that TPD was over-reporting crime numbers.

“No two communities are the same. Our primary concern should always be Tallahassee, and when you look at our community’s data now compared to previous years, the 2017 numbers reflect a positive trend,” DeLeo said in an emailed statement.

“Crime in Leon County is down approximately 39 percent compared to 20 years ago, 5 percent compared to 10 years ago, and more recently, 15 percent compared to 2016. So far in 2018, crime continues to decline. There is more work to be done, and TPD will continue to meet every challenge head on with a continued commitment to supporting innovative, community-focused programs helping to drive down crime.”

Leon's surrounding counties reported increases in crime. Franklin County reported a 9 percent increase, Gadsden reported a 64 percent increase, despite the Quincy Police Department not reporting data. Jefferson County reported a 19.5 percent increase. Wakulla County reported a 6 percent increase. Liberty’s data was incomplete.

More: 'Work to be done' Leon has highest crime rate in Florida again

More: High crime rate could factor into 2018 races

More: Chief DeLeo: 'We’re not where we want to be'

CLOSE For the third year in a row, Leon County has the highest crime rate in the state. Ashley White/Democrat

Read or Share this story: https://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/2018/05/22/crime-rate-down-but-leon-still-tops-state/631783002/