Sheriff Walt McNeil on governor's race: Don't use politics to attack law enforcement
Buy Photo Sheriff Walt McNeil (Photo: Hali Tauxe/Democrat)Buy Photo

A day after some of the sharpest attacks yet on Democratic gubernatorial candidate Andrew Gillum's record on crime, Sheriff Walt McNeil is weighing in.

Gillum’s campaign put out a statement from McNeil, who is the constitutionally elected lawman over Leon County, denouncing “the political fear mongering” put out by GOP candidate Ron DeSantis over Tallahassee's crime rate as “false, dangerous and disrespectful.”

DeSantis zeroed in on mailers sent out by Gillum’s former chief of staff and Tallahassee mayoral candidate Dustin Daniels noting the county’s record homicide rate last year and persistent issues with trying to reduce crime. The mailers drew the attention of Donald Trump Jr., who took to Twitter to criticize Gillum.

Related story: Andrew Gillum set to attend fundraiser tonight for Dustin Daniels' PAC in mayor bid

McNeil said, while about 80 percent of the crime in the county happens in the city limits, the strides and long hours put in by LCSO deputies and Tallahassee Police officers was not to be overshadowed for political gain.

“Two years ago, I said we had a crime problem. But we don’t have that same crime problem today,” McNeil said in an interview. “It’s offensive for someone for political reasons to start attacking law enforcement and the job we’re doing.”

McNeil pointed to a reduction in the overall crime rate of 15 percent and a drop in all violent crime of 10 percent from 2016 to 2017, resulting in a five-year low. In the first six months of 2018, violent crime has declined 24 percent while overall crime had dropped about 10 percent.

Leon County’s crime rate has topped the state for the past four years, according to annual data compiled by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement.

The FBI, which utilizes the data, as well as other groups, warns against using crime data to make comparisons because specific conditions and community factors vary.

The violent crime index, which tracks murders, rapes, robberies and aggravated assaults, shows that Leon County had 17 murders the first year Gillum was mayor in 2014, 22 murders in 2015, 12 in 2016 and 22 again in 2017. During the same period, however, the overall violent crime index dropped 9 percent — from 724.5 incidents per 100,000 residents to 658.9 per 100,000.

Crime in Tallahassee

Deputies are working longer hours. The LCSO Aviation Unit has shifted its hours to align with high-crime periods during the day. Both LCSO and TPD Tuesday made a significant arrest of three teens connected to a string of auto burglaries and car thefts linked to gunfire over the weekend in a north side neighborhood.

Arrests have been made in all seven of the fatal shootings in Tallahassee this year.

McNeil, who is not shy about addressing the problem that crime poses to the county, said he was taken aback by the comments given the work put in by more than a half-dozen law enforcement agencies in town.

McNeil said he had not spoken directly to Gillum about his statement. He instead contacted his former campaign manager Sean Pittman, who is also a senior advisor for Gillum, and said he wanted a statement to go out.

McNeil noted that, as Tallahassee's mayor, Gillum has little to do with on-the-ground law enforcement efforts.

"That's on me," he said. “It’s bad enough that with the effort we made we still have a high crime rate, but we have the crime down. If we were still where we were two years ago, I wouldn’t say a word. They’re just working too hard to have that shot across the bow without it being responded to.”

Contact Karl Etters at ketters@tallahassee.com or @KarlEtters on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: https://www.tallahassee.com/story/news/2018/09/27/mcneil-responds-govs-race-dont-use-politics-attack-law-enforcement/1435952002/