Rural hospital in Brownsville set to close
CLOSE

Craig A. Becker (Photo: Handout email)

A rural hospital is Brownsville is closing.

Community Health Systems is ending both inpatient and emergency services at Haywood Park Community Hospital effective July 31. The 62-bed hospital will become an urgent care clinic.

Tennessee’s failure to expand its Medicaid program was a contributing factor for the decision, said W. Larry Cash, the chief financial officer of Franklin-based Community Health Systems.

“It is a situation where we will continue certain services there but inpatient services can be done at our hospital there in Jackson better,” Cash said.

The clinic will offer treatment for minor illnesses and non-life-threatening injuries.

In its official statement, Community Health Systems said, “Recent years have seen many changes and challenges for hospitals across the U.S., as fewer patients require inpatient acute care and reimbursement is less for the care provided.”

The company said it would work to retain as many employees as possible and those that lost their jobs would be provided with outplacement services and severance packages.

“Our hospital has a proud tradition of providing quality, personalized care and we have strong patient satisfaction,” said Joel Southern, chief executive officer of Haywood Park Community Hospital. “In spite of this, these are challenging times for all hospitals and we must evolve and adjust to new realities.”

The Tennessee Hospital Association warned that rural hospitals would close if Tennessee did not expand its Medicaid program.

“The vast majority of our hospitals that are financially distressed right now are in our rural areas,” Craig Becker, president of the Tennessee Hospital Association, told The Tennessean in December.

Tennessee began losing out on more than $6 million a day on Jan. 1 when the federal government began picking up all the cost for covering people who newly qualify for Medicaid under expanded guidelines — an offer that goes away at the end of 2016. It then phases down the federal match to a permanent 90 percent in 2020.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-342-8237. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Reach Tom Wilemon at 615-726-5961 or on Twitter @TomWilemon.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1kraZMS