32 Republicans Who Caused the Government Shutdown
Representative: Louie Gohmert

Home District: Tyler, Texas

Quoted: "There are just so many broken promises that we need to slow this train wreck, this nightmare. It's time to put the skids on this thing and slow it down before more people get hurt."

Representative: Tom Graves

Home District: Ranger, Georgia

Quoted: "House GOP is united around a very reasonable policy: POTUS should give families the same Obamacare delay he gave to businesses."



Representative: Vicky Hartzler

Home District: Harrisonville, Missouri

Quoted: "The American people have spoken already on this: They do not want Obamacare .... It is hurting people."

Representative: Tim Huelskamp

Home District: Fowler, Kansas

Quoted: "Most Americans realize the government shutdown has no impact on their daily life. They got their mail today; they're going to get their Social Security check."

Representative: Jim Jordan

Home District: Urbana, Ohio

Quoted: "We have to get something on Obamacare, because that — if you want to get this country on a fiscal path to balance, you cannot let an entitlement of this size that will truly bankrupt the country and, more importantly, one that's not going to help Americans with their health care, you can't let this happen. "

Representative: Steve King

Home District: Kiron, Iowa

Quoted: "The American people have rejected Obamacare. The president is willing to put all of that on the line to save his namesake legislation, which I think would go down in history as the largest political tantrum ever."

Representative: Raul Labrador

Home District: Eagle, Idaho

Quoted: To Chris Matthews of MSNBC: "You know, your boss, Tip O'Neill, shut down the government 12 different times. And you didn't call him a terrorist."



Representative: Tom Massie

Home District: Garrison, Kentucky

Quoted: "It’s just not that big of a deal."

Representative: Tom McClintock

Home District: Elk Grove, California

Quoted: In response to Harry Reid calling Tea Partiers "anarchists": "When the other guy starts calling you names, you know that you're winning the debate, and you know that he knows you're winning the debate."

Representative: Mark Meadows

Home District: Cashier, North Carolina

Quoted: “James Madison wrote in Federalist No. 58 that ‘the power over the purse may, in fact, be regarded as the most complete and effectual weapon . . . for obtaining redress of every grievance.’"

Representative: Randy Neugebauer

Home District: Lubbock, Texas

Quoted: "We get tons of mail and E-mails and phone calls. And overwhelmingly, those phone calls say, 'Congressman, do everything you can to get rid of this very onerous piece of legislation. We don’t want the government running our health care.' And so, from my perspective, we’re doing the people’s work here.”



Representative: Matt Salmon

Home District: Mesa, Arizona

Quoted: “I was here during the government shutdown in 1995. It was a divided government. we had a Democrat president of the United States. We had a Republican Congress. And I believe that that government shutdown actually gave us the impetus, as we went forward, to push toward some real serious compromise.”