Obituary: Harry Fleischman
Harry Fleischman, who has died of cancer aged 90, was a link to the once-powerful American Socialist party. The party's national secretary from 1942 to 1950, he was also the presidential campaign manager of its charismatic leader Norman Thomas in 1944 and 1948.

In 1964 his Norman Thomas: A Biography, the definitive portrait of that major American figure, was published. From 1979 he led the Workers Defense League (WDL), fighting against obdurate employers.

Fleischman was born to Jewish immigrant, working-class parents in the Bronx, in New York. He lost his first job for attempting to organise a union. Like so many others, he moved leftward at the onset of the depression, but was attracted not to the furious revolutionary impulses of the Communist party of the United States (Cpusa), preferring moderate socialist electoral strategies.

Fleischman saw in Thomas, a former Presbyterian minister, the proper successor to the late Eugene V Debs, who had dominated American socialism in the first decades of the 20th century. Thomas's vote of nearly a million in the 1932 presidential election - won by Franklin D Roosevelt - was heartening, if less than expected, but proved to be the apex of the socialist revival. The populist tilt of the New Deal in 1935 and Roosevelt's popularity within the growing industrial union movement eclipsed Thomas's following and boosted a much-moderated Cpusa into the leading force on the left.

Many socialists, including some of the most prominent, abandoned Thomas, but Fleischman did not. During the ensuing decade, he divided his time between labour and socialist organising in New York, Illinois and Michigan. Travelling for the Young People's Socialist League and national secretary of the Young Falcons - a socialistic alternative to the Boy Scouts - he graduated to being a major figure in the socialists' diminished ranks.

During the second world war, the WDL became more important in Fleischman's life. Founded by Thomas in 1936, it had heroically defended southern share-croppers, battled for the right to organise unions, and sometimes simply fought for Americans' right to speak in hostile terrain. In the 1940s, the WDL successfully fought for changes in treatment of military personnel, including racial desegregation; defended Japanese-Americans facing internment; and supported individual war resisters. With Thomas in the lead, socialists aspired, in the face of their own decline, to uphold the conscience of the nation.

The cold war all but eliminated the remaining few electoral strong points of socialists in Connecticut, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Thomas abandoned his presidential candidacy after 1948. Fleischman kept travelling, working among the party faithful and against the rightward-shift in the labour and political milieu, while turning out newspaper columns urging civil liberties and world peace.

As labour editor of Voice of America and director of the American Jewish Committee's National Labour Service from 1953 to 1979, Fleischman found himself during the 1950s trapped between competing forces. Labour leaders around him were embracing the politics of the cold war while adamantly resisting efforts to compel racial integration of union membership or high office.

In 1965, Thomas and Fleischman furiously denied charges that they had knowingly accepted funds from the CIA. And yet the problems raised were vexing, because most of the pair's allies ardently supported the Vietnam war and its strident labour hawk, George Meany, the president of the AFL-CIO (the equivalent of the TUC).

Fleischman launched a WDL pilot effort to integrate New York's building trades and break the racially restrictive patterns widespread in American unions. But, taken over by the US Labour Department, endorsed by the AFL-CIO, the apprenticeship training programmes became merely symbolic, a substitute for change. A disappointed Fleischman watched as the American labour movement, unable or unwilling to encompass the emerging workforce of women and minorities, went into a steady, perhaps terminal, decline.

However, Fleischman did reach out to a new generation via the Democratic Socialists of America (DSA), who focused their activity within the Democratic party.

Their influence reached a peak in the later 1970s in such scattered cities as Madison in Wisconsin and Santa Cruz in California, where antinuclear and environmental coalitions successfully contested municipal elections. For decades, Fleischman penned On The Left in the DSA's magazine, Democratic Left.

Like Thomas, his leader and guide, Fleischman could be said to have retained the old vision of peace and, with it, the hope for true social transformation.

His first wife, Natalie Wiencek, whom he married in 1937, died in 1989. He is survived by his second wife, Ethel Kahn, and three children from his first marriage.

· Harry Fleischman, activist, born October 3 1914; died November 7 2004