Iran election protests: the dead, jailed and missing
A month ago we ask you to help us record those killed or imprisoned since the 12 June election. We still need your help

A month ago today, the Guardian began an attempt to record the names and faces of those killed or imprisoned in Iran since the 12 June election – and we asked you to help, locating the blogs, Facebook profiles and news stories connected with those in the protests against what was claimed as Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's victory.

Iran's official figures for the six weeks since the election include 2,500 arrests in Tehran alone, with as many as 150 still in jail and 30 dead. The true figures are believed to be much higher – the death toll could be in the hundreds.

Our figures come from human rights groups and campaigners inside and outside Iran, news reports and our users. They are: 80 dead, around 750 still detained, just under 100 released and 10 missing or not heard of since the mid-June protests.

Iran yesterday announced the release of 140 people from Evin prison, the Tehran jail where many of the protesters and opposition figures were held. We do not know at present who these people were; if you do please use this form to tell us.

The detained include students, members of the main opposition parties, former members of ex-president Mohammad Khatami's reformist administration, campaigners for Ahmadinejad's main opponent, Mir Hossein Mousavi, journalists and bloggers. Over the last few weeks, human rights lawyers have been detained too – Mohammad Ali Dadkhah, a founder member of Nobel laureate Shirin Ebadi's Human Rights Defenders Centre, was arrested with several colleagues while Shadi Sadr, a lawyer and women's rights activist, was seized on the street and bundled in to a car just under two weeks ago.

Campaigners are also pressing for the release of Kian Tajbakhsh, an American-Iranian scholar said to be under pressure to confess involvement in an alleged western plot to orchestrate the protests.

There is concern about the conditions in which the detainees are being held. On Monday, we reported the deaths of Mohsen Rouholamini, 25, and Amir Javadifar, 24, from meningitis after their injuries went untreated. Ramin Ghahremani, 30, who died in hospital days after his release, told his mother he had been hung upside down from the ceiling. Isa Saharkhiz, a prominent reformist journalist and commentator, reportedly suffered broken ribs after being tortured under interrogation. Saeed Hajarian, disabled since an assassination attempt in 2000 and in need of daily medical care, was reported by his wife to be undergoing interrogations in 40-degree heat and to be "completely weak and was unable to speak easily". He may be one of those set to be released.

The father of one of the detained, Mohammadreza Jalaeipour, 27, an Oxford PhD student and Mousavi's social media strategist (in this interview with the Wall Street Journal, he says he developed many ideas while obsessively following the Obama campaign), compared the jails to Abu Ghraib. One, however, has been closed: Kahrizak, on the southern edge of Tehran, which Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said "lacked the standards" to hold prisoners. It is thought that many of those arrested on the 9 July protests were held there.

Then there are the dead – those who died in jail and those killed in protests, such as Neda Agha Soltan. Our list also includes Mohammed Asghari, who had responsibility for the security of the IT network in Iran's interior ministry and was killed in a suspicious car accident in Tehran. He reportedly leaked evidence that the elections were rigged.

Tomorrow is the 40th day since the shooting of Neda Agha Soltan, an important marker in the Shia Islam practised in Iran. Mousavi and other opposition leaders have asked permission to hold a public mourning ceremony.

You can see the full list of those believed killed or detained and download a spreadsheet here. If you have any information and can help us, contribute using this form.