Migration and health: human rights in the era of populism
1 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Migration Policy Debates. “Is migration good for the economy?”. 2 Abubakar I

Aldridge RW

Devakumar D

et al. The UCL–Lancet Commission on Migration and Health: the health of a world on the move. Historically, the overall contribution of migrants to the economy and wealth of hosting countries has exceeded their costs. Migration helps address labour market imbalances, and migrants contribute more in taxes and social contributions than they receive in benefits.However, increasing opposition to migration is expressed in political rhetoric and social media. Xenophobia and racism are galvanised by populist discourse that serves domestic political interests. A climate of intolerance facilitates the passing of discriminatory laws and the introduction of measures against migrants that contradict fundamental human rights. Additionally, public misinformation campaigns and the diffusion of fake news through social media make public opinion more receptive to extreme actions such as forced expulsions and building walls between peoples. The UCL–Lancet Commission on Migration and Healthmakes a strong case for action to respond to the health needs of migrants while maximising the benefit from migration. The Commission provides evidence that discredits those who promote intolerance and shows that mortality is, on average, lower among migrants than people in host countries.

3 Khan MS

Osei-Kofi A

Omar A

et al. Pathogens, prejudice, and politics: the role of the global health community in the European refugee crisis. 4 WHO Regional Office for Europe Migration and health: key issues. 5 UN United Nations, Treaty Series. Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. 6 US Department of Justice Attorney General Announces Zero-Tolerance Policy for Criminal Illegal Entry. Health security is often evoked by opponents of migration as a concern, despite the absence of systematic association between migrants and transmission of infectious diseases.Protecting the health of the host community could be better achieved through early detection and treatment of communicable diseases by providing universal access to health services without discrimination and without fear of sequestration or deportation. Although epidemic threats represent a serious challenge to all countries, they are linked to globalisation and the rapid and frequent cross-border movements. Therefore, national and foreign travellers involved in daily business transactions and tourism could present a higher risk than migrants.Criminalisation of irregular entry and stay of migrants under security pretexts is an infringement of international law.This approach fuels residence and working irregularity, trafficking, and exploitation, and hinders access to health, education, and social services. Measures such as deportation and sequestration lead to inhuman repercussions, including separation of young children from their parents.

7 WHO World Bank Group Tracking Universal Health Coverage: 2017 Global Monitoring Report. 8 Al-Janabi A

Al-Wahdani B

Ammar W

et al. Bellagio Declaration on high-quality health systems: from a quality moment to a quality movement. UN member states are committed to achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including the sustainable development goal target 3.8 on universal health coverage (UHC). By definition, UHC means that everyone, everywhere, should have equitable access to needed essential health services without facing financial hardship.“Leave no one behind” implies that people in greatest need should get more attention. Yet the most vulnerable, such as migrants, are less likely to receive good quality health care when it is accessible.

9 UNHCR Global appeal 2017 update. This Commission highlights the fact that although the debate and concerns about migration are taking place in high-income countries (HICs), most global migration occurs within low-income and middle-income countries (LMICs). The dilemma is that migrants are in general better accepted in their neighbouring countries that have insufficient resources to meet their needs. By contrast, HICs that are better equipped to serve migrants, vastly restrict their entry. The international assistance to LMICs, where there are large numbers of migrants, remains moderate and is far from meeting the appeals.Although the Commission provides evidence to promote action for better treatment of migrants, the human rights argument should remain the strongest one. Political leaders should not absolve themselves from their responsibility in creating or exacerbating many of the drivers of migration—whether these drivers are related to the irrational exploitation of the world's natural resources, climate change, armed conflicts, or oppressive political regimes. Responding to forced migration is a shared responsibility, and wealthy countries have a moral obligation to support LMICs that host migrants.

Copyright © 2018 Ivor Prickett/Panos

10 Aoun GM Address by the President of the Republic of Lebanon at the 73rd session of UN General Assembly, New York. 11 Davies AA

Borland RM

Blake C

West HE The dynamics of health and return migration. Displaced people are often affected by challenging domestic and regional politics. The debate in Lebanon for or against a rapid return of displaced Syrians is linked to the position of different political parties towards the Syrian regime and to their affiliations with regional powers. When it comes to the official position of the Lebanese Government, the main arguments behind encouraging rapid return are the fragile social fabric of the Lebanese society and constrained resources.Return migration covers diverse situations, ranging from migrant workers returning back to their countries to migrants who fled natural disasters or armed conflicts and wish to regain their normal life after recovery. Those latter migrants are vulnerable to ill health and need special attention, especially when the health system in their home country needs rehabilitation. Therefore, multisectoral policies at global and national levels are required to ensure continuity of care across and within borders.

12 UN Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. Intergovernmentally Negotiated And Agreed Outcome. 13 UNHCR Towards a global compact on refugees. 14 The Lancet–University of Oslo Commission on Global Governance for Health Global Governance for Health The political origins of health inequity: prospects for change. Human rights and international treaties on refugees and migrants, such as the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migrationand the Global Compact on Refugeesput legal obligations on states to protect and respect the rights of migrants. However, there are insufficient enforcement mechanisms to hold states accountable for these obligations. This problem was identified by the Lancet Commission on Global Governance for Health as a global governance dysfunction that requires global political solutions.Similarly, the UCL–Lancet Commission on Migration and Health calls on the UN, states, and non-state actors to establish a Global Migration and Health Observatory to enhance transparency and accountability at the global level. It is time to create global mechanisms to hold political leaders accountable for their commitments and obligations to international human rights laws.

I am Director General of the Lebanese Ministry of Public Health and declare no other competing interests.