California’s uncounted ballots outnumber total votes of 34 states
YouGov’s Will Jordan made an interesting observation over the weekend: California, the nation’s largest state and home to 12 per cent of its population, still has more ballots to count than were cast in 34 states and Washington, D.C. Unsurprisingly, California is already recording more votes cast than any other state, according to U.S. Election Atlas. But the 2.8 million ballots left to count is more than were cast in Wyoming, Alaska, D.C., Vermont, the Dakotas, Hawaii and Delaware combined. Not all will be valid ballots, but most should be, further extending Hillary Clinton’s 1.7 million-vote lead in the national popular vote.

California sits in the middle of the pack in terms of number of electers per voter. ( Ana Venegas / The Associated Press )

Because of how the Electoral College is structured, even small states get a minimum number of electors (just as they get a minimum number of senators and representatives). The lowest-population and lowest-vote-tally states — like Wyoming and Alaska — end up getting more electors-per-voter than does a place like California. This leads to the perception that the electoral college is hopelessly tilted toward those smaller states. Interestingly, though, that’s not really the case. California’s in about the middle of the pack in terms of the number of electors each voter is worth. If all 2.8 million of those ballots are determined to be valid, though, the state will sink into the lower third. Donald Trump won a lot of states where the voters are under-represented in the electoral college, just as he won a lot where the voters are overrepresented.

Article Continued Below

In fact, on average across states, places where Trump won had slightly fewer electors per voter than did Clinton states. The core dynamic of the election was that Clinton won her states big and Trump won his narrowly. That’s why the House is Republican, too: Democrats winning huge margins in many districts while Republicans win more narrow victories and the majority.

Read more about: