Flanagan wants to starve Start-Up NY program
Albany

The state Senate is proposing to once again to get rid of Gov. Andrew Cuomo's Start-Up NY program that provides tax-breaks for companies that create jobs in partnership with SUNY schools.

On Tuesday, Senate Majority Leader John Flanagan said he has a plan to kill the Start-Up NY program by starving it of new applicants.

Flanagan also wants to "redirect" $44.5 million in advertising funding Cuomo has been using in part to promote the state's start-up and high-tech sectors.

"We actually want to restrict the program by getting rid of it," Flanagan said of his plan to force the state to stop accepting applications to the Start-Up NY program. "I think we should be spending money on tourism because I think there is an exponential return in so doing. If we have to send out ads saying we're great, I think that creates a problem in and of itself."

In making his case against Start-Up NY, Flanagan cited a 2016 Start-Up NY annual report published by Empire State Development, the state's economic development arm, that states that a total of 722 "net" new jobs had been created through the program since it launched in 2014.

Flanagan says that's not good enough. Participants claimed $6 million in business and personal tax credits under the program.

"If you look to the last report, this is not a report that came out from the Senate. This is a report that came out from ESDC," Flanagan said at the press conference. "There were 156 companies who were enlisted in the program. They acknowledged that only 756 jobs had been created as a result. That alone — that alone — should make us take a hard look and say 'Do we even really need this program?'"

The number cited in the 2016 report is actually 722 "net" new jobs, which are jobs that have been in existence for at least six months and a day. The total jobs created cited in the report was 1,135, with 757 being created during 2016 alone. Start-Up NY began in late 2013, with the first companies accepted in 2014.

Flanagan's push to sideline Start-Up NY comes as Senate Republicans unveiled their economic development strategy for the upcoming budget negotiations. The Senate wants to lower business-related taxes in the state by $1.1 billion through what it calls the Our Jobs and Opportunity Agenda.

"We are the only people in Albany that are talking about reducing taxes," Flanagan said at the press conference.

The Senate wants the state to stop accepting new applications for Start-Up NY at the end of this year and "redirect" the $44.5 million that the governor included in his executive budget for advertising that promotes the state's business climate.

A press release outlining Flanagan's plan says the plan is to "shut down Start-Up and redirect advertising funding" to other state priorities.

"The governor's Start-Up program has failed to produce the job-creating results that were promised," the Senate press release states. "The Senate will propose to stop the state from accepting new applications for the program at the end of 2018. In addition, the Senate will redirect the $44.5 million in advertising money included in the 2018-2019 executive budget and support more effective economic development programs."

Although that money goes to promote cutting-edge companies growing and moving to New York, which are the goals of Start-Up NY, the state stopped running ads specifically promoting the Start-Up NY program in 2015.

"Start-Up doesn't have a $44 million ad budget. You know that," Cuomo spokesman Richard Azzopardi said when asked about the Senate's proposal and its impact on Start-Up NY promotion.

The $44.5 million that the governor has in his executive budget is money set aside to generally promote tourism and business investment in the state. The money has been used to fund ads that promote the state's business climate along with quality of life.

Flanagan said he'd rather not have that money in the budget at all, although the Senate plan calls for redirecting the money elsewhere. Flanagan said others in his conference have suggested directing it toward tourism or agriculture marketing, although he'd like to zero it out.

"If I had my druthers, I'd take that $44 million and cut taxes," Flanagan said.

Flanagan was asked if TV ads promoting the state's business climate had any value.

"By virtue of our actions, creating jobs, creating a more business-friendly environment, I think that alone, word of mouth — and I'm not trying to be simplistic saying this —but if people feel the state of New York has their doors open for businesses and are welcoming people, I think that alone creates its own advertising."

Flanagan believes the state can get there by lowering business taxes and has targeted energy taxes as a top priority.

His plan would reduce energy taxes by $280 million through the elimination of a 2 percent gross receipts tax on utility bills that brings in $190 million a year and the so-called 18-A assessment tax that brings in $90 million a year.

The Cuomo administration has cast Start-Up NY as a success story. Its 2016 annual report said that in 2016, the Start-Up NY program generated business investment of more than $31 million along with the 757 new jobs created.

Since the first companies were approved for participation in 2014, the program has attracted $44 million in investment and generated employee wages of $95.7 million, the report states, in addition to the 1,135 jobs created.

"Weighing the business tax benefits against the 1,135 jobs and more than $140 million in investment and wages paid by program participants, Start-Up NY is proving to be one of the

most cost-effective, innovative and valuable tools in New York's economic development tool box," the 2016 annual report states.