Kanye West: 'I would have voted for Trump — if I voted'
CLOSE So is Kanye 2020 still going to happen? @albertoreyes/Twitter

“I told y’all I didn’t vote, right?" West told the Bay Area crowd. ”But if I would have voted, I would have voted on Trump." (Photo: Chris Pizzello, AP)

Concertgoers at Kanye West's show Thursday night in San Jose, Calif., were met with a political screed by the rapper one week after the bitterly fought presidential election.

What floored many was hearing the rapper, who once told the nation "George Bush doesn't care about black people" during a 2005 telethon for Hurricane Katrina victims, announce that not only did he not vote, but if he had, he would have pulled the lever for Donald Trump.

It left many on Twitter as stupefied as West's co-host Mike Myers seemed during that Katrina fundraising effort.

Hearing kanye say he would have voted for trump bothers me more than trump actually becoming president...why kanye why😫 — Ali (@Big_Fish88) November 18, 2016

Jay Z: Kanye supports Donald Trump



Beyoncé: another reason why we won't let Blue Ivy play with North pic.twitter.com/01RUNAZiRA — Matthew Kick (@MatthewKick) November 18, 2016

"I would've voted for Trump" - Kanye West.

Kanye, if you thought Bush didn't care about black people, boy howdy, do I have news for you. — Kalandria Brown (@razzledazzlekal) November 18, 2016

As a committed fan of Kanye West for more than 10 years... I can truly say the Kanye I admired years ago is no longer this years Kanye. — scottiebeam (@ScottieBeam) November 18, 2016

West went on to tell the audience that he's "glad Trump inspired racists to reveal themselves" and that if we can all hold out for another four years, he's still thinking about running for president in 2020.

He praised music for its power to of unify the country after such a polarizing election, saying, "I'm not asking ya'll on your opinions on who's better, but there are people who voted for either side that come together for music."

The declaration validates President-elect Trump, who last year said he knew West was a supporter.

"I'll never say bad about him, because he loves Trump," he said, responding to West's speech at the MTV Video Music Awards hinting at a presidential run. "He goes around saying Trump is my all-time hero. He says it to everybody. So Kanye West, I love him."

Though Trump admitted he'd change his tune if West followed through with his political plans.

"Now, maybe in a few years I'll have to run against him, I don't know, so I'll take that back."

CLOSE Responding to a question about Kanye West’s VMA speech where he indicated he would run for presidency in 2020, Donald Trump said that Kanye West loves Trump. USA TODAY

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2g58jZz