CBO: Immigration bill would reduce federal deficit
Members of the Senate "Gang of Eight", a group of four Democrats and four Republicans, announce their sweeping immigration bill April 18, 2013. (Photo: Charles Dharapak AP) Story Highlights CBO estimates immigration bill would lead to $197 billion drop in federal deficit in first decade

The bill would lead to another $700 decrease in the federal deficit in the second decade

Estimate finds that first decade of bill will lead to drop in American wages and higher unemployment

WASHINGTON -- The American economy would suffer some initial struggles if a Senate bill legalizing the nation's million unauthorized immigrants becomes law, but the overall effect would be a reduction in the federal deficit, according to an analysis from the Congressional Budget Office.

But the CBO also found that the border security components in the bill would reduce illegal immigration only by 25%.

The CBO, which estimates the cost of legislation, stated the bill would decrease federal deficits by $197 billion within a decade of passing Congress and an additional $700 billion over the next decade.

Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., called the report a "huge momentum boost for immigration reform." Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., said the study "confirmed what most conservative economists have found."

The estimate comes as the bill is being debated on the floor of the Senate, where the costs of granting legal status to millions of people has emerged as a sticking point for many. Republicans like Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., have said it would lead to an economic disaster to U.S. workers and the economy at large if the bill is passed.

"The CBO report is explicit – under this legislation, if it were to pass, the wages of American workers will fall," Sessions said on the Senate floor Tuesday night. "That alone should cause us to defeat this bill."

Sessions and other Republicans have cited a report from the conservative Heritage Foundation that estimated the bill would lead to the government paying $9.4 trillion in benefits and services to the newly-legalized immigrants, but receiving only $3.1 trillion in taxes from them - resulting in a $6.3 trillion loss to the U.S. over 50 years.

The CBO report said that over the first decade under the bill, the government would pay out an estimated $262 billion, mostly in tax credits and health care payments through Medicaid and the new health care act. But those costs would be more than offset by $459 billion in income and payroll taxes paid by legalized immigrants. That surplus would only increase with time, leading to the $700 billion reduction in the federal deficit in the second decade under the law.

Yet the report's finding that illegal immigration will be reduced only 25% over estimates despite the bill's measures to secure the border could prove contentious.

The bill adds $6.5 billion to securing the southwest border, 3,500 new Customs and Border Protection officers and requires the Department of Homeland Security to build more fencing along the border.

The nation's business owners would have to use a federal program to check the immigration status of new employees. The bill targets the problem of visa overstays - the estimated 40% of unauthorized immigrants who entered the country legally but overstayed their visas - by beginning a program to collect the fingerprints of departing foreigners at some of the nation's airports.

The report said that combination would make it "harder both to enter the country and to find employment while unauthorized. However, other aspects of the bill would probably increase the number of unauthorized residents - in particular, people overstaying their visas issued under the new programs for temporary workers."

Members of the Gang of Eight have joined with Democrats to vote down three Republican amendments designed to strengthen different security provisions in the bill. Republicans fearful of future waves of illegal immigration will continue those attempts in the coming weeks, they say.

Other findings from the report:

Average wages for the entire labor pool would drop by 0.1% in the first decade, but would be up 0.5% by the end of the second decade.

Between 100,000 and 200,000 more people would apply for unemployment insurance each year throughout the first decade after the bill passes, costing the government $5.1 billion.

About 8 million of the 11 million unauthorized immigrants living the U.S. would qualify for temporary legal status, the precursor to applying for a green card or U.S. citizenship.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/11XBcKA