President Trump thanks Saudis for lower oil prices, a day after he defended kingdom over Khashoggi murder
CLOSE President Donald Trump defended his decision not to punish Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman or cut arms sales to Saudi Arabia for the killing of journalist Jamal Khashoggi. insisting it would be "foolish" to cut ties. (Nov. 20) AP

President Donald Trump (Photo: Carolyn Kaster, AP)

A day after indicating he would do nothing to Saudi Arabia after the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi, President Donald Trump on Wednesday thanked the Saudis for lowering oil prices through more production.

"Oil prices getting lower. Great! Like a big Tax Cut for America and the World," Trump tweeted. "Enjoy! $54, was just $82. Thank you to Saudi Arabia, but let’s go lower!"

The thank-you tweet – done from his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach, Fla., where he is spending Thanksgiving weekend – came after Trump – in seeming defiance of the U.S. intelligence community – said he saw no reason to hold the Saudis accountable for the death of Khashoggi, a columnist for the Washington Post.

“It could very well be that the crown prince had knowledge of this tragic event – maybe he did and maybe he didn’t!” Trump said in a written statement, adding that he would not change the U.S. business relationship with the key Middle East ally.

Oil prices getting lower. Great! Like a big Tax Cut for America and the World. Enjoy! $54, was just $82. Thank you to Saudi Arabia, but let’s go lower! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 21, 2018

In an unusual statement filled with exclamation points – "the world is a very dangerous place!" – Trump declared that "the United States intends to remain a steadfast partner of Saudi Arabia to ensure the interests of our country, Israel and all other partners in the region."

Lawmakers pointed out that intelligence agencies have determined that Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman had knowledge of plans to kill Khashoggi, and may have well have authorized the operation to get rid of the journalist.

"I never thought I’d see the day a White House would moonlight as a public relations firm for the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia," tweeted Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

Corker said he and Sen. Bob Menendez, D-New Jersey, the committee's top Democrat, sent a letter to Trump "requiring that he specifically determine whether Saudi Crown Prince Mohamed bin Salman is responsible for the murder" of Khashoggi.

Some members of Congress said they would work to impose sanctions on Saudi Arabia.

Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., a frequent ally of Trump, said Saudi Arabia may be a "strategic ally," but the Crown Prince's behavior has made him "beyond toxic" to the relationship.

“I firmly believe there will be strong bipartisan support for serious sanctions against Saudi Arabia, including appropriate members of the royal family, for this barbaric act which defied all civilized norms,” Graham said.

More: ‘Maybe he did and maybe he didn’t!’ Trump says US will stand by Saudis despite Khashoggi murder

More: 'I bet you'd be on my side if I had killed a journalist': Michelle Wolf claps back at Trump

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2018/11/21/donald-trump-saudi-arabia-jamal-khashoggi/2076902002/