40.9 Section 212(a)(9) of the Act - Aliens Unlawfully Present after Previous Immigration Violations
\ afm \ Adjudicator's Field Manual - Redacted Public Version \ Chapter 40 Grounds of Inadmissibility under Section 212(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act \ 40.9 Section 212(a)(9) of the Act - Aliens Unlawfully Present after Previous Immigration Violations

|



[Chapter 40.9 added May 6, 2009] 40.9 Section 212(a)(9) of the Act - Aliens Unlawfully Present after Previous Immigration Violations





Section 212(a)(9) of the Act renders certain aliens inadmissible based on prior violations of U.S. immigration law. Section 212(a)(9) of the Act has three major subsections.





Under section 212(a)(9)(A) of the Act, an alien, who was deported, excluded or removed under any provision of law, is inadmissible if the alien seeks admission to the United States during the period specified in section 212(a)(9)(A) of the Act, unless the alien obtains consent to reapply for admission during this period.





Under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act, an alien is inadmissible if the alien has accrued a specified period of unlawful presence, leaves the United States after accruing the unlawful presence, and then seeks admission during the period specified in (either 3 years or 10 years after the departure, depending on the section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) duration of the accrued unlawful presence).





Under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i) of the Act, an alien is inadmissible if the alien enters or attempts to enter the United States without admission after having been removed or after having accrued more than one year (in the aggregate) of unlawful presence.





AFM Chapter 40.9.2 provides an overview of USCIS’ policy concerning the accrual of unlawful presence and the resulting inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B) or section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act.





40.9.1 Inadmissibility Based on Prior Removal (Section 212(a)(9)(A) of the Act) or Based on Unlawful Return after Prior Removal (Section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(II) of the Act) 40.9.1 Inadmissibility Based on Prior Removal (Section 212(a)(9)(A) of the Act) or Based on Unlawful Return after Prior Removal (Section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(II) of the Act)







[Reserved]





40.9.2 Inadmissibility Based on Prior Unlawful Presence (Sections 212(a)(9)(B) and (C)(i)(I) of the Act) 40.9.2 Inadmissibility Based on Prior Unlawful Presence (Sections 212(a)(9)(B) and (C)(i)(I) of the Act)





Table of Contents: Chapter 40.9.2



Adjudicator’s Guidance: Chapter 40.9.2





(a) Overview

(a)



If an alien, other than an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, accrues unlawful presence in the United States, he or she may be inadmissible pursuant to

If an alien, other than an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, accrues unlawful presence in the United States, he or she may be inadmissible pursuant to section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) (Three-year and Ten-year bars) or 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act (Permanent bar).



Outline of Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) and Section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act (1)





Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) of the Act - The 3-Year and the 10-Year Bars . (A) section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) is broken into two (2) sub-groups:





· Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) of the Act (3-year bar)





This provision renders inadmissible for three (3) years those aliens, who were unlawfully present for more than 180 days but less than one (1) year, and who departed from the United States voluntarily prior to the initiation of removal proceedings.





· Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(II) of the Act (10-year bar)





This provision renders inadmissible an alien, who was unlawfully present for one (1) year or more, and who seeks again admission within ten (10) years of the date of the alien’s departure or removal from the United States.





of the Act. Both bars can be waived pursuant to section 212(a)(9)(B)(v) of the Act.





Section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act - The Permanent Bar (B)





This provision renders an individual inadmissible, if he or she has been unlawfully present in the United States for an aggregate period of more than one (1) year, and who enters or attempts to reenter the United States without being admitted.





A waiver is also available for certain Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) self-petitioners under An alien, who is inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act is permanently inadmissible; however, after having been outside the United States for at least ten (10) years, he or she may seek consent to reapply for admission pursuant to section 212(a)(9)(C)(ii) of the Act and 8 CFR 212.2 A waiver is also available for certain Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) self-petitioners under section 212(a)(9)(C)(iii) of the Act.







The 10-year absence requirement does not apply to a VAWA self-petitioner who is seeking a waiver under section 212(a)(9)(C)(iii) of the Act, rather than seeking consent to reapply under section 212(a)(9)(C)(ii) of the Act.





Matter of Torres-Garcia, 23 I&N Dec. 866 (BIA 2006), however, the consent to reapply regulation at 8 CFR 212.2 predates the enactment of A DHS regulation at 8 CFR 212.2 addresses the filing and adjudication of an application for consent to reapply (filed on Form I-212 ). As stated by the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) in23 I&N Dec. 866 (BIA 2006), however, the consent to reapply regulation at 8 CFR 212.2 predates the enactment of section 212(a)(9)(C) of the Act and the related consent to reapply provision in section 212(a)(9)(A)(iii) of the Act.





filing procedures in Thus, although thein 8 CFR 212.2 are still in effect, the substantive requirements of section 212(a)(9) of the Act govern during the adjudication of Form I-212 , Application for Permission to Reapply for Admission into the United States After Deportation and Removal.





A USCIS adjudicator must consider the specific requirements of section 212(a)(9)(C)(ii) of the Act when adjudicating Form I-212 that is filed by an alien who is inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i) of the Act. That is, because of the 10-year absence requirement for consent to reapply, section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act is a permanent bar for which neither the retroactive nor the prospective grant of consent to reapply is possible.





see Torres-Garcia , at 875, and the alien has to be physically outside the United States for a period of at least ten years since his or her last departure before being eligible to be granted consent to reapply. See id ., at 876. The regulatory language at 8 CFR 212.2(i) and (j) is not applicable,, at 875, and the alien has to be physically outside the United States for a period of at least ten years since his or her last departure before being eligible to be granted consent to reapply.., at 876.





See id . at 874 (for a historical analysis). Finally, the regulatory language referring to the 5-year and the 20-year limitation on consent to reapply does not apply to section 212(a)(9)(C) of the Act; these limitations refer to former sections 212(a)(6)(A) and (B) , the predecessors of current section 212(a)(9)(A) of the Act.. at 874 (for a historical analysis).





Also, an adjudicator should pay special attention to the possibility that an alien who is inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(II) of the Act (because the alien entered or attempted to enter without admission after having been removed) may be subject to the reinstatement provision of section 241(a)(5) of the Act (reinstatement of removal orders).





Distinction Between “Unlawful Status” and “Unlawful Presence ” (2)





To understand the operation of sections 212(a)(9)(B) and 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act, it is important to comprehend the difference between being in an unlawful immigration status and the accrual of unlawful presence (“period of stay not authorized”). Although these concepts are related (one must be present in an unlawful status in order to accrue unlawful presence), they are not the same.





of the AFM , there are situations in which an alien who is present in an unlawful status nevertheless does not accrue unlawful presence. As a matter of prosecutorial discretion, DHS may permit an alien who is present in the United States unlawfully, but who has pending an application that stops the accrual of unlawful presence, to remain in the United States while that application is pending. In this sense, the alien’s remaining can be said to be “authorized.” However, the fact that the alien does not accrue unlawfu l presence does not mean that the alien’s presence in the United States is actually lawful. As discussed in chapters 40.9.2(b)(2) and 40.9.2(b)(3) , there are situations in which an alien who is present in an unlawful status nevertheless does not accrue unlawful presence. As a matter of prosecutorial discretion, DHS may permit an alien who is present in the United States unlawfully, but who has pending an application that stops the accrual of unlawful presence, to remain in the United States while that application is pending. In this sense, the alien’s remaining can be said to be “authorized.” However, the fact that the alien does not accrue unlawfu l presence doesmean that the alien’s presence in the United States is actually lawful.







Example 1 An alien is admitted as a nonimmigrant, with a Form I-94 that expires on January 1, 2009. The alien remains in the United States after the Form I-94 expires. The alien’s status becomes unlawful, and she begins to accrue unlawful presence, on January 2, 2009. On May 10, 2009, the alien properly files an application for adjustment of status. The filing of the adjustment application stops the accrual of unlawful presence. But it does not “restore” the alien to a substantively lawful immigration status. She is still amenable to removal as a deportable alien under The filing of the adjustment application stops the accrual of unlawful presence. But it does not “restore” the alien to a substantively lawful immigration status. She is still amenable to removal as a deportable alien under section 237(a)(1)(C) of the Act because she has remained after the expiration of her nonimmigrant admission.



Example 2 An alien is admitted as a nonimmigrant, with a Form I-94 that expires on January 1, 2009. On October 5, 2008, he properly files an application for adjustment of status. He does not, however, file any application to extend his nonimmigrant stay, which expires on January 1, 2009. The adjustment of status application is still pending on January 2, 2009. On January 2, 2009, he becomes subject to removal as a deportable alien under On January 2, 2009, he becomes subject to removal as a deportable alien under section 237(a)(1)(C) of the Act because he has remained after the expiration of his nonimmigrant admission. For purposes of future inadmissibility, however, the pending adjustment application protects him from the accrual of unlawful presence.



status from the accrual of unlawful presence. Guidance concerning section 245(k) may be found in AFM . If the requirements of section 245(k) are met, this provision relieves certain employment-based immigrants of ineligibility under section 245(c)(2), (c)(7) or (c)(8) of the Act for adjustment of status. The application of section 245(k) of the Act is a good example of the importance of clearly distinguishing unlawfulfrom the accrual of unlawful presence. Guidance concerning section 245(k) may be found in chapter 23.5(d) of the. If the requirements of section 245(k) are met, this provision relieves certain employment-based immigrants of ineligibility under section 245(c)(2), (c)(7) or (c)(8) of the Act for adjustment of status.





For example, an alien who failed to maintain a lawful status after any entry is, ordinarily, ineligible for adjustment of status under section 245(c)(2) of the Act. Departure from the United States and return does, ordinarily, not relieve the alien of this provision. 8 CFR 245.1(d)(3)





last lawful admission is considered in determining whether the alien is subject to For an alien who is eligible for the benefit of section 245(k) of the Act, however, only a failure to maintain status since theis considered in determining whether the alien is subject to section 245(c)(2) (c)(7) or (c)(8) of the Act. AFM Chapter 23.5(d)(4). Unless the alien, since the last lawful admission failed to maintain lawful status for at least 181 days, section 245(k) of the Act relieves the alien of ineligibility under section 245(c)(2), (c)(7) or (c)(8) of the Act.





AFM , some aliens who are actually present in an unlawful status , are, nevertheless, protected from accruing unlawful presence. But if their unlawful status continues for more than 180 days, in the aggregate, they would be ineligible for the benefit of even if they have accrued no unlawful presence for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act. As stated in chapters 40.9.2(b)(2) and 40.9.2(b)(3) of the, some aliens who are actually present in an unlawful, are, nevertheless, protected from accruing unlawful presence. But if their unlawful status continues for more than 180 days, in the aggregate, they would be ineligible for the benefit of section 245(k) of the Act,of the Act.





Example 3 An alien is admitted for “duration of status” as an F-1 nonimmigrant student. One year later, the alien drops out of school, and remains in the United States for one year after dropping out. The alien’s status became unlawful when she dropped out of school. Neither USCIS nor an IJ ever makes a finding that the alien was out of status; therefore, she never accrues any unlawful presence for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B ) of the Act. AFM Chapter 40.9.2(b)(1)(E)(ii) . The alien eventually leaves the United States and returns lawfully as a nonimmigrant. While in nonimmigrant status, a Form I-140 is approved and the alien applies for adjustment of status. Because the alien failed to maintain a lawful status for more than 180 days during her prior sojourn, she is ineligible for adjustment under section 245(c)(2) of the Act, and section 245(k) of the Act does not relieve her of this ineligibility. section 245(c) of the Act. Also, the alien did not accrue unlawful presence despite the prior unlawful status, and so the alien is not inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act. Under section 245(k) of the Act, the alien is still eligible for adjustment, since the prior failure to maintain status does not apply to make the alien ineligible underof the Act. Also, the alien did not accrue unlawfuldespite the prior unlawfuland so the alien is not inadmissible underof the Act.



Example 4 The alien is admitted as a lawful nonimmigrant, and, while still in status, applies for adjustment of status on the basis of an approved Form I-140. While the Form I-485 is pending, the alien’s employment authorization documentation (EAD) expires, and the alien fails to apply for a new EAD. Nevertheless, the alien continues to work after the EAD expires. The period of unauthorized employment exceeds 180 days. The alien would not be inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act, since the pendency of the Form I-485 stopped the accrual of unlawful presence. Also, there has been no “departure” to trigger section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act. Section 245(k) of the Act does not relieve the alien of ineligibility under section 245(c)(2) of the Act since the alien engaged in unauthorized employment for more than 180 days.



An alien who is present in a lawful status will not accrue unlawful presence as long as that lawful status is maintained.





Definition of Unlawful Presence and Explanation of Related Terms (3)





(A) Unlawful Presence





and Section 212(a)(9)(B)(ii) of the Act defines “unlawful presence” for purposes of sections 212(a)(9)(B)(i) 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act to mean that an alien is deemed to be unlawfully present in the United States, if the alien is:





· present after the expiration of the period of stay authorized by the Secretary of Homeland Security; or





· present without being admitted or paroled.





(B) Period of Stay Authorized (Authorized Stay)





When nonimmigrants are admitted into the United States, the period of stay authorized is generally noted on Form I-94 , Admission/Departure Record. Additionally, by policy, USCIS has designated other statuses - including some that are not actually lawful - as “periods of stay authorized.” see the more detailed analysis in AFM chapters 40.9.2(b) and 40.9.2(c)





(C) Admission





The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA) (Div. C of Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, and the Judiciary Appropriations Act of 1997, PL 104-208 (September 30, 1996)) amended section 101(a)(13) of the Act by removing the definition of the term “entry,” and by replacing it with a definition of the terms “admission” and “admitted.”





See section 101(a)(13)(A) of the Act. Section 101(a)(13)(A) of the Act now defines “admission” and “admitted” as “the lawful entry of the alien into the United States after inspection and authorization by an immigration officer.”section 101(a)(13)(A) of the Act.





See section 101(a)(13)(B) of the Act. Section 101(a)(13)(B) of the Act furthermore clarifies that parole is not admission, and that an alien crewman, who is permitted to land temporarily in the United States, shall not be considered to have been admitted.section 101(a)(13)(B) of the Act.





(D) Parole





Parole is the discretionary decision, under section 212(d)(5)(A) of the Act, to permit an inadmissible alien to leave the inspection facility free of official custody, so that, although the alien is not admitted, the alien is permitted to be physically present in the United States.





See Leng May Ma v. Barber , 357 U.S. 185, 188-189 (1958), quoting Kaplan v. Tod , 267 U.S. 228 (1925). By statutory definition, parole is not admission. section 101(a)(13)(B) of the Act. An alien, who has been paroled under section 212(d)(5)(A) of the Act “[is] still in theory of law at the boundary line and [has] gained no foothold in the United States.”, 357 U.S. 185, 188-189 (1958),, 267 U.S. 228 (1925).





See Parole may be granted on a case-by-case basis for urgent humanitarian reasons (humanitarian parole) or for significant public benefit. section 212(d)(5)(A) of the Act and 8 CFR 212.5





Deferred inspection and advance parole are parole, as are individual port of entry paroles and paroles authorized while a person is overseas. Section 212(a)(9)(B)(ii) of the Act makes clear that an alien, who has been paroled, does not accrue unlawful presence as long as the parole lasts.





see AFM chapter 54 . For purposes of unlawful presence, the reason for the grant of parole is irrelevant. For more information on parole pursuant to section 212(d)(5) of the Act,



Cuban Adjustment Act . Only parole under section 212(d)(5)(A) of the Act qualifies as parole for purposes of section 212(a)(9) of the Act. In an April 1999 memorandum and an August 1998 legal opinion (Legal Opinion No. 98-10, August 21, 1998), former INS suggested that a release under section 236 of the Act (conditional parole) could also be considered “parole” for purposes of adjustment of status under the





See Matter of Ortega-Cervantes, 2005 WL 649116 (BIA, January 6, 2005). The Ninth Circuit confirmed the BIA’s decision and held that release under See Ortega-Cervantes v. Gonzales , 501 F.3d 1111 (9th Cir. 2007). The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) has rejected this interpretation in at least one unpublished decision.2005 WL 649116 (BIA, January 6, 2005). The Ninth Circuit confirmed the BIA’s decision and held that release under section 236 of the Act was not “parole” for purposes of adjustment of status., 501 F.3d 1111 (9th Cir. 2007).





See September 28, 2007 Memorandum, Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Homeland Security, Clarification of the Relation Between Release Under Section 236 and Parole Under Section 212(d)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act . DHS/Office of the General Counsel reconsidered that aspect of the 1999 memorandum, and the related 1998 legal opinion. On September 28, 2007, it issued a memorandum stating that release under section 236 of the Act is not deemed to be a form of parole under section 212(d)(5) of the Act.September 28, 2007 Memorandum, Office of the General Counsel of the Department of Homeland Security,





As of the release of this AFM chapter, the Ninth Circuit is the only circuit that has decided this issue, although several circuits have cases outstanding. If the adjudicator encounters the issue, he or she is advised to inquire with the USCIS Office of the Chief Counsel (Adjudications Law Division) about the status of any pending litigation or further developments.





(4) General Considerations when Counting Unlawful Presence Time Under Sections 212(a)(9)(B) and 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act





(A) Unlawful Presence for Purposes of the 3-Year and 10-Year Bars Is Not Counted in the Aggregate





any single stay in the United States; the length of the alien’s accrued unlawful presence is not calculated by combining periods of unlawful presence accrued during multiple unlawful stays in the United States. Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) of the Act only applies to an alien, who has accrued the required amount of unlawful presence duringstay in the United States; the length of the alien’s accrued unlawful presence is not calculated by combining periods of unlawful presence accrued during multiple unlawful stays in the United States.





If, during any single stay, an alien has more than one (1) period during which the alien accrues unlawful presence, the length of each period of unlawful presence is added together to determine the total period of unlawful presence time accrued during that single stay.







Reminder The statutory provisions of the 3-year and the 10-year bars became effective on or after April 1, 1997. An alien, who was unlawfully present in the United States prior to April 1, 1997, started to accrue unlawful presence on April 1, 1997, if he or she remained present in the United States at that time. An alien, who was unlawfully present in the United States prior to April 1, 1997, but departed prior to April 1, 1997, did not accrue any unlawful presence for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act.



Example 1 See AFM chapter 40.9.2(b)(3)(A) . An alien’s status becomes unlawful, and the alien begins to accrue unlawful presence on April 1, 2004. On September 1, 2004 (150 days after April 1, 2004), the alien files an adjustment of status application. The alien does not accrue unlawful presence while the adjustment application is pending. The adjustment application is denied on October 15, 2006 (administratively final decision). After the denial, the alien continues to remain in the United States unlawfully; the accrual of unlawful presence resumes on October 16, 2006, a day after the application is denied. The alien leaves the United States on January 1, 2007. At that time, the individual had accrued unlawful presence from April 1, 2004 to September 1, 2004, and again from October 16, 2006 to January 1, 2007. The total period of unlawful presence time accrued during this single unlawful stay exceeds 180 days. By departing the United States on January 1, 2007, the alien triggered the three-year bar and is inadmissible under By departing the United States on January 1, 2007, the alien triggered the three-year bar and is inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) of the Act.



Example 2 An alien’s status becomes unlawful, and the alien begins to accrue unlawful presence on April 1, 2004. On September 1, 2004, the alien leaves the United States. The alien returns unlawfully on October 15, 2006. He departs the United States again on January 1, 2007. Although the alien has been unlawfully present in the United States for more than 180 days in the aggregate, the unlawful presence was accrued during two (2) separate stays in the United States; during each of these stays, the alien accrued less than 180 days of unlawful presence. Thus, the alien is not inadmissible under Although the alien has been unlawfully present in the United States for more than 180 days in the aggregate, the unlawful presence was accrued during two (2) separate stays in the United States; during each of these stays, the alien accrued less than 180 days of unlawful presence. Thus, the alien is not inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) of the Act.



(B) Unlawful Presence for Purposes of the Permanent Bar Is Counted in the Aggregate





Under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act, the alien’s unlawful presence is counted in the aggregate, i.e. the total amount of unlawful presence time is determined by adding together all periods of time during which an alien was unlawfully present in the United States on or after April 1, 1997.



single stay or during multiple stays , departs the United States, and subsequently reenters or attempts to reenter without admission, he or she is subject to the permanent bar of Therefore, if an alien accrues a total of more than one (1) year of unlawful presence time, whether accrued during a, departs the United States, and subsequently reenters or attempts to reenter without admission, he or she is subject to the permanent bar of section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act.





Example An alien enters the United States unlawfully on April 1, 2004, and leaves on September 1, 2004. The alien has accrued about 150 days of unlawful presence at this time. She reenters the United States unlawfully on January 1, 2005 and stays until November 1, 2005. This time, the alien has accrued 300 days of unlawful presence. Although neither period of unlawful presence exceeds one (1) year, the aggregate period of unlawful presence does exceed one (1) year by totaling 450 days of unlawful presence, which the alien accrued during both stays. If the alien ever returns or attempts to return to the United States without being admitted, he or she will be inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act.



(C) Specific Requirements for Inadmissibility under Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) of the Act (The 3-Year Bar)





For the three-year bar to apply, the individual must have accrued at least 180 days but less than one (1) year of unlawful presence, and thereafter, must have departed voluntarily prior to the commencement of removal proceedings. Any period of unlawful presence accrued prior to April 1, 1997, does not count for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) of the Act.





The alien does not need a formal grant of voluntary departure by DHS for his or her departure to be considered voluntary. However, if DHS grants voluntary departure, the departure is still voluntary because removal proceedings have not yet commenced.





prior to the commencement of removal proceedings. Removal proceedings commence with the filing of the Notice to Appear (NTA) with the immigration court following service of the NTA on the alien. See 8 CFR 1003.14 . The statutory language of section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) of the Act specifically requires that the alien must have departed the United Statesto the commencement of removal proceedings. Removal proceedings commence with the filing of the Notice to Appear (NTA) with the immigration court following service of the NTA on the alien.





An alien, who departs the United States after the NTA has been filed with the immigration court, therefore, is not subject to the three-year bar according to the statutory language.







To avoid future inadmissibility, however, the alien must leave before he or she has accrued more than one year of unlawful presence, and becomes inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(II) of the Act, rather than section 212(a)(9)(A)(i)(I) of the Act. This provision provides the alien with an incentive to end his or her unlawful presence by leaving the United States, rather that contesting removal.





The burden is on the applicant to establish that the NTA had already been filed by the time the applicant had departed. The record of proceedings before the immigration court will generally indicate when the NTA was actually filed, and the filing date shown in the court’s record will be controlling.





Even if the applicant is not subject to the three-year or the ten-year bar, there may be other grounds of inadmissibility that apply based on the fact that the removal proceedings were initiated and the alien departed the United States during the proceedings. For example, a conviction that made the alien subject to removal as a deportable alien may also make the alien inadmissible.





(D) Specific Requirements for Inadmissibility under Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(II) of the Act (The 10-Year Bar)





An alien, who voluntarily departs the United States or who was removed from the United States after having been unlawfully present for more than one (1) year, triggers the 10-year bar to admission under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(II) of the Act. Any period of unlawful presence accrued prior to April 1, 1997 does not count for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(II) of the Act.





Unlike the 3-year bar, the 10-year bar applies even if the alien leaves after removal proceedings have commenced; the individual will be inadmissible, even if he or she leaves after the NTA has been filed with the immigration court. Moreover, filing the NTA does not stop the accrual of unlawful presence. 8 CFR 239.3





(E) Specific Requirements for Inadmissibility under Section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act (The Permanent Bar)





(i) General Requirements





To be permanently inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act, an alien must have accrued more than one (1) year of unlawful presence in the aggregate, must have left the United States thereafter, and must then have entered or attempted to reenter the United States without being admitted. Any unlawful presence accrued prior to April 1, 1997, or any unlawful entry or attempted reentry into the United States prior to April 1, 1997, does not count for purposes of inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act.





(ii) Special Note on the Effect of An Alien’s Entry on Parole After Having Accrued More Than One (1) Year Of Unlawful Presence





Is an alien, who had accrued more than one (1) year of unlawful presence, and who is paroled into the United States but not admitted, subject to section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act?





An alien’s inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act is fixed at the time of the alien’s unlawful entry or attempted reentry.





never returned or attempted to return without admission after that unlawful presence, and who is paroled into the United States pursuant to An alien who had accrued more than one (1) year of unlawful presence, and who hasreturned or attempted to return without admission after that unlawful presence, and who is paroled into the United States pursuant to section 212(d)(5) of the Act, but not admitted, is not subject to inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act.





not deemed to be an “entry or attempted reentry without being admitted,” even though parole is not considered admission. See It is the Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) policy that for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) inadmissibility, an alien’s parole isdeemed to be an “entry or attempted reentry without being admitted,” even though parole is not considered admission. section 101(a)(13)(B) and section 212(d)(5)(A) of the Act.





This conclusion reflects the legal principle that, although a parolee is actually allowed to physically enter the United States, a parolee is deemed to be at a port of entry, pending a final decision on whether to admit the alien or not. See Leng May Ma v. Barber , 357 U.S. 185, 188-189 (1958), quoting Kaplan v.Tod , 267 U.S. 228 (1925).





As noted, however, an alien’s inadmissibility for returning unlawfully after accruing sufficient unlawful presence is fixed at the time of the alien’s unlawful return or attempt to return. Paroling an alien who is already inadmissible does not relieve the alien of inadmissibility.





For example, if an alien who is already present in the United States without being admitted because he or she entered without inspection, and who, in the past, had accumulated unlawful presence in excess of one (1) year, is taken into custody, and then later paroled pursuant to section 212(d)(5) of the Act, the alien’s parole would not relieve the alien of inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i) of the Act.





see AFM Chapter 40.9.2(a)(6)(B) . For a more detailed explanation and examples,





Triggering the Bar by Departing the United States (5)





See AFM Chapter 40.9.2(a)(6) . An alien must leave the United States after accruing more than 180 days or one (1) year of unlawful presence in order to trigger the 3-year or 10-year bar to admission under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act. This includes departures made while traveling after having approved advance parole or with a valid refugee travel document.







Note: By granting advance parole or a refugee travel document, USCIS does not authorize the alien’s departure from the United States; it merely provides a means for the alien to return to the United States, regardless of admissibility. Therefore, even if the alien has an advance parole document, the alien’s actual departure from the United States will still trigger the bar to inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act.



Section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act does not explicitly mention “departure” as a prerequisite for the bar to apply. However, according to the wording of the statute, an alien with the requisite period of unlawful presence must “enter or attempt to enter without admission” in order to incur inadmissibility.





Thus, the alien cannot violate the provision unless the alien leaves the United States and then returns or attempts to return. See Matter of Rodarte-Roman , 23 I&N Dec. 905 (BIA 2006) (Departure triggers the bars; the IJ erred when denying adjustment of status because of the individual’s accrual of unlawful presence in excess of one (1) year without departure).





Triggering the 3-Year and the 10-Year Bars But Not the Permanent Bar When Departing with Advance Parole or with a Refugee Travel Document (6)





An alien with a pending adjustment of status application, who has accrued more than 180 days of unlawful presence time, will trigger the bars to admission, if he or she travels outside the United States subsequent to the issuance of an advance parole document.





When the alien presents the advance parole document at a port of entry, he or she may be permitted to return to the United States as a parolee because aliens who request parole into the United States are not required to establish admissibility under section 212(a) of the Act.





However, the fact that the alien is permitted to return to the United States as a parolee does not confer a waiver of inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) and (II) of the Act. Consequently, a waiver under section 212(a)(9)(B)(v) of the Act would be required when determining the alien’s eligibility to adjust status to lawful permanent residence.





A Special Note on the Effect on Section 212(a)(9)(C) of the Act of an Alien’s Entry on Parole After Having Accrued More Than One (1) Year Of Unlawful Presence (B)





See Parole is not admission. section 101(a)(13)(B) of the Act. An individual is subject to section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act, if he or she has accrued more than one (1) year of unlawful presence in the United States during a single stay or during multiple stays, who departs, and subsequently enters or attempts to reenter “without being admitted.”







The statutory language omits the word “parole” and makes it unclear whether an alien, who enters on parole, triggers the bar to inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C) of the Act.





Therefore, if an alien is paroled into the United States pursuant to section 212(d)(5)(A) of the Act after having accrued more than one (1) year of unlawful presence, is he or she inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act because the alien was not “admitted”? The answer is “no” for the following reason:





An alien’s inadmissibility pursuant to section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act is fixed as of the date of the alien’s entry or attempted reentry without being admitted.





If an alien, who has accrued unlawful presence in excess of one (1) year, came to a port of entry and applied for admission to the United States or asked to be paroled into the United States, the alien will not be deemed to have attempted to enter the United States without “being admitted,” if DHS actually paroles the alien.





The significant point is that the alien will have arrived at a port of entry and presented himself or herself for inspection. If the alien is paroled, the alien will continue to be considered an applicant for admission, and so cannot be said to have entered or attempted to enter without admission.





Thus, if DHS paroles the alien under section 212(d)(5) of the Act, the alien’s departure and subsequent return as a parolee does not trigger the section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) -bar for purposes of a subsequent admissibility determination by DHS (such as at the time of the adjustment of status adjudication).





This conclusion reflects the legal principle that, although a parolee is actually allowed to physically enter the United States, a parolee is deemed to be at a port of entry, pending a final decision on whether to admit the alien or not. See Leng May Ma v. Barber , 357 U.S. 185, 188-189 (1958), quoting Kaplan v. Tod , 267 U.S. 228 (1925).







Example: As an example, assume the following: · An alien enters the United States on a B visa: · The status expires on January 1, 2000. · On January 2, 2000, the individual commences to accrue unlawful presence as having overstayed his or her period of admission. · The alien applies for adjustment of status on January 1, 2005. The individual is in authorized stay during the pendency of the adjustment of status application and does not accrue unlawful presence. See AFM chapter 40.9.2(b)(3)(A) Based on the pending adjustment application, the alien applies for advance parole ( Form I-131 ) which is approved. The alien then leaves the United States on April 1, 2005; at this time, the alien has triggered the 10-year bar to admission to the United States because the alien had accrued unlawful presence in excess of one (1) year (from January 2, 2000, to January 1, 2005). On April 15, 2005, the alien returns to the United States through a port of entry, presents his advance parole document, and is paroled into the United States. The alien will not be considered to have triggered inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act. Because the alien is currently a parolee, the alien is deemed to still be at the port of entry. At the time of the adjudication of the adjustment of status application, the alien’s request for admission (through the adjustment of status application) will be decided. Thus, the individual is a parolee, he or she is not deemed to have “entered or attempted to reenter without being admitted.”



Note: The alien still may be inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act at the time of the adjustment of status application. By contrast, the parole of an alien after the alien had already become inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i) would not relieve the alien of inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i) of the Act.



Example As an example, assume the following: An alien enters the United States on a B visa. The status expires on January 1, 2000. On January 1, 2000, the alien commences to accrue unlawful presence for having overstayed his or her period of admission. The alien applies for adjustment of status on January 1, 2005. The alien departs the United States and returns illegally by crossing the border 30 miles west of the nearest port of entry on April 15, 2005. The alien is now inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act. (An additional consequence, unrelated to the illegal entry, is that the alien also abandoned his or her adjustment application). Even if the alien were later taken into custody and paroled under section 212(d)(5) of the Act, or were to later travel and return on a grant of advance parole, the alien would remain inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act since the alien did, in fact, enter without admission after having accrued the requisite period of unlawful presence.



The instructions to Form I-131 , Application for Travel Document, and Form I-485 , Application to Register Permanent Residence or Adjust Status, as well as the standard Form I-512 , Authorization for Parole of an Alien into the United States, include language warning the alien that traveling abroad and returning to the United States by using Form I-512 may make the alien inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act.





(C) Travel on a Valid Refugee Travel Document Issued pursuant to Section 208(c)(1)(C) of the Act and 8 CFR 223





An asylee who had accrued more than 180 days of unlawful presence time prior to having filed the bona fide asylum application, will trigger the bar to admission, if he or she departs the United States while traveling on a valid refugee travel document. When the asylee presents the travel document at a port of entry, he or she can be permitted to reenter the United States to resume status as an asylee; however, the asylee will be inadmissible when he or she applies to adjust status to lawful permanent reside nt, and a waiver would be required at that time.





Multiple Grounds of Inadmissibility and the Relationship Between Sections 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I), (B)(i)(II), and (C)(i)(I) of the Act (7)





Sections 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) , (B)(i)(II) , and (C)(i)(I) of the Act establish different grounds of inadmissibility based on prior unlawful presence. Whether a specific ground applies to an alien depends on an analysis of the facts of the person’s case in light of that specific ground.





both section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act and section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act. It is possible that the alien’s immigration history makes the alien inadmissible underof the Act and section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act.







Example: An alien with more than one (1) year of unlawful presence leaves the United States, thus triggering the 10-year bar to admissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(II) of the Act. Three (3) years after the alien’s last departure, the alien returns to the United States and enters illegally, thus without having been admitted. The alien is now inadmissible under sections 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(II) and 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act.



Also, an alien with sufficient unlawful presence who is removed from the United States, may be inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(A), as well as section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(II) and/or section 212(a)(9)(C)(i) of the Act depending on the circumstances of the individual case.





Benefits That May Be Available Despite Inadmissibility under Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I), (B)(i)(II), or (C)(i)(I) of the Act (8)





Under Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) or (II) of the Act . An alien, who is inadmissible under (A). An alien, who is inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) of the Act may apply for and receive, if eligible, a grant of:





· Registry under Registry under section 249 of the Act;





· Adjustment of status under section 202 of NACARA;





· Adjustment of status under section 902 of HRIFA ;





· Adjustment of status under section Adjustment of status under section 245(h)(2)(A) of the Act;





· Change to V nonimmigrant status under Change to V nonimmigrant status under 8 CFR 214.15 (but the alien may need a waiver to obtain adjustment of status to LPR after having acquired V nonimmigrant status);







· LPR status pursuant to the LIFE Legalization Provision: A Legalization applicant under section 1104 of the LIFE Act may travel with authorization during the pendency of the application without triggering inadmissibility under See 8 CFR 245a.13(e)(5) . LPR status pursuant to the LIFE Legalization Provision: A Legalizationmay travel with authorization during the pendency of the application without triggering inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act.





(B) Under Section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act





An alien who is inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act may apply for and receive, if eligible, a grant of registry under section 249 of the Act.





(C) Special Concerns Regarding Section 245(i) – Applications





The USCIS position is that inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B) or (C) of the Act makes an alien ineligible for adjustment of status under section 245 of the Act, regardless of whether the alien applies under section 245(a) or section 245(i) of the Act.





The BIA has endorsed this view. In Matter of Briones , 24 I&N Dec. 355 (BIA 2007), the Board held that an alien who is inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act is not eligible for adjustment under section 245(i) of the Act. An alien who is inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act is also ineligible for section 245(i) adjustment. Matter of Lemus , 24 I&N Dec. 373 (BIA 2007).





USCIS adjudicators will follow Matter of Briones and Matter of Lemus in all cases, regardless of the decisions of the Ninth Circuit in Acosta v. Gonzales, 439 F.3d 550 (9th Cir. 2006) or of the Tenth Circuit in Padilla-Caldera v. Gonzales, 453 F.3d 1237 (10th Cir. 2005). Following these Board cases, rather than Acosta and Padilla-Caldera , will allow the Board to reexamine the continued validity of these court decisions.





USCIS adjudicators should also be aware that the Ninth Circuit has held that the Board’s decision in Matter of Torres-Garcia, 23 I&N Dec. 866 (BIA 2006) is entitled to judicial deference, and that the decision in Perez-Gonzales v. Ashcroft, 379 F.3d 783 (9th Cir. 2004), is no longer good law. Gonzales v. Department of Homeland Security, 508 F.3d 1227 (9th Cir. 2007).





Effective Date of Sections 212(a)(9)(B) and (C)(i)(I) of the Act (9)





(A) Effective Date





For purposes of section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act, one (1) full year of unlawful presence must have accrued. Therefore, the earliest an individual could have been subjected to this ground of inadmissibility was April 2, 1998.





(B) The Child Status Protection Act and Its Influence on Unlawful Presence





On August 6, 2002, the Child Status Protection Act (CSPA) (PL 107-208, August 6, 2002) was enacted to provide relief to certain children, who “aged-out” during the processing of certain applications.





The CSPA applies to derivative children of asylum and refugee applicants, children of United States citizens, children of Lawful Permanent Residents (LPRs), and derivative beneficiaries of family-based, employment-based, and diversity visas.





The CSPA changes how a child’s age should be calculated for purposes of eligibility for certain immigration benefits; it does not change the definition of “child” pursuant to section 101(b)(1) of the Act.





The CSPA was effective on August 6, 2002. In general, its provisions are not retroactive: Any qualified petition or application that was pending on the effective date is subject to the provisions of the CSPA. For detailed information, consult the policy memorandum, Domestic Operations, April 30, 2008, Revised Guidance for the Child Status Protection Act (AD07-04), or AFM Chapter 21.2(e)





Calculation of Unlawful Presence, if the CSPA Is Applicable : Any derivative beneficiary child who is in a “period of stay authorized” because of a pending application or petition, does not accrue unlawful presence merely because of his or her “aging-out,” if the requirements and conditions of the CSPA are met. For more information about the applicability of the CSPA, see AFM sections describing individual types of immigration benefits and : Any derivative beneficiary child who is in a “period of stay authorized” because of a pending application or petition, does not accrue unlawful presence merely because of his or her “aging-out,” if the requirements and conditions of the CSPA are met. For more information about the applicability of the CSPA,sections describing individual types of immigration benefits and Chapter 21.2(e)





The CSPA applies only to those benefits expressly specified by the statute. Nothing in the CSPA provides protection for nonimmigrant visa holders (such as K or V nonimmigrants), or to NACARA, HRIFA, Family Unity, Cuban Adjustment Act, and Special Immigrant Juvenile Applicants, and/or derivatives.





See However, there may be limited coverage for K-2 and K-4 individuals. Chapter 21.2(e) . This list is not exhaustive.





(b) Determining When an Alien Accrues Unlawful Presence

(b)



Aliens Present in Lawful Status or as Parolees (1)





An alien does not accrue unlawful presence, if he or she is present in the United States under a period of stay authorized by the Secretary of Homeland Security, or if he or she has been inspected and paroled into the United States and the parole is still in effect.





An alien who is present in the United States without inspection accrues unlawful presence from the date of the unlawful arrival, unless the alien is protected from the accrual of unlawful presence as described in this AFM chapter.





Note: An alien, who arrived at a port of entry and obtained permission to come into the United States by making a knowingly false claim to be a citizen, is present in the United States without having been inspected and admitted. See Matter of S--, 9 I&N Dec. 599 (BIA 1962).



(A) Lawful Permanent Residents (LPRs )





An alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence will not accrue unlawful presence unless the alien becomes subject to an administratively final order of removal by the IJ or the BIA (which means that during the course of proceedings, the alien was found to have lost his or her LPR status), or if he or she is otherwise protected from the accrual of unlawful presence. Unlawful presence will start to accrue the day after the order becomes administratively final, and not on the date of the event that made t he alien subject to removal.





(B) Lawful Temporary Residents (Section 245A(b) of the Act and 8 CFR 245a)





A lawful temporary resident must file an application to adjust from temporary to permanent resident status before the beginning of the 43 third month from the date he or she was granted lawful temporary resident status. See 8 CFR 245a.3(a)(2) .





See However, unlike conditional permanent residents, the status of a lawful temporary resident does not automatically terminate, if the alien fails to file a timely application, and DHS needs to advise the alien of its intent to terminate his or her Temporary Residence Status. section 245A(b)(2) of the Act, and 8 CFR 245a.2(u)(2)







The same procedures apply, if the alien’s status is terminated for the reasons specified in section 245A(b)(2) of the Act. Lawful Temporary Resident status also terminates upon the entry of a final order of deportation, exclusion, or removal. See 8 CFR 245.2(u)(2).





If DHS advises the alien of its intent to terminate lawful temporary resident status, the alien continues to be a lawful temporary resident and does not accrue unlawful presence until a notice of termination is issued.





If the termination is appealed, the period of authorized stay continues through the administrative appeals process. The termination of an alien’s lawful temporary resident status cannot be reviewed in removal proceedings before an immigration judge. The alien would accrue unlawful presence time during removal proceedings or while a petition for review is pending in Federal court.





(C) Conditional Permanent Residents under Sections 216 and 216A of the Act





(i) Termination upon the Entry of an Administratively Final Order of Removal





As is the case with other LPRs, an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence on a conditional basis under section 216 or 216A of the Act begins to accrue unlawful presence upon the entry of an administratively final order of removal.





A conditional LPR will also accrue unlawful presence before the entry of an administratively final removal order, if USCIS terminates the alien’s conditional LPR status, as described below.





(ii) Automatic Termination





or See Pursuant to section 216 216A of the Act, an alien, who was granted conditional permanent resident status must properly file a petition to remove the conditions placed on his or her status within the 90-day period immediately preceding the second anniversary of the date on which lawful permanent resident status on a conditional basis was granted. Sections 216(c)(1) and 216A(c)(1) of the Act.





See id . Also, failure to appear for the personal interview that may be required by USCIS in relation to the Form I-751 or I-829 petition results in the automatic termination of the conditional legal permanent resident status, unless the parties establish good cause for the failure to appear. See The alien begins to accrue unlawful presence as of the date of the second anniversary of the alien’s lawful admission for permanent residence.. Also, failure to appear for the personal interview that may be required by USCIS in relation to the Form I-751 or I-829 petition results in the automatic termination of the conditional legal permanent resident status, unless the parties establish good cause for the failure to appear. section 216(c)(2)(A) of the Act and 8 CFR 216.4(b)(3) section 216A(c)(2)(A) of the Act and 8 CFR 216.6(b)(3)





(iii) Late Filings of the Petition to Remove the Conditional Basis Of LPR Status by the Alien





Current regulations at 8 CFR 216.4(a)(6) and 8 CFR 216.6(a)(5) allow a conditional resident to submit a late filing to USCIS, if jurisdiction has not yet vested with the immigration judge, and if certain requirements are met. If the late filed petition is accepted and approved, no unlawful presence time will be deemed to have accrued.





If jurisdiction has already vested with the immigration judge, the judge may terminate removal proceedings upon joint motion by the alien and DHS. Consequently, if a late filing is accepted and approved while the alien is in proceedings, the alien will not accrue unlawful presence time.





If, however, the late filing is rejected, the alien begins to accrue unlawful presence time on the date his or her status as a conditional resident automatically terminated.





(iv) Termination on Notice





If DHS advises the alien of its intent to terminate conditional permanent resident status, the alien continues to be a conditional permanent resident and does not accrue unlawful presence until a notice of termination is issued.





See 8 CFR 216.3 . The alien begins to accrue unlawful presence on the day after the notice of termination is issued, unless the alien seeks review of the termination in removal proceedings.





(v) Review in Removal Proceedings





See 8 CFR 216.3 . If the alien seeks review of the termination in removal proceedings, DHS bears the burden of proving that the termination was proper. Thus, the alien will be deemed not to accrue unlawful presence unless the immigration judge affirms the termination.





If the immigration judge affirms the termination, the alien will begin to accrue unlawful presence on the day after the immigration judge’s removal order becomes administratively final.





(D) Aliens Granted Cancellation of Removal or Suspension of Deportation





Section 240A of the Act provides for two (2) different types of cancellation of removal:





· Cancellation of removal for an alien who has been admitted for permanent residence, section 240A(a) of the Act, and





· Cancellation of removal and adjustment of status for certain aliens who have been present in the United States for a period of not less than ten (10) years, section 240A(b) of the Act.





Therefore, the effect of a grant of cancellation of removal on the accrual of unlawful presence (or of suspension of deportation under former section 244 of the Act) depends on the alien’s status immediately before relief was granted, and as outlined below:





· If an alien who has already acquired LPR status becomes subject to removal but applies for and receives a grant of cancellation of removal under section 240A(a) of the Act, or a grant of suspension of deportation under former section 244 of the Act, the alien retains his or her LPR status. No period of unlawful presence will have accrued because the grant of cancellation or suspension prevents the loss of LPR status.





· If an alien who is not already an LPR obtains a grant of cancellation of removal under section 240A(b) of the Act, or a grant of suspension of deportation under former section 244 of the Act, the alien becomes an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence as of the date of the final decision granting relief.





As such, the alien will no longer accrue unlawful presence after cancellation of removal or suspension of deportation is granted. Moreover, given the special nature of these forms of relief, any unlawful presence that may have accrued before the grant of cancellation of removal or suspension of deportation will be eliminated for purposes of any future application for admission.





Example An alien had accrued ten (10) years of unlawful presence in the United States, and is subsequently granted cancellation of removal. The alien is now an LPR. If, after becoming an LPR, the alien travels abroad and returns to the United States through a port of entry, none of the pre-grant unlawful presence will be considered in determining the alien’s admissibility. Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) of the Act does not apply to LPRs.



(E) Lawful Nonimmigrants





The period of authorized stay for a nonimmigrant may end on a specific date or may continue for “duration of status (D/S).” Under current USCIS policy, nonimmigrants begin to accrue unlawful presence as follows:





(i) Nonimmigrants Admitted until a Specific Date (Date Certain) Other Than F, J, or M Nonimmigrants





Nonimmigrants admitted until a specific date will generally begin to accrue unlawful presence the day following the date the authorized period of admission expires, as noted on Form I-94 , Arrival/Departure Record.





If USCIS finds, during the adjudication of a request for immigration benefit, that the alien has violated his or her nonimmigrant status, unlawful presence will begin to accrue either the day after Form I-94 expires or the day after USCIS denies the request, whichever is earlier.





If an immigration judge makes a determination of nonimmigrant status violation in exclusion, deportation or removal proceedings, unlawful presence begins to accrue the day after the immigration judge’s order or the day after the Form I-94 expired, whichever is earlier.





It must be emphasized that the accrual of unlawful presence neither begins on the date that a status violation occurs, nor on the day on which removal proceedings are initiated. Removal proceedings have no impact on whether an individual is accruing unlawful presence. See 8 CFR 239.3 .





Example: An individual is admitted in H-1B status until September 20, 2007, as evidenced on Form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record. On January 1, 2007, an NTA is issued and the individual is placed in removal proceedings. The individual will not start to accrue unlawful presence unless the immigration judge holds that the alien had violated his or her nonimmigrant status, or until his or her Form I-94 expires, whichever is earlier.



Nonimmigrants Admitted for Duration of Status (D/S) Other Than F or J Nonimmigrants (ii)





If USCIS finds a nonimmigrant status violation while adjudicating a request for an immigration benefit, unlawful presence will begin to accrue on the day after the request is denied.





If an immigration judge makes a determination of nonimmigrant status violation in exclusion, deportation, or removal proceedings, unlawful presence begins to accrue the day after the immigration judge’s order.





See 8 CFR 239.3 . It must be emphasized that the accrual of unlawful presence neither begins on the date that a status violation occurs, nor on the day on which removal proceedings are initiated.



(iii) F or J Nonimmigrants Admitted for Duration of Status (D/S) or F, J, or M Nonimmigrants Admitted Until a Specific Date (Date Certain) Background Since the creation of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), USCIS has followed the former Immigration and Naturalization Service’s (INS) various policies on the accrual of unlawful presence. In 2009, USCIS consolidated its prior policy guidance in this AFM chapter.[1] According to that policy—now superseded by this guidance—foreign students and exchange visitors (F and J nonimmigrants, respectively) admitted for, or present in the United States in, duration of status (D/S) started accruing unlawful presence on the day after USCIS formally found a nonimmigrant status violation while adjudicating a request for another immigration benefit or on the day after an immigration judge ordered the applicant excluded, deported, or removed (whether or not the decision is appealed), whichever came first. F and J nonimmigrants, and foreign vocational students (M nonimmigrants), admitted until a specific date (date certain) accrued unlawful presence on the day after their Form I-94 expired, or on the day after USCIS formally found a nonimmigrant status violation while adjudicating a request for another immigration benefit, or on the day after an immigration judge ordered the applicant excluded, deported, or removed (whether or not the decision was appealed), whichever came first.[2] The former INS policy, as consolidated in the AFM, went into effect in 1997 prior to the creation of some of the technologies and systems currently used by DHS to monitor nonimmigrants who are admitted to the United States in or otherwise acquire F, J, or M nonimmigrant status. Over the years, DHS has also made significant progress in its ability to identify and calculate the number of nonimmigrants who have failed to maintain status, including certain F, J, or M nonimmigrants.[3] For example, since the creation of the policy, the Student and Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS)—the DHS system used to monitor F, J, and M nonimmigrants—has provided USCIS officers additional information about an alien’s immigration history, including information that indicates that an alien in F, J, or M nonimmigrant status may have completed or ceased to pursue his or her course of study or activity, as outlined in Form I-20, Certificate of Eligibility for Nonimmigrant Student Status, and related forms, or Form DS-2019, Certificate of Eligibility for Exchange Visitor (J-1) Status. For FY 2016, DHS calculated that a total of 1,457,556 aliens admitted in F, J, and M nonimmigrant status were either expected to change status or depart the United States. Of this population, it was estimated that the total overstay rate was 6.19 percent for F nonimmigrants, 3.80 percent for J nonimmigrants, and 11.60 percent for M nonimmigrants.[4] To reduce the number of overstays and to improve how USCIS implements the unlawful presence ground of inadmissibility under INA 212(a)(9)(B) and INA 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I), USCIS changed its policy on how to calculate unlawful presence for F-1, J-1, and M-1 nonimmigrants, and their dependents (F-2, J-2, and M-2) effective on August 9, 2018. Policy Foreign students (F-1 nonimmigrants), exchange visitors (J-1 nonimmigrants), and vocational students (M-1 nonimmigrants), and their dependents, admitted or otherwise authorized to be present in the United States in duration of status (D/S) or admitted until a specific date (date certain) (in accordance with 8 CFR 214.2(f), 8 CFR 214.2(j), or 8 CFR 214.2(m)) start accruing unlawful presence as outlined below.[5] When assessing whether an F, J, or M nonimmigrant accrued unlawful presence and was no longer in a period of stay authorized, the USCIS officer should consider information relating to the alien’s immigration history, including but not limited to: Information contained in the systems available to USCIS;





Information contained in the alien’s record; [6] and





and Information obtained through a Request for Evidence (RFE) or Notice of Intent to Deny (NOID), if any. The officer should follow current USCIS guidance on the issuance of RFEs or NOIDs.[7] F, J or M nonimmigrants who failed to maintain nonimmigrant status before August 9, 2018 F, J, or M nonimmigrants who failed to maintain their nonimmigrant status[8] before August 9, 2018 start accruing unlawful presence based on that failure on August 9, 2018, [9] unless the alien had already started accruing unlawful presence on the earliest of the following: The day after DHS denied the request for the immigration benefit, if DHS made a formal finding that the alien violated his or her nonimmigrant status while adjudicating a request for another immigration benefit;[10] The day after the Form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record expired, if the F, J, or M nonimmigrant was admitted for a date certain; or The day after an immigration judge ordered the alien excluded, deported, or removed (whether or not the decision is appealed). F, J, or M nonimmigrants who failed to maintain nonimmigrant status on or after August 9, 2018 An F, J, or M nonimmigrant begins accruing unlawful presence, due to a failure to maintain his or her status[11] on or after August 9, 2018, on the earliest of any of the following: The day after the F, J, or M nonimmigrant no longer pursues the course of study or the authorized activity, or the day after he or she engages in an unauthorized activity; The day after completing the course of study or program (including any authorized practical training plus any authorized grace period, as outlined in 8 CFR 214.2); The day after the Form I-94 expires, if the F, J, or M nonimmigrant was admitted for a date certain; or The day after an immigration judge orders the alien excluded, deported, or removed (whether or not the decision is appealed). Foreign students (F nonimmigrant) generally do not accrue unlawful presence in certain situations, including but not limited to: During the period permitted under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(5)(i) (period of up to 30 days before the program start date listed on the F-1 nonimmigrant’s Form I-20); While the F-1 nonimmigrant is pursuing a full course of study at an educational institution approved by DHS for attendance by foreign students, and any additional periods of authorized pre- or post-completion practical training, including authorized periods of unemployment under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(10)(ii)(E); During a change in educational levels as outlined in 8 CFR 214.2(f)(5)(ii), provided the F-1 nonimmigrant transitions to the new educational level according to transfer procedures outlined in 8 CFR 214.2(f)(8); While the F-1 nonimmigrant is in a cap gap period under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(5)(vi), that is, during an automatic extension of an F-1 nonimmigrant’s D/S and employment authorization as provided under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(5)(vi) for a beneficiary of an H-1B petition and request for a change of status that has been timely filed and states that the employment start date for the F-1 nonimmigrant is October 1 of the following fiscal year; While the F-1 nonimmigrant’s application for post-completion Optional Practical Training (OPT) remains pending under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(10)(ii)(D); While the F-1 nonimmigrant is pursuing a school transfer provided that he or she has maintained status as provided in 8 CFR 214.2(f)(8); The period of time a timely-filed[12] reinstatement application under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(16) is pending with USCIS; The period of time an F-1 nonimmigrant was out of status if he or she applies for reinstatement under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(16), provided that the application is ultimately approved;





During annual vacation permitted under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(5)(iii) if the F-1 nonimmigrant is eligible and intends to register for the next term;





During any additional grace period as permitted under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(5)(iv) to prepare for departure:



60 days following completion of a course of study and any authorized practical training;

15 days if the designated school official (DSO) authorized the withdrawal from classes (SEVIS termination reason: authorized early withdrawal); or

No grace period if the F-1 nonimmigrant failed to maintain a full course of study without the approval of the DSO or otherwise failed to maintain status.





Emergent circumstances as outlined in 8 CFR 214.2(f)(5)(v), in which any or all of the requirements for on-campus or off-campus employment are suspended by a Federal Register notice and the student reduces his or her full course of study as a result of accepting employment based on the Federal Register notice; and





During a period of reduced course load, as authorized by the DSO under 8 CFR 214.2(f)(6)(H)(iii). Foreign exchange visitors (J nonimmigrants) generally do not accrue unlawful presence in certain situations, including but not limited to: The period of time annotated on Form DS-2019 as the approved program time plus any grace period, either before the program start date or after the conclusion of the program as outlined in 8 CFR 214.2(j)(1)(ii);





Any extension of program time annotated on Form DS-2019 as outlined in 8 CFR 214.2(j)(1)(iv);





While the J-1 nonimmigrant is in a cap gap period as outlined in 8 CFR 214.2(j)(1)(vi); [13] and





and The period of time a J-1 nonimmigrant was out of status, if he or she is granted reinstatement under 22 CFR 62.45. Foreign vocational students (M nonimmigrants) generally do not accrue unlawful presence in certain situations, including but not limited to: The period of admission as indicated on Form I-94, plus up to 30 days before the report or start date of the course of study listed on the Form I-20 as outlined in 8 CFR 214.2(m)(5);



Any authorized grace period as outlined in 8 CFR 214.2(m)(5);





During the time the M-1 nonimmigrant completes authorized practical training as outlined in 8 CFR 214.2(m)(14);





The period of time a timely-filed [14] reinstatement application under 8 CFR 214.2(m)(16) is pending with USCIS; and,





reinstatement application under 8 CFR 214.2(m)(16) is pending with USCIS; and, The period of time an M-1 nonimmigrant was out of status if he or she applies for reinstatement under 8 CFR 214.2(m)(16), provided that the application is ultimately approved. The period of stay authorized for an F-2, J-2, or M-2 nonimmigrant dependent (spouse or child) admitted for D/S or for a date certain is contingent on the F-1, J-1, or M-1 nonimmigrant remaining in a period of stay authorized. An F-2, J-2, or M-2 nonimmigrant’s period of stay authorized ends when the F-1, J-1, or M-1 nonimmigrant’s period of stay authorized ends. In addition, an F-2, J-2, or M-2 nonimmigrant’s period of stay authorized may end due to the F-2, J-2, or M-2 nonimmigrant dependent’s own conduct or circumstances. An alien under 18 years of age does not accrue unlawful presence.[15] Therefore, any F, J, or M nonimmigrant who is under 18 years of age does not accrue unlawful presence. Additionally, the F, J, or M nonimmigrant may be otherwise protected from accruing unlawful presence, as outlined in this chapter.



(iv) Non-Controlled Nonimmigrants (for example, Canadian B-1/B-2)





Nonimmigrants, who are not issued a Form I-94 , Arrival/Departure Record, are treated as nonimmigrants admitted for D/S S (as addressed in Chapter 40.9.2(b)(1)(E)(ii)) for purposes of determining unlawful presence.





(F) Other Types of Lawful Status





(i) Aliens in Refugee Status





In general, the period of authorized stay begins on the date the alien is admitted to the United States in refugee status. If refugee status is terminated, unlawful presence will start to accrue the day after the refugee status is terminated.





If the individual is a derivative refugee, either by accompanying or by following to join the principal, the alien will commence to accrue unlawful presence as follows:





· If the derivative refugee is outside the United States: The period of stay authorized begins on the date the alien either enters as an accompanying or following-to-join refugee pursuant to section 207(c)(2) of the Act and 8 CFR 207.7 .





· If the derivative refugee is inside the United States: The accrual of unlawful presence ceases when USCIS accepts the filing of a bona fide Form I-730 , Asylee/Refugee Relative Petition, on the individual’s behalf. USCIS interprets the language of section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(II) of the Act to apply to refugees and asylees alike. Form I-730





Therefore, once the bona fide Form I-730 petition is filed on behalf of the individual, the individual will be protected from the accrual of unlawful presence.





No period of time during which the bona fide petition is pending shall be taken into account in determining the period of unlawful presence. If the petition is subsequently denied, the individual will again begin to accrue unlawful presence, if the individual has previously accrued unlawful presence.





· Because filing a Form I-730 stops the accrual of unlawful presence, but does not cure any unlawful presence that has already accrued, an individual who departs the United States during the pendency of the petition, with or without advance parole, will trigger the 3-year or the 10-year bar.





In this case and because an individual seeking refugee status has to be admissible as an immigrant pursuant to section 207 of the Act, the individual will be required to file Form I-602, Application by Refugee For Waiver of Grounds of Excludability, to overcome the bars to admissibility before the Asylee/Refugee Relative Petition can be approved.





If the alien is not permitted to reenter the United States, the individual will have to seek the waiver through the U.S. consulate where the approved I-730 is processed .





(ii) Aliens Granted Asylum





The period of authorized stay begins on the date the alien files a bona fide application for asylum. See section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(II) of the Act; see also AFM Chapter 40.9.2(b)(2)(B) of this chapter.





This includes aliens, who entered the United States illegally but who were subsequently granted asylum. If asylum status is terminated, unlawful presence starts to accrue the day after the date of termination. A grant of asylum does not eliminate any prior periods of unlawful presence.





An individual who is included in the principal’s asylum application, Form I-589 , as a derivative beneficiary is in a period of stay authorized as of the date the principal applicant is in a period of stay authorized (unless he or she works without authorization or it is deemed that the application for the derivative individual is not bona fide).





However, if it is determined that the asylum application is not bona fide for reasons other than the ones to be attributed to the derivative beneficiary, the individual is in a period of stay authorized until the determination is made that the application by the principal was not bona fide.





Also, if the principal works without authorization, the derivative beneficiary only commences to accrue unlawful presence at the time the determination is made that the principal had worked without authorization.





Finally, a derivative beneficiary, who is physically present in the United States, but who was not included on the asylum application, is protected from the accrual of unlawful presence once the qualifying asylee files an Asylee/Refugee Relative Petition on behalf of the individual.





DHS interprets the language of section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(II) of the Act to apply to all applicants for asylum, including derivative beneficiaries, who obtain their status through an Asylee/Refugee Relative Petition.





(iii) Aliens Granted Temporary Protected Status (TPS) pursuant to Section 244 of the Act





If an alien’s TPS application has been granted, the alien is deemed to be in lawful nonimmigrant status for the duration of the grant. See section 244(f) of the Act; also s ee AFM Chapter 40.9.2(b)(3)(G) for the effect of a violation of TPS status on the accrual of unlawful presence, and for the effect of a pending TPS application on the accrual of unlawful presence. ee AFM





If an alien is granted TPS, he or she is, while the grant is in effect, deemed to be in lawful nonimmigrant status for purposes of adjustment of status and change of status according to section 244(f) of the Act.





A grant of TPS does not, however, cure any unlawful presence that may have accrued before the grant of TPS. If the alien was present without inspection and admission or parole, the alien remains an alien who has not been inspected and admitted or paroled, despite the grant of TPS. See INS General Counsel Opinion, 91-27, March 4, 1991.





Therefore, if before TPS is granted, the applicant had previously accrued unlawful presence sufficient to trigger the bars, and the applicant travels outside the United States after having obtained advance parole, his or her departure triggers the bars for purposes of an adjustment of change of status application; that is, the individual may be ineligible to adjust despite the wording of section 244(f) of the Act, and depending on the basis upon which the alien seeks adjustment.





Also, if a waiver was granted for inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B) or (C) of the Act for purposes of the TPS application, the alien is still inadmissible for purposes of adjustment of status because the standard of the waiver granted for TPS status is different than the one granted in relation to an immigrant benefits application (although both are filed on Form I-601 , Application for Waiver of Grounds of Inadmissibility).





(G) Aliens Present as Parolees .





Section 212(a)(9)(B)(ii) of the Act makes clear that an alien, who has been paroled, does not accrue unlawful presence as long as the parole lasts.





For purposes of the accrual of unlawful presence, the specific type of parole and the reasons for the grant of parole do not matter; however, conditional parole pursuant to section 236 of the Act cannot be considered parole for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B)(ii) of the Act. See AFM chapter 40.9.1(a)(3)(D).





An alien, who has been paroled into the United States does, however, begin to accrue unlawful presence as follows:





When a parolee remains in the United States beyond the period of parole authorization, unlawful presence begins to accrue the day following the expiration of the parole authorization.







Example: The alien’s parole expires January 1, 2007, and the alien does not depart. January 2, 2007 will be the alien’s first day of unlawful presence.



If the parole authorization is revoked or terminated prior to its expiration date, unlawful presence begins to accrue the day after the revocation or termination.





An alien paroled for the purpose of removal proceedings will begin to accrue unlawful presence the day after the date the removal order becomes administratively final, or unless the alien is otherwise protected from the accrual of unlawful presence.





Aliens Present in Unlawful Status Who Do not Accrue Unlawful Presence by Statute for Purposes of Section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act (Statutory Exceptions) (2)





As noted in AFM Chapter 40.9.2(a)(2) , an alien must be in the United States in an unlawful status in order to accrue unlawful presence; however, there are some situations in which unlawful presence does not accrue despite unlawful status.





The alien may be protected from accruing unlawful presence by section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act itself, or by USCIS policy. AFM Chapter 40.9.2(b)(2) deals with individuals, who are actually in unlawful status but who, by statute, do not accrue unlawful presence for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act.





only to grounds of inadmissibility listed in section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act, and do not apply for purposes of inadmissibility under The exceptions listed in AFM Chapter 40.9.2(b)(2) applyto grounds of inadmissibility listedin section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act, andapply for purposes of inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C) of the Act.





There are two reasons for this conclusion:





· The terms of only to specific subsections of The terms of sections 212(a)(9)(B)(iii) and (iv) of the Act referto specific subsections of section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) of the Act; and





· Inadmissibility under Inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act rests on a more serious immigration violation than simple unlawful presence: To be inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act, the alien must not only have accrued sufficient unlawful presence but also returned or attempted to return to the United States without admission.





See June 17, 1997, Office of Programs memorandum – Additional Guidance for Implementing Sections 212(a)(6) and 212(a)(9) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (Act) ; see also Since the precise language of sections 212(a)(9)(B)(iii) and (iv) of the Act clearly make them apply only to inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act and not to inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act, and because violations of section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) of the Act are more culpable than mere unlawful presence, USCIS has concluded that these statutory exceptions do not apply to section 212(a)(9)(C)(i)(I) cases.June 17, 1997, Office of Programs memorandum – AFM Chapter 40.9.2(b)(3) below for the same remark.





Minors Who Are under 18 Years of Age (A)





An alien whose unlawful status begins before his or her 18th birthday does not begin to accrue unlawful presence for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act until the day after his or her 18th birthday pursuant to section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(I) of the Act.





Aliens with Pending Asylum Applications (Including Children Aging Out and Dependents of Asylum Applicants) (B)





(i) Principal Applicant





See An alien, whose bona fide application for asylum is pending, is in an authorized period of stay and does not accrue unlawful presence for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act unless the alien is employed without authorization while the application is pending. section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(II) of the Act. It does not matter whether the application is or was filed affirmatively or defensively.





DHS has interpreted the phrase “bona fide asylum application” to mean a properly filed asylum application that has a reasonably arguable basis in fact or law, and is not frivolous. If this is the case, unlawful presence does not accrue while the application is pending unless the alien engages in unauthorized employment. DHS considers the application for asylum to be pending during any administrative or judicial review (including review in Federal court).





A denial of an asylum claim is not determinative of whether the claim was bona fide for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(II) of the Act. Similarly, the abandonment of an application for asylum does not mean that the application was not bona fide.





The Asylum Division within the Refugee, Asylum, and International Operations Directorate at USCIS HQ can provide guidance regarding whether a filing of an asylum application can be deemed “bona fide” based on the specific facts of the case and should be contacted, if there are any questions as to the determination.







(ii) Dependents in General





An individual who is included in the principal’s asylum application (Form I-589) as a derivative beneficiary is in a period of stay authorized as of the date the principal applicant is in a period of stay authorized (unless he or she works without authorization or it is deemed that the application for the derivative individual is not bona fide).





However, if it is determined that the asylum application is not bona fide for reasons other than the ones to be attributed to the dependent, the individual is in a period of stay authorized, for example until the determination is made that the application was not bona fide.





Also, if the principal works without authorization, the derivative beneficiary only commences to accrue unlawful presence at the time the determination is made that the principal had worked without authorization.





A dependent’s asylum case is no longer considered pending if the principal asylum applicant notifies USCIS that the dependent is no longer part of the principal’s application, or if USCIS determines that the dependent relationship no longer exists (for example because of divorce, or if the individual is no longer considered a “child”).



In such cases, USCIS will remove the individual from the pending asylum application; the individual must file his or her own asylum application as a principal applicant within a reasonable amount of time.





The individual will commence to accrue unlawful presence from the time USCIS has removed the dependent from the principal’s application. Individuals, who do file a bona fide application within a reasonable period of time, will be deemed to have a pending application and they do not accrue unlawful presence from the time the new bona fide application is pending.





Finally, a derivative beneficiary, who is physically present in the United States but who was not included on the asylum application, is in a period of stay authorized at the time the qualifying asylee files an Asylee/Refugee Relative Petition on behalf of the individual. DHS interprets the language of section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(II) of the Act to apply to all applicants for asylum, including derivative beneficiaries who obtain their status through an Asylee/Refugee Relative petition.





Adjudicators should keep in mind that if the principal asylum applicant’s dependent is not yet 18 years old, then the dependent will be protected from accrual of unlawful presence under section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(I) of the Act.





(iii) Children Who Age Out and The Child Status Protection Act (CSPA)





CSPA amended Theamended section 208(b)(3)(B) of the Act to allow continued classification as a child for an unmarried son or daughter, who was under 21 years of age on the date the parent filed for asylum, provided that the son or daughter turned 21 years of age while the application remained pending.



Therefore, if the requirements of the CSPA are met (the alien is present in the United States, named in the asylum application of his or her parent, and the application was pending on or after August 6, 2002) the individual may continue to be classified as a “child” and can be considered to have a pending application. Thus, unlawful presence does not accrue in such cases.





Example: Form I-589, Application for Asylum and for Withholding of Removal, was filed on February 7, 2000, listing a 20-year old derivative son in the United States. The son turned 21 on October 1, 2000. The application remained pending through August 6, 2002, and continues to be pending. For purposes of the asylum application, the son continues to be a “child” because the application was filed prior to his 21 st birthday. The son will not start to accrue unlawful presence until and unless the application is denied.



Aliens Physically Present in the United States with pending Forms I-730 (C)





Accrual of unlawful presence stops upon the filing of a bona fide Form I-730 , Asylee/Refugee Relative Petition. USCIS interprets the language of section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(II) of the Act to apply to refugees and asylees alike. Therefore, once the bona fide petition is properly filed on behalf of the individual, the individual will no longer accrue unlawful presence. Form I-730





If the alien was already accruing unlawful presence when the Form I-730 was filed, and the Form I-730 is subsequently denied, the individual will again begin to accrue unlawful presence on the day after the denial of the petition.







If, at the time of the filing of the Form I-730, the alien was protected from the accrual of unlawful presence (for example, was in lawful status or had another application pending), but the other basis for protection expired while the Form I-730 was pending, then the alien will begin to accrue unlawful presence on the day after the denial of the Form I-730.







No period during which the bona fide Form I-730 was pending will be counted in determining the accrual of unlawful presence. Since the filing of a Form I-730 does not cure any unlawful presence that has already accrued, if the individual departs during the pendency of the petition, the individual will trigger the 3-year and the 10-year bar, if, prior to the filing of the petition, the individual has already accrued sufficient unlawful presence.





Because a refugee has to be admissible as an immigrant pursuant to section 207 of the Act, the individual, upon his return to the United States, will be required to file Form I-602 , Application By Refugee For Wavier of Grounds of Excludability, to overcome the bars to admissibility before Form I-730 can be granted to confer derivative refugee status. If the alien departs without advance parole, the individual will have to seek the waiver through the U.S. consulate where the approved Asylee/Refugee Relative Petition will be processed. Form I-602





(D) Beneficiary of Family Unity Protection (FUP) Granted pursuant to Section 301 of the Immigration Act of 1990; 8 CFR 236.15





No period of time in which an alien is a beneficiary of FUP shall be taken into account in determining the period of unlawful presence in the United States, for purposes of section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act. If the FUP application ( Form I-817 ) is approved, the accrual of unlawful presence will be deemed to have stopped as of the date of the filing of Form I-817, Application for Family Unity Benefits, and will continue through the period the alien retains FUP protection. The grant of FUP protection does not, however, erase prior unlawful presence. Form I-817





The filing of Form I-817, by itself, does not stop the accrual of unlawful presence. If the Form I-817 is denied, the individual will continue to accrue unlawful presence as if no Form I-817 had been filed.





under section 1504 of the LIFE Act Amendments of 2000. As a matter of policy, US CIS treats section 1504 FUP cases the same as section 301 FUP cases, for purposes of the accrual of unlawful presence. See Section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(II) of the Act, by its terms, applies only to Family Unity Program benefits under section 301 of the Immigration Act of 1990. Congress provided similar benefitsCIS treats section 1504 FUP cases the same as section 301 FUP cases, for purposes of the accrual of unlawful presence. See AFM chapter 40.9.2(b)(3)(F)





Certain Battered Spouses, Parents, and Children (E)





An approved Violence Against Women Act of 1994 (VAWA) self-petitioner and his or her child(ren) can claim an exception from inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) of the Act, if he or she can establish a substantial connection between the abuse suffered, the unlawful presence, and his or her departure from the United States.





He or she may claim this exception by submitting evidence of such substantial connection with his or her adjustment application. If the exception is granted, the individual is deemed to not be inadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) of the Act for purposes of future immigration benefits. This exception does not apply to inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(C)(i) of the Act, which has its own VAWA waiver in section 212(a)(9)(C)(iii) of the Act.





Victims of Severe Form of Trafficking in Persons (F)





See Section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) of the Act does not apply to certain victims of severe forms of trafficking. section 212(a)(9)(B)(iii)(V) of the Act.





Similar to the battered spouses, a victim of a severe form of trafficking in persons may claim an exception to inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9)(B)(i) of the Act, if he or she can demonstrate that the severe form of trafficking (as that term is defined in section 7102 of Title 22 U.S.C.) was at least one central reason for the alien’s unlawful presence in the United States.





See 8 CFR 214.11 ; 8 CFR 245.23 . If the exception is granted by USCIS, the individual will be deemed to have never accrued any unlawful presence for purposes of the current nonimmigrant benefits application or any future benefits application. An individual can claim the exception by submitting evidence of the central reason with Form I-914 , Application for T Nonimmigrant Status, or, at the time of the adjustment, when filing Form I-485 , Application to Register Permanent Residence or Adjust Status.If the exception is granted by USCIS, the individual will be deemed to have never accrued any unlawful presence for purposes of the current nonimmigrant benefits application or any future benefits application.





See See 8 CFR 212.18 . If the exception is not granted, the individual may apply for a discretionary waiver of the ground of inadmissibility. If seeking T nonimmigrant status, the alien would apply under section 212(d)(3)(A) or 212(d)(13) of the Act by filing Form I-192 , Advance Permission to Enter as Nonimmigrant. 8 CFR 212.16 . If the alien is already a T nonimmigrant, and is seeking adjustment of status, the alien would file Form I-601, Application for Waiver Grounds of Inadmissibility.





Nonimmigrants with Pending Requests for Extension of Status (EOS) or Change of Status (COS)(“Tolling”) (G)





Pursuant to section 212(a)(9)(B)(iv) of the Act, a nonimmigrant, who has filed a timely request for extension of nonimmigrant status (EOS) or change of nonimmigrant status (COS), is protected from accruing unlawful presence during the pendency of the application for up to 120 days (the accrual of unlawful presence is “tolled”). Section 212(a)(9)(B)(iv) of the Act is only applicable to the three-year bar of section 212(a)(9)(B)(i)(I) of the Act, and is also referred to as the “tolling-provision.” However, unlawful presence for purposes of the 3-year bar will only be tolled, if:





· the alien has been lawfully admitted or paroled into the United States, and





· the application for EOS or COS is timely filed, and not frivolous, and





· the alien does not engage and/or has not been engaging in unauthorized employment. See section 212(a)(9)(B)(iv) of the Act.





By policy, USCIS has extended the 120-day statutory tolling period to cover the entire period during which an application for EOS or COS is pending; this extension is valid for the 3-year and the 10-year bars.





For a more detailed description of this extension and guidance concerning whether unlawful presence accrues after the 120-day period specified by the statute. See AFM Chapter 40.9.2(b)(3)(C) .





Aliens Present in Unlawful Status Who Do not Accrue Unlawful Presence by Virtue of USCIS Policy for Purposes of Sections 212(a)(9)(B) and (C)(i)(I) of the Act (3)





As noted in AFM Chapter 40.9.2(a)(2) , there are some circumstances in which an alien whose status is actually unlawful is, nevertheless, protected from the accrual of unlawful presence.





As a matter of policy, USCIS has determined that an alien whose status is actually unlawful does not accrue unlawful presence in the situations described in this subsection.





These exceptions are based on policy, unlike the statutory exceptions listed in sections 212(a)(9)(B)(iii) and (iv) of the Act that were discussed in AFM Chapter 40.9.2(b)(2) . It is USCIS’ policy that these exceptions apply to unlawful presence accrued for purposes of sections 212(a)(9)(B) and (C)(i)(I) of the Act unless otherwise noted in this section.





(A) Aliens with Properly Filed Pending Applications for Adjustment of Status or Registry ( Sections 209 , 245 , and 245(i) of the Act, sections 202 of P ublic Law 99-603 (Cuban-Haitian Adjustment), section 202(b) of NACARA, section 902 of HRIFA, and aliens with properly filed, pending Registry applications under section 249 of the Act)





Accrual of unlawful presence stops on the date the application is properly filed pursuant to 8 CFR 103 and the regulatory filing requirements governing the particular type of benefit sought.





Note that, if the application is properly filed according to the regulatory requirements, the applicant will not accrue unlawful presence, even if it is ultimately determined that the applicant was not eligible for the benefit in the first place. The accrual of unlawful presence is tolled until the application is denied.





Example: An alien, who has been unlawfully in the United States for 90 days, and who had worked without authorization during the 90 days, applies for adjustment of status based on an approved Form I-130, Petition for Alien Relative. The application for adjustment of status is properly filed, that is, the application is fully executed, signed, and the applicant pays the proper fee. See 8 CFR 103.2(a)(7) . Also, with the application package, the alien provides a copy of Form I-797 , Notice of Approval for the Alien Relative Petition, and a copy of the newest Visa Bulletin, demonstrating that a visa number is immediately available in his or her preference category. See 8 CFR 245.2 . Therefore, USCIS accepts the application and stamps it as received and properly filed as of January 1, 2007. What is not readily apparent from the initial review of the application is that the alien had previously worked without authorization, and therefore, he or she is not eligible to apply for adjustment of status pursuant to section 245(c) of the Act. However, because the application was accepted by USCIS as (technically) properly filed, the applicant is now in authorized stay and does not accrue any unlawful presence during the pendency of the properly filed application for adjustment of status. At the time of the interview, on April 1, 2007, the applicant’s adjustment of status application is denied based on section 245(c) of the Act, for having been employed without authorization. On April 2, 2007, the alien’s accrual of unlawful presence resumes because he or she no longer has a pending application for adjustment of status. The alien departs the United States on May 1, 2007, after having secured an immigrant visa interview at the US Embassy/consular section in his or her home country. In assessing the alien’s inadmissibility under section 212(a)(9) of the Act, the consular officer will count the alien’s 90 days of unlawful presence that accrued prior to the filing of the adjustment of status application, and the 30 days of unlawful presence that accrued after the adjustment of status application was denied. However, the consular officer will not count the time period during which the adjustment of status application was pending because the individual was in a period of stay authorized and did not accrue unlawful presence during the pendency of the adjustment application.



In total, the alien had accrued 120 days of unlawful presence in the United States; the alien is not i nadmissible under nadmissible under section 212(a)(9)(B) of the Act.





Except in the case of a NACARA or HRIFA applica