Whole Health For Life
VA facilities are shifting from a health care system focused primarily on treating disease to one rooted in forming continuous healing relationships and partnerships that support Veterans in achieving their greatest overall well-being.

The result is a whole health approach, which is a bold redesign of health care focused on empowering and equipping Veterans to take charge of their health and well-being. Guided by a personalized health plan, VA’s Whole Health System considers the physical, mental, emotional, spiritual, and environmental elements that work together to provide the best quality of life for each Veteran.

As we reconnect with what matters most in our lives and learn new approaches to help us live life to the fullest, VA health teams will be there each step of the way. THIS is the VA of the future.

In 2018, VA is launching the full Whole Health System in one Flagship facility in each of the 18 Veterans Integrative Service Networks (VISN). Flagship sites are expanding Veteran self-empowerment, self-healing, and self-care through the implementation of three components, The Pathway, Well-being Programs and Whole Health Clinical Care.

The Pathway is a partnership with peers where Veterans are empowered to explore their mission, aspiration, and purpose, and begin their overarching personal health plan. Well-being Programs focus on self-care and equip each person with skill building and proactively supports one’s personal health plan with complementary and integrative health (CIH) approaches such as mindfulness, yoga, tai chi, and health coaching. Whole Health Clinical Care is provided by clinicians who utilize a whole health approach is which grounded in a healing relationship and incorporates complementary and integrative health approaches based on the Veteran’s personal health plan. This care may be provided in the VA or in the community.



Additionally, we are pleased to announce the selection of new sites that will be serving as Whole Health Design Sites. As Whole Health Design Sites these facilities will implement elements of whole health and/or expand their existing efforts to implement a Whole Health System. Even if you do not live near one of the VA whole health sites, there are many VA facilities nationwide with whole health practices in place. Visit the Office of Patient Centered Care and Cultural Transformation’s website at https://www.va.gov/patientcenteredcare to learn more about how whole health can benefit you.

The 2018 Whole Health Design Sites are:

Edith Nourse Rogers Memorial Veterans Hospital (Bedford, MA)

Birmingham VA Medical Center

Central California VA Health Care System

Cincinnati VA Medical Center

John D. Dingell VA Medical Center (Detroit, MI)

Fargo VA Health Care System

William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital (Madison, WI)

Manchester VA Medical Center

Mountain Home VA Medical Center

Royal C. Johnson Veterans Memorial Medical Center (Sioux Falls, SD)

Syracuse VA Medical Center

West Palm Beach VA Medical Center

Kansas City VA Medical Center

2018 Whole Health Flagship Sites

VISN 1: VA Boston Health Care System

VISN 2: VA New Jersey Health Care System (East Orange, NJ)

VISN 4: Erie VA Medical Center

VISN 5: Beckley VA Medical Center

VISN 6: W. G. (Bill) Hefner VA Medical Center (Salisbury, NC)

VISN 7: Atlanta VA Medical Center

VISN 8: Tampa VA Medical Center

VISN 9: Tennessee Valley Health Care System

VISN 10: Aleda E. Lutz VA Medical Center (Saginaw, MI)

VISN 12: Tomah VA Medical Center

VISN 15: St. Louis VA Health Care System

VISN 16: Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System (Little Rock, AR)

VISN 17: South Texas Veterans Health Care System (San Antonio, TX)

VISN 19: Salt Lake City VA Medical Center

VISN 20: VA Portland Health Care System

VISN 21: Palo Alto VA Medical Center

VISN 22: Tucson VA Medical Center

VISN 23: VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System (Omaha, NE)

2017 Whole Health Design Sites

Baltimore VA Medical Center

Central Arkansas Health Care System

Durham VA Medical Center

VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System

VA Hudson Valley Health Care System

Iowa City VA Health Care System

Minneapolis VA Health Care System

VA Portland Health Care System

San Francisco VA Health Care System

VA St. Louis Health Care System

Tomah VA Medical Center

2016 Whole Health Design Sites