BREAKING CAIR-FL Welcomes Failure of Original Version of Anti-Islam Bill, SB 386
CAIR-FL Welcomes Failure of Original Version of Anti-Islam Bill, SB 386

Original Anti-Sharia Bill Dies With Strike All Amendment Which Created New Bill



(TAMPA, FL 4/30/14) - The Florida chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR-Florida) today along with allies welcomed the failure of the original "anti-sharia" version of SB 386 which had been based on language written by Islamophobe David Yerushalmi.



Yerushalmi is head of the anti-Islam hate group Society of Americans for National Existence (SANE), which once offered a policy proposal that would make "adherence to Islam" punishable by 20 years in prison, called for the immediate deportation of all non-citizen Muslims and urged Congress to declare war on the "Muslim Nation."

The bill was supported by anti-Muslim hate groups like ACT! and the FFA while opposed by leading Muslim and Jewish civil rights organizations, and legal organizations including the American Bar Association and the Family Law and International Law sections of the Florida Bar.



Representative Jim Waldman, D-Coconut Creek, strongly stated on the Florida House floor regarding the original language of SB 386 that "This law stems directly from a hatred of Muslims."



The new amended version of SB 386 passed the Senate today with completely new language, effectively killing the previous anti-sharia version of SB 386/HB 903.

As amended Senate Bill 386, is dramatically different than the bill as originally filed. In its final form the legislation simply parrots existing case law and should have negligible to no new affect in judicial proceedings.



Pressure generated by CAIR-FL and allies led to the bill being amended at the last minute before passage through a "Strike All Amendment" by Senator Simmons. The Strike All Amendment effectively deleted all language in SB 386 that had been influenced by the anti-sharia movement and created a new bill which simply codified existing case law applicable to legal disputes involving courts from foreign countries. Leadership from the American Muslim community worked closely with Senator Simmons to develop the new language which alleviated concerns that the bill could be used to marginalize the American Muslim Community.



Critics are still concerned that the new SB 386 is unnecessary, but are relieved that the previous anti-Muslim version of SB 386 has died. CAIR-FL Chief executive director Hassan Shibly stated: "The failure of the original anti-Muslim version of this bill makes it clear that the majority of the Florida public will not tolerate laws intended to demonize minorities and allow politicians to use their authority to advance their personal religious biases."



Senator Alan Hayes, a sponsor of the bill who distributed anti-Muslim literature in the state capitol in the past, was asked on the Senate floor if passing the amended language would mean not having to deal with a fifth version of the legislation next year. He responded that he was done. Unfortunately, House sponsor Representative Neil Combee, was asked the same question and defiantly refused to make a similar commitment.



Special thanks go out to Senator David Simmons who took control of the bill in the last couple of weeks and to EMERGE USA and the International Law Section of the Florida Bar who worked with him in perfecting the amendatory language. We are also grateful to Mark Schlakman, Senior Program Director of the Center for the Advancement of Human Rights at Florida State University, for his testimony against the bill before numerous committees in both the House and Senate and for the terrific column he wrote in the Tallahassee Democrat. Special thanks to all friends, allies, and the concerned Floridians who sent thousands of emails to Tallahassee voicing their objection to the original anti-Muslim version of SB 386 which died this week as the amended version was passed.



This is the fourth year in a row that language influenced by the anti-shariah hate group movement has failed in Tallahassee thanks to the efforts of CAIR-FL and our friends and allies.



CAIR-FL is a chapter of America's largest Muslim civil liberties and advocacy organization. Its mission is to enhance the understanding of Islam, encourage dialogue, protect civil liberties, empower American Muslims, and build coalitions that promote justice and mutual understanding.



- END -



CONTACT: CAIR-Florida Chief Executive Director Hassan Shibly, 813-541-4321, hshibly@cair.com; Florida Community & Government Relations Director Ghazala Salam, 954-309-4797, gsalam@cair.com