Daniel J. Weitzner

Co-Director, MIT CSAIL Decentralized Information Group

W3C Technology and Society Policy Director

[bio] [short bio - 200 words] [very short - 100 words] [2line bio] [General CV] [CV in One Picture] [Full CV][short CV]

Daniel Weitzner is Policy Director of the World Wide Web Consortium's Technology and Society activities. As such, he is responsible for development of technology standards that enable the web to address social, legal, and public policy concerns such as privacy, free speech, security, protection of minors, authentication, intellectual property and identification. Weitzner holds an appointment as Principal Research Scientist at MIT's Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, co-directs MIT's Decentralized Information Group with Tim Berners-Lee, and teaches Internet public policy at MIT.

As one of the leading figures in the Internet public policy community, he was the first to advocate user control technologies such as content filtering and rating to protect children and avoid government censorship of the Intenet. These arguments played a critical role in the 1997 US Supreme Court case, Reno v. ACLU, awarding the highest free speech protections to the Internet. He successfully advocated for adoption of amendments to the Electronic Communications Privacy Act creating new privacy protections for online transactional information such as Web site access logs.

Before joining the W3C, Mr. Weitzner was co-founder and Deputy Director of the Center for Democracy and Technology, a leading Internet civil liberties organization in Washington, DC. He was also Deputy Policy Director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation. He serves on the Boards of Directors of the Center for Democracy and Technology, the Software Freedom Law Center, the Web Science Research Initiative. and the Internet Education Foundation.

His publications on technical and public policy aspects of the Internet have appeared in the Yale Law Review, Science magazine, Communications of the ACM, Computerworld, Wired Magazine, and The Whole Earth Review. He is also a commentator for NPR's Marketplace Radio.

Mr. Weitzner has a degree in law from Buffalo Law School, and a B.A. in Philosophy from Swarthmore College.

Selected W3C Activities

Chair, Patent Policy Working Group

Chair, Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P) Coordination Group

Selected Publications:

T. Berners-Lee, W. Hall, J. Hendler, N. Shadbolt, D. Weitzner, "Creating a Science of the Web." Science 11 August 2006: Vol. 313. no. 5788, pp. 769 – 771.

Weitzner, D, Berman, J., "Abundance and Control: Renewing the Democratic Heart of the First Amendment in the Age of Interactive Media," Yale Law Journal, Vol. 104, No.7, May 1995

Weitzner, D, "Directing Policy-Making: Beyond the Net's Metaphor," Communications of the ACM, Vol. 40, No. 2, February 1997.

Weitzner, D., Berman, J., "Technology and Democracy, " Social Research (Volume 64 No. 3 (Fall 1997))

Weitzner, D., (ed.), Browning, G., Electronic Democracy: Using the Internet to Influence American Politics. Pemberton Press, 1996.

Weitzner, D. "The Clipper Chip Controversy," Computerworld July 25, 1994.

Ackerman, M., Darrell, T., & Weitzner, D. J. (2001). Privacy in context. Human-Computer Interaction, 16, pp. 167-176

Kapor, M., Weitzner, D., "The EFF Open Platform Proposal," 1992. http://www.eff.org/pub/Infrastructure/Old/overview_eff.op

My complete CV is also available.

Information :

email: djweitzner@csail.mit.edu djweitzner@w3,org telephone: MIT : +1.617.253.8036

postal mail: MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Building 32-G516

77 Massachusetts Ave

Cambridge, MA 02139

USA street address 32 Vassar St.

Cambridge, MA

USA

I have a foaf file. You can get in on the ground floor of semanitc web by having a FOAF file, too. [more information]

Last updated: August 2006