Joe Manchin's Republican challenger, W. Va. Atty. Gen. Patrick Morrissey, is married to a K Street lobbying mogul
West Virginia Attorney General Patrick Morrissey is quickly finding out that politics literally makes strange bedfellows. Sen. Joe Manchin's presumed challenger, Morrissey, is also the husband of a veteran D.C. lobbyist.

Denise Henry Morrissey owns the second-largest stake in Capitol Counsel, a high-powered, bipartisan lobbying shop that, according to federal disclosures, regularly undercuts positions held by her Republican husband. And more than once, that's led to embarrassing conflicts of interest.

While Morrissey was leading a coalition of attorneys general in support of Judge Neil Gorsuch, his wife's lobbying shop went to war against President Trump's Supreme Court nominee. Planned Parenthood enlisted those hired guns in March to shoot down the nomination just a month after Morrissey drafted an open letter to the Senate in support of the nominee.

Of course, as James Carville and Mary Matalin prove, it's possible for bipartisan love to bloom. Political disagreements don't necessarily doom relationships. But on the Gorsuch issue, the official positions of the Morrissey household seem worlds apart.

Writing on behalf of 20 attorneys general back in March, Mr. Morrissey plugged Gorsuch as "an outstanding jurist with a proven commitment to upholding the U.S. Constitution and the rule of law."

Planned Parenthood, which Mrs. Morrissey's company was representing at the time, described Gorsuch as "an extreme Supreme Court nominee," dismissing him because of his supposedly "extreme judicial philosophy and dangerous record on reproductive health."

Mrs. Morrissey's name doesn't appear listed on any disclosures connected to Planned Parenthood. But as the Charleston Gazette-Mail notes, the attorney general's wife holds a 15 percent stake in Capitol Counsel and altogether the lobbying shop has cashed Planned Parenthood checks worth $460,000. Her equity stake in the firm is, ultimately, funding a portion of this lobbying activity.

Morrissey's spokesman, Curtis Johnson, told the Washington Examiner that his boss would continue to speak out against abortion despite "efforts to smear his wife."

"As a strong, pro-life Attorney General, Patrick Morrisey will keep fighting aggressively for the unborn, speaking out against Planned Parenthood funding and working to ensure that highly qualified judges such as Neil Gorsuch sit on the Supreme Court," Johnson wrote in a statement.

Mr. and Mrs. Morrissey have also taken opposing positions on the repeal and replacement of Obamacare. While he regularly rails against the healthcare law as an attorney general, she's lobbied for power players, like Blue Cross and Blue Shield, with a vested interest in preserving portions of the law.

In the past the pair have gotten tangled up in ethical questions. The attorney general admitted that he failed "to permanently screen himself" from involvement in a lawsuit against Cardinal Health, a pharmaceutical giant his wife was lobbying for on Capitol Hill.

A disciplinary lawyer panel eventually dismissed the attorney general's involvement in that case as not "substantive." But the episode makes clear that the Morrissey household has a hard time achieving the proper work-life balance, a task that would become exponentially more difficult if he won a Senate seat and moved to D.C.

No doubt during election season, that power couple's private relationship will become a public topic of debate.

Philip Wegmann is a commentary writer for the Washington Examiner.