Congressman Forbes’ Statement on Funding Agreement
Congressman J. Randy Forbes (VA-04) released the following statement today on his vote against the continuing resolution to fund the government for the remainder of the fiscal year:



“As our nation’s leaders have struggled to make decisions on funding our government this year, I have made every effort towards a compromise resolution. I have listened to the President, the Speaker, other Members of Congress, and my constituents. I have supported three continuing resolutions to allow time to negotiate cuts that reflect the serious fiscal condition our nation faces and I have taken a strong stand that our men and women in uniform ought not to be pawns in the political battles surrounding these discussions. After reviewing and analyzing the details of the funding compromise reached last week, and after listening to the President's speech yesterday, I believe this Administration has shown that it has no intention of recognizing the gravity of our nation’s economic crisis much less changing course to correct it. Unfortunately, time is running out,” Forbes said.



“The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, our nation’s top military officer, said that the single biggest threat to national security is our national debt. I agree. I also believe that our national defense is still one of America’s greatest treasures. Yet, this Administration has shown a willingness to slash our military strength without strategy and, in an unprecedented fashion, announced yesterday its plans to double the pace at which we will hollow out our military. No such vigorous cuts have been proposed or demonstrated when it comes to other spending programs that are bankrupting our nation.”



“As the details of this deal have unfolded, we have learned that it will reduce $38 billion in budget authority – the amount that the Administration is allowed to spend on a given program. Yet, the reduction in outlays of taxpayer dollars this year will be just $352 million, only a little more than half of the total money spent on the Administration’s unauthorized war in Libya. I believe that it is not enough to reduce just the license to spend taxpayer dollars, we must reduce the actual spending.”



“Each day our nation borrows $4 billion, or 42% of each dollar spent, not each dollar authorized. And, each day our nation pays communist China $73.9 million in interest on our debt, money that is allowing them to aggressively modernize their military and increase their global influence. We pay them enough in daily interest to buy a new jet for a carrier while we do not have enough planes for our own fleet. Every week, we pay them enough in interest to buy three joint strike fighters while the United States has halted production of our own state-of-the-art F-22 fighter planes because the Administration said that we could no longer afford them.”



“And still today, many said this is the best we can do. I fear our children and grandchildren will say we could and should have done better. I would agree with them, and therefore had no choice other than to vote no on this funding deal.”