Police officers prosecuted for use of deadly force

Since 2005, 54 officers nationwide have been criminally charged after they shot and killed someone in the line of duty, according to a review by The Washington Post and Bowling Green State University researchers. The Post analyzed the details of those prosecutions, which involved the killings of 49 people. Read related story.

Most of the police officers were white, most of the victims were black In three-quarters of the reviewed cases, the race of the charged officer was white. Of those, two-thirds shot and killed a black person. In none of the cases did a black officer fatally shoot a white person. 9 Black 43 White 2 Other RACE OF OFFICER 54 total RACE OF VICTIM 49 total 33 14 2 Black White Other 9 43 2 Black White Other RACE OF OFFICER 54 total RACE OF VICTIM 49 total 33 14 2 Black White Other RACE OF OFFICER RACE OF VICTIM 54 total 49 total 9 Black 33 Black 43 White 14 White 2 Other 2 Other

Previous Next Add a category Note: Each line represents one police officer. There were four cases where multiple police officers shot and killed the same victim, and one case where multiple victims were shot by the same officer. Explore the details of all 54 charges »

When prosecutors filed charges, there were often additional factors In 80 percent of the cases, at least one of the following occurred: the victim was shot in the back, there was a video recording of the incident, other officers testified against the shooter or a coverup was alleged. Click here to expand all case details

How the analysis was done

The 54 criminal prosecutions were identified by Bowling Green State University criminologist Philip M. Stinson and The Washington Post. Cases were culled from news reports, grand jury announcements and news releases from prosecutors. For individual cases, reporters obtained and reviewed thousands of pages of court records, police reports, grand jury indictments, witness testimony and video recordings. Dozens of prosecutors and defense attorneys in the cases were interviewed, along with legal experts, officers who were prosecuted and surviving relatives of the shooting victims.

Note: This graphic has been updated to more accurately describe attorney Robin Schulberg’s comments to The Post.

SOURCE: Washington Post investigation. GRAPHIC: Vesko Cholakov, Kimbriell Kelly, Kimberly Kindy and Kevin Schaul. Published April 11, 2015.