Hillary Clinton adds top digital talent to campaign-in-waiting
(Ben Fogletto/Press of Atlantic City via AP)

Hillary Rodham Clinton has added some of the Democratic Party's most experienced digital strategists to her team of political advisers as she gets ready to launch her 2016 presidential campaign.

Teddy Goff, the digital director of President Obama's 2012 reelection campaign, is advising the Clinton campaign-in-waiting on its digital strategy, while longtime Clinton aide Katie Dowd is on board to be the campaign's digital director with Jenna Lowenstein as her deputy, according to several Democrats with knowledge of the moves.

Andrew Bleeker, a digital marketing guru and veteran of Obama's 2008 and 2012 campaigns, also could join the Clinton campaign in an advisory role, according to the sources, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the Clinton team's staffing decisions.

Goff is expected to serve as a top adviser for digital strategy to the Clinton campaign, which would enable him to continue running his private business. Dowd, who is widely respected in the Clinton orbit as a skilled manager and has a personal relationship with the former secretary of state, will be on staff overseeing the campaign's day-to-day digital operations. And Lowenstein, who has been vice president of digital at Emily's List, one of the outside groups laying the groundwork for Clinton's candidacy, would join the staff as deputy digital director.

In 2008, the Obama team pioneered the use of new technologies for political campaigns while the Clinton campaign struggled to keep up. Now, two cycles later, Clinton is the overwhelming favorite for the Democratic nomination and has her pick from the party's deep bench of digital talent, which includes alumni of Obama's innovative campaigns.

During his 2012 stint, Goff led a staff of 250 and oversaw the Obama campaign's social media outreach, online advertising and fundraising, and product development and design. He managed state-level digital efforts in more than 25 battleground states during Obama's 2008 campaign. Goff is a partner at Precision Strategies, a firm he co-founded with Obama campaign veterans Stephanie Cutter and Jennifer O'Malley Dillon.

Bleeker is another Obama world star, having overseen digital marketing strategy on the president's 2008 and 2012 campaigns. He founded Bully Pulpit Interactive, a digital firm that advises corporations as well as political campaigns, and worked for Clinton's 2008 campaign.

Dowd has been Clinton's director of digital strategy at the Bill, Hillary and Chelsea Clinton Foundation. She served as new media director on Clinton's 2008 campaign and followed Clinton to the State Department, where she worked as an innovation adviser running Foggy Bottom's digital diplomacy efforts. She also worked at the White House as senior adviser to the U.S. chief technology officer.

Lowenstein joins the Clinton team from Emily's List, which helps elect Democratic women who support abortion rights. She is credited with expanding the group's reach on social media and breaking its online fundraising records in the 2014 midterm campaign cycle. Emily's List is preparing to play a major role supporting Clinton from the outside and earlier this month honored her at its 30th anniversary gala. Lowenstein previously has served as deputy digital director for the Democratic National Committee and for Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe's 2013 campaign.