Donald Trump promises to ‘bomb the hell out of ISIS’ in new radio ad
WORCESTER, Mass. — In a new radio ad released Wednesday, Donald Trump accuses President Obama and other politicians of "losing the war on terrorism" and promises to "quickly and decisively bomb the hell out of ISIS."

The minute-long ad, which will soon air in early primary states, features Trump's voice over ominous instrumental music. Trump opens the ad saying: "The tragic attacks in Paris prove once again that America needs to get tough on radical Islamic terrorism. President Obama and other politicians have consistently failed us. Just hours before the attacks in Paris, President Obama said ISIS has been contained. It's amazing that the United States can have a president who is so out of touch, but it's also dangerous. Obama has no strategy to defeat ISIS. And now he's preparing to let hundreds of thousands of refugees from Syria into the United States."

Trump has for months warned his supporters of the potential danger of allowing Syrian refugees to resettle in the United States, saying they could be a "Trojan horse" army that could attack the country. He has promised that, as president, he would bar any Syrian refugees from entering the country and kick out any already here, the most severe position taken by any Republican candidate for president. Trump has repeatedly said the United States plans to accept hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees, although the Obama administration has only committed to resettling 10,000. Despite a series of fact-checkers deeming this number completely inaccurate, Trump has continued to use it on the campaign trail, in interviews and now in a campaign ad.

[Common sentiment at Donald Trump rallies: A fear of Syrian refugees]

As the radio ad continues, Trump promises to stop illegal immigration and build a wall on the Mexican border, both steps he has said will protect the country from terrorists.

"And yes, I will also quickly and decisively bomb the hell out of ISIS, will rebuild our military and make it so strong no one — and I mean, no one — will mess with us," Trump says towards the end of the ad. "If I win, we will not have to listen to the politicians who are losing the war on terrorism. We will keep America safe, and we will make America great again."

The ad was one of four the campaign released on its Web site Wednesday afternoon that will soon air in Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina. These ads are part of a $300,000 ad buy the campaign made this month — an amount that pales in comparison to the millions other campaigns are spending on television ads.

The collection features two Iowa-focused ads, one that features Iowa co-chair Sam Clovis discussing how Trump is different from career politicians and another that features Trump touting that he is "self-financing" his run for the White House. Although Trump has kicked in millions of his own money to pay for his campaign, federal filings show a majority of the money he spent up until Sept. 30 was provided by donors to his campaign who gave an average of $50.

[Voters are mad about mega-donors — and that's helping Trump]

There's also a New Hampshire-focused ad featuring the voice of a woman named Louise Buck who says she is voting for Trump because he's not a career politician, has experience creating jobs and can "get us out of this mess," among a list of other things.

"He may not always be politically correct, but he will keep us safe from terrorism and that's important to me and my family and hopefully to you," Buck says at the end of the ad.