House Advances American Health Care Act
“I want to have a great healthcare bill and plan – and we will. It will happen.”

– President Donald J. Trump

OBAMACARE IS COLLAPSING: Across the country, Obamacare is failing the American people, delivering high costs, few options, and broken promises.

Despite false promises of lowering healthcare costs for all Americans, under Obamacare, real healthcare has become unaffordable as premiums and deductibles have spiraled out of control. Under Obamacare, premiums have risen by over 40 percent on average, and over 100 percent in some places. The Department of Health and Human Services estimated that 8.4 million Americans would see a sharp rise in premiums this year. Six states on the Federal Obamacare exchange saw premiums rise by over 50 percent. The two most popular Obamacare health plans had deductibles equivalent to 10 percent and 6 percent of the American household’s median income. In 2016 alone, average individual premiums went up by 25 percent. Average deductibles increased in 41 states, with 17 of them facing double digit rate increases.

Americans across the country have seen their health insurance choices collapse under Obamacare, leaving an increasing number with only one option. In 2017, five states have only one insurer on the Obamacare marketplace and nearly a third of all counties have only one insurer. According to the McKinsey Center, the number of eligible Americans with only one insurer to choose from increased from 2 percent in 2016 to 18 percent in 2017. The number of insurers on the Obamacare marketplace fell by 28 percent between 2016 and 2017.

With high costs and few options, it is no surprise that Americans are fleeing Obamacare. Enrollment fell by 500,000 people in 2017 compared to 2016, and enrollment is millions of people below what was initially estimated. In 2016, nearly 20 million people opted out of Obamacare all together, with 6.5 million forced to pay the mandate penalty.

Obamacare was sold to the American people with rosy promises that have been routinely broken. Americans were promised Obamacare would bring down healthcare costs, but instead Americans continue their premiums skyrocket. President Obama was forced to apologize to Americans for promising that “if you like your plan, you can keep your plan. If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor.” President Obama’s false promise was named 2013’s “lie of the year.” Americans were promised Obamacare would increase competition among insurance companies, but more and more are leaving the marketplace. President Obama promised the middle class wouldn’t see their taxes raised “by a single dime,” but the Joint Committee on Taxation found a $377 billion tax hike.



REPEALING AND REPLACING: President Donald J. Trump supports the American Health Care Act (AHCA), which will remove Obamacare’s burden and put in place a responsible replacement.

The AHCA protects the most vulnerable Americans, including those with pre-existing conditions. Nobody can be denied coverage on the basis of a pre-existing condition and the bill provides over $120 billion for states to keep those plans affordable. $8 billion is specifically directed to states that waive certain Obamacare rules to ensure plans stay affordable for those with pre-existing conditions. Insurance companies are banned from increasing premiums or turning away patients from renewing their plans simply because they are sick $79 billion is being restored to hospitals who provide a high proportion of care to the most vulnerable, including those on Medicaid and Medicare. $100 billion is being provided to states to help low-income Americans access affordable health care. $15 billion is being provided for the care of maternity, newborn, mental health, and substance abuse. $8 billion is being provided to Americans who see changes in premiums due to their state’s decision to seek a waiver for some community ratings. Medicaid financing is reformed to send money to states based on its population, prioritizing funding for the most vulnerable and economic downturns. States will have the option of both a block grant and work requirements for certain populations.

The AHCA reduces costs of health care to Americans, while providing greater choice and flexibility. Middle and low income Americans will receive monthly, advanceable, and refundable tax credits to help pay for healthcare premiums. Tax credits will range from $2,000 to $14,000 a year and will adjust to make sure older Americans receive proper support. Americans will have expanded access to health savings accounts (HSAs) by nearly doubling the maximum allowed tax-deductible contribution. In 2017, an individual American would be able to deduct $6,550 in contributions to an HAS. One-size-fits-all mandates will be eliminated to free States to create marketplaces that promote innovation and competition. Job-based health insurance is preserved and relief is provided from the current law’s “Cadillac tax.”

AHCA will reduce Federal spending while lowering taxes for Americans. The Federal deficit will be reduced as major entitlement reform capping Medicaid spending will save taxpayers nearly $840 billion. Americans, including middle-income and small business owners, will see nearly $1 trillion in tax relief.



A PROMISE TO AMERICA: President Trump Has repeatedly said he will repeal the collapsing Obamacare with real healthcare reform that will benefit all Americans.