Cleveland School, Kershaw County, South Carolina
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2003 • THE STATE NEWSROOM • PAGE 11 C O L U M B I A S O U T H C A R O L I N A

By KRISTY EPPLEY RUPON, Staff Writer Kershaw County residents gather the morning after the 1923 Cleveland School fire to begin the cleanup process and to identify the bodies of the dead. Many of those who died were buried in a mass grave at nearby Beulah United Methodist Church. ‘The school was going to burn down on me’ 77 people died when fired destroyed Camden’s Cleveland School Cleveland School students are pictured in front of the school in 1921 or 1922, just a year or two before the fire. The fire devastated the Charlotte Thompson community, killing 77 people, including several entire families. EIGHTY YEARS ago, when C.C. Bruce took the stage for the senior play at Kershaw County’s Cleveland School, he didn’t know that four of eight fellow actors, and nearly a third of the audience, would die that evening. On May 17, 1923, an oil lamp fell to the floor at the school, starting a fire. Audience members tried to put it out, but the flames reached flimsy curtains, and the building went up quickly. Seventy-seven people perished in the blaze, one of the worst school fires the nation had seen. The tragedy had a significant impact on adopting strict building and fire code standards in the United States, according to Gene Faulkenberry, today’s Kershaw County fire marshal. The small Charlotte Thompson community, several miles outside of Camden, was devastated by the fire. Most families lost at least one member and, in some instances, whole families perished. Those who survived later told their stories. Bruce, 19, was playing the role of Ned in the play “Topsy Turvey,” which was being performed by seniors as part of commencement exercises. It was the last event scheduled in the building; students would be sent to other schools the following year. “Everyone acted panicky and began to rush for the stairway, the only exit, and a very narrow and rickety one,” Bruce said in a 1923 interview with The Columbia Record, a former afternoon newspaper published by The State-Record Co. “The men tried to keep the crowd from pushing each other down the steps but could not control them, and the flames were licking closer on all sides,” Bruce said. “Soon, some of the people in the hall began going to the windows and began jumping out. Mothers threw their children to ones below and some jumped after them.” Clara Hinson Woodson was one of those who jumped out the window. At 14, she was in charge of several younger siblings and a cousin at the event. She shared her story with the Kershaw County Historical Society seven years ago, at age 88. When the fire started, Woodson headed for the stairwell with a friend, but she went back to look for the other children. The only one she could find was her sister, Leila, who had suffered from pneumonia the previous winter and was having trouble breathing. Woodson saved her and her sister’s lives when she stopped at a window to let her sister get a breath of fresh air. While she was stopped, several people jumped out of the windows and were caught by people below. “The man on the ground kept saying to me, as I held Leila up for air, ‘Drop the little girl down,’” Woodson wrote. “Leila was crying and holding to the window ledge but I pried her fingers loose, and as she dropped, the man caught her. ... I got into the window, gripped the ledge and then released it. I came to myself with Leila pulling at my dress and telling me that I must get up, that the school was going to burn down on me.” Another of Woodson’s sisters was badly burned and took months to recover, but her 11-year- old sister and 9-year-old brother, along with a 9-year-old cousin, died. Many who died in the Cleveland School fire were jammed into the stairwell, which collapsed and trapped the victims. Some were crushed to death before the flames even reached them. Woodson wrote in her recount to the Kershaw County Historical Society that she went back to the fire scene the next day to identify her brother and sister. She could only identify her brother from the remainder of his shirt; her sister had hardly been burned. “There was no sign of burning on her except this one little spot of hair that showed some singe. This was my beautiful sister, Ora Belle. There were no burns on her dress, none on her body and her socks and sandals looked just as they did when she had dressed the evening before. I later realized that she was probably one of the first to go down the steps and fell as others fell onto her.” Ina Stephens was the school’s principal. She told her story to The State newspaper a couple of days after the fire, from the front porch of her home that stood just 500 yards from the school ruins. “I don’t know exactly how I escaped the flames,” Stephens said. “I was caught in the jam near the cloak room door, and someone picked me up by my feet and threw me on top of the crowd. Someone else pulled me out and threw me out of the door.” Stephens said the community had been planning to celebrate the closing of the school the day after the play with a picnic on the school grounds. Instead, they gathered at the scene to identify and mourn their dead. “We had fried chicken, baked cakes and cooked the usual good things to eat for the next day (for the picnic),” she said in the interview 80 years ago. “And to think the day was turned into the most horrible in the history of South Carolina instead of our nice, quiet little picnic.”