Former DOJ Counsel Jeannie Rhee Rejoins WilmerHale
WilmerHale is pleased to announce that Jeannie Rhee has rejoined the firm's Washington DC office as a partner in the Litigation/Controversy Department and a member of the Investigations and Criminal Litigation Practice . Ms. Rhee will resume her practice focused on advising clients who are the subject of government investigations, including white-collar criminal investigations, False Claims Act allegations and securities enforcement matters. Ms. Rhee previously represented individuals and corporations in favorably resolving criminal and civil fraud matters involving issues such as government-guaranteed loans, national security breaches, tax shelter transactions, stock options backdating, public corruption, off-label drug promotion and environmental contamination.Ms. Rhee rejoins the firm after serving for two years as a Deputy Assistant Attorney General in the Office of Legal Counsel for the US Department of Justice, where she advised the Attorney General, the White House and senior agency officials on constitutional, statutory and regulatory issues regarding criminal law, criminal procedure, executive privilege, civil rights and national security.Prior to first joining the firm in 2006, Ms. Rhee was an Assistant US Attorney in the US Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia, where she tried more than 30 jury and bench trials, including the successful prosecution of officers of the Washington Teachers' Union. Ms. Rhee also served as a legislative fellow in the office of former Senator Tom Daschle and as a counsel in the US Department of Justice's Office of Legal Policy. She was a law clerk for the Honorable Judith Rogers of the US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit as well as for the Honorable Stanley Sporkin of the US District Court for the District of Columbia.Ms. Rhee graduated from Yale Law School, where she was editor-in-chief of the Yale Journal of Law & the Humanities and editor of the Yale Law Journal. She served as president of the Yale Law School Alumni Association of Washington DC; as a member of the US District Court Standing Committee on Electronic Case Filing; as an adjunct professor at Georgetown University; and as co-chair of the Criminal Litigation Committee of the American Bar Association's Section of Litigation.