WISGOP Launches Digital Campaign: Feingold Foundation
September 12, 2016

WISGOP Launches Digital Campaign: Feingold Foundation

[Madison, Wis] –– Throughout his career, Senator Feingold developed a sophisticated, coordinated political machine with one primary beneficiary, Senator Feingold himself. This coordinated effort, The Feingold Foundation, has helped Senator Feingold cash out on the backs of taxpayers, students and donors for nearly his entire adult life.

Now, as ethical and legal questions related to a State Department email scandal stalk Senator Feingold’s campaign, the Republican Party of Wisconsin is launching a new digital effort highlighting the Feingold Foundation and informing voters about Senator Feingold’s 34 years of living off of taxpayers, students and donors. You can view the splash page and digital advertisement here.

The Republican Party of Wisconsin also launched a new twitter account: @RDFFoundation

“It’s no longer a secret that Senator Feingold and Hillary Clinton represent the corrupt Washington elite,” said Pat Garrett, spokesman for the Republican Party of Wisconsin. “Whether it’s the Clinton Foundation or the ‘Feingold Foundation,’ Hillary and Feingold have only been looking out for themselves as they try to gain power, influence and wealth at the expense of everyday Americans.”

Background on The Feingold Foundation:

For 34 years, the Feingold Foundation has helped Senator Feingold…

Live off taxpayers

Over his career, Senator Feingold has collected more than $3 million from taxpayers and Wisconsinites have little more than broken promises to show for it.

Live off students

Senator Feingold made a living off of being a highly-paid lecturer – and can’t square his $8,000 per class paydays with his college affordability rhetoric.

Live off donors

The Feingold Foundation’s political arm, Progressives United, raised millions of dollars from liberal donors and only 5% of it went to actual candidates – most was spent developing fundraising lists Senator Feingold is hitting up to pay for his campaign and salaries for Senator Feingold and his cronies.[1]

Senator Feingold seems to be in similar situation to Hillary Clinton, doing whatever it takes to hide the truth and protect their own careers. Find out more at www.wisgop.org.

[1] (Daniel Bice, “Russ Feingold’s PAC Funded Fees, Salaries For Former Staffers, Himself,” Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel, 6/15/15)