Perdue on Common Core and likeability
In a free-wheeling interview with WSB host and Red State editor-in-chief Erick Erickson, Republican Senate hopeful David Perdue offered further thoughts on the controversial Common Core education standards and his own likeability in a crowded primary field.

“I’ve been flooded with conservative activists who are upset with you over your statements to the Marietta Daily Journal…about Common Core,” Erickson said in regards to comments made by the former Dollar General CEO over the weekend.

“My mother and father were teachers, and we were in a federally impacted area because of Robins Air Force Base and a lot of the money they used in that school system had to be federal money, and because of that we got the strings attached. So local control has been part of my dinner conversations since I was 6 or 7,” Perdue responded. “I believe we should have a set of unbiased standards but what happened in Common Core is that the original intent got convoluted when the federal government started trying to get involved at the local level.”

“In the last 30 years, we’ve proven one thing. We can throw money at it from the federal government and it doesn’t help our education situation,” he continued. “I want to clear the air, I think Common Core is overreaching right now and should be abandoned in its current form.”

In the aforementioned Marietta Daily Journal interview, Perdue carried a similar message, albeit in less harsh terms.

“It’s where it gets into the details, into the weeds of how it’s going to be administered, that’s where I have a problem,” he previously stated.

The interview covered a wide range of topics, including Perdue’s background and reasons for entering the race, which is his first-run for office.

Near its close, Erickson posed a question regarding likeability and how Perdue, a wealthy businessman who’s donated substantially to his campaign, would “relate to the common people in Eastman, or Colquitt County, or where have you.”

“Well it’s something I’ve done my whole life. I wasn’t born in the corner office,” Perdue responded. “I grew up working on our family farms. I know what it’s like to be up at 3:30 helping my uncle on his dairy farm. I know what it’s like to raise watermelons and plant soybeans.”

However, the former Reebok and Dollar General CEO stated he had no shame about the success he’s enjoyed in a business career that’s spanned four decades.

“I’m not embarrassed by my success. That’s part of what America’s all about.”

Perdue is squaring off with former Secretary of State Karen Handel and Reps. Jack Kingston, Paul Broun, and Phil Gingrey in the May 20th primary.

The full interview can be heard below: