Former President Obama campaigns for Sen. Baldwin, Tony Evers in Milwaukee
Former President Barack Obama campaigned in Milwaukee on Friday on behalf of the state's Democratic candidates.

He campaigned with U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin, Democratic gubernatorial candidate Tony Evers, U.S. Rep. Gwen Moore and Randy Bryce, a Democrat running to fill outgoing House Speaker Paul Ryan's seat.

Former President Obama urged the importance of voting. "I am here to ask you to vote for might be the most important election of our lifetime," said Former President Barack Obama.

He says Republicans have done a lot of damage since taking office two years ago. "They cut taxes for the rich and corporations just like they did last time. They stripped rules to protect our air and our water just they like they did last time. They ran up the deficit just like they did last time," said Former President Obama.

The former president was endorsing the Democratic candidates and the issues they stand for. One of those is ensuring the Affordable Care Act stays in tact which Democrats say is a target of Republicans.

"The health care of millions is on the ballot. Making sure they get a fair share is on the ballot... Whether the union movement survives is on the ballot. But maybe most of all, the character of country is the on ballot," Former President Obama said.

Democratic candidate for governor Tony Evers took the stage to tell supporters his plan for Wisconsin which he says is focused on health care, supporting educators and students, fixing roads and infrastructure and the biggest topic he says is protecting pre-exisiting conditions.

"We're going to make sure that anybody with pre-exisiting conditions, including yours truly, will never have to worry about that and getting health insurance. We are going to protect pre-existing conditions," Evers said.

Democratic Senator Tammy Baldwin also took to the stage to stress the importance of protecting pre-exisiting conditions and make sure voters get to the polls this November.

The fall General Election is Nov. 6.