Eight States Sue to Block Release of Plans for 3D-Printed Firearms
Eight states filed suit Monday to block a pro-gun group from distributing files online for making firearms with 3-D printers.

A recent settlement between the group, Defense Distributed, and the State Department that allowed the files to be posted has spurred outcry from gun-control groups and Democratic lawmakers. They say it will allow people to avoid background checks by using 3-D printers to make their own guns at home.

“These downloadable guns are unregistered and very difficult to detect, even with metal detectors, and will be available to anyone regardless of age, mental health or criminal history,” said Bob Ferguson, Washington state’s attorney general who filed the suit on behalf of the other states.

The suit was filed in federal court in Seattle and seeks a temporary restraining order to block the files from being posted online. The suit names the State Department and Defense Distributed as defendants, arguing that the settlement violates states’ ability to regulate guns among other things.

Cody Wilson, who runs Defense Distributed, said the group will fight the suit. For years, Mr. Wilson has sought to make it possible for anyone to make their own gun, telling The Wall Street Journal in 2013 that it “represents the total liberation of access to firearms.”

The State Department tried to block his efforts, contending they violated firearm export laws. However, he won a settlement earlier this summer allowing him to post the files. Shortly after, Mr. Wilson posted a picture on Twitter of a gravestone inscribed with the words, “American Gun Control.”

President Trump said in a tweet Tuesday morning that he was “looking into 3-D Plastic Guns being sold to the public. Already spoke to NRA, doesn’t seem to make much sense!”

A U.S. Department of State representative referred questions on the lawsuit to the Justice Department. A Justice Department spokeswoman declined to comment.

The U.S. State Department had included the files on a list of munitions subject to export controls, barring their distribution. But the department in June reversed its position and allowed the files to be posted, prompting an outcry from gun-control groups and Democratic lawmakers who say the files will enable individuals to avoid background checks by using 3D printers to make guns at home.

Some firearms experts played down the danger of these guns because they said most 3D printers use materials that aren’t strong enough to produce a reliable firearm.

“You can 3D-print a pistol that will fire a few rounds through the barrel—after that it’ll just break,” said Rick Vasquez, a firearms consultant and former Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives official.

Given the limitations of 3D printers, criminals are likely to buy a more reliable gun on the black market or build one from sturdier parts, said Mr. Vasquez.

David Chipman, a retired ATF agent and senior policy adviser at the Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, a gun-control group, said that he fears the technology will quickly improve, making 3D-printed guns more lethal.

“We don’t want this horse to leave the barn and then have put it back in,” said Mr. Chipman.

Write to Zusha Elinson at zusha.elinson@wsj.com