Virginia 6th District :: GOODLATTE LEADS LETTER TO ATF RAISING CONCERNS ABOUT ADMINISTRATION'S BACKDOOR BAN ON BULLETS
For Immediate Release March 4, 2015 March 4, 2015

GOODLATTE LEADS LETTER TO ATF RAISING CONCERNS ABOUT ADMINISTRATION'S BACKDOOR BAN ON BULLETS

Chairman Bob Goodlatte: “Once again, President Obama has used his pen and phone to stretch his authority to implement policies that Congress has refused to enact, this time to deprive Americans of their Second Amendment rights. We’ve seen this before with our immigration laws, drug laws, Obamacare changes, welfare laws, and now our gun laws. Folks in the Sixth District are fed up with actions like these, and now 239 bipartisan Members of Congress – a clear, sizeable majority of the House – agree that this attack on the Second Amendment is wrong and should be overturned. Under the Obama Administration’s command, the ATF is changing a longstanding exemption that will impact many law-abiding gun owners and restrict the American people’s ability to legally and responsibly exercise their Second Amendment rights. I respect the Second Amendment, and urge the Obama Administration to halt this drastic policy change.”

WASHINGTON, D.C. – In a bipartisan letter led by House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte (R-Va.), 239 Members of Congress express strong concern to Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) Director B. Todd Jones about the Obama Administration’s plan to ban a popular bullet used for the AR-15. Americans own more than five million AR-15s, which are the most commonly used rifles for sports shooting as well as home protection.

Although the ammunition used for the AR-15 has been exempted under federal law for sporting purposes for over 30 years – which allows it to be lawfully manufactured, imported, and sold on the civilian market in the United States – the ATF recently announced a “Framework” with the intention to ban the manufacture and importation of the second-most common ammunition used for the AR-15, the M855 or “green tip.”

In the letter, the Members of Congress write that the ATF’s “Framework” “establishes an unduly restrictive standard, does not comport with the letter or spirit of the law, and will interfere with Second Amendment rights by disrupting the market for ammunition that law abiding Americans use for sporting and other legitimate purposes.” They also express concern that the agency’s “Framework” was not published in the federal register, which is required when the Executive Branch creates a new rule.