German FM makes impassioned plea for peace
Published on Jul 21, 2015

1. Wide shot of audience

2. German Defence Joschka Fischer (clapping earlier to Rumsfeld's speech)

3. SOUNDBITE: (German) German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer:

"We haven't even finished the first job, we by far haven't finished the job of fighting terrorism and the al Qaeda network. Who of you pretends to know that we will not get a blow which is not from Saddam Hussein but from the unfinished terrorism network? That's why I ask this critical question: why these priorities? Why do this now?"

4. Close up of US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld

5. SOUNDBITE: (German/ English) German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer:

"We owe the Americans our democracy. They are very important for stability and peace especially. We Germans would never have been able to free ourselves from the Nazi regime without America. The Americans allowed us to build up our democracy but in this democracy my generation has learnt...

(switches to English) You have to make the case, and to make the case in a democracy you have to be convinced yourself, and excuse me I am not convinced, this is my problem and I cannot go to the public and say, well let's go to war because there are reasons and so on, and I don't believe in that."

6. Mid shot of Fischer at podium looking towards Rumsfeld in audience

7. Wide shot of delegates at security conference



STORYLINE:



German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer made an impassioned plea for patience with Iraq on Saturday and said the German public sees no justification for going to war.



Fischer responded to an earlier pro-war speech by Rumsfeld, stating that diplomatic efforts to secure Iraq's disarmament had not been exhausted and it was premature to start military moves.



The Iraq crisis and the divisions it has caused among traditional allies dominated the annual conference in Munich where dozens of ministers and military and defence experts from Europe, North America and Asia have gathered.



Fischer told the conference that Germany would not support a "military build up" ahead of the next UN Security Council session on February when chief weapons inspector Hans Blix is due to present a new report.



Fischer also said that Germany would respect its commitments to Turkey under the NATO treaty.



NATO has to decide by Monday whether to order its military experts to plan for the deployment of early warning planes, missile defence batteries and specialized units to Turkey.



France, Germany and Belgium have held up the NATO planning for three weeks, arguing that it could undermine UN efforts to avert a war. Anxious alliance officials fear continued refusal could do permanent damage to NATO.





You can license this story through AP Archive: http://www.aparchive.com/metadata/you...

Find out more about AP Archive: http://www.aparchive.com/HowWeWork