Cuccinelli says he has answers for students in need
RICHMOND

In proposing law changes to ease charter school creation and legalize public aid for religious schools, Ken Cuccinelli is laying out a robust education overhaul plan with the potential to reopen some contentious education policy debates.

The Republican nominee for governor today is expected to unveil a package built on accountability and choices for disadvantaged students in under-performing schools, a theme highlighted in a new campaign ad out this week.

"No child should be sentenced to a failing school just because of where they live," Cuccinelli says in the "Opportunity" commercial.

He echoed that sentiment several times Monday during an interview about an education plan he bills as having the potential to particularly benefit poor and minority students shortchanged by the current system.

"Look, the people who are most hurt by failing schools today are minorities. They're black kids in Richmond. They're minorities around Virginia - Norfolk, Petersburg," said Cuccinelli, whose plan points out those achievement disparities.

Locally, several public schools fell short of state expectations during the last school year when 14 of Norfolk's 46 schools were not fully accredited and four of Portsmouth's 19 schools were in that category.

Three in Norfolk - Lafayette-Winona Middle, Ruffner Academy Middle and Lindenwood Elementary - are in jeopardy of a state takeover under a new law that gives the state power to run the lowest-performing schools.

That law is among the education changes achieved during Gov. Bob McDonnell's term that Cuccinelli's plan appears to build on. He would go further by allowing a majority of parents to petition for the conversion of a failing school to a charter school, or for its closure.

Like McDonnell, Cuccinelli favors more emphasis on math, science and technology in the curriculum; additional teacher oversight; increased online or virtual learning; and merit pay to certain teachers. He wants to expand a new law that allows companies to claim state income tax credits for donations to private school scholarships for needy students, targeting specific relief for kids in failing schools.

Passage of that law last year has been a sore point for public education advocates as well as black legislators. They view it as a legally questionable work-around to a constitutional ban on public aid to private schools that, to some, evokes painful memories of Massive Resistance.

Although he said it's not a priority for him, Cuccinelli also expressed a willingness to support legislation enabling homeschool parents who meet income guidelines to claim a "couple of hundred dollar tax credit for school supplies."

Some of Cuccinelli's children have been homeschooled.

Another recommendation: a blue ribbon panel to suggest state standardized testing changes, with a focus on student cognitive development rather than memorizing information for a test.

Amending the state constitution is Cuccinelli's preference for improving a Virginia charter school law that's been ranked among the weakest in the nation. He wants to strip local school boards of the veto power they now hold over charter applications.

Five charters presently operate in Virginia - one in Virginia Beach - though Norfolk Schools Superintendent Samuel King has proposed converting 10 city schools into charters.

A constitutional amendment likewise is the proposed vehicle to remove a ban on the appropriation of public funds to sectarian institutions.

"The point is to make options available to children that aren't otherwise available to them," Cuccinelli said. "If the best place for that to happen is a so-called sectarian school, then so be it. If it's in a public school, all the better."

Cuccinelli said he will campaign on the constitutional amendments in communities saddled with failing schools. He expects to convince people along the way. He shouldn't expect the state teachers lobby to come around, though.

"It sounds like he's focused on a few failed ideas - like giving public money to private interests - that don't address the real needs of Virginia students or public schools" whose funding is below 2009 levels, Virginia Education Association President Meg Gruber said in an email after getting a broad overview of the plan.

The VEA has endorsed Democrat Terry McAuliffe for governor.

Pilot reporter Sarah Hutchins contributed to this article.

Julian Walker, 804-697-1564, julian.walker@pilotonline.com