Bill encourages school uniforms by providing state cash
TALLAHASSEE — A proposal making its way through the state Legislature could put an end to early morning battles over what to wear to school.

The measure (HB 7043), dubbed the Students Attired for Education (SAFE) Act, encourages school districts to create a uniform policy in at least kindergarten through eighth grade. The measure provides additional funding to school boards that adopt a uniform policy, setting aside $10 million for districts is 2015-16.

“It’s not a mandate. It’s not a requirement. School districts are free to set a policy or not set a policy,” said Rep. Janet Adkins, R-Fernandina Beach, “We’re just … creating incentives and we believe, based on the testimony from school districts, that we’ll see positive results.”

The state House is expected to vote on the proposal Friday.

The proposal came out of a February panel discussion with officials in four school districts — Polk, Orange, Miami-Dade and Jackson counties. During that meeting, district officials told the House K-12 education subcommittee about their policies, and how it has changed the landscape of their school district.

In Polk County, the elementary and middle school uniform policy has been in place districtwide since 1998. Wendy Dodge, the district’s director of legislative affairs, told the House subcommittee the policy is “just part of our culture” and parents supported the program.

Nancy Woolcock, the district’s assistant superintendent of learning support, said students can wear dark blue, black or khaki bottoms, such as pants, shorts or skirts, and white or navy shirts with a collar. Students are also allowed to wear school T-shirts, and each school can pick another color, collared shirt that students are allowed to wear.

Woolcock said the policy helps reduce peer pressure and teasing, and puts the focus on academics, not fashion.

“I have always liked uniforms,” Woolcock said.

So has Kristen Zimmerman, chairwoman of Spring Creek Elementary School’s advisory committee in Lee County. Zimmerman said her son, now in third grade, has worn a uniform since he started school.

Parents don’t need to worry about buying more clothes than necessary, which Zimmerman said is a “true benefit for parents.” Nor are students spending a lot of time talking about their clothes.

“I think it helps the student remain more focused,” she said. “I don’t think this is something that people should be concerned about if it gets adopted or promoted at the state level. I think uniformity removes a lot of the stressors and distractions that exist at the schools.”

In Hillsborough County, whether students are required to wear uniforms is a school-by-school decision.

One hundred of the district’s 250-plus public schools have adopted a mandatory uniform policy. The policy can be enacted if at least three-fourths of parents and teachers support the idea.

“That way, you get buy-in,” school district spokesman Stephen Hegarty said.

The schools that require uniforms help families that may not have the money to buy them. And parents can fill out an opt-out form if they choose not to have their children participate. An additional 21 Hillsborough schools have voluntary uniform policies allowing parents to choose yes or no.

At Oakridge Middle School in Naples, Principal Kim Lonergan said faculty members approached her last year about uniforms and the school’s advisory committee supported the proposal.

“We’re seeing a lot less ‘killer b’s’, the boobs, butts and bellies,” committee said. “There a lot less of that when you have to wear a polo.”

Adkins hopes her measure will win support from lawmakers. The proposal has received unanimous approval in all three committee stops.

“If this works in Miami and this works in Marianna, that ought to tell us something,” said Rep. Joe Geller, D-Aventura, during a subcommittee meeting last month. “This is a program that seems to be working at every level. It works across the board.”

Tribune staff writer Erin Kourkounis contributed to this report.

[email protected]

(239) 263-4805