Paul: Benghazi a 3 a.m. call Clinton 'never picked up'
Sen. Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulDem wins Kentucky state House seat in district Trump won by 49 points GOP's tax reform bait-and-switch will widen inequality Pentagon budget euphoria could be short-lived MORE (R-Ky.) attempted to throw cold water on Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonWoman behind pro-Trump Facebook page denies being influenced by Russians Trump: CNN, MSNBC 'got scammed' into covering Russian-organized rally Pennsylvania Democrats set to win big with new district map MORE's expected campaign launch on Sunday, hearkening back to one of her most memorable ads during her last White House bid.

"I think Benghazi was a 3 a.m. phone call that she never picked up," Paul said in an interview aired Sunday on CNN's "State of the Union." ADVERTISEMENT "She didn't provide the security — not just that day — for nine months. Dozens and dozens of requests for more security all completely ignored by Hillary Clinton," Paul said. "There is sort of a history of the Clintons sort of feeling like they're above the law," Paul said. Paul also took aim at Clinton, President Obama and hawkish members of his own party over wars in Syria and Libya.

Pressed for anything he would say Clinton did well as secretary of State from 2009 to 2013, Paul said he was "not so certain of that."

Paul has also sought to distinguish himself from other potential 2016 GOP rivals by not harshly criticizing the Obama administration's push to secure a deal over Iran's nuclear program, pointing to differing views on the framework's details.

"I keep an open mind as to who is telling the truth," Paul said on CBS's "Face the Nation," adding the Iranians aren't "helping the situation" with tweets bashing details of the potential deal.

"I want peace, I want negotiations, I don't want another war. But I also want a good agreement," Paul said, adding he wanted Iran to "give up their nuclear ambitions." He offered similar remarks during an interview on NBC's "Meet the Press."

Paul also shrugged off several high-profile clashes with reporters in the first week of his presidential campaign rollout.