Senate rejects Obama budget in 99-0 vote
A budget resolution based on President Obama’s 2013 budget failed to get any votes in the Senate on Wednesday.

In a 99-0 vote, all of the senators present rejected the president’s blueprint.

It’s the second year in a row the Senate has voted down Obama’s budget.

ADVERTISEMENT

Obama's 2012 budget failed 97 to 0 last May after Obama himself last April said he wanted deeper deficit cuts.

The House earlier this year unanimously rejected Obama's budget.

The White House sought to provide cover for Democrats to vote against the Obama budget resolution before the vote, arguing the resolution offered by Sen. Jeff Sessions Jefferson (Jeff) Beauregard SessionsInquiry into origins of Russia investigation is a scam Conservatives spark threat of bloody GOP primaries Roy Moore: 'Everybody knows I can win' MORE (R-Ala.) was different from Obama’s budget because it did not include policy report language.

Democrats made the same point on the floor Wednesday in explaining their votes.

The Senate also voted on four GOP budget blueprints, which were all defeated.

More from The Hill:

♦ GOP energy loan probe could ensnare two Cabinet secretaries

♦ GOP hints it’ll part with Keystone to finish highway bill

♦ McCain huddles with Dems on campaign finance reform

♦ GOP lawmaker: Obama 'tone-deaf' on harm from high gas prices

♦ Dem: Control of House will ride on healthcare reform

♦ GOP questions $126M stimulus grant to West Virginia libraries

♦ Ron Paul back in Congress to debate defense authorization

♦ Senate intel panel to release report on 'enhanced interrogation' this summer



The GOP forced the votes and believes they showcase the party's ability to produce plans that eventually balance the budget with the lack of a Democratic alternative.

Republicans have hammered Senate Democrats for their inability to produce a budget, which the GOP notes is approaching three years.

“For three years, Senate Democrats have refused to produce a budget, as required by law,” Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTaylor Swift urges GOP senator to support Equality Act: 'I personally reject the President's stance' Two years after Trump's Paris climate move, frustrated Democrats eye 2020 Hillicon Valley: Mueller remarks put spotlight on election security bills | US to ask visa applicants for social media info | Tech blasts Trump tariffs on Mexico MORE (R-Ky.) said in a statement. “And today, they soundly rejected the president’s budget proposal which spends too much, taxes too much and borrows too much."

McConnell said Obama's budget was "bad for jobs because it includes the biggest tax hike in history, it’s bad for seniors because it lets Medicare and Social Security become insolvent and it’s bad for our economy because it fails to address the nation’s $15 trillion debt.”

But the GOP push was blunted a bit when the House Republican budget from Rep. Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanAmash storm hits Capitol Hill Debate with Donald Trump? Just say no Ex-Trump adviser says GOP needs a better health-care message for 2020 MORE (R-Wis.) faced Republican defections in a 41-58 vote.

The "no" votes included five Republicans: Sens. Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsSenate GOP vows to quickly quash any impeachment charges The Hill's Morning Report - Trump says no legislation until Dems end probes Collins offering bill to boost battery research as GOP pushes energy 'innovation' MORE (Maine), Olympia Snowe (Maine), Scott Brown (Mass.), Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulThe Memo: Trump's anti-Mueller rage is for real Trump campaign manager calls Amash 'Phony,' 'Grandstanding Swamp Creature' Amash gets standing ovation at first town hall after calling for Trump's impeachment MORE (Ky.) and Dean Heller Dean Arthur HellerThis week: Barr back in hot seat over Mueller report Trump suggests Heller lost reelection bid because he was 'hostile' during 2016 presidential campaign Trump picks ex-oil lobbyist David Bernhardt for Interior secretary MORE (Nev.). Heller and Brown are both in competitive reelection battles this fall.



Sen. Lisa Murkowski Lisa Ann MurkowskiOvernight Energy: Lawmaker warns White House not to influence science in climate report | Trump appeals Arctic drilling decision | Officials promote natural gas exports as 'freedom gas' Trump administration appeals ruling that blocked offshore Arctic drilling Senate GOP vows to quickly quash any impeachment charges MORE (R-Alaska) initially voted against Ryan's budget but then changed her vote to "yes." She had voted against Ryan's budget last year.

In a statement, she said said she voted for Ryan's budget now that he had altered the Medicare proposals to make private insurance only an option.

Heller explained his no vote by saying the votes staged by his own leadership were a sham he would not endorse.

“Today was about political posturing. The American people are tired of it, and so am I,” he said.

Snowe lamented she was not able to offer amendments to the Ryan budget and Brown called for a bipartisan approach.

“We need to end our out-of-control spending, our trillion dollar annual deficits, and the attitude that taxing more and spending more is the answer," Brown said. "To do that, we need to work together, Democrats and Republicans.”

Presumptive GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney's campaign pounced on the news, noting more than 500 members of Congress had now gone on record opposing Obama's budget.

"President Obama is clearly in over his head and incapable of leading the country," Lanhee Chen, Romney's policy director, said in a statement. "It is time to turn to Mitt Romney's proven experience and leadership."

The other three budget resolutions sponsored by Sens. Pat Toomey (R-Pa.), Paul, and Mike Lee Michael (Mike) Shumway LeeOvernight Energy: Trump allows use of ethanol gas in summer | Move to benefit farmers | Britain goes two weeks without using coal | EPA watchdog hands Pruitt probe findings to Congress On The Money: Senate passes disaster aid bill after deal with Trump | Trump to offer B aid package for farmers | House votes to boost retirement savings | Study says new tariffs to double costs for consumers Senate passes disaster aid bill after deal with Trump MORE (R-Utah) failed in 42-57, 16-83, and 17-82 votes, respectively.

No Democrats voted for any of the budgets and Collins, Brown, Heller and Snowe voted against all the plans.

Toomey sent out a new release gloating that his budget got one more vote than the Ryan plan. While the Ryan plan balances the budget by 2040, Toomey's does so in eight years.

Paul’s budget plan balances the budget in five years, partly by eliminating four government departments.

Lee's budget, which also balanced the budget in five years, is modeled after a proposal from the Heritage Foundation and cuts a steep $7 trillion right away. Democrats said Lee had made serious math errors in his budget, however.

Toomey would also cut all marginal individual income tax rates by 20 percent, and reduce the top corporate rate to 25 percent.

Both Paul (17 percent) and Lee (25 percent) would install a flat tax for businesses and individuals.

—This story was updated at 7:47 p.m.