Scott Brown will be sworn in as Massachusetts senator Thursday
Sen.-elect Scott Brown (R), the successor to the late Sen. Edward Kennedy (D-Mass.), will be sworn in to office Thursday afternoon, giving Republicans 41 seats in the upper chamber.



"Once we get his certificate, we expect to swear him in tomorrow afternoon as early as 5 o'clock, which is earlier than he suggested," said Jim Manley, spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid Harry Mason ReidManchin’s likely senior role on key energy panel rankles progressives Water wars won’t be won on a battlefield Poll finds most Americans and most women don’t want Pelosi as Speaker MORE (D-Nev.), in an interview Wednesday.

ADVERTISEMENT

A senior GOP aide said he expected Brown to be sworn in around 5 p.m. on Thursday although a precise time has not yet been set.



Brown's entry into the Senate marks the formal end of the Democrats' filibuster-proof Senate majority.

Brown asked top Massachusetts officials Wednesday to take action that would allow him to be seated this Thursday instead of next Thursday.



Brown's legal counsel wrote Gov. Deval Patrick (D) and Secretary of State William Galvin asking them to certify the election results immediately, which would allow him to be sworn in to the U.S. Senate as early as Thursday.

"While Sen.-elect Brown had tentatively planned to be sworn in to office Feb. 11, he has been advised that there are a number of votes scheduled prior to that date," his attorneys wrote. "For that reason, he wants certification to occur immediately."



President Barack Obama Barack Hussein ObamaNearly the entire country gets it wrong on the minimum wage The Hill's Morning Report — Trump maintains his innocence amid mounting controversies A sea change for sexual conduct on campus MORE reminded Democratic senators at a retreat Wednesday that they still control the largest majority in a generation.



Brown had told reporters that he originally expected to be sworn in last week.



Brown has asked for a seat on the Senate Appropriations Committee.



This story was updated at 4:25 p.m.