Warren joins calls to get rid of ICE
Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Ann WarrenInsurgency shakes up Democratic establishment HHS should look into Azar's close ties to the drug industry The Hill's Morning Report — Sponsored by Better Medicare Alliance — Day Two: Kavanaugh to spar with hostile Democrats MORE (D-Mass.) on Saturday joined calls from the left to get rid of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), saying it should be replaced with something new.

“The president's deeply immoral actions have made it obvious we need to rebuild our immigration system from top to bottom starting by replacing ICE with something that reflects our morality and that works,” Warren said during a rally in Boston.

ADVERTISEMENT

“President Trump Donald John TrumpNorth Korea to cooperate with US in nuclear talks: report Nike to air Kaepernick ad during 'Thursday Night Football: report Brothel owner who won Nevada GOP primary being investigated over sexual assault allegations MORE seems to think that the only way to have immigration rule is to rip parents from their family, is to treat rape victims and refugees like terrorists and to put children in cages,” she continued. “This is ugly and this is wrong and this is not the way to run our country.”

The Democratic senator had last week visited a processing center in McAllen, Texas, for immigrants entering the U.S. through the southwestern border.

Warren joins a small but growing contingent of Democrats in the Senate who are calling for ICE to be abolished or replaced as the issue quickly becomes a litmus test for Democrats.

On Thursday, Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand Kirsten Elizabeth GillibrandInsurgency shakes up Democratic establishment Political analyst predicts 25 Dems will run for president in 2020 The Hill's Reid Wilson: Senators now have 'national spotlight' to boost presidential prospects MORE (N.Y.) become the first sitting senator to call for ICE to be scrapped, saying the agency should be “reimagined.”

Sens. Bernie Sanders Bernard (Bernie) SandersHillicon Valley: Twitter chief faces GOP anger over bias | DOJ convenes meeting on bias claims | Rubio clashes with Alex Jones | DHS chief urges lawmakers to pass cyber bill | Sanders bill takes aim at Amazon On The Money: Trump revives shutdown threat over border wall | Trump, Trudeau dig in on NAFTA talks | House GOP leaders plan 'tax cut 2.0' vote this month | Sanders bill targets Amazon Election Countdown: Fallout from Massachusetts stunner | In Delaware, Carper looks to avoid next progressive upset | Dem 2020 primary already in full swing | How a Dem ex-governor hopes to take red-state Tennessee | GOP challengers hit Dems over tax votes MORE (I-Vt.) and Kamala Harris Kamala Devi HarrisInsurgency shakes up Democratic establishment Budowsky: Female GOP senators can destroy Roe v. Wade Election Countdown: Fallout from Massachusetts stunner | In Delaware, Carper looks to avoid next progressive upset | Dem 2020 primary already in full swing | How a Dem ex-governor hopes to take red-state Tennessee | GOP challengers hit Dems over tax votes MORE (D-Calif.) have also called for the agency to be examined, but not fully abolished.

Their calls to get rid of and reform the agency come after the harsh backlash to Trump’s “zero tolerance” immigration policy that has led to the separation of families illegally crossing the U.S.-Mexico border.