Progress Report: The Affordable Care Act’s Extended Dependent Coverage Provision
T.R. Goldman

December 16, 2013

This week Health Affairs is releasing a Health Policy Brief by T.R. Goldman on Young Adults and the ACA. The brief focuses on the importance of enrolling young adults in coverage through the law’s new marketplaces and Medicaid expansion beginning in 2014. But another provision of the law also aimed at young adults took effect more than three years ago. Here Goldman provides a progress report on the ACA’s dependent coverage expansion.

One of the earliest and most popular provisions in the Affordable Care Act requires insurers to extend dependent coverage on a family plan until the age of 26. The requirement is essentially unconditional and does not depend on whether the young adult lives at home, is a full-time student, is married, is a tax dependent, or is eligible to buy insurance on a state health exchange. Until 2014, dependent coverage was not available if the young adult had a separate offer of employer-based coverage, but starting on Jan. 1, 2014, even that exception will no longer apply. Typically, most employer-based health insurance plans have ended dependent coverage at either 19 or upon college graduation.

The law is straightforward: any insurance plan that already offers dependent coverage must offer the same level of coverage at the same price of coverage to dependents under 26. This applies to insurance offered by employers who either self-insure or purchase insurance through an insurance company. And it includes insurance plans parents buy for their families in the non-group market. Dependent coverage under a parent’s plan, however, does not extend to the children and spouses of those dependents.

Early Take-Up The dependent coverage provision received lots of favorable press in the hectic weeks before the ACA was signed into law, in part because unlike many aspects of the ACA, it is a simple, easy to understand, uniform change that benefits a broad swathe of the middle class. Many insurers and employers began enrolling older dependents well before Sept. 23, 2010, when the provision took effect, because annual enrollment periods often began earlier in the year.

The dependent coverage provision took effect just six months after the ACA became law, and several recent studies have shown that it quickly had a significant impact on coverage.

A Kaiser Health survey reported that 70 percent of the public was already aware of the provision just one month after the ACA was enacted. A weak economy no doubt also spurred dependents without jobs to take advantage of their parent’s plans. Taken together, the dependent coverage provision led to a “rapid and large” reduction in the number of uninsured adults, notes Joel Cantor and several others in July 2012 National Bureau of Economic Research paper, a “rare public policy success in the effort to cover the uninsured.” Results released by the National Center for Health Statistics in December 2011 show that the number of young adults aged 19 to 25 with health insurance increased by 2.5 million from September 2010 to June 2011, while there was no corresponding increase in coverage for those aged 26 to 35.

At the end of 2012, according to the Census Bureau, the uninsured rate for the 19 to 25 age group was 27.2 percent, a figure that was no longer statistically different than the next older age bracket for the second year running. With just weeks remaining before the ACA takes full effect on January 1, 2014, it is now estimated that the dependent coverage provision has added 3.1 million young adults to the health insurance roles.

An August 2013 study from the Commonwealth Fund based on insurance survey tracking data from 2011 and 2013 reports that by March, 2013, half of the country’s 19-25 year olds — or about 15 million young adults — had been on a parent’s health insurance policy in the prior 12 months, up by 1.3 million in 17 months. Of those 15 million, says the report, 7.8 million would not have been eligible to enroll in their parent’s plan without the ACA.

Put another way, in November, 2011, some 18 million young adults, or 39 percent, were uninsured or had been uninsured at some point in the prior year. By March, 2013, that share had fallen by five percentage points to 15.7 million people. A separate study led by the University of Indiana’s Kosali Simon looked at the results of the first year of the dependent coverage provision and concluded that young adults were 30 percent more likely to be on their parents’ policies since the law was enacted.

Requiring insurers to raise the age of dependents beyond their late teens or early twenties is not a new idea. Nearly two-thirds of states already had laws that aimed at expanding dependent coverage before the ACA’s requirement took effect. Most of the state dependent care mandates, however, had one or more restrictions, from limiting coverage to unmarried young adults to requiring residency requirements for non-students. Unlike the ACA requirement, states usually do not require extended dependent coverage for employers who are self-insured, directly providing coverage to their employees instead of through an insurance company. The ACA dependent coverage provision now supersedes any state dependent coverage mandates for anyone under the age of 26, while any applicable state laws will apply to those 26 and above.

Privacy The dependent coverage extension does have one potential privacy downside. Typically, explanations of benefits are addressed to the policyholder, who in this case would be the parent, which could pose problems if the EOB details something a young adult would rather keep private. Usually, on request, insurance companies will send sensitive EOB’s to a different address, and some, like Cigna, have gone so far as to redesign its EOBs to remove any specific treatment or service information.

The extension of dependent coverage might also not work well for dependents who live in another state than their parents, because the parents’ plan might only provide for expensive, out-of-network coverage for those living elsewhere. And not all parents with individual plans are necessarily able to afford the extra costs of family coverage.

While the extension of the dependent coverage provision to age 26 is widely viewed as a success, there are still millions of uninsured young adults who are outside its scope because their parents do not have employer-based health insurance or their plans do not offer family coverage. For them, the best chance of getting coverage is though their state’s health insurance marketplace with its premium tax credits, or Medicaid for those whose income is 133 percent of the federal poverty level or below and live in a Medicaid expansion state.