You Can Stay at Donald Trump's New Washington D.C. Hotel for $800 a Night
If you have $800 to spare, you can have the privilege of being among the first guests at Donald Trump’s new hotel in downtown Washington, D.C.

Trump’s luxury hotel — located in the renovated Old Post Office building at Pennsylvania Avenue and 12th St NW — will begin serving guests Monday, the Associated Press reported. It’s a “soft opening,” meaning there won’t be any pomp and circumstance surrounding the opening. An official ceremony, however, is planned for October.

The 263-room hotel is an easy walk to national monuments and museums and has 35 guest suites with a private entrance on Pennsylvania Avenue. The 19th century building’s original stonework and wood paneling were restored for the opening, and there is a 13,200-foot ballroom in case you want to throw a big party there. There’s also a BLT Prime steakhouse restaurant, a Starbucks and a gorgeous lobby bar. Trump’s daughter Ivanka designed the spa and fitness center.

There’s no availability at the hotel on Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday of this week. But if you’d like to stay on Thursday night, the cheapest nightly rate is $806 a night for AAA members, according to a search on the hotel website MONEY conducted on Monday morning.

For everyone else, the rate rises to $895 a night, and $865 if you book at least three to five days in advance. If you’d like to splurge (even more), you can opt for the “rise and dine” selection, which gives guests an $80 breakfast credit and Wi-Fi access. If that’s not enough, the Postmaster Suite will run you $4,800 a night during the soft opening.

Rates will go down after the soft opening period, starting at about $472 a night. However, some of the most luxurious rooms in the hotel will keep their astronomically high price tags. The one-bedroom presidential suite will cost $9,000 a night, and the two-bedroom Trump Townhouse will run you $18,750 each night.

Trump broke ground on the renovation before he entered the presidential race, boasting that it would be one of the finest hotels in the world. However, the development process has not been without its own hiccups.

After he launched his campaign, two well-known chefs — Geoffrey Zakarian and Jose Andres — backed out of plans to open restaurants in the hotel because of Trump’s comments about Mexican immigrants, according to Eater. Trump sued both chefs, who also filed countersuits against him. While Andres’ restaurant was filled by BLT Prime, Zakarian’s was repurposed into a large conference room.

Here’s a rendering of the $9,000-a-night Presidential Suite: