Energy Information Administration
Question: Where can I find international prices for natural gas? EIA provides international natural gas prices for selected countries by sector (electric generation, household, industry).

Question: How does EIA calculate the year-ago and 5-year averages in the Natural Gas Weekly Storage Report? Calculations for the year-ago and 5-year averages are explained in Appendix A of the Methodology section of the Storage Report found at: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oog/info/ngs/methodology.html#5year

Question: What is the total working gas capacity in underground natural gas storage? There are several ways that total underground working gas capacity may be measured. The Energy Information Administration (EIA) estimates that as of the end of April 2009, the aggregate peak working gas capacity for U.S. underground natural gas storage was 3.889 trillion cubic feet (Tcf). Working gas design capacity, an alternative, less conservative indicator of gas storage capacity, was 4.313 Tcf as of the end of April 2009. Estimates of Maximum Underground Working Gas Storage Capacity in the United States, 2009 Update (PDF)

Question: How can I choose my natural gas supplier in my State? Residential consumers in some States have the opportunity to choose their supplier for the natural gas itself. Suppliers are either the local distribution company or approved gas marketers. Regardless of supplier, the local distribution company continues to provide local transportation and distribution services. Learn More: To find out more about States that have "customer choice" programs, see Natural Gas Residential Choice Programs.

Question: Where can I find shale gas and coal bed methane (or unconventional natural gas) production data? EIA publishes estimates of U.S. production of unconventional natural gas, which includes shale gas and coalbed methane for two years, and a forecast out 20 to 25 years, in the Annual Energy Outlook; for the 2010 Reference Case, see Table 14. There are reserves estimates for shale gas and coalbed methane in Table 9.2. on the 2nd page of the Assumptions to the Annual Energy Outlook 2010 Oil and Gas Supply Module. Links to historical state-level production data and estimates of proved reserves for shale gas and coalbed methane are in the EIA's annual reserves report. EIA does not publish data or forecasts specifically for shale gas or coalbed methane for other countries.

Question: Can I obtain a list of companies involved in the natural gas industry, such as utilities, pipeline companies, and storage operators? Yes. EIA collects and publishes a list of natural gas underground storage operators by State. EIA also collects and publishes information on natural gas investor-owned local distribution companies (LDC), municipally-owned LDC, and pipeline companies, which can be downloaded from the EIA-176 Query System.