Rafael Cruz, senator’s dad: send Obama “back to Kenya”
Fast forward to 19:20 for the Kenya remark.

WASHINGTON — Rafael Cruz, a Dallas-area pastor whose son was born in Canada and may run for president, apparently is a birther when it comes to President Barack Obama.

In September 2012, stumping for Ted Cruz’s Senate campaign, the elder Cruz spoke of sending Obama “back to Kenya.” That’s the land of birth for Obama’s father, though by every authoritative account, the 44th president was born in Hawaii, making him a natural-born American two ways — by birth on American soil, and because his mother was from Kansas.

Ted Cruz’s own claim to eligibility is slightly more complicated.

Like Obama, he had one American citizen parent at the time of his birth (Rafael Cruz was a Cuban citizen at the time, though the senator’s mother was from Delaware). But unlike Obama, it’s unquestioned that Cruz was born outside the United States.

That makes Rafael Cruz’s comments somewhat cheeky.

“We have our work cut out for us. We need to send Barack Obama back to Chicago. I’d like to send him back to Kenya, back to Indonesia,” he told a North Texas Tea Party gathering on Sept. 12, 2012.

The comments were revealed by the liberal magazine Mother Jones in a lengthy expose on Rafael Cruz that includes video footage of him preaching the virtue of making the United States a “Christian nation,” calling Obama a “Marxist” and embracing the view that Obama wasn’t American-born. (Read that article here.)

Aides to Sen. Cruz sought to tamp down the damage without explicitly disavowing the comments.

“These selective quotes, taken out of context, mischaracterize the substance of Pastor Cruz’s message. Like many Americans, he feels America is on the wrong track,” Cruz spokeswoman Catherine Frazier said by email — the verbatim response Mother Jones got from another spokesman, Sean Rushton. “Pastor Cruz does not speak for the senator.”

In fact, Pastor Cruz does speak on his son’s behalf, routinely.

The Cruz campaign deployed him throughout last year’s election as a surrogate, so it’s not as though he’s some rogue supporter with a tenuous connection. They make joint appearances. The elder Cruz has introduced his son many times to conservative gatherings, typically ones that draw Christian conservatives. At one such gathering this summer in Iowa, Rafael Cruz — as he regularly does – compared Obama to Fidel Castro, the Communist dictator who ruled his native Cuba.

So-called “birthers” – people who view Obama’s Hawaiian birth certificate as fraudulent and doubt his eligibility to serve as president – like to cite the president’s childhood years in Indonesia, when his mother moved there for four years.

Under U.S. law, people born outside the United States to an American citizen parent receive automatic American citizenship, with some bureaucratic hoops.

Cruz’s birth in Calgary, Alberta, conferred both American and Canadian citizenship, as we reported two months ago. And, apparently unbeknownst to Cruz or his parents, he has retained dual citizenship throughout his life. The senator has vowed to renounce his Canadian citizenship, a legal process that can take several months to more than a year.