Heat index: A fact check of Perry's claim on taxes, spending
Here's a fact check of Gov. Rick Perry's latest TV ad by our Austin bureau chief, Christy Hoppe:

THE CLAIM: In a new TV ad, various Texans thank the governor for his efforts to keep taxes and state spending low. Prominently touted is a claim that "Perry has vetoed over $3 billion in spending."

THE FACTS: On cutting taxes, Perry is taking credit for only half the equation. He could also take credit for increasing taxes more than any other governor in state history.

In 2006, the state was facing a judicial mandate to change the unconstitutional way it funded public schools, mostly through property taxes. Under Perry's leadership, a tax swap was created that cut school property taxes by up to one-third. To pay for that, Perry signed a bill that nearly tripled the amount Texas collects from businesses. The tax swap created a net tax decrease, but the new business tax coupled with one added to tobacco still counts as the largest tax increase in Texas.

The governor later signed a bill to eliminate the tax for thousands of small businesses, which is also mentioned in the ad.

On vetoing spending, Perry is counting heavily on dead bills -- contingency appropriations built into the budget for proposals that failed to make it through the Legislature. That money wasn't going to be spent, whether he vetoed it or not.

Of the more than $3 billion in "spending" cuts that Perry cites over 10 years, nearly $2.5 billion was earmarked for bills the Legislature nixed, agencies that were discontinued, federal money that had to be repaid anyway and spending that was shortly thereafter restored, with Perry's general approval.

The governor has even acknowledged that the vetoes were merely procedural. In supporting materials for the ad, his campaign points to the veto proclamations Perry issued at the time, and in those, he explains that the underlying bills failed to pass the Legislature.

Almost one-third of his claimed savings came from the 2005 proposal to place a special tax on nursing homes. Administrators had agreed to the proposal because it would have triggered a federal reimbursement that would have netted them more than the new tax. But

Republican lawmakers balked at voting for a new tax -- even a welcomed one -- and killed the proposal.

Perry claims credit for rejecting the $1 billion in revenue that would have been raised by the nursing-home tax by vetoing the lines of the budget that applied to the dead bill.

BOTTOM LINE: Perry's ad is correct in portraying the governor as an advocate of cutting spending and taxes. But the specific claims are a major exaggeration of what he has actually been able to do in office.

And here's the ad in question: