Whenever You Notice Black Dots On A Women’s palm, Call the Police As Soon As Possible.
Blog By mariam | 29-01-18

This is very serious.

The Black Dot





Have you seen any woman on social media or in real with a black dot on their palm? Well, it's actually a serious thing and if you see anyone with it, you should immediately call 911 and direct the emergency help to them because they're in need!

The Person Is In Trouble





The black dot indicates that the person is in danger and needs your immediate help!

The Actual Meaning Of The Dot





The dot means that there is domestic abuse in her house and that she can't call the cops because she is being watched and controlled. Now, it's up to you to report this.

The Black Dot Campaign





Called as the black dot campaign, it started off with a Facebook post which said "The black dot on the hand lets professionals know you’re a really vulnerable domestic violence survivor, and that you need help but can’t ask because your abuser is watching your every move."

Spread The World





This message was shared by more than 6000 women and 6 has been helped by it which indicates that it was indeed an effective campaign!

Spread the campaign





Hence, we urge you to share this post as much as possible to let women be more vigilant and aware of what they can do in such situation!

The Woman Who Started This





The woman who started this wrote, “I’m heavily pregnant and the baby’s father is very abusive. With words, his hands. I’ve been petrified for so long and even more with the baby coming soon. I was at the hospital yesterday, he was with me, he never leaves my side anymore. I had to have an examination so the consultant asked me to lie on the bed and drew the curtain."

The Emergence of the Idea





I leaned over and took the pen out of his pocket, pulled his hand over to me and wrote HELP ME. I didn’t have to say a word. This campaign gave me the strength and the idea how to ask for help.

She's now safe





Thanks to this idea that she is now safe. Just 2 weeks away from the due date, she's in a happy place now!

The Flip Side





While the idea seems to have a great intention, but there is an inadvertent flipside that Polkinghorne, the head of a prevention center for domestic violence, pointed out. He said, “The Black Dot Campaign is a very well-meaning idea, but a bad idea nonetheless.”



Dina's statement continued: “The campaign is getting a lot of attention, so abusers may also be aware of it. They might question why their partner would have the dot on their hand. A well-meaning family member could also see the dot, and inadvertently compound the violence.”