Non-Citizen Voting in School Board Elections
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee

The Way It Is Now: The San Francisco Unified School District operates public schools in San Francisco for students from pre-kindergarten through grade 12.

The San Francisco Board of Education oversees the School District, including

• establishing educational goals and standards;

• approving curriculum;

• setting the district budget;

• confirming appointment of all personnel; and

• approving purchases of equipment, supplies, services, leases, renovation, construction, and union contracts.

The Board of Education appoints a superintendent of schools, who is responsible for managing the day-to-day administration of the district.

The Board of Education has seven members who are elected by San Francisco voters to serve four-year terms. Elections for members of the Board of Education are held in November of even-numbered years.

San Francisco residents who are 18 years of age or older, United States citizens, and not in prison or on parole for a felony conviction are eligible to register to vote in San Francisco elections.

The Proposal: Proposition N is a Charter amendment that would allow any non-citizen resident of San Francisco to vote for members of the Board of Education if the resident:

• is the parent, legal guardian or legally recognized caregiver of a child living in the School District, and

• is of legal voting age and not in prison or on parole for a felony conviction.

Proposition N would apply to the November 2018, 2020 and 2022 elections for members of the Board of Education. The measure would expire after the 2022 election unless the Board of Supervisors adopts an ordinance allowing it to continue.

A “YES” Vote Means: If you vote “yes,” you want to allow a non-citizen resident of San Francisco who is of legal voting age and the parent, legal guardian or legally recognized caregiver of a child living in the San Francisco Unified School District to vote for members of the Board of Education.

A “NO” Vote Means: If you vote “no,” you do not want to make this change.

Controller’s Statement on “N”

City Controller Ben Rosenfield has issued the following statement on the fiscal impact of Proposition N:

Should the proposed Charter amendment be approved by the voters, in my opinion, there would be an additional cost, as estimated by the Department of Elections, of a minimum of $160,000 per election to print and distribute voting materials, train poll workers and separately register people who would become eligible to vote in School Board elections. Should the election take place by absentee ballot only, which would require a subsequent ordinance by the Board, costs may be reduced to approximately $110,000, in addition to any costs associated with registration processes.

The amendment would permit non-citizens 18 years of age or older who have children residing in the San Francisco Unified School District to vote in the elections for the School Board. The amendment would sunset on December 31, 2022, but could be extended by ordinance.

How “N” Got on the Ballot

On July 26, 2016, the Board of Supervisors voted 10 to 1 to place Proposition N on the ballot. The Supervisors voted as follows:

Yes: Avalos, Breed, Campos, Cohen, Kim, Mar, Peskin, Tang, Wiener, Yee.

No: Farrell.

This measure requires 50%+1 affirmative votes to pass.