Tennessee General Assembly Legislation
Fiscal Summary

Increase State Expenditures - $99,800 One-Time/Included in the Governors FY07-08 Budget

Bill Summary

Present law authorizes the department of safety to issue a certificate for driving to persons whose presence in the United States has been authorized by the federal government for a specific purpose and for a specified period of authorized stay. This certificate for driving is valid only during the period of the applicant's authorized stay in the United States for a minimum period of one year and a maximum of five years.



The department may also issue a certificate for driving for no more than one year to a person who does not meet the above requirements for authorized stay in the United States and who has no proof of U.S. citizenship or residency.



This bill eliminates the issuance of certificates of driving. This bill allows issuance of a temporary driver license, temporary intermediate driver license, temporary photo identification, or a temporary learner permit (hereinafter, "temporary license"), to persons whose presence in the United States has been authorized by the federal government. The temporary license would be valid only during the period of time the applicant is authorized to stay in the United States, but would be issued for a period of not less than one year nor more than five years. The applicant must present proof acceptable to the department relative to the applicant's identity, Tennessee residency, and authorized period of stay in the U.S.



This bill also:



(1) Authorizes the department of safety to adopt rules and regulations promulgated by the department of homeland security and to utilize any verification process to comply with those rules and regulations;

(2) Removes the present law prohibition on the department issuing a tank endorsement unless the applicant has been licensed for, and has regularly driven for not less than one year, the vehicle or combination of vehicles covered by the license classification on which the tank endorsement will be placed;

(3) Exempts persons applying for reinstatement of a cancelled, suspended or revoked driver license from taking an eye test if the license has not been expired in excess of one renewal cycle; and

(4) Extends the provision whereby an applicant who completed a driver education and training course offered for Class D vehicles by a public school, a public institution of higher learning, or a commercial driver training school is deemed to have satisfactorily completed the department's examinations to make the provision applicable to a person who completed a course offered by non-public schools in categories 1, 2, or 3.



ON MAY 3, 2007, THE HOUSE ADOPTED AMENDMENT #1 AND PASSED HOUSE BILL 1827, AS AMENDED.



AMENDMENT #1 corrects typographical errors and otherwise clarifies provisions of this bill but makes no substantive changes.