051208
For Release: May 12, 2008

Contact: J. Tucker Martin or David Clementson

Email: tucker.martin@oag.state.va.us or dclementson@oag.state.va.us

Phone: 804-786-2071

Virginia Medicaid Fraud Control Unit Receives National Award

Awarded Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General’s ‘2008 State Medicaid Fraud Control Award’

Unit Achieved Highest Amount of Recoveries in History of all State MFCU’s

***Unit Recovered Over $650 Million During Fiscal Year 2007***

Washington, D.C – The Virginia Office of the Attorney General’s Medicaid Fraud Control Unit was recognized today by the Department of Health and Human Services. The Unit was awarded the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General’s State Fraud Award.

This award is given to the state Medicaid Fraud Control Unit that has most effectively demonstrated their ability to combat fraud and abuse committed against the State’s Medicaid program. The award was presented to Attorney General Bob McDonnell by the Honorable Daniel R. Levinson, Inspector General for the Department of Health and Human Services, at a ceremony in Washington D.C. attended by a number of the Unit’s staff.

In a letter from the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General dated Jan. 21, 2008, it was announced that:

“During FY 2007, the Commonwealth of Virginia MFCU achieved the highest amount of monetary recoveries in the history of all State MFCUs. … Due to its long history of successfully prosecuting Medicaid provider fraud and patient abuse and neglect cases, and in particular for an outstanding year in FY 2007, the Commonwealth of Virginia MFCU has been chosen to receive the OIG State Fraud Award for FY 2007.”

Attorney General McDonnell said, “The outstanding performance of the Virginia Medicaid Fraud Control Unit is attributable to an overall team effort, including the Unit’s exceptional relationship with federal and state law enforcement partners. The most significant reason for the tremendous success of the MFCU has been the diligent work performed by the men and women in this Unit who spend many days and nights away from families and friends while conducting surveillances, executing search warrants, analyzing millions of documents, conducting interviews, and prosecuting and litigating cases. I can’t say enough about the work done by these members of our office, and I congratulate them all on an honor well deserved.”

McDonnell added, “Monies recovered are primarily returned to the Commonwealth’s Healthcare Fund. In addition, they are used to fund initiatives designed to detect and combat fraud and abuse in Virginia. This enables core services related to healthcare and public safety to be provided without further burdening Virginia citizens with higher taxes to make up for the inappropriate actions of others.”

The Virginia Medicaid Fraud Control Unit gained national attention in 2007 when it helped to lead a state and federal investigation into the Purdue Frederick Company for felony misbranding of the highly addictive painkiller, Oxycontin. This led to the recovery of $634 million to state and federal health care and public safety agencies, including $105 million to Virginia.

Click here to read more about the case.