Government Advertised In JANUARY For “Escorts” For 65,000 Illegal Alien Children To Be “Resettled”
This particular ad ran in FedBizOpps in January with RFI for “Escorts” for 65,000 unaccompanied alien children.

This is the relevant description:

Procurement Type: Request for Information (RFI)/Sources Sought Title: Escort Services for Unaccompanied Alien Children Classification Code: V- Transportation/Travel/Relocation NAICS code: 561612 Primary POC: Rachel Ali, Contract Specialist/ [email protected] Secondary POC: Tony Ross, Contracting Officer/ [email protected] A. Introduction U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), a component of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), has a continuing and mission critical responsibility for accepting custody of Unaccompanied Alien Children (UAC) from U.S. Border Patrol and other Federal agencies and transporting these juveniles to Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) shelters located throughout the continental United States. ICE is seeking the services of a responsible vendor that shares the philosophy of treating all UAC with dignity and respect, while adhering to standard operating procedures and policies that allow for an effective, efficient, and incident free transport. The Contractor shall provide unarmed escort staff, including management, supervision, manpower, training, certifications, licenses, drug testing, equipment, and supplies necessary to provide on-demand escort services for non-criminal/non-delinquent unaccompanied alien children ages infant to 17 years of age, seven (7) days a week, 365 days a year. Transport will be required for either category of UAC or individual juveniles, to include both male and female juveniles. There will be approximately 65,000 UAC in total: 25% local ground transport, 25% via ICE charter and 50% via commercial air. Escort services include, but are not limited to, assisting with: transferring physical custody of UAC from DHS to Health and Human Services (HHS) care via ground or air methods of transportation (charter or commercial carrier), property inventory, providing juveniles with meals, drafting reports, generating transport documents, maintaining/stocking daily supplies, providing and issuing clothing as needed, coordinating with DHS and HHS staff, travel coordination, limited stationary guard services to accommodate for trip disruptions due to inclement weather, faulty equipment, or other exigent circumstances. In emergency situations, the Contractor shall be called on to provide temporary shelter locations (such as trailers) with shower facilities for juveniles who are pending placement with HHS when bed space is unavailable nationwide for extended periods of time. The Contractor shall provide temporary guard services and other support as necessary during these emergencies.

You can view more of the document here.

This advertisement raises a lot of questions. There is a lot of specificity reflected in this document that seeks to deal with an influx that hadn’t as yet happened. How could they know 65,000, even breaking down the percentages that would be covered by ground, charter and air transportation?

Having received a lot of flack for the influx of illegals, there are some in the Obama regime who are now trying to suggest, oh, of course, the children will be deported after the initial emergency crush is addressed. But if that is so, why the reference to “Office of Refugee Resettlement”

What is the mission of the Office of Refugee Resettlement?

The Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) provides new populations with opportunities to maximize their potential in the United States, linking people in need to critical resources to assist them in becoming integrated members of American society.

The purpose is not to take care of them and then ship them out, the purpose of the ORR is, in their own words, to resettle them and integrate them into the United States. The language is already defining them as “refugees” making it clear the administration’s desire to have them stay, before they even arrive, before any individual case for asylum is even considered.

The very language confirms the Obama regime 1) knew with specificity a huge influx was on the way and 2) they intended them to stay.

Troubling to say the least…

HT: Conservative Wife