Smoking in cars with children is illegal starting January 30, 2018
A ban has been applied since last month. It is now illegal for anyone to smoke in their car as long as there are children in the vehicle.

Whether you have the car door open or the aircon on, the new rule still applies. The new law aims to try and reduce the number of people who smoke and to protect children.

The law became effective on January 30, 2018. It is meant is to protect children from secondhand smoking and violating this law could result in a fine of up to $100.

The Department of Health stated that when a child breathes in secondhand smoke, they breathe in thousands of chemicals, just like the actual smoker. This puts the child at risk of serious conditions including cancer, bronchitis, and pneumonia.

Secondhand smoke can also worsen asthma. This new law applies to any private vehicle that is completely enclosed or partly enclosed by a roof.

It applies even if people have the windows or sunroof open. It also applies to you if you have the air-conditioning on, or if they are sitting in a parked car with the door open.

The federal agency Housing and Urban Development are rolling out its nationwide ban on smoking in public housing. This is just a few years after many states outlawed smoking in beaches and public parks.

The law makes people wonder if the complete prohibition of tobacco smoking might be close. Ronald Bayer, co-director of the Center for the History and Ethics of Public Health at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health, spoke to Yahoo Lifestyle.

“In America, it’s very difficult to be simply paternalistic.”

Ronald Bayer, Love This Pic, February 3, 2018

He told the site that American values of privacy and freedom made it very difficult to prohibit anything as mainstream as tobacco. The old ‘nanny state’ argument apparently reared its head every time the argument came up.

Millions of people are still addicted to cigarettes and there is also the fear that a ban would bring about a black market. The market would be similar to what exists with illegal drugs or what happened with alcohol during Prohibition.

Bayer suggested that one way to help people quit would be by tackling the problem from the supply side. “I think we would do much better to think about reducing the nicotine content, so that the addictive quality of cigarettes wasn’t as severe, and make quitting easier,” he said.

In 2008, the World Health Organization’s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control established a method called MPOWER. The method aims to end the ‘global tobacco epidemic,’ which kills over 7 million people each year.

The plan is to not ban it all at once, but instead to monitor usage and prevention, protecting citizens from second-hand smoke. The WHO also wished to offer people ways to help them quit.

They want to keep warning people of the dangers of smoking, enforcing bans on advertising, and raising taxes on tobacco products.