2001 --
ARTICLE 12 AS AMENDED

RELATING TO REVENUES

SECTION 1. Chapter 31-3-6.1 of the General Laws entitled "Registration of Vehicles" is hereby amended by adding thereto the following section:

31-3-6.1.1. Denial of registration- Denial of transfer of registration -- Failure to file tax returns and/or pay taxes. -- (a) On or before October 31 in each year and at least quarterly thereafter, the tax administrator shall furnish the division of motor vehicles, with a list of the names, addresses and social security numbers of persons who have neglected or refused to file a tax return(s) and/or to pay any tax administered by the tax administrator and that there is no administrative or appellate review pending regarding such tax matter.

(b) Thereafter, the tax administrator, at the times and in the manner mutually agreed to by the tax administrator and the administrator of the division of motor vehicles, shall furnish to the division of motor vehicles the names, addresses and social security numbers of those persons whose names appear on that list but who have subsequently filed all required returns and paid all required taxes, interest and attendant penalties in full or entered into a time payment agreement satisfactory to the tax administrator. Upon receipt of said information, said names, addresses and social security numbers of said persons shall be removed from the list.

(c) The administrator of the division of motor vehicles shall not register any motor vehicle or transfer the registration of any motor vehicle for any person whose name appears on a list provided by the tax administrator pursuant to subsection (a) above until all state taxes, interest and attendant penalties have been paid in full and the payment has been certified to the division of motor vehicles by the tax administrator.

(d) If the person thereafter files an overdue return and/or remits past taxes due or enters into a satisfactory time payment agreement with respect to any and all returns due and taxes payable, the tax administrator shall, within five (5) business days of the person's request, provide the division of motor vehicles with a certificate of good standing specified in ยง 5-76-5. Within five (5) business days of receiving such a certificate, the division of motor vehicles shall register or transfer the person's registration.

(e) If a person files an overdue return and/or remits past due taxes in order to register a motor vehicle or transfer the registration of a motor vehicle, said late filing and/or payment shall not be an admission of a violation of any criminal tax statute regarding late filing and/or late payment. The tax administrator shall not refer such person to the attorney general for prosecution based solely upon said late filing and/or payment of past due taxes.

SECTION 2. Chapter 44-30 of the General Laws entitled "Personal Income Tax" is hereby amended by adding thereto the following section:

44-30-100. Lookup table to report use tax on personal income tax return. -- (a) When reporting the amount of use tax obligation on the Rhode Island personal income return, the taxpayer shall list either the actual amount (from books, records, and other sources), or an amount using a lookup table established by the tax administrator.

(b) Establishment of lookup table. (1) The tax administrator shall create the lookup table with reference to a taxpayer's federal adjusted gross income (AGI) as listed on the Rhode Island personal income tax return before modifications, adjustments, or other changes. To determine the amount of use tax from the lookup table, the taxpayer shall multiply 0.0008 by the amount of the taxpayer's federal AGI as listed on the Rhode Island personal income tax return before modifications, adjustments, or other changes.

(2) The AGI income ranges within the lookup table shall be adjusted by the tax administrator by December 31 of each calendar year by the percentage, if any, by which the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) as of the close of the 12-month period ending on August 31 of that year, exceeds the CPI-U as of the close of the 12-month period ending on August 31 of the immediately preceding year. For purposes of the annual calculation, the tax administrator shall be free to substitute an inflation index which is substantially similar to the CPI-U.

(3) If a taxpayer uses the lookup table, the taxpayer shall list on the return not only the result from the lookup table, but also the actual amount of each single purchase whose purchase price equals or exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000).

(4) Instructions for the personal income tax form shall indicate that the use of the lookup table as described in this section is, for the taxpayer, a "safe harbor" alternative to listing the actual amount of the taxpayer's use tax obligation.

(c) When completing and filing a Rhode Island personal income tax return, the taxpayer shall check a box attesting to the amount of use tax listed on the return. The tax administrator shall direct computer software providers to require the taxpayer or the taxpayer's preparer to proactively check the box; software providers shall not program an automatically checked attestation box.

(d) The tax administrator shall make clear on personal income tax forms and instructions that use tax is typically due on internet, mail-order, and catalog out-of-state purchases.

SECTION 3. Title 44 of the General Laws entitled "TAXATION" is hereby amended by adding thereto the following chapter:

CHAPTER 69

COMPLIANCE OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES WITH STATE INCOME TAX ACT

44-69-1. Short title. -- This chapter shall be known as the "Public Employee Tax Compliance Act".

44-69-2. Definitions. -- (a) "Appointing authority" means the person or group of persons having the power by virtue of the constitution, a state statute, or lawfully delegated authority to make appointments.

(b) "Employee" or "state or public employee" means an elected official, appointed officer or employee of any political subdivision of this state.

(c) "State agency" means any office, department, board, commission or institution of the executive, legislative, higher education or judicial branch of state government.

(d) "Political subdivision" means any office, department, board, commission or institution of the executive, legislative, education, or, public safety, or judicial branch of any city, town, or school district within the state.

44-69-3. Administration. -- (a) The department of administration and all political subdivisions shall, not later than August 1, 2014, and August 1 of each year thereafter, provide to the tax administrator a list of all public employees as of the preceding July 1 and such identifying information as may be required by the tax administrator. Such list and information shall be used by the tax administrator exclusively for the purpose of collection of income taxes due to the state of Rhode Island.

(b) The tax administrator shall, not later than December 1, 2014, and December 1 of each year thereafter, notify any public employee who is not in compliance with the income tax laws of this state. Such notification shall include:

(1) A statement that the employee will be subject to mandatory garnishment of wages by the state controller, unless the taxpayer is deemed by the tax administrator to be in compliance with the income tax laws of this state;

(2) The reasons that the taxpayer is considered to be out of compliance with the income tax laws of this state, including a statement of the amount of any tax, penalties and interest due, or a list of the tax years for which income tax returns have not been filed, as required by law;

(3) An explanation of the rights of the taxpayer and the procedures which must be followed by the taxpayer in order to come into compliance with the income tax laws of this state; and

(4) Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the tax administrator.

(c) A public employee who has entered into and is abiding by a payment agreement, or who has requested relief as an innocent spouse, which request is pending or has been granted, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the state income tax laws for purposes of this section.

(d) If the tax administrator notifies a public employee who is not in compliance with the income tax laws of this state as required in this section and such public employee does not respond to such notification or fails to come into compliance with the income tax laws of this state after an assessment has been made final or after the Tax Administrator determines that every reasonable effort has been made to assist the public employee to come into compliance with the income tax laws of this state, the tax administrator shall so notify the state controller or political subdivision, which shall commence mandatory garnishment of the public employee's wages and shall notify the employee of the reason for such action. If a public employee, who has been previously reported by the tax administrator to a state agency or the political subdivision as being out of compliance, comes into compliance, the tax administrator shall immediately notify the state controller or the political subdivision. Neither a state agency or the political subdivision nor an appointing authority shall be held liable for any action with respect to a public employee pursuant to the provisions of this section.

SECTION 4. Section 44-33-3 of the General Laws in Chapter 44-33 entitled "Property Tax Relief" is hereby amended to read as follows:

44-33-3. Definitions. -- As used in this chapter:

(1) "Claimant" means a homeowner or renter, sixty-five (65) years of age or older, and/or disabled, who has filed a claim under this chapter and was domiciled in this state for the entire calendar year for which he or she files a claim for relief under this chapter. In the case of claim for rent constituting property taxes accrued, the claimant shall have rented property during the preceding year for which he or she files for relief under this chapter. Claimant shall not mean or include any person claimed as a dependent by any taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, 26 U.S.C. section 1 et seq. When two (2) individuals of a household are able to meet the qualifications for a claimant, they may determine between themselves as to who the claimant is. If they are unable to agree, the matter is referred to the tax administrator and his or her decision is final. If a homestead is occupied by two (2) or more individuals, and more than one individual is able to qualify as a claimant, and some or all of the qualified individuals are not related, the individuals may determine among themselves as to who the claimant is. If they are unable to agree, the matter is referred to the tax administrator, and his or her decision is final.

(2) "Disabled" means those persons who are receiving a social security disability benefit.

(3) "Gross rent" means rental paid in cash or its equivalent solely for the right of occupancy of a homestead, exclusive of charges for any utilities, services, furniture, furnishings, or personal property appliances furnished by the landlord as a part of the rental agreement. If the landlord and tenant have not dealt with each other at arm's length, and the tax administrator is satisfied that the gross rent charged was excessive, he or she may adjust the gross rent to a reasonable amount for purposes of this chapter. "Gross rent" includes the rental of space paid to a landlord for parking of a mobile home, or docking or mooring a houseboat, exclusive of any charges for utilities, services, furniture, furnishings, or personal appliances furnished by the landlord as a part of the rental. Twenty percent (20%) of the annual gross rental plus the space rental fees paid during the year are the annual "property taxes accrued."

(4) "Homestead" means the dwelling, whether owned or rented, and so much of the land surrounding it, not exceeding one acre, as is reasonably necessary for use of the dwelling as a home, and may consist of a part of the multi-dwelling or multi-purpose building and a part of the land upon which it is built ("owned" includes a vendee in possession under a land contract and one or more joint tenants or tenants in common). It does not include personal property such as furniture, furnishings, or appliances, but a mobile home or a houseboat may be a homestead.

(5) "Household" means one or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. "Household" shall not include bona fide lessees, tenants, or roomers, and boarders on contract.

(6) "Household income" means all income received by all persons of a household in a calendar year while members of the household.

(7) "Income" means the sum of federal adjusted gross income as defined in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, 26 U.S.C. section 1 et seq., and all non-taxable income including, but not limited to, the amount of capital gains excluded from adjusted gross income, alimony, support money, non-taxable strike benefits, cash public assistance and relief (not including relief granted under this chapter), the gross amount of any pension or annuity (including Railroad Retirement Act (see 45 U.S.C. section 231 et seq.) benefits, all payments received under the federal Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. section 301 et seq., state unemployment insurance laws, and veterans' disability pensions (see 38 U.S.C. section 301 et seq.), non-taxable interest received from the federal government or any of its instrumentalities, workers' compensation, and the gross amount of "loss of time" insurance. It shall not include gifts from nongovernmental sources, or surplus foods or other relief in kind supplied by a public or private agency. For the purpose of this chapter, the calculation of "income" shall not include any deductions for rental losses, business losses, capital losses, exclusion for foreign income, and any losses received from pass-through entities.

(8) "Property taxes accrued" means property taxes (exclusive of special assessments, delinquent interest, and charges for service) levied on a claimant's homestead in this state in 1977 or any calendar year thereafter. If a homestead is owned by two (2) or more persons or entities as joint tenants or tenants in common, and one or more persons or entities are not a member of claimant's household, "property taxes accrued" is that part of property taxes levied on the homestead which reflects the ownership percentage of the claimant and his or her household. For purposes of this subdivision, property taxes are "levied" when the tax roll is certified by the city or town assessor. When a homestead is sold during the calendar year of the levy, the "property taxes accrued" for the seller and buyer is the amount of the tax levy prorated to each in the closing agreement pertaining to the sale of the homestead or, if not provided for in the closing agreement, the tax levy is prorated between seller and buyer based upon the delivery date of the deed of conveyance. When a household owns and occupies two (2) or more homesteads in the same calendar year, "property taxes accrued" is the sum of the prorated taxes attributable to the household for each of the homesteads. If the household owns and occupies the homestead for the part of the calendar year and rents a household for part of the calendar year, it may include both the proration of taxes on the homestead owned and "rent constituting property taxes accrued" with respect to the months the homestead is rented, in computing the amount of the claim. All prorations are made on the basis of the gross tax levy after all exemptions. If a homestead is an integral part of a larger unit such as a farm, or a multi-purpose or multi-dwelling building, property taxes accrued is that percentage of the total property taxes accrued as the value of the homestead is of the total value. For the purposes of this subdivision, "unit" refers to the parcel of property covered by a single tax statement of which the homestead is a part.

(9) "Rent constituting property taxes accrued" means twenty percent (20%) of the gross rent actually paid in cash or its equivalent in any calendar year by a claimant and his or her household solely for the right of occupancy of their Rhode Island homestead in the calendar year, and which rent constitutes the basis, in the succeeding calendar year, of a claim for relief under this chapter by the claimant, but shall not include any part of the rent paid for occupancy of premises which are legally exempt from the payment of property taxes.

SECTION 5. Section 44-25-1 of the General Laws in Chapter 44-25 entitled "Real Estate Conveyance Tax" is hereby amended to read as follows:

44-25-1. Tax imposed -- Payment -- Burden. -- (a) There is imposed, on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold is granted, assigned, transferred, or conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or her or their direction, when the consideration paid exceeds one hundred dollars ($100), a tax at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) two dollars and thirty cents ($2.30) for each five hundred dollars ($500) or fractional part of it which is paid for the purchase of the property (inclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining at the time of sale), which tax is payable at the time of making, execution, delivery, acceptance or presenting for recording of the instrument. In the absence of an agreement to the contrary, the tax shall be paid by the grantor.

(b) In the event no consideration is actually paid for the lands, tenements, or realty, the instrument of conveyance shall contain a statement to the effect that the consideration is such that no documentary stamps are required.

(c) The tax administrator shall contribute to the distressed community relief program the sum of thirty cents ($.30) per two dollars ($2.00) two dollars and thirty cents ($2.30) of the face value of the stamps to be distributed pursuant to section 45-13-12 . , and to the housing resources commission restricted receipts account the sum of thirty cents ($.30) per two dollars and thirty cents ($2.30) of the face value of the stamps. Funds will be administered by the department of administration, office of housing and community development, through the housing resources commission. The state shall retain sixty cents ($.60) for state use. The balance of the tax shall be retained by the municipality collecting the tax. Provided, however, in fiscal years 2004 and 2005, from the proceeds of this tax, the tax administrator shall deposit as general revenues the sum of ninety cents ($.90) per two dollars ($2.00) two dollars and thirty cents ($2.30) of the face value of the stamps. The balance of the tax is retained by the municipality collecting the tax.

SECTION 6. Section 42-128-2 of the General Laws in Chapter 42-128 entitled "Rhode Island Housing Resources Act of 1998" is hereby amended to read as follows:

42-128-2. Rhode Island housing resources agency created. -- There is created within the executive department a housing resources agency with the following purposes, organization, and powers:

(1) Purposes:

(i) To provide coherence to the housing programs of the state of Rhode Island and its departments, agencies, commissions, corporations, and subdivisions.

(ii) To provide for the integration and coordination of the activities of the Rhode Island housing and mortgage finance corporation and the Rhode Island housing resources commission.

(2) Coordinating committee -- Created -- Purposes and powers:

(i) The coordinating committee of the housing resources agency shall be comprised of the chairperson of the Rhode Island housing and mortgage finance corporation, the chairperson of the Rhode Island housing resources commission, the director of the department of administration, or the designee of the director, and the executive director of the Rhode Island housing and mortgage finance corporation. The chairperson of the Rhode Island housing resources commission shall be chairperson of the coordinating committee.

(ii) The coordinating committee shall develop and shall implement, with the approval of the Rhode Island housing and mortgage finance corporation and the Rhode Island housing resources commission, a memorandum of agreement describing the fiscal and operational relationship between the Rhode Island housing and mortgage finance corporation and the Rhode Island housing resources commission and shall define which programs of federal assistance will be applied for on behalf of the state by the Rhode Island housing and mortgage finance corporation and the Rhode Island housing resources commission.

(3) There is hereby established a restricted receipt account within the general fund of the state. Funds from this account shall be used to provide for the lead hazard abatement program, housing rental subsidy, and homeless prevention assistance and housing retention assistance.

SECTION 7. Section 44-30-2.6 of the General Laws in Chapter 44-30 entitled "Personal Income Tax" is hereby amended to read as follows:

44-30-2.6. Rhode Island taxable income -- Rate of tax. -- (a) "Rhode Island taxable income" means federal taxable income as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. section 1 et seq., not including the increase in the basic standard deduction amount for married couples filing joint returns as provided in the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 and the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA), and as modified by the modifications in section 44-30-12.

(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 44-30-1 and 44-30-2, for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, a Rhode Island personal income tax is imposed upon the Rhode Island taxable income of residents and nonresidents, including estates and trusts, at the rate of twenty-five and one-half percent (25.5%) for tax year 2001, and twenty-five percent (25%) for tax year 2002 and thereafter of the federal income tax rates, including capital gains rates and any other special rates for other types of income, except as provided in section 44-30-2.7, which were in effect immediately prior to enactment of the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA); provided, rate schedules shall be adjusted for inflation by the tax administrator beginning in taxable year 2002 and thereafter in the manner prescribed for adjustment by the commissioner of Internal Revenue in 26 U.S.C. section 1(f). However, for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2006, a taxpayer may elect to use the alternative flat tax rate provided in section 44-30-2.10 to calculate his or her personal income tax liability.

(c) For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, if a taxpayer has an alternative minimum tax for federal tax purposes, the taxpayer shall determine if he or she has a Rhode Island alternative minimum tax. The Rhode Island alternative minimum tax shall be computed by multiplying the federal tentative minimum tax without allowing for the increased exemptions under the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (as redetermined on federal form 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax-Individuals) by twenty-five and one-half percent (25.5%) for tax year 2001, and twenty-five percent (25%) for tax year 2002 and thereafter, and comparing the product to the Rhode Island tax as computed otherwise under this section. The excess shall be the taxpayer's Rhode Island alternative minimum tax.

(1) For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2005 and thereafter the exemption amount for alternative minimum tax, for Rhode Island purposes, shall be adjusted for inflation by the tax administrator in the manner prescribed for adjustment by the commissioner of Internal Revenue in 26 U.S.C. section 1(f).

(2) For the period January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2007, and thereafter, Rhode Island taxable income shall be determined by deducting from federal adjusted gross income as defined in 26 U.S.C. section 62 as modified by the modifications in section 44-30-12 the Rhode Island itemized deduction amount and the Rhode Island exemption amount as determined in this section.

(A) Tax imposed.

(1) There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of married individuals filing joint returns and surviving spouses a tax determined in accordance with the following table:

If taxable income is: The tax is:

Not over $53,150 3.75% of taxable income

Over $53,150 but not over $128,500 $1,993.13 plus 7.00% of the excess over $53,150

Over $128,500 but not over $195,850 $7,267.63 plus 7.75% of the excess over $128,500

Over $195,850 but not over $349,700 $12,487.25 plus 9.00% of the excess over $195,850

Over $349,700 $26,333.75 plus 9.90% of the excess over $349,700

(2) There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of every head of household a tax determined in accordance with the following table:

If taxable income is: The tax is:

Not over $42,650 3.75% of taxable income

Over $42,650 but not over $110,100 $1,599.38 plus 7.00% of the excess over $42,650

Over $110,100 but not over $178,350 $6,320.88 plus 7.75% of the excess over $110,100

Over $178,350 but not over $349,700 $11,610.25 plus 9.00% of the excess over $178,350

Over $349,700 $27,031.75 plus 9.90% of the excess over $349,700

(3) There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of unmarried individuals (other than surviving spouses and heads of households) a tax determined in accordance with the following table:

If taxable income is: The tax is:

Not over $31,850 3.75% of taxable income

Over $31,850 but not over $77,100 $1,194.38 plus 7.00% of the excess over $31,850

Over $77,100 but not over $160,850 $4,361.88 plus 7.75% of the excess over $77,100

Over $160,850 but not over $349,700 $10,852.50 plus 9.00% of the excess over $160,850

Over $349,700 $27,849.00 plus 9.90% of the excess over $349,700

(4) There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of married individuals filing separate returns and bankruptcy estates a tax determined in accordance with the following table:

If taxable income is: The tax is:

Not over $26,575 3.75% of taxable income

Over $26,575 but not over $64,250 $996.56 plus 7.00% of the excess over $26,575

Over $64,250 but not over $97,925 $3,633.81 plus 7.75% of the excess over $64,250

Over $97,925 but not over $174,850 $6,243.63 plus 9.00% of the excess over $97,925

Over $174,850 $13,166.88 plus 9.90% of the excess over $174,850

(5) There is hereby imposed a taxable income of an estate or trust a tax determined in accordance with the following table:

If taxable income is: The tax is:

Not over $2,150 3.75% of taxable income

Over $2,150 but not over $5,000 $80.63 plus 7.00% of the excess over $2,150

Over $5,000 but not over $7,650 $280.13 plus 7.75% of the excess over $5,000

Over $7,650 but not over $10,450 $485.50 plus 9.00% of the excess over $7,650

Over $10,450 $737.50 plus 9.90% of the excess over $10,450

(6) Adjustments for inflation.

The dollars amount contained in paragraph (A) shall be increased by an amount equal to:

(a) Such dollar amount contained in paragraph (A) in the year 1993, multiplied by;

(b) The cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (J) with a base year of 1993;

(c) The cost-of-living adjustment referred to in subparagraph (a) and (b) used in making adjustments to the nine percent (9%) and nine and nine tenths percent (9.9%) dollar amounts shall be determined under section (J) by substituting "1994" for "1993."

(B) Maximum capital gains rates

(1) In general

If a taxpayer has a net capital gain for tax years ending prior to January 1, 2010, the tax imposed by this section for such taxable year shall not exceed the sum of:

(a) 2.5 % of the net capital gain as reported for federal income tax purposes under section 26 U.S.C. 1(h)(1)(a) and 26 U.S.C. 1(h)(1)(b).

(b) 5% of the net capital gain as reported for federal income tax purposes under 26 U.S.C. 1(h)(1)(c).

(c) 6.25% of the net capital gain as reported for federal income tax purposes under 26 U.S.C. 1(h)(1)(d).

(d) 7% of the net capital gain as reported for federal income tax purposes under 26 U.S.C. 1(h)(1)(e).

(2) For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2010 the tax imposed on net capital gain shall be determined under subdivision 44-30-2.6(c)(2)(A).

(C) Itemized deductions.

(1) In general

For the purposes of section (2) "itemized deductions" means the amount of federal itemized deductions as modified by the modifications in section 44-30-12.

(2) Individuals who do not itemize their deductions

In the case of an individual who does not elect to itemize his deductions for the taxable year, they may elect to take a standard deduction.

(3) Basic standard deduction.

The Rhode Island standard deduction shall be allowed in accordance with the following table:

Filing status Amount

Single $5,350

Married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er) $8,900

Married filing separately $4,450

Head of Household $7,850

(4) Additional standard deduction for the aged and blind.

An additional standard deduction shall be allowed for individuals age sixty-five (65) or older or blind in the amount of $1,300 for individuals who are not married and $1,050 for individuals who are married.

(5) Limitation on basic standard deduction in the case of certain dependents.

In the case of an individual to whom a deduction under section (E) is allowable to another taxpayer, the basic standard deduction applicable to such individual shall not exceed the greater of:

(a) $850;

(b) The sum of $300 and such individual's earned income;

(6) Certain individuals not eligible for standard deduction.

In the case of:

(a) A married individual filing a separate return where either spouse itemizes deductions;

(b) Nonresident alien individual;

(c) An estate or trust;

The standard deduction shall be zero.

(7) Adjustments for inflation.

Each dollars amount contained in paragraphs (3), (4) and (5) shall be increased by an amount equal to:

(a) Such dollar amount contained in paragraphs (3), (4) and (5) in the year 1988, multiplied by

(b) The cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (J) with a base year of 1988.

(D) Overall limitation on itemized deductions

(1) General rule.

In the case of an individual whose adjusted gross income as modified by section 44-30-12 exceeds the applicable amount, the amount of the itemized deductions otherwise allowable for the taxable year shall be reduced by the lesser of:

(a) Three percent (3%) of the excess of adjusted gross income as modified by section 44-30-12 over the applicable amount; or

(b) Eighty percent (80%) of the amount of the itemized deductions otherwise allowable for such taxable year.

(2) Applicable amount.

(a) In general.

For purposes of this section, the term "applicable amount" means $156,400 ($78,200 in the case of a separate return by a married individual)

(b) Adjustments for inflation.

Each dollar amount contained in paragraph (a) shall be increased by an amount equal to:

(i) Such dollar amount contained in paragraph (a) in the year 1991, multiplied by

(ii) The cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (J) with a base year of 1991.

(3) Phase-out of Limitation.

(a) In general.

In the case of taxable year beginning after December 31, 2005, and before January 1, 2010, the reduction under section (1) shall be equal to the applicable fraction of the amount which would be the amount of such reduction.

(b) Applicable fraction.

For purposes of paragraph (a), the applicable fraction shall be determined in accordance with the following table:

For taxable years beginning in The applicable fraction is

calendar year

2006 and 2007 2/3

2008 and 2009 1/3

(E) Exemption amount

(1) In general.

Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the term "exemption amount" mean $3,400.

(2) Exemption amount disallowed in case of certain dependents.

In the case of an individual with respect to whom a deduction under this section is allowable to another taxpayer for the same taxable year, the exemption amount applicable to such individual for such individual's taxable year shall be zero.

(3) Adjustments for inflation.

The dollar amount contained in paragraph (1) shall be increased by an amount equal to:

(a) Such dollar amount contained in paragraph (1) in the year 1989, multiplied by

(b) The cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (J) with a base year of 1989. (4) Limitation.

(a) In general.

In the case of any taxpayer whose adjusted gross income as modified for the taxable year exceeds the threshold amount shall be reduced by the applicable percentage.

(b) Applicable percentage.

In the case of any taxpayer whose adjusted gross income for the taxable year exceeds the threshold amount, the exemption amount shall be reduced by two (2) percentage points for each $2,500 (or fraction thereof) by which the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the taxable year exceeds the threshold amount. In the case of a married individual filing a separate return, the preceding sentence shall be applied by substituting "$1,250" for "$2,500." In no event shall the applicable percentage exceed one hundred percent (100%).

(c) Threshold Amount.

For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "threshold amount" shall be determined with the following table:

Filing status Amount

Single $156,400

Married filing jointly of qualifying widow(er) $234,600

Married filing separately $117,300

Head of Household $195,500

(d) Adjustments for inflation.

Each dollars amount contain in paragraph (b) shall be increased by an amount equal to:

(i) Such dollar amount contained in paragraph (b) in the year 1991, multiplied by

(ii) The cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (J) with a base year of 1991.

(5) Phase-out of Limitation.

(a) In general.

In the case of taxable years beginning after December 31, 2005, and before January 1, 2010, the reduction under section 4 shall be equal to the applicable fraction of the amount which would be the amount of such reduction.

(b) Applicable fraction.

For the purposes of paragraph (a), the applicable fraction shall be determined in accordance with the following table:

For taxable years beginning in The applicable fraction is

calendar year

2006 and 2007 2/3

2008 and 2009 1/3

(F) Alternative minimum tax

(1) General rule. - There is hereby imposed (in addition to any other tax imposed by this subtitle) a tax equal to the excess (if any) of:

(a) The tentative minimum tax for the taxable year, over

(b) The regular tax for the taxable year.

(2) The tentative minimum tax for the taxable year is the sum of:

(a) 6.5 percent of so much of the taxable excess as does not exceed $175,000, plus

(b) 7.0 percent of so much of the taxable excess above $175,000.

(3) The amount determined under the preceding sentence shall be reduced by the alternative minimum tax foreign tax credit for the taxable year.

(4) Taxable excess. - For the purposes of this subsection the term "taxable excess" means so much of the federal alternative minimum taxable income as modified by the modifications in section 44-30-12 as exceeds the exemption amount.

(5) In the case of a married individual filing a separate return, subparagraph (2) shall be applied by substituting "$87,500" for $175,000 each place it appears.

(6) Exemption amount.

For purposes of this section "exemption amount" means:

Filing status Amount

Single $39,150

Married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er) $53,700

Married filing separately $26,850

Head of Household $39,150

Estate or trust $24,650

(7) Treatment of unearned income of minor children

(a) In general.

In the case of a minor child, the exemption amount for purposes of section (6) shall not exceed the sum of:

(i) Such child's earned income, plus

(ii) $6,000.

(8) Adjustments for inflation.

The dollar amount contained in paragraphs (6) and (7) shall be increased by an amount equal to:

(a) Such dollar amount contained in paragraphs (6) and (7) in the year 2004, multiplied by

(b) The cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (J) with a base year of 2004.

(9) Phase-out.

(a) In general.

The exemption amount of any taxpayer shall be reduced (but not below zero) by an amount equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount by which alternative minimum taxable income of the taxpayer exceeds the threshold amount.

(b) Threshold amount.

For purposes of this paragraph, the term "threshold amount" shall be determined with the following table:

Filing status Amount

Single $123,250

Married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er) $164,350

Married filing separately $82,175

Head of Household $123,250

Estate or Trust $82,150

(c) Adjustments for inflation

Each dollar amount contained in paragraph (9) shall be increased by an amount equal to:

(i) Such dollar amount contained in paragraph (9) in the year 2004, multiplied by

(ii) The cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (J) with a base year of 2004.

(G) Other Rhode Island taxes

(1) General rule. - There is hereby imposed (in addition to any other tax imposed by this subtitle) a tax equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of:

(a) The Federal income tax on lump-sum distributions.

(b) The Federal income tax on parents' election to report child's interest and dividends.

(c) The recapture of Federal tax credits that were previously claimed on Rhode Island return.

(H) Tax for children under 18 with investment income

(1) General rule. - There is hereby imposed a tax equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of:

(a) The Federal tax for children under the age of 18 with investment income. (I) Averaging of farm income

(1) General rule. - At the election of an individual engaged in a farming business or fishing business, the tax imposed in section 2 shall be equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of:

(a) The Federal averaging of farm income as determined in IRC section 1301.

(J) Cost-of-living adjustment

(1) In general.

The cost-of-living adjustment for any calendar year is the percentage (if any) by which:

(a) The CPI for the preceding calendar year exceeds

(b) The CPI for the base year.

(2) CPI for any calendar year.

For purposes of paragraph (1), the CPI for any calendar year is the average of the Consumer Price Index as of the close of the twelve (12) month period ending on August 31 of such calendar year.

(3) Consumer Price Index

For purposes of paragraph (2), the term "consumer price index" means the last consumer price index for all urban consumers published by the department of labor. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the revision of the consumer price index which is most consistent with the consumer price index for calendar year 1986 shall be used.

(4) Rounding.

(a) In general.

If any increase determined under paragraph (1) is not a multiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the next lowest multiple of $50.

(b) In the case of a married individual filing a separate return, subparagraph (a) shall be applied by substituting "$25" for $50 each place it appears.

(K) Credits against tax. - For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, a taxpayer entitled to any of the following federal credits enacted prior to January 1, 1996 shall be entitled to a credit against the Rhode Island tax imposed under this section:

(1) [Deleted by P.L. 2007, ch. 73, art. 7, section 5].

(2) Child and dependent care credit;

(3) General business credits;

(4) Credit for elderly or the disabled;

(5) Credit for prior year minimum tax;

(6) Mortgage interest credit;

(7) Empowerment zone employment credit;

(8) Qualified electric vehicle credit.

(L) Credit against tax for adoption. - For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2006, a taxpayer entitled to the federal adoption credit shall be entitled to a credit against the Rhode Island tax imposed under this section if the adopted child was under the care, custody, or supervision of the Rhode Island department of children, youth and families prior to the adoption.

(M) The credit shall be twenty-five percent (25%) of the aforementioned federal credits provided there shall be no deduction based on any federal credits enacted after January 1, 1996, including the rate reduction credit provided by the federal Economic Growth and Tax Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA). In no event shall the tax imposed under this section be reduced to less than zero. A taxpayer required to recapture any of the above credits for federal tax purposes shall determine the Rhode Island amount to be recaptured in the same manner as prescribed in this subsection.

(N) Rhode Island earned income credit

(1) In general.

A taxpayer entitled to a federal earned income credit shall be allowed a Rhode Island earned income credit equal to twenty-five percent (25%) ten percent (10%) of the federal earned income credit. Such credit shall not exceed the amount of the Rhode Island income tax.

(2) Refundable portion.

In the event the Rhode Island earned income credit allowed under section (J) exceeds the amount of Rhode Island income tax, a refundable earned income credit shall be allowed.

(a) For purposes of paragraph (2) refundable earned income credit means fifteen percent (15%) one hundred percent (100%) of the amount by which the Rhode Island earned income credit exceeds the Rhode Island income tax.

(O) The tax administrator shall recalculate and submit necessary revisions to paragraphs (A) through (J) to the general assembly no later than February 1, 2010 and every three (3) years thereafter for inclusion in the statute.

(3) For the period January 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011, and thereafter, "Rhode Island taxable income" means federal adjusted gross income as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. 1 et seq., and as modified for Rhode Island purposes pursuant to section 44-30-12 less the amount of Rhode Island Basic Standard Deduction allowed pursuant to subparagraph 44-30-2.6(c)(3)(B), and less the amount of personal exemption allowed pursuant of subparagraph 44-30-2.6(c)(3)(C).

(A) Tax imposed.

(I) There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of married individuals filing joint returns, qualifying widow(er), every head of household, unmarried individuals, married individuals filing separate returns and bankruptcy estates, a tax determined in accordance with the following table:

Over But not over Pay + Excess on the amount over

$ 0 - $ 55,000 $ 0 + 3.75% $ 0

55,000 - 125,000 2,063 + 4.75% 55,000

125,000 - 5,388 + 5.99% 125,000

(II) There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of an estate or trust a tax determined in accordance with the following table:

Over But not over Pay + % on Excess on the amount over

$ 0 - $ 2,230 $ 0 + 3.75% $ 0

2,230 - 7,022 84 + 4.75% 2,230

7,022 - 312 + 5.99% 7,022

(B) Deductions: (I) Rhode Island Basic Standard Deduction. Only the Rhode Island standard deduction shall be allowed in accordance with the following table:

Filing status: Amount

Single $7,500

Married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er) $15,000

Married filing separately $7,500

Head of Household $11,250

(II) Nonresident alien individuals, estates and trusts are not eligible for standard deductions.

(III) In the case of any taxpayer whose adjusted gross income, as modified for Rhode Island purposes pursuant to section 44-30-12, for the taxable year exceeds one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars ($175,000), the standard deduction amount shall be reduced by the applicable percentage. The term "applicable percentage" means twenty (20) percentage points for each five thousand dollars ($5,000) (or fraction thereof) by which the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the taxable year exceeds one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars ($175,000).

(C) Exemption Amount:

(I) The term "exemption amount" means three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500) multiplied by the number of exemptions allowed for the taxable year for federal income tax purposes.

(II) Exemption amount disallowed in case of certain dependents. In the case of an individual with respect to whom a deduction under this section is allowable to another taxpayer for the same taxable year, the exemption amount applicable to such individual for such individual's taxable year shall be zero.

(D) In the case of any taxpayer whose adjusted gross income, as modified for Rhode Island purposes pursuant to section 33-30-12, for the taxable year exceeds one hundred seventy- five thousand dollars ($175,000), the exemption amount shall be reduced by the applicable percentage. The term "applicable percentage" means twenty (20) percentage points for each five thousand dollars ($5,000) (or fraction thereof) by which the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the taxable year exceeds one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars ($175,000).

(E) Adjustment for inflation. - The dollar amount contained in subparagraphs 44-30-2.6(c)(3)(A), 44-30-2.6(c)(3)(B) and 44-30-2.6(c)(3)(C) shall be increased annually by an amount equal to:

(I) Such dollar amount contained in subparagraphs 44-30-2.6(c)(3)(A), 44-30-2.6(c)(3)(B) and 44-30-2.6(c)(3)(C) adjusted for inflation using a base tax year of 2000, multiplied by;

(II) The cost-of-living adjustment with a base year of 2000.

(III) For the purposes of this section the cost-of-living adjustment for any calendar year is the percentage (if any) by which the consumer price index for the preceding calendar year exceeds the consumer price index for the base year. The consumer price index for any calendar year is the average of the consumer price index as of the close of the twelve (12) month period ending on August 31, of such calendar year.

(IV) For the purpose of this section the term "consumer price index" means the last consumer price index for all urban consumers published by the department of labor. For the purpose of this section the revision of the consumer price index which is most consistent with the consumer price index for calendar year 1986 shall be used.

(V) If any increase determined under this section is not a multiple of fifty dollars ($50.00), such increase shall be rounded to the next lower multiple of fifty dollars ($50.00). In the case of a married individual filing separate return, if any increase determined under this section is not a multiple of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), such increase shall be rounded to the next lower multiple of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).

(E) Credits against tax.

(I) Notwithstanding any other provisions of Rhode Island Law, for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2011, the only credits allowed against a tax imposed under this chapter shall be as follows:

(a) Rhode Island Earned Income Credit: Credit shall be allowed for earned income credit pursuant to subparagraph 44-30-2.6(c)(2)(N).

(b) Property Tax Relief Credit: Credit shall be allowed for property tax relief as provided in section 44-33-1 et seq.

(c) Lead Paint Credit: Credit shall be allowed for residential lead abatement income tax credit as provided in section 44-30.3-1 et seq.

(d) Credit for income taxes of other states. - Credit shall be allowed for income tax paid to other states pursuant to section 44-30-74.

(e) Historic Structures Tax Credit: Credit shall be allowed for historic structures tax credit as provided in section 44-33.2-1 et seq.

(f) Motion Picture Productions Tax Credit: Credit shall be allowed for motion picture production tax credit as provided in section 44-31.2-1 et seq.

(g) Child and Dependent Care: Credit shall be allowed for twenty-five percent (25%) of the federal child and dependent care credit allowable for the taxable year for federal purposes; provided, however, such credit shall not exceed the Rhode Island tax liability.

(h) Tax credits for contributions to Scholarship Organizations: Credit shall be allowed for contributions to scholarship organizations as provided in section 44-62 et seq.

(i) Credit for tax withheld. - Wages upon which tax is required to be withheld shall be taxable as if no withholding were required, but any amount of Rhode Island personal income tax actually deducted and withheld in any calendar year shall be deemed to have been paid to the tax administrator on behalf of the person from whom withheld, and the person shall be credited with having paid that amount of tax for the taxable year beginning in that calendar year. For a taxable year of less than twelve (12) months, the credit shall be made under regulations of the tax administrator.

(2) Except as provided in section 1 above, no other state and federal tax credit shall be available to the taxpayers in computing tax liability under this chapter.

SECTION 8. Chapter 44-19 of the General Laws entitled "Sales and Use Taxes - Enforcement and Collection" is hereby amended by adding thereto the following section:

44-19-42. Sales suppression devices -- Definitions and applicability. -- (a) As used in this section:

(1) Automated sales suppression device," also known as a "zapper," means a software program, carried on a memory stick or removable compact disc, accessed through an Internet link, or accessed through any other means, that falsifies transaction data, transaction reports, or any other electronic records of electronic cash registers and other point-of-sale systems.

(2) "Electronic cash register" means a device that keeps a register or supporting documents through the means of an electronic device or computer system designed to record transaction data for the purpose of computing, compiling, or processing retail sales transaction data in any manner.

(3)"Phantom-ware" means a hidden programming option, whether preinstalled or installed at a later time, embedded in the operating system of an electronic cash register or hardwired into the electronic cash register that:

(i) Can be used to create a virtual second till; or

(ii) May eliminate or manipulate transaction records.

(4) "Transaction data" includes items purchased by a customer, the price for each item. A taxability determination for each item, a segregated tax amount for each of the taxed items, the amount of cash or credit tendered, the net amount returned to the customer in change, the date and time of the purchase, the name, address, and identification number of the vendor, and the receipt or invoice number of the transaction.

(5)"Transaction reports" means a report documenting, but not limited to, the sales, taxes collected, media totals, and discount voids at an electronic cash register that is printed on cash register tape at the end of a day or shift, or a report documenting every action at an electronic cash register that is stored electronically.

(b) A person shall not knowingly sell, purchase, install, transfer or possess an automated sales suppression device or phantom-ware.

(c) Any person who violates subdivision (b) of this section shall be guilty of a felony and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding fifty-thousand dollars ($50,000) or imprisonment not exceeding five (5) years, or both.

(d) In addition, a person who violates subdivision (b) of this section shall be liable to the state for:

(1) All taxes, interest, and penalties due as the result of the person's use of an automated sales suppression device or phantom-ware; and

(2) All profits associated with the person's sale of an automated sales suppression device or phantom-ware.

(e) An automated sales suppression device or phantom-ware and any device containing such device or software shall be deemed contraband and shall be subject to seizure by the tax administrator or by a law enforcement officer when directed to do so by the tax administrator.

(f) Safe harbor. A person shall not be subject to prosecution under Rhode Island general laws ยง 44-19-4 2, if by October 1, 20 14, the person:

(1) Notifies the division of taxation of the person's possession of an automated sales suppression device;

(2) Provides any information requested by the division of taxation, including transaction records, software specifications, encryption keys, passwords, and other data; and

(3) Corrects any underreported sales tax records and fully pays the division of taxation any amounts previously owed.

(g) This section shall not be construed to limit the person's civil or criminal liability under any other provision of law.

SECTION 9. Section 44-18-30 of the General Laws in Chapter 44-18 entitled "Sales and Use Taxes - Liability and Computation" is hereby amended to read as follows:

44-18-30. Gross receipts exempt from sales and use taxes. -- There are exempted from the taxes imposed by this chapter the following gross receipts:

(1) Sales and uses beyond constitutional power of state. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of tangible personal property the gross receipts from the sale of which, or the storage, use, or other consumption of which, this state is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the United States or under the constitution of this state.

(2) Newspapers.

(i) From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of any newspaper.

(ii) "Newspaper" means an unbound publication printed on newsprint, which contains news, editorial comment, opinions, features, advertising matter, and other matters of public interest.

(iii) "Newspaper" does not include a magazine, handbill, circular, flyer, sales catalog, or similar item unless the item is printed for and distributed as a part of a newspaper.

(3) School meals. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of meals served by public, private, or parochial schools, school districts, colleges, universities, student organizations, and parent teacher associations to the students or teachers of a school, college, or university whether the meals are served by the educational institutions or by a food service or management entity under contract to the educational institutions.

(4) Containers.

(i) From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of:

(A) Non-returnable containers, including boxes, paper bags, and wrapping materials which are biodegradable and all bags and wrapping materials utilized in the medical and healing arts, when sold without the contents to persons who place the contents in the container and sell the contents with the container.

(B) Containers when sold with the contents if the sale price of the contents is not required to be included in the measure of the taxes imposed by this chapter.

(C) Returnable containers when sold with the contents in connection with a retail sale of the contents or when resold for refilling.

(ii) As used in this subdivision, the term "returnable containers" means containers of a kind customarily returned by the buyer of the contents for reuse. All other containers are "non-returnable containers."

(5) (i) Charitable, educational, and religious organizations. - From the sale to as in defined in this section, and from the storage, use, and other consumption in this state or any other state of the United States of America of tangible personal property by hospitals not operated for a profit, "educational institutions" as defined in subdivision (18) not operated for a profit, churches, orphanages, and other institutions or organizations operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes, interest free loan associations not operated for profit, nonprofit organized sporting leagues and associations and bands for boys and girls under the age of nineteen (19) years, the following vocational student organizations that are state chapters of national vocational students organizations: Distributive Education Clubs of America, (DECA); Future Business Leaders of America, phi beta lambda (FBLA/PBL); Future Farmers of America (FFA); Future Homemakers of America/Home Economics Related Occupations (FHA/HERD); and Vocational Industrial Clubs of America (VICA), organized nonprofit golden age and senior citizens clubs for men and women, and parent teacher associations.

(ii) In the case of contracts entered into with the federal government, its agencies or instrumentalities, this state or any other state of the United States of America, its agencies, any city, town, district, or other political subdivision of the states, hospitals not operated for profit, educational institutions not operated for profit, churches, orphanages, and other institutions or organizations operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes, the contractor may purchase such materials and supplies (materials and/or supplies are defined as those which are essential to the project) that are to be utilized in the construction of the projects being performed under the contracts without payment of the tax.

(iii) The contractor shall not charge any sales or use tax to any exempt agency, institution, or organization but shall in that instance provide his or her suppliers with certificates in the form as determined by the division of taxation showing the reason for exemption; and the contractor's records must substantiate the claim for exemption by showing the disposition of all property so purchased. If any property is then used for a nonexempt purpose, the contractor must pay the tax on the property used.

(6) Gasoline. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of: (i) gasoline and other products taxed under chapter 36 of title 31, and (ii) fuels used for the propulsion of airplanes.

(7) Purchase for manufacturing purposes.

(i) From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of computer software, tangible personal property, electricity, natural gas, artificial gas, steam, refrigeration, and water, when the property or service is purchased for the purpose of being manufactured into a finished product for resale, and becomes an ingredient, component, or integral part of the manufactured, compounded, processed, assembled, or prepared product, or if the property or service is consumed in the process of manufacturing for resale computer software, tangible personal property, electricity, natural gas, artificial gas, steam, refrigeration, or water.

(ii) "Consumed" means destroyed, used up, or worn out to the degree or extent that the property cannot be repaired, reconditioned, or rendered fit for further manufacturing use.

(iii) "Consumed" includes mere obsolescence.

(iv) "Manufacturing" means and includes manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, preparing, or producing.

(v) "Process of manufacturing" means and includes all production operations performed in the producing or processing room, shop, or plant, insofar as the operations are a part of and connected with the manufacturing for resale of tangible personal property, electricity, natural gas, artificial gas, steam, refrigeration, or water and all production operations performed insofar as the operations are a part of and connected with the manufacturing for resale of computer software.

(vi) "Process of manufacturing" does not mean or include administration operations such as general office operations, accounting, collection, sales promotion, nor does it mean or include distribution operations which occur subsequent to production operations, such as handling, storing, selling, and transporting the manufactured products, even though the administration and distribution operations are performed by or in connection with a manufacturing business.

(8) State and political subdivisions. - From the sale to, and from the storage, use, or other consumption by, this state, any city, town, district, or other political subdivision of this state. Every redevelopment agency created pursuant to chapter 31 of title 45 is deemed to be a subdivision of the municipality where it is located.

(9) Food and food ingredients. - From the sale and storage, use, or other consumption in this state of food and food ingredients as defined in section 44-18-7.1(l).

For the purposes of this exemption "food and food ingredients" shall not include candy, soft drinks, dietary supplements, alcoholic beverages, tobacco, food sold through vending machines or prepared food (as those terms are defined in section 44-18-7.1, unless the prepared food is:

(i) Sold by a seller whose primary NAICS classification is manufacturing in sector 311, except sub-sector 3118 (bakeries);

(ii) Sold in an unheated state by weight or volume as a single item;

(iii) Bakery items, including bread, rolls, buns, biscuits, bagels, croissants, pastries, donuts, danish, cakes, tortes, pies, tarts, muffins, bars, cookies, tortillas; and

is not sold with utensils provided by the seller, including plates, knives, forks, spoons, glasses, cups, napkins, or straws.

(10) Medicines, drugs and durable medical equipment. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state, of;

(i) "Drugs" as defined in section 44-18-7.1(h)(i), sold on prescriptions, medical oxygen, and insulin whether or not sold on prescription. For purposes of this exemption drugs shall not include over-the-counter drugs and grooming and hygiene products as defined in section 44-18-7.1(h)(iii).

(ii) Durable medical equipment as defined in section 44-18-7.1(k) for home use only, including, but not limited to, syringe infusers, ambulatory drug delivery pumps, hospital beds, convalescent chairs, and chair lifts. Supplies used in connection with syringe infusers and ambulatory drug delivery pumps which are sold on prescription to individuals to be used by them to dispense or administer prescription drugs, and related ancillary dressings and supplies used to dispense or administer prescription drugs shall also be exempt from tax.

(11) Prosthetic devices and mobility enhancing equipment. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state, of prosthetic devices as defined in section 44-18-7.1(t), sold on prescription, including but not limited to, artificial limbs, dentures, spectacles and eyeglasses, and artificial eyes; artificial hearing devices and hearing aids, whether or not sold on prescription and mobility enhancing equipment as defined in section 44-18-7.1(p) including wheelchairs, crutches and canes.

(12) Coffins, caskets, and burial garments. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of coffins or caskets, and shrouds or other burial garments which are ordinarily sold by a funeral director as part of the business of funeral directing.

(13) Motor vehicles sold to nonresidents.

(i) From the sale, subsequent to June 30, 1958, of a motor vehicle to a bona fide nonresident of this state who does not register the motor vehicle in this state, whether the sale or delivery of the motor vehicle is made in this state or at the place of residence of the nonresident. A motor vehicle sold to a bona fide nonresident whose state of residence does not allow a like exemption to its nonresidents is not exempt from the tax imposed under section 44-18-20. In that event the bona fide nonresident pays a tax to Rhode Island on the sale at a rate equal to the rate that would be imposed in his or her state of residence not to exceed the rate that would have been imposed under section 44-18-20. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, a licensed motor vehicle dealer shall add and collect the tax required under this subdivision and remit the tax to the tax administrator under the provisions of chapters 18 and 19 of this title. When a Rhode Island licensed motor vehicle dealer is required to add and collect the sales and use tax on the sale of a motor vehicle to a bona fide nonresident as provided in this section, the dealer in computing the tax takes into consideration the law of the state of the nonresident as it relates to the trade-in of motor vehicles.

(ii) The tax administrator, in addition to the provisions of sections 44-19-27 and 44-19-28, may require any licensed motor vehicle dealer to keep records of sales to bona fide nonresidents as the tax administrator deems reasonably necessary to substantiate the exemption provided in this subdivision, including the affidavit of a licensed motor vehicle dealer that the purchaser of the motor vehicle was the holder of, and had in his or her possession a valid out of state motor vehicle registration or a valid out of state driver's license.

(iii) Any nonresident who registers a motor vehicle in this state within ninety (90) days of the date of its sale to him or her is deemed to have purchased the motor vehicle for use, storage, or other consumption in this state, and is subject to, and liable for the use tax imposed under the provisions of section 44-18-20.

(14) Sales in public buildings by blind people. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in all public buildings in this state of all products or wares by any person licensed under section 40-9-11.1.

(15) Air and water pollution control facilities. - From the sale, storage, use, or other consumption in this state of tangible personal property or supplies acquired for incorporation into or used and consumed in the operation of a facility, the primary purpose of which is to aid in the control of the pollution or contamination of the waters or air of the state, as defined in chapter 12 of title 46 and chapter 25 of title 23, respectively, and which has been certified as approved for that purpose by the director of environmental management. The director of environmental management may certify to a portion of the tangible personal property or supplies acquired for incorporation into those facilities or used and consumed in the operation of those facilities to the extent that that portion has as its primary purpose the control of the pollution or contamination of the waters or air of this state. As used in this subdivision, "facility" means any land, facility, device, building, machinery, or equipment.

(16) Camps. - From the rental charged for living quarters, or sleeping or housekeeping accommodations at camps or retreat houses operated by religious, charitable, educational, or other organizations and associations mentioned in subdivision (5), or by privately owned and operated summer camps for children.

(17) Certain institutions. - From the rental charged for living or sleeping quarters in an institution licensed by the state for the hospitalization, custodial, or nursing care of human beings.

(18) Educational institutions. - From the rental charged by any educational institution for living quarters, or sleeping or housekeeping accommodations or other rooms or accommodations to any student or teacher necessitated by attendance at an educational institution. "Educational institution" as used in this section means an institution of learning not operated for profit which is empowered to confer diplomas, educational, literary, or academic degrees, which has a regular faculty, curriculum, and organized body of pupils or students in attendance throughout the usual school year, which keeps and furnishes to students and others records required and accepted for entrance to schools of secondary, collegiate, or graduate rank, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any individual.

(19) Motor vehicle and adaptive equipment for persons with disabilities.

(i) From the sale of: (A) special adaptations, (B) the component parts of the special adaptations, or (C) a specially adapted motor vehicle; provided, that the owner furnishes to the tax administrator an affidavit of a licensed physician to the effect that the specially adapted motor vehicle is necessary to transport a family member with a disability or where the vehicle has been specially adapted to meet the specific needs of the person with a disability. This exemption applies to not more than one motor vehicle owned and registered for personal, noncommercial use.

(ii) For the purpose of this subsection the term "special adaptations" includes, but is not limited to: wheelchair lifts; wheelchair carriers; wheelchair ramps; wheelchair securements; hand controls; steering devices; extensions, relocations, and crossovers of operator controls; power-assisted controls; raised tops or dropped floors; raised entry doors; or alternative signaling devices to auditory signals.

(iii) From the sale of: (a) special adaptations, (b) the component parts of the special adaptations, for a "wheelchair accessible taxicab" as defined in section 39-14-1 and/or a "wheelchair accessible public motor vehicle" as defined in section 39-14.1-1.

(iv) For the purpose of this subdivision the exemption for a "specially adapted motor vehicle" means a use tax credit not to exceed the amount of use tax that would otherwise be due on the motor vehicle, exclusive of any adaptations. The use tax credit is equal to the cost of the special adaptations, including installation.

(20) Heating fuels. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of every type of fuel used in the heating of homes and residential premises.

(21) Electricity and gas. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of electricity and gas furnished for domestic use by occupants of residential premises.

(22) Manufacturing machinery and equipment.

(i) From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of tools, dies, and molds, and machinery and equipment (including replacement parts), and related items to the extent used in an industrial plant in connection with the actual manufacture, conversion, or processing of tangible personal property, or to the extent used in connection with the actual manufacture, conversion or processing of computer software as that term is utilized in industry numbers 7371, 7372, and 7373 in the standard industrial classification manual prepared by the technical committee on industrial classification, office of statistical standards, executive office of the president, United States bureau of the budget, as revised from time to time, to be sold, or that machinery and equipment used in the furnishing of power to an industrial manufacturing plant. For the purposes of this subdivision, "industrial plant" means a factory at a fixed location primarily engaged in the manufacture, conversion, or processing of tangible personal property to be sold in the regular course of business;

(ii) Machinery and equipment and related items are not deemed to be used in connection with the actual manufacture, conversion, or processing of tangible personal property, or in connection with the actual manufacture, conversion or processing of computer software as that term is utilized in industry numbers 7371, 7372, and 7373 in the standard industrial classification manual prepared by the technical committee on industrial classification, office of statistical standards, executive office of the president, United States bureau of the budget, as revised from time to time, to be sold to the extent the property is used in administration or distribution operations;

(iii) Machinery and equipment and related items used in connection with the actual manufacture, conversion, or processing of any computer software or any tangible personal property which is not to be sold and which would be exempt under subdivision (7) or this subdivision if purchased from a vendor or machinery and equipment and related items used during any manufacturing, converting or processing function is exempt under this subdivision even if that operation, function, or purpose is not an integral or essential part of a continuous production flow or manufacturing process;

(iv) Where a portion of a group of portable or mobile machinery is used in connection with the actual manufacture, conversion, or processing of computer software or tangible personal property to be sold, as previously defined, that portion, if otherwise qualifying, is exempt under this subdivision even though the machinery in that group is used interchangeably and not otherwise identifiable as to use.

(23) Trade-in value of motor vehicles. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of so much of the purchase price paid for a new or used automobile as is allocated for a trade-in allowance on the automobile of the buyer given in trade to the seller, or of the proceeds applicable only to the automobile as are received from the manufacturer of automobiles for the repurchase of the automobile whether the repurchase was voluntary or not towards the purchase of a new or used automobile by the buyer. For the purpose of this subdivision, the word "automobile" means a private passenger automobile not used for hire and does not refer to any other type of motor vehicle.

(24) Precious metal bullion.

(i) From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of precious metal bullion, substantially equivalent to a transaction in securities or commodities.

(ii) For purposes of this subdivision, "precious metal bullion" means any elementary precious metal which has been put through a process of smelting or refining, including, but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum, rhodium, and chromium, and which is in a state or condition that its value depends upon its content and not upon its form.

(iii) The term does not include fabricated precious metal which has been processed or manufactured for some one or more specific and customary industrial, professional, or artistic uses.

(25) Commercial vessels. - From sales made to a commercial ship, barge, or other vessel of fifty (50) tons burden or over, primarily engaged in interstate or foreign commerce, and from the repair, alteration, or conversion of the vessels, and from the sale of property purchased for the use of the vessels including provisions, supplies, and material for the maintenance and/or repair of the vessels.

(26) Commercial fishing vessels. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of vessels and other water craft which are in excess of five (5) net tons and which are used exclusively for "commercial fishing", as defined in this subdivision, and from the repair, alteration, or conversion of those vessels and other watercraft, and from the sale of property purchased for the use of those vessels and other watercraft including provisions, supplies, and material for the maintenance and/or repair of the vessels and other watercraft and the boats nets, cables, tackle, and other fishing equipment appurtenant to or used in connection with the commercial fishing of the vessels and other watercraft. "Commercial fishing" means the taking or the attempting to take any fish, shellfish, crustacea, or bait species with the intent of disposing of them for profit or by sale, barter, trade, or in commercial channels. The term does not include subsistence fishing, i.e., the taking for personal use and not for sale or barter; or sport fishing; but shall include vessels and other watercraft with a Rhode Island party and charter boat license issued by the department of environmental management pursuant to section 20-2-27.1 which meet the following criteria: (i) the operator must have a current U.S.C.G. license to carry passengers for hire; (ii) U.S.C.G. vessel documentation in the coast wide fishery trade; (iii) U.S.C.G. vessel documentation as to proof of Rhode Island home port status or a Rhode Island boat registration to prove Rhode Island home port status; (iv) the vessel must be used as a commercial passenger carrying fishing vessel to carry passengers for fishing. The vessel must be able to demonstrate that at least fifty percent (50%) of its annual gross income derives from charters or provides documentation of a minimum of one hundred (100) charter trips annually; (v) the vessel must have a valid Rhode Island party and charter boat license. The tax administrator shall implement the provisions of this subdivision by promulgating rules and regulations relating thereto.

(27) Clothing and footwear. - From the sales of articles of clothing, including footwear, intended to be worn or carried on or about the human body for sales prior to October 1, 2012. Effective October 1, 2012, the exemption will apply to the sales of articles of clothing, including footwear, intended to be worn or carried on or about the human body up to two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) of the sales price per item. For the purposes of this section, "clothing or footwear" does not include clothing accessories or equipment or special clothing or footwear primarily designed for athletic activity or protective use as these terms are defined in section 44-18-7.1(f). In recognition of the work being performed by the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Governing Board, upon passage of any federal law which authorizes states to require remote sellers to collect and remit sales and use taxes, this unlimited exemption will apply as it did prior to October 1, 2012. The unlimited exemption on sales of clothing and footwear shall take effect on the date that the state requires remote sellers to collect and remit sales and use taxes.

(28) Water for residential use. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of water furnished for domestic use by occupants of residential premises.

(29) Bibles. - [Unconstitutional; see Ahlburn v. Clark, 728 A.2d 449 (R.I. 1999); see Notes to Decisions.]From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in the state of any canonized scriptures of any tax-exempt nonprofit religious organization including, but not limited to, the Old Testament and the New Testament versions.

(30) Boats.

(i) From the sale of a boat or vessel to a bona fide nonresident of this state who does not register the boat or vessel in this state, or document the boat or vessel with the United States government at a home port within the state, whether the sale or delivery of the boat or vessel is made in this state or elsewhere; provided, that the nonresident transports the boat within thirty (30) days after delivery by the seller outside the state for use thereafter solely outside the state.

(ii) The tax administrator, in addition to the provisions of sections 44-19-17 and 44-19-28, may require the seller of the boat or vessel to keep records of the sales to bona fide nonresidents as the tax administrator deems reasonably necessary to substantiate the exemption provided in this subdivision, including the affidavit of the seller that the buyer represented himself or herself to be a bona fide nonresident of this state and of the buyer that he or she is a nonresident of this state.

(31) Youth activities equipment. - From the sale, storage, use, or other consumption in this state of items for not more than twenty dollars ($20.00) each by nonprofit Rhode Island eleemosynary organizations, for the purposes of youth activities which the organization is formed to sponsor and support; and by accredited elementary and secondary schools for the purposes of the schools or of organized activities of the enrolled students.

(32) Farm equipment. - From the sale and from the storage or use of machinery and equipment used directly for commercial farming and agricultural production; including, but not limited to, tractors, ploughs, harrows, spreaders, seeders, milking machines, silage conveyors, balers, bulk milk storage tanks, trucks with farm plates, mowers, combines, irrigation equipment, greenhouses and greenhouse coverings, graders and packaging machines, tools and supplies and other farming equipment, including replacement parts, appurtenant to or used in connection with commercial farming and tools and supplies used in the repair and maintenance of farming equipment. "Commercial farming" means the keeping or boarding of five (5) or more horses or the production within this state of agricultural products, including, but not limited to, field or orchard crops, livestock, dairy, and poultry, or their products, where the keeping, boarding, or production provides at least two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) in annual gross sales to the operator, whether an individual, a group, a partnership, or a corporation for exemptions issued prior to July 1, 2002; for exemptions issued or renewed after July 1, 2002, there shall be two (2) levels. Level I shall be based on proof of annual gross sales from commercial farming of at least twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500) and shall be valid for purchases subject to the exemption provided in this subdivision except for motor vehicles with an excise tax value of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or greater; Level II shall be based on proof of annual gross sales from commercial farming of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or greater and shall be valid for purchases subject to the exemption provided in this subdivision including motor vehicles with an excise tax value of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or greater. For the initial issuance of the exemptions, proof of the requisite amount of annual gross sales from commercial farming shall be required for the prior year; for any renewal of an exemption granted in accordance with this subdivision at either Level I or Level II, proof of gross annual sales from commercial farming at the requisite amount shall be required for each of the prior two (2) years. Certificates of exemption issued or renewed after July 1, 2002, shall clearly indicate the level of the exemption and be valid for four (4) years after the date of issue. This exemption applies even if the same equipment is used for ancillary uses, or is temporarily used for a non-farming or a non-agricultural purpose, but shall not apply to motor vehicles acquired after July 1, 2002, unless the vehicle is a farm vehicle as defined pursuant to section 31-1-8 and is eligible for registration displaying farm plates as provided for in section 31-3-31.

(33) Compressed air. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in the state of compressed air.

(34) Flags. - From the sale and from the storage, consumption, or other use in this state of United States, Rhode Island or POW-MIA flags.

(35) Motor vehicle and adaptive equipment to certain veterans. - From the sale of a motor vehicle and adaptive equipment to and for the use of a veteran with a service-connected loss of or the loss of use of a leg, foot, hand, or arm, or any veteran who is a double amputee, whether service connected or not. The motor vehicle must be purchased by and especially equipped for use by the qualifying veteran. Certificate of exemption or refunds of taxes paid is granted under rules or regulations that the tax administrator may prescribe.

(36) Textbooks. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of textbooks by an "educational institution" as defined in subdivision (18) of this section and as well as any educational institution within the purview of section 16-63-9(4) and used textbooks by any purveyor.

(37) Tangible personal property and supplies used in on-site hazardous waste recycling, reuse, or treatment. - From the sale, storage, use, or other consumption in this state of tangible personal property or supplies used or consumed in the operation of equipment, the exclusive function of which is the recycling, reuse, or recovery of materials (other than precious metals, as defined in subdivision (24)(ii) of this section) from the treatment of "hazardous wastes", as defined in section 23-19.1-4, where the "hazardous wastes" are generated in Rhode Island solely by the same taxpayer and where the personal property is located at, in, or adjacent to a generating facility of the taxpayer in Rhode Island. The taxpayer shall procure an order from the director of the department of environmental management certifying that the equipment and/or supplies as used, or consumed, qualify for the exemption under this subdivision. If any information relating to secret processes or methods of manufacture, production, or treatment is disclosed to the department of environmental management only to procure an order, and is a "trade secret" as defined in section 28-21-10(b), it is not open to public inspection or publicly disclosed unless disclosure is required under chapter 21 of title 28 or chapter 24.4 of title 23.

(38) Promotional and product literature of boat manufacturers. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption of promotional and product literature of boat manufacturers shipped to points outside of Rhode Island which either: (i) accompany the product which is sold, (ii) are shipped in bulk to out of state dealers for use in the sale of the product, or (iii) are mailed to customers at no charge.

(39) Food items paid for by food stamps. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of eligible food items payment for which is properly made to the retailer in the form of U.S. government food stamps issued in accordance with the Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. section 2011 et seq.

(40) Transportation charges. - From the sale or hiring of motor carriers as defined in section 39-12-2(l) to haul goods, when the contract or hiring cost is charged by a motor freight tariff filed with the Rhode Island public utilities commission on the number of miles driven or by the number of hours spent on the job.

(41) Trade-in value of boats. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of so much of the purchase price paid for a new or used boat as is allocated for a trade-in allowance on the boat of the buyer given in trade to the seller or of the proceeds applicable only to the boat as are received from an insurance claim as a result of a stolen or damaged boat, towards the purchase of a new or used boat by the buyer.

(42) Equipment used for research and development. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption of equipment to the extent used for research and development purposes by a qualifying firm. For the purposes of this subdivision, "qualifying firm" means a business for which the use of research and development equipment is an integral part of its operation, and "equipment" means scientific equipment, computers, software, and related items.

(43) Coins. - From the sale and from the other consumption in this state of coins having numismatic or investment value.

(44) Farm structure construction materials. - Lumber, hardware and other materials used in the new construction of farm structures, including production facilities such as, but not limited to, farrowing sheds, free stall and stanchion barns, milking parlors, silos, poultry barns, laying houses, fruit and vegetable storages, rooting cellars, propagation rooms, greenhouses, packing rooms, machinery storage, seasonal farm worker housing, certified farm markets, bunker and trench silos, feed storage sheds, and any other structures used in connection with commercial farming.

(45) Telecommunications carrier access service. - Carrier access service or telecommunications service when purchased by a telecommunications company from another telecommunications company to facilitate the provision of telecommunications service.

(46) Boats or vessels brought into the state exclusively for winter storage, maintenance, repair or sale. - Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 44-18-10, 44-18-11, 44-18-20, the tax imposed by section 44-18-20 is not applicable for the period commencing on the first day of October in any year to and including the 30th day of April next succeeding with respect to the use of any boat or vessel within this state exclusively for purposes of: (i) delivery of the vessel to a facility in this state for storage, including dry storage and storage in water by means of apparatus preventing ice damage to the hull, maintenance, or repair; (ii) the actual process of storage, maintenance, or repair of the boat or vessel; or (iii) storage for the purpose of selling the boat or vessel.

(47) Jewelry display product. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of tangible personal property used to display any jewelry product; provided, that title to the jewelry display product is transferred by the jewelry manufacturer or seller and that the jewelry display product is shipped out of state for use solely outside the state and is not returned to the jewelry manufacturer or seller.

(48) Boats or vessels generally. - Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the tax imposed by sections 44-18-20 and 44-18-18 shall not apply with respect to the sale and to the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of any new or used boat. The exemption provided for in this subdivision does not apply after October 1, 1993, unless prior to October 1, 1993, the federal ten percent (10%) surcharge on luxury boats is repealed.

(49) Banks and Regulated investment companies interstate toll-free calls. - Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the tax imposed by this chapter does not apply to the furnishing of interstate and international, toll-free terminating telecommunication service that is used directly and exclusively by or for the benefit of an eligible company as defined in this subdivision; provided, that an eligible company employs on average during the calendar year no less than five hundred (500) "full-time equivalent employees", as that term is defined in section 42-64.5-2. For purposes of this section, an "eligible company" means a "regulated investment company" as that term is defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. section 1 et seq., or a corporation to the extent the service is provided, directly or indirectly, to or on behalf of a regulated investment company, an employee benefit plan, a retirement plan or a pension plan or a state chartered bank.

(50) Mobile and manufactured homes generally. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of mobile and/or manufactured homes as defined and subject to taxation pursuant to the provisions of chapter 44 of title 31.

(51) Manufacturing business reconstruction materials.

(i) From the sale and from the storage, use or other consumption in this state of lumber, hardware, and other building materials used in the reconstruction of a manufacturing business facility which suffers a disaster, as defined in this subdivision, in this state. "Disaster" means any occurrence, natural or otherwise, which results in the destruction of sixty percent (60%) or more of an operating manufacturing business facility within this state. "Disaster" does not include any damage resulting from the willful act of the owner of the manufacturing business facility.

(ii) Manufacturing business facility includes, but is not limited to, the structures housing the production and administrative facilities.

(iii) In the event a manufacturer has more than one manufacturing site in this state, the sixty percent (60%) provision applies to the damages suffered at that one site.

(iv) To the extent that the costs of the reconstruction materials are reimbursed by insurance, this exemption does not apply.

(52) Tangible personal property and supplies used in the processing or preparation of floral products and floral arrangements. - From the sale, storage, use, or other consumption in this state of tangible personal property or supplies purchased by florists, garden centers, or other like producers or vendors of flowers, plants, floral products, and natural and artificial floral arrangements which are ultimately sold with flowers, plants, floral products, and natural and artificial floral arrangements or are otherwise used in the decoration, fabrication, creation, processing, or preparation of flowers, plants, floral products, or natural and artificial floral arrangements, including descriptive labels, stickers, and cards affixed to the flower, plant, floral product or arrangement, artificial flowers, spray materials, floral paint and tint, plant shine, flower food, insecticide and fertilizers.

(53) Horse food products. - From the sale and from the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of horse food products purchased by a person engaged in the business of the boarding of horses.

(54) Non-motorized recreational vehicles sold to nonresidents.

(i) From the sale, subsequent to June 30, 2003, of a non-motorized recreational vehicle to a bona fide nonresident of this state who does not register the non-motorized recreational vehicle in this state, whether the sale or delivery of the non-motorized recreational vehicle is made in this state or at the place of residence of the nonresident; provided, that a non-motorized recreational vehicle sold to a bona fide nonresident whose state of residence does not allow a like exemption to its nonresidents is not exempt from the tax imposed under section 44-18-20; provided, further, that in that event the bona fide nonresident pays a tax to Rhode Island on the sale at a rate equal to the rate that would be imposed in his or her state of residence not to exceed the rate that would have been imposed under section 44-18-20. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, a licensed non-motorized recreational vehicle dealer shall add and collect the tax required under this subdivision and remit the tax to the tax administrator under the provisions of chapters 18 and 19 of this title. Provided, that when a Rhode Island licensed non-motorized recreational vehicle dealer is required to add and collect the sales and use tax on the sale of a non-motorized recreational vehicle to a bona fide nonresident as provided in this section, the dealer in computing the tax takes into consideration the law of the state of the nonresident as it relates to the trade-in of motor vehicles.

(ii) The tax administrator, in addition to the provisions of sections 44-19-27 and 44-19-28, may require any licensed non-motorized recreational vehicle dealer to keep records of sales to bona fide nonresidents as the tax administrator deems reasonably necessary to substantiate the exemption provided in this subdivision, including the affidavit of a licensed non-motorized recreational vehicle dealer that the purchaser of the non-motorized recreational vehicle was the holder of, and had in his or her possession a valid out-of-state non-motorized recreational vehicle registration or a valid out-of-state driver's license.

(iii) Any nonresident who registers a non-motorized recreational vehicle in this state within ninety (90) days of the date of its sale to him or her is deemed to have purchased the non-motorized recreational vehicle for use, storage, or other consumption in this state, and is subject to, and liable for the use tax imposed under the provisions of section 44-18-20.

(iv) "Non-motorized recreational vehicle" means any portable dwelling designed and constructed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreational, and vacation use which is eligible to be registered for highway use, including, but not limited to, "pick-up coaches" or "pick-up campers," "travel trailers," and "tent trailers" as those terms are defined in chapter 1 of title 31.

(55) Sprinkler and fire alarm systems in existing buildings. - From the sale in this state of sprinkler and fire alarm systems, emergency lighting and alarm systems, and from the sale of the materials necessary and attendant to the installation of those systems, that are required in buildings and occupancies existing therein in July 2003, in order to comply with any additional requirements for such buildings arising directly from the enactment of the Comprehensive Fire Safety Act of 2003, and that are not required by any other provision of law or ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant to that Act. The exemption provided in this subdivision shall expire on December 31, 2008.

(56) Aircraft. - Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the tax imposed by sections 44-18-18 and 44-18-20 shall not apply with respect to the sale and to the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of any new or used aircraft or aircraft parts.

(57) Renewable energy products. - Notwithstanding any other provisions of Rhode Island general laws the following products shall also be exempt from sales tax: solar photovoltaic modules or panels, or any module or panel that generates electricity from light; solar thermal collectors, including, but not limited to, those manufactured with flat glass plates, extruded plastic, sheet metal, and/or evacuated tubes; geothermal heat pumps, including both water-to-water and water-to-air type pumps; wind turbines; towers used to mount wind turbines if specified by or sold by a wind turbine manufacturer; DC to AC inverters that interconnect with utility power lines; manufactured mounting racks and ballast pans for solar collector, module or panel installation. Not to include materials that could be fabricated into such racks; monitoring and control equipment, if specified or supplied by a manufacturer of solar thermal, solar photovoltaic, geothermal, or wind energy systems or if required by law or regulation for such systems but not to include pumps, fans or plumbing or electrical fixtures unless shipped from the manufacturer affixed to, or an integral part of, another item specified on this list; and solar storage tanks that are part of a solar domestic hot water system or a solar space heating system. If the tank comes with an external heat exchanger it shall also be tax exempt, but a standard hot water tank is not exempt from state sales tax.

(58) Returned property. - The amount charged for property returned by customers upon rescission of the contract of sale when the entire amount exclusive of handling charges paid for the property is refunded in either cash or credit, and where the property is returned within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of delivery.

(59) Dietary Supplements. - From the sale and from the storage, use or other consumption of dietary supplements as defined in section 44-18-7.1(l)(v), sold on prescriptions.

(60) Blood. - From the sale and from the storage, use or other consumption of human blood.

(61) Agricultural products for human consumption. - From the sale and from the storage, use or other consumption of livestock and poultry of the kinds of products of which ordinarily constitute food for human consumption and of livestock of the kind the products of which ordinarily constitute fibers for human use.

(62) Diesel emission control technology. - From the sale and use of diesel retrofit technology that is required by section 31-47.3-4 of the general laws.

(63) Feed for certain animals used in commercial farming. - From the sale of feed for animals as described in subsection 44-18-30(61).

(64) Alcoholic beverages. - From the sale and storage, use, or other consumption in this state by a Class A licensee of alcoholic beverages, as defined in section 44-18-7.1, excluding beer and malt beverages from December 1, 2013 through March 31, 2015 June 30, 2015 ; provided, further, notwithstanding section 6-13-1 or any other general or public law to the contrary, alcoholic beverages, as defined in section 44-18-7.1, shall not be subject to minimum markup from December 1, 2013 through March 31, 2015 June 30, 2015 .

SECTION 10. Section 3-10-1 of the General Laws in Chapter 3-10 entitled "Taxation of Beverages" is hereby amended to r