Staff & Leaders
Board of Directors

Barbara Zabawa, JD, MPH – President

Elizabeth Wendt – Secretary

Ann McCall, MSW – Treasurer

Angela Janis, MD – Immediate Past President

Meghan Benson

Kristen Dexter

Astar Herndon

Kate Johnson

Kwadwo Owusu-Ofori, PhD

Deborah Thompson

Iana Vladimirova

Tosha Wetterneck, MD

If you are interested in serving on our Board of Directors, please link here to submit your application.

Staff

Since June of 2004, Sara has been leading the effort to develop a new organizational coalition to unite, coordinate and amplify the voices of women’s health supporters in Wisconsin. Prior to assuming this role, Sara was the Northeast Director of Membership and Professional Relations for the Wisconsin Medical Society. She received her undergraduate degree in Political Science from the University of Wisconsin Eau Claire. She was a 2009 Mid-America Public Health Leadership Institute Fellow and is Past President of the Wisconsin Public Health Association. In 2010, Sara received a Champion of Women’s Health Award from the Wisconsin Women’s Health Foundation. In 2011, she was recognized by the Wisconsin Coalition Against Sexual Assault with a Voices of Courage Award. In 2012, Sara was been honored with a HealthWatch Wisconsin Outreach Effort Award for her coordination work of the Save BadgerCare Coalition, an Outstanding Recent Alumni Award from UW Eau Claire, was named a Woman to Watch by BRAVA Magazine and was named a Champion of Change by the White House for her work related to the Affordable Care Act. In 2015, The Business Forum of Madison honored Sara with an Athena Young Professional Award.

As a public health professional and women’s health advocate, Amy dedicates the majority of her time to ensuring that women and girls in Wisconsin are able to reach their highest health potential. She earned a masters degree in Family and Consumer Communication in 2005 and a Masters of Public Health degree in May of 2010 from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Amy worked for a number of years inside the health care industry at Group Health Cooperative of South Central Wisconsin where she was intimately involved in health communication and health promotion efforts before independently partnering with a number of non-profit and scientific research organizations to enhance their communications, outreach, and impact. Today, Amy is dedicated to her role as Associate Director of the Wisconsin Alliance for Women’s Health where she also directs the PATCH (Providers And Teens Communicating for Health) Program. Amy has been recognized for her work in this role with the Center for Child and Family Well-being 2014 Award of Excellence, the 2013 UW-Milwaukee College of Nursing Parntership Award, a 2012 Youth Ally Award from Diverse and Resilient, and honorable mention for the 2012 Ron Biendseil Youth Worker of the Year Award. Amy is currently an active committee member of the Wisconsin Public Health Association, and a member of the University of Wisconsin-Madison MPH Community Advisory Committee.

Mike has almost ten years of experience working on public policy in Wisconsin. After earning his law degree at the University of Wisconsin Law School in Madison, Mike worked as the Policy Specialist for the Wisconsin Coalition Against Sexual Assault (WCASA). At WCASA, he advocated for public policies that empowered victims of sexual violence, including several issues related to women’s access to comprehensive health care. After leaving WCASA, Mike served as legislative staff in the Wisconsin State Assembly for five years. During his time in the Assembly, Mike worked on a broad array of public policy issues. Mike is passionate about advocating for policies that promote comprehensive women’s health and is eager to work with anyone who wants to get in involved in the policy making process to help achieve this goal. Mike serves as the Chair of the Dane County Commission on Sensitive Crimes, serves on the Board of Directors of the Dane County Rape Crisis Center and serves as the Vice-Chair of the March of Dimes-Wisconsin Advocacy Committee. Before moving to Wisconsin, Mike earned a political science degree from Gonzaga University in Spokane, Washington. He is originally from Billings, Montana.

Since Erica was 19, she has dedicated her time to improving health education for adolescents and young adults across the mid-west. She spent many years as a sexual health educator for diverse groups of adolescents in Topeka, Kansas and Minneapolis, Minnesota. Following graduation from Washburn University she spent one year living in a Cambodian village working for the Peace Corps. In Cambodia she taught about hygiene and nutrition in the local health center, started a village aerobics class in the rice paddy fields, and lead sexual health education sessions with village health promoters. In 2015, Erica earned a masters degree in Gender and Women’s Studies from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, where her research focused on holistic, life-long approaches to sexual health education. She also worked in curriculum development with Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin during graduate school and played a vital role in revamping their sexual health curriculum. Erica is passionate about creating a community where people can relate to their individual sexuality in a positive way, and believes that flourishing sexual health is strongly correlated with overall health. Erica is originally from Rose Hill, Kansas and, coming from a rural community that would have greatly benefitted from peer educators, she is eager to work with the PATCH teen educators as they grow and empower others to take control of their own health and healthcare decisions!

With passion and zeal, Chelsea has dedicated her career to protecting the health and well-being of individuals, families and their communities through education, programming and advocacy. In 2011, she received a B.S. degree in Community Health Education and Spanish from the University of Wisconsin-La Crosse and the designation of Certified Health Education Specialist (CHES). As a part of her degree, she studied public health issues in both Ireland and Argentina. In 2016, she received her Master of Public Health degree from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Her previous work experiences include: coordinating the School District of Onalaska’s Fit Kids, Living Healthy student wellness program; advocating health equity as a part of the University of New Mexico’s Pathways to a Healthy Bernalillo County Program; and promoting a culture of health and wellness at Riverside Center in La Crosse and the Independence Missouri Public School District. Most recently, Chelsea worked as a graduate student on a Wisconsin Partnership Program grant funded initiative addressing the racial disparities in Wisconsin’s infant mortality rates. As PATCH’s Development Manager, she is committed to improving the health of future generations by growing and sustaining the innovative, teen-driven program.

With dedication, Patrice has devoted her career to working with youth and families to promote growth and change. Patrice received her B.S. degree in human services from Springfield College of Springfield, MA. She spent many years working as an educational assistant for Milwaukee Public Schools as well as monitoring safety and advocating for youth as a Safety Service Case Manager with Child Protective Services in Milwaukee, WI. Patrice has also coordinated services for children with special needs. Currently, she is in the process of completing her Masters of Arts in clinical mental health counseling from Argosy University of Schaumburg. IL and is expected to graduate in November 2016. As a graduate student, Patrice works as a sexual assault counseling intern teaching safety and stabilization skills. She is excited to work with the PATCH teen educators as they learn to advocate for their health care needs and to promote change

Current Interns:

Billy Burrough

Leen Bynat

Emma Carpenter

Henry Gaylord

Shaunna Newton

Helen Powling

Ayden Prehara

Tia Ramirez

Kathy Staats

Leah Voskuil

Violet Wang

Sarah Yeazel

Past Interns

Thanks to the following individuals for volunteering their time and talents to the development and work of WAWH!

Stephanie Arneson, Sara Arnsdorf, Emma Barnes, Kelsey Baubie, Rebecca Bleil, Lindsey Bouras, Willa Brenneis, Leen Bynat, Michele Coleman, Caroline Cooney, Hannah Cutts, Krista Czerwinski, Lyndsey Drake, Sari Edelman, Sara Eskrich, Rachel Fassbender, Hayley Maloof Gallaher, Stephanie Goerl, Emily Gordon, Marie Gorman, Monet Goudreault, Casey Grittner, Laura Grogan, Hannah Handal, Christina Hanna, Chandler Hegna, Angela Holecko, Heidi Katchkey, Song Kim, Tamara Kozyckyj, Lacy Langbecker, Cole Leiter, Kelsey Lensmire, Kristin Lewis, Maggie Lyons, Laura Miller, Azin Moghadam, Mike Noto, Amy Olejniczak, Emily O’Malley Laursen, Rachel Maslansky, Laura Miller, Shauna Newton, Mike Noto, Fiona O’Connell-Gates, Jenn Ryan O’Melia, Kristine Omen, Hannah Otolara-Fadner, Stacey Park, Amanda Parrish, Claire Peterson, Rebecca Pfender, Ayden Prehara, Katie Remmington, Kate Reynolds-Gooch, Alyssa Ricketts, Elle Russell, Brooke Saias, Vibha Sanghvi, Anna Schettle, Sherri Schroeder, Emily Schwartzstein, Lara Shoemaker, Norma-Jean Simon, Nikki Smith, Rhea Stark, Natasa Stjepanovic, Claire Stevens, Kim Sutter, Rebecca Swearingen, Joanna Tess, Rachel Vallens, Robyn Vinje, Leah Voskuil, Steph Walczak, Abbe Walsh, Elizabeth Wendt, Chelsea Zess

A special thanks goes out to the Development Team, our original Steering Committee and all individuals who participated in our valuable Listening Sessions.