Madison School Board votes to increase tax levy by 4.95 percent : Ct
Over the course of a five-hour session en route to signing off on the Madison School District's 2012-13 preliminary budget, one thing became clear: Members of the School Board were highlighting many more areas in need of additional educational investment than they were identifying fat that could easily be trimmed.

At the end of the night, however, the board refrained from asking for all it could from local taxpayers in approving a total budget of $376.2 million, which equates to an increase in overall spending of 0.8 percent compared to 2011-12.

“The sad thing is, if we had more support from the state, and if we had a few more corporations pay their taxes, then maybe we could do more for our kids and the district,” board Vice President Marj Passman, who continually lamented the tough budget choices facing the body, said after Monday’s meeting at the district’s Doyle Administration Building. “But that’s not the case so we had to make some very tough decisions.”

That modest bump in overall expenditures will nonetheless result in a 4.95 percent increase in the property tax levy, which means the amount the district charges local homeowners is expected to increase by $91.32 on the average house, valued at about $232,000. The budget includes $4.5 million for a new plan designed to address Madison’s achievement gap problem and an increase in maintenance funding of $3.5 million.

Those final numbers are slightly higher than the $374.7 million budget put forth late last month by Superintendent Dan Nerad, whose proposed 4.1 percent tax levy increase would have boosted taxes on the average home by about $68.

The only member voting against the preliminary budget was board President James Howard, an economist with the Forest Products Laboratory.

“As an economist, I just thought that the public is hurting financially,” said Howard. “No one is more aware of what our schools need than myself. I have children in the district, so I’m well aware of the needs. But at the same time I’m also well aware of the economic circumstances of our citizens and the fact that we have a lot more people on fixed and declining incomes. So I seek a balance. We’ll see if this is a balance people will back.”

Howard also said he hopes it’s a budget that the next superintendent can live with. Nerad announced last week that he plans to accept a superintendent job offer in Birmingham, Mich.

“I certainly hope we didn’t hamstring out next leader, but I guess only time will tell,” said Howard. “We put a lot of the things in place around the achievement gap plan, so I hope the next person coming in is agreeable to those ideas.”

The School Board won’t officially finalize its budget until October, after enrollment numbers and state funding figures are finalized.

This past winter there was a good deal of buzz around the possibility that Madison would redouble its effort to address its decades-old achievement gap between black and white students, in particular. In February, Nerad unveiled to a good deal of fanfare a 100-page game plan designed to tackle the problem. But that initial proposal, called “Building our Future,” had a price tag of $12.4 million for 2012-13, and a staggering $105.6 million over the next five years.

This initial report -– which was produced after the proposed Madison Preparatory Academy was voted down by the School Board in December -- highlighted the need for increased engagement with families, members of the public, community organizations and local employers, and featured 40 recommendations in six categories: academic instruction and support; college and career readiness; culturally responsive practices; safe schools; family engagement; and workforce diversity.

The district then spent the next two months gathering feedback from the community with a series of public listening sessions before Nerad in mid-May released an updated plan with a considerably smaller price tag -- calling for $5.8 million in new spending in 2012-13 and $55.6 million over the next five years.

And when his 2012-13 budget proposal was released May 31, it further trimmed the achievement gap plan’s price tag to $4.4 million. That final district proposal contained 17 concepts to address the achievement gap under the original six areas of focus.

In the end, after several amendments were passed by the board Monday, the cost for the achievement gap plan in 2012-13 is up slightly, to $4.5 million. One amendment expanded the successful AVID/TOPS college preparatory program at the middle school level, while another will fund a program tied in with Operation Fresh Start that will help dropouts earn a high school diploma instead of an equivalency degree.

It became clear a few times during extended debate Monday night over the pros and cons of more than 40 amendments to Nerad’s proposed budget that board members were becoming uneasy with the projected increase in the tax levy.

“I think we’re putting too much on the property tax levy and we’re going to be backed into a really difficult budget in the future,” new board member Mary Burke said a little more than two hours into the meeting. “And I don’t want to be presenting that to a new superintendent saying, ‘Your hands are tied because we’ve already spent all that money.'”

Those concerns led the board to alter how it funded the $3.5 million in additional maintenance. That originally was to be paid for by using $2.2 million from the tax levy and $1.3 million in reserve funds. But an amendment proposed by member Ed Hughes to use $2.0 million in reserve funds and $1.5 million from the tax levy passed.

Near the end of the meeting, however, Hughes recommended moving $3 million of the budget that was to be funded using reserve funds onto the tax levy. He argued that if the move wasn’t made the district could be facing a $6 million rise in the property tax levy next year just for the district to be able to continue services. “That’s something we won’t be able to deal with. I think it’s much better for us to bite the bullet now and recognize the spending that we’re authorizing.” His amendment passed.

“This was a very challenging budget proposal because it’s intended to keep our same programs and services for children, to address our achievement gap, and to also address maintenance needs,” Nerad said after Monday’s meeting. “And my feeling is that the board deliberated in a very thorough manner and balanced those needs.”

Indeed, even those board members most in favor of funding as many initiatives as possible to help students admit they can only ask property owners for so much.

“Madisonians have been so good to us in supporting our schools,” said Passman. “We can’t push that, especially in this kind of an economy. I think we tried to come out of here with the fairest possible finance plan, and I think we did that.”