On the Capitol: Burke explains school budget vote : Wsj
Madison School Board member Mary Burke, who is considering running against Gov. Scott Walker next year, cast the only vote opposing the Madison School District’s preliminary 2013-14 budget this week.

Burke, who was easily elected in 2012 despite opposition from the powerful teachers union, said the budget didn’t do enough to balance a property tax increase with accountability for how taxpayer dollars are spent.

“The superintendent is on the right track and I’m impressed by the progress she has made, but given the projected cut in state funding and the increase in the local tax levy, I don’t think this budget meets that test of balance,” Burke said in an email.

The $391 million budget includes a 4.5 percent property tax increase. Burke didn’t respond to a follow-up question about what she wanted done differently.

Capitol arrest data

As the Capitol protest arrests stretched into their sixth week, the Department of Administration released a database listing every arrest between February 2011 and Aug. 20.

According to the list, there were 711 citations issued to 383 people during that time period. Irving Smith with 49 citations received the most.

Of the total, 411 remain open, 181 were dismissed, 29 resulted in guilty verdicts and one ended in a deferred prosecution. The other cases didn’t list dispositions.

The top charges were no permit (195), disorderly conduct (158) and unlawful assembly (145).

U.S. District Judge William Conley on July 9 temporarily struck down the state’s policy requiring groups of four or more who gather in the Capitol to get a permit. Conley otherwise let stand the policy for groups of 20 or more. A trial is scheduled in January.

On July 24, Capitol Police began a crackdown, issuing hundreds of tickets and placing many protesters in handcuffs.

From July 24 until Aug. 20, there were 287 citations issued to 181 people. Almost all of them were for no permit or unlawful assembly.

On a related note ....

Retiring Madison Police Chief Noble Wray wrote on his blog this week that off-duty officers participating in the daily Solidarity Singalong have a constitutional right to express their opinions and are not violating department policy.

“Certainly I do not condone our officers violating criminal laws or MPD policies, but I do support their right to engage in political and other protected First Amendment related activities when off-duty,” Wray wrote. “They were not functioning as MPD officers, but as individual citizens expressing personal beliefs.”

GOP Rep. Sensenbrenner

a friend of voting rights

Wisconsin’s U.S. Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner may be marching in the opposite direction from some of his Republican colleagues when it comes to the Voting Rights Act.

According to Wispolitics.com, Sensenbrenner wants to replace the part of the civil-rights era law that the U.S. Supreme Court struck down earlier this year, saying he wants to retain the law “as an effective tool to prevent discrimination.”

Sensenbrenner, R-Menomonee Falls, reportedly made the remarks at a Republican National Committee event to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the March on Washington.

The Supreme Court earlier this year invalidated a section of the law that gave the federal government oversight of electoral changes in jurisdictions and states with a history of discrimination.

Wispolitics quoted Sensenbrenner as acknowledging that strengthening the law could be a hard sell among fellow Republicans who control the House.

“It ain’t going to be easy,” the congressman said, “but when we all are together, we shall overcome.”

— Reporter Dee J. Hall

contributed to this report.