Hewlett-Packard and Compaq agree to merge, creating $87 billion global technology leader Will Offer Businesses And Consumers Most Complete Set Of Products And Services, With Commitment To Open Systems And Architectures Will Have #1 Worldwide Positions In Servers, PCs and Hand-helds, and Imaging and Printing; Leading Positions In IT Services, Storage, Management Software Companies Expect Annual Cost Synergies Of Approximately $2.5 Billion; Transaction Expected To Be Substantially Accretive In Year One

PALO ALTO, CA and HOUSTON, TX, September 3, 2001

Hewlett-Packard Company (NYSE: HWP) and Compaq Computer Corporation (NYSE: CPQ) announced today a definitive merger agreement to create an $87 billion global technology leader. The new HP will offer the industry's most complete set of IT products and services for both businesses and consumers, with a commitment to serving customers with open systems and architectures. The combined company will have #1 worldwide revenue positions in servers, access devices (PCs and hand-helds) and imaging and printing, as well as leading revenue positions in IT services, storage and management software.

The merger is expected to generate cost synergies reaching approximately $2.5 billion annually and drive a significantly improved cost structure. Based on both companies' last four reported fiscal quarters, the new HP would have approximate pro forma assets of $56.4 billion, annual revenues of $87.4 billion and annual operating earnings of $3.9 billion. It would also have operations in more than 160 countries and over 145,000 employees.

Carly Fiorina, chairman and chief executive officer of HP , will be chairman and CEO of the new HP . Michael Capellas, chairman and chief executive officer of Compaq, will be president. Capellas and four other members of Compaq's current Board of Directors will join HP 's Board upon closing.

"This is a decisive move that accelerates our strategy and positions us to win by offering even greater value to our customers and partners," said Fiorina. "In addition to the clear strategic benefits of combining two highly complementary organizations and product families, we can create substantial shareowner value through significant cost structure improvements and access to new growth opportunities. At a particularly challenging time for the IT industry, this combination vaults us into a leadership role with customers and partners -- together we will shape the industry for years to come."

Capellas said, "We are creating a new kind of industry leader -- one founded on customer success, world-class engineering, and best of breed products and services. In sharp contrast to our competitors, we are committed to leading the industry to open, market-unifying architectures and interoperability, which reduce complexity and cost for our customers. With this move, we will change the basis of competition in the industry."

Under the terms of the agreement, unanimously approved by both Boards of Directors, Compaq shareowners will receive 0.6325 of a newly issued HP share for each share of Compaq, giving the merger a current value of approximately $25 billion. HP shareowners will own approximately 64% and Compaq shareowners 36% of the merged company. The transaction, which is expected to be tax-free to shareowners of both companies for U.S. federal income tax purposes, will be accounted for as a purchase.

The transaction is expected to be substantially accretive to HP 's pro forma earnings per share in the first full year of combined operations based on achieving planned cost synergies. Cost synergies of approximately $2.0 billion are expected in fiscal 2003, the first full year of combined operations. Fully realized synergies are expected to reach a run rate of approximately $2.5 billion by mid-fiscal 2004. These anticipated synergies result from product rationalization; efficiencies in administration, procurement, manufacturing and marketing; and savings from improved direct distribution of PCs and servers. Subject to regulatory and shareowner approvals and customary closing conditions, the transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2002. In connection with the transaction, both companies have adopted shareowner rights plans; information on these plans will be filed today with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

The merged entity will be headquartered in Palo Alto and retain a significant presence in Houston, which will be a key strategic center of engineering excellence and product development.

The new HP will be structured around four operating units that build on the companies' similar go-to-market and product development structures to provide clear customer and competitive focus. Leadership and estimated revenues (calculated by combining the two companies' trailing four reported fiscal quarters) are as follows:

A $20 billion Imaging and Printing franchise to be led by Vyomesh Joshi, currently president, Imaging and Printing Systems, of HP .

. A $29 billion Access Devices business to be led by Duane Zitzner, currently president, Computing Systems, of HP .

. A $23 billion IT Infrastructure business, encompassing servers, storage and software, to be led by Peter Blackmore, currently executive vice president, Sales and Services, of Compaq.

A $15 billion Services business with approximately 65,000 employees in consulting, support and outsourcing to be led by Ann Livermore, currently president, HP Services.

The chief financial officer of the combined entity will be Robert Wayman, chief financial officer of HP . The integration team will be led by Webb McKinney, currently president of HP 's Business Customer Organization, and Jeff Clarke, chief financial officer of Compaq.

Fiorina concluded, "Clearly, the potential of this combination is compelling, but we understand the magnitude of the challenge and the need for discipline and speed. We're helped by the fact that both companies have been pursuing similar organizational structures and sales force models, and there is immense talent resident in both organizations. We have done comprehensive integration planning and have clear metrics to drive our success. We are committed to achieving the synergies we have identified while maintaining our competitive position and momentum in the marketplace."

Investment Community and Media Event Information

The companies will host a meeting for the investment community Tuesday, Sept. 4, at 9 a.m. EDT at the Equitable Building in New York City, 787 Seventh Avenue (between 51st & 52nd streets) in the Auditorium, Lower Level. Those unable to attend may listen by calling (888) 849-9184 (US) or (212) 896-6074 (international), using reservation number: 19649821. The event can also be accessed via audiocast at www.hp.com or www.compaq.com. The slides used for this presentation will be available on each company's website 10 minutes prior to the start of the event. A replay will be available for 14 days following the meeting at (800) 633-8284 (US) or (858) 812-6440 (international), using reservation number: 19649821. There will also be a question and answer session for the media at 10:30 a.m. EDT following the analyst meeting, also in the Equitable Auditorium. Those unable to attend may participate by calling (888) 754-3420 (US) or (212) 676-5416 (international), using reservation number: 19650338. The event can also be accessed via audiocast at www.hp.com or www.compaq.com. A replay will be available for 14 days following the meeting at (800) 633-8284 (US) or (858) 812-6440 (international), using reservation number: 19650338.

Fact Sheet

A fact sheet related to the merger is attached to this press release.

Calculation of Combined Revenues

The statements of combined revenues in this release and the attached fact sheet are estimates and have been calculated by adding similar category information from the companies' separate filings with the Securities Exchange Commission for each of their past four fiscal quarters. Because the companies have different fiscal year-ends, these estimates do not track a matching time period. The measurement method described above may result in amounts that differ from amounts resulting from other methodologies the companies may use in the future.

About HP

Hewlett-Packard Company -- a leading global provider of computing and imaging solutions and services -- is focused on making technology and its benefits accessible to all. HP had total revenue from continuing operations of $48.8 billion in its 2000 fiscal year. Information about HP and its products can be found on the World Wide Web at www.hp.com.

About Compaq

Compaq Computer Corporation is a leading global provider of enterprise technology and solutions. Compaq designs, develops, manufactures and markets hardware, software, solutions and services, including industry-leading enterprise storage and computing solutions, fault-tolerant business-critical solutions, communication products, and desktop and portable personal computers that are sold in more than 200 countries. Information on Compaq and its products and services is available at www.compaq.com.

Additional Information about the Merger and Where to Find It

This information pertains to this document and all related documents linked from this one. HP and Compaq intend to file with the SEC a joint proxy statement/prospectus and other relevant materials in connection with the Merger. The joint proxy statement/prospectus will be mailed to the stockholders of HP and Compaq. Investors and security holders of HP and Compaq are urged to read the joint proxy statement/prospectus and the other relevant materials when they become available because they will contain important information about HP , Compaq and the Merger. The joint proxy statement/prospectus and other relevant materials (when they become available), and any other documents filed by HP or Compaq with the SEC, may be obtained free of charge at the SEC's web site at www.sec.gov. In addition, investors and security holders may obtain free copies of the documents filed with the SEC by HP by contacting HP Investor Relations, 3000 Hanover Street, Palo Alto, California 94304, 650-857-1501. Investors and security holders may obtain free copies of the documents filed with the SEC by Compaq by contacting Compaq Investor Relations, P.O. Box 692000, Houston, Texas 77269-2000, 800-433-2391. Investors and security holders are urged to read the joint proxy statement/prospectus and the other relevant materials when they become available before making any voting or investment decision with respect to the Merger.

HP, Carleton S. Fiorina, HP's Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, Robert P. Wayman, HP's Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, and certain of HP's other executive officers and directors may be deemed to be participants in the solicitation of proxies from the stockholders of HP and Compaq in favor of the Merger. The other executive officers and directors of HP who may be participants in the solicitation of proxies in connection with the Merger have not been determined as of the date of this filing. A description of the interests of Ms. Fiorina, Mr. Wayman and HP's other executive officers and directors in HP is set forth in the proxy statement for HP's 2001 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, which was filed with the SEC on January 25, 2001. Full participant information may be found in HP's Form 425 filed with the SEC on September 24, 2001. Investors and security holders may obtain more detailed information regarding the direct and indirect interests of Ms. Fiorina, Mr. Wayman and HP's other executive officers and directors in the Merger by reading the joint proxy statement/prospectus when it becomes available.

Compaq and Michael D. Capellas, Compaq's Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, and certain of Compaq's other executive officers and directors may be deemed to be participants in the solicitation of proxies from the stockholders of Compaq and HP in favor of the Merger. The other executive officers and directors of Compaq who may be participants in the solicitation of proxies in connection with the Merger have not been determined as of the date of this filing. A description of the interests of Mr. Capellas and Compaq's other executive officers and directors in Compaq is set forth in the proxy statement for Compaq's 2001 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, which was filed with the SEC on March 12, 2001. Full participant information may be found in Compaq's Form 425 filed with the SEC on September 25, 2001. Investors and security holders may obtain more detailed information regarding the direct and indirect interests of Mr. Capellas and Compaq's other executive officers and directors in the Merger by reading the joint proxy statement/prospectus when it becomes available.

HP /COMPAQ FACT SHEET

Transaction Summary:

Structure: Stock-for-stock merger Exchange Ratio: 0.6325 of an HP share per Compaq share Current Value: Approximately $25 billion Ownership: HP shareholders 64%; Compaq shareholders 36% Accounting: Purchase Expected Closing: First half of 2002

Overview:

Creates an $87 billion global technology leader, with the industry's most complete set of IT products and services for both businesses and consumers.

New HP would be the #1 global player in servers, imaging & printing, and access devices (PCs & hand-helds), as well as Top 3 player in IT services, storage and management software.

would be the #1 global player in servers, imaging & printing, and access devices (PCs & hand-helds), as well as Top 3 player in IT services, storage and management software. The combination furthers each company's commitment to open, market-unifying systems and architectures and aggressive direct and channel distribution models.

Combined company can create substantial shareowner value through significant cost structure improvements and access to new growth opportunities.

Transaction expected to be substantially accretive to pro forma EPS in first full year of combined operations.

The merger is expected to generate cost synergies of approximately $2.0 billion in fiscal 2003, the first full year of operations; fully realized synergies are expected to reach a run rate of approximately $2.5 billion by mid-fiscal 2004.

New HP would have operations in more than 160 countries and over 145,000 employees.

Key Facts

(last 4 qtrs): HP Compaq Pro Forma Combined Total

Revenues $47.0 billion $40.4 billion $87.4 billion Assets $32.4 billion $23.9 billion $56.4 billion Operating

Earnings $2.1 billion $1.9 billion $3.9 billion

Leadership:

Board of Directors: 5 Compaq directors to join HP Board

Board Chairman and Chief Executive Officer: Carly Fiorina

President: Michael Capellas

Chief Financial Officer: Robert Wayman

Imaging & Printing: Vyomesh Joshi

Access Devices: Duane Zitzner

IT Infrastructure: Peter Blackmore

Services: Ann Livermore

FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

This document contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. If any of these risks or uncertainties materializes or any of these assumptions proves incorrect, the results of HP and its consolidated subsidiaries could differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements.

All statements other than statements of historical fact are statements that could be deemed forward-looking statements, including any projections of earnings, revenues, synergies, accretion or other financial items; any statements of the plans, strategies, and objectives of management for future operations, including the execution of integration and restructuring plans and the anticipated timing of filings, approvals and closings relating to the Merger or other planned acquisitions; any statements concerning proposed new products, services, developments or industry rankings; any statements regarding future economic conditions or performance; any statements of belief and any statements of assumptions underlying any of the foregoing.

The risks, uncertainties and assumptions referred to above include the ability of HP to retain and motivate key employees; the timely development, production and acceptance of products and services and their feature sets; the challenge of managing asset levels, including inventory; the flow of products into third-party distribution channels; the difficulty of keeping expense growth at modest levels while increasing revenues; the challenges of integration and restructuring associated with the Merger or other planned acquisitions and the challenges of achieving anticipated synergies; the possibility that the Merger or other planned acquisitions may not close or that HP , Compaq or other parties to planned acquisitions may be required to modify some aspects of the acquisition transactions in order to obtain regulatory approvals; the assumption of maintaining revenues on a combined company basis following the close of the Merger or other planned acquisitions; and other risks that are described from time to time in HP 's Securities and Exchange Commission reports, including but not limited to HP 's annual report on Form 10-K, as amended on January 30, 2002, for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2001 and HP 's registration statement on Form S-4 filed on February 5, 2002.

HP assumes no obligation and does not intend to update these forward-looking statements.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE MERGER AND WHERE TO FIND IT