911 Truth Statement

Respected Leaders and Families Launch 9/11 Truth Statement Demanding Deeper Investigation into the Events of 9/11 NEW YORK CITY, NY (Oct. 26, 2004)(Updated Sep. 11, 2009) - An alliance of 100 prominent Americans and 40 family members of those killed on 9/11 today announced the release of the 911 Truth Statement, a call for immediate inquiry into evidence that suggests high-level government officials may have deliberately allowed the September 11th attacks to occur. The Statement supports an August 31st Zogby poll that found nearly 50% of New Yorkers believe the government had foreknowledge and "consciously failed to act," with 66% wanting a new 9/11 investigation. Focusing on twelve questions, the Statement highlights areas of incriminating evidence that were either inadequately explored or ignored by the Kean Commission, ranging from insider trading and hijacker funding to foreign government forewarnings and inactive defenses around the Pentagon. The Statement asks for four actions: an immediate investigation by New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, Congressional hearings, media analysis, and the formation of a truly independent citizens-based inquiry. The Statement's list of signatories includes notables spanning the political spectrum, from Presidential candidates Ralph Nader, Michael Badnarik, and David Cobb to Catherine Austin Fitts, a member of the first Bush administration, as well as Washington veterans like Pentagon whistleblower Daniel Ellsberg and retired CIA analyst Ray McGovern. Other signers range from peace activists like Global Exchange's Kevin Danaher to former US Ambassador and Chief of Mission to Iraq, Edward L. Peck; from environmentalists like Randy Hayes and John Robbins; from populist journalist Ronnie Dugger to renowned investigative reporter Kelly Patricia O'Meara.



The Statement also includes 43 noted authors, including New York Times #1 bestseller John Gray, as well as 18 eminent professors, historians, and theologians. Other notables include five-term Georgia Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney, singers Michelle Shocked and Michael Franti, and actors Ed Asner and Mimi Kennedy. The Statement was facilitated by 911truth.org, a leading coalition. The organization has also announced a press conference outside of Eliot Spitzer's Manhattan office (corner of Cedar and Nassau) at 2:00PM on Thursday, Oct. 28th where 9/11 family members and victim group representatives will file a formal complaint demanding the first criminal investigation of 9/11 events by the New York Attorney General. Page Update 9/9/2009: Following is the actual statement endorsed by these signatories, as referred to in the press release above.

The Statement We Want Real Answers About 9/11 On August 31, 2004, Zogby International, the official North American political polling agency for Reuters, released a poll that found nearly half (49.3%) of New York City residents and 41% of those in New York state believe US leaders had foreknowledge of impending 9/11 attacks and "consciously failed" to act. Of the New York City residents, 66% called for a new probe of unanswered questions by Congress or the New York Attorney General.



In connection with this news, we have assembled 100 notable Americans and 40 family members of those who died to sign this 9/11 Statement, which calls for immediate public attention to unanswered questions that suggest that people within the current administration may indeed have deliberately allowed 9/11 to happen, perhaps as a pretext for war. We want truthful answers to questions such as: Why were standard operating procedures for dealing with hijacked airliners not followed that day? Why were the extensive missile batteries and air defenses reportedly deployed around the Pentagon not activated during the attack? Why did the Secret Service allow Bush to complete his elementary school visit, apparently unconcerned about his safety or that of the schoolchildren? Why hasn't a single person been fired, penalized, or reprimanded for the gross incompetence we witnessed that day? Why haven't authorities in the U.S. and abroad published the results of multiple investigations into trading that strongly suggested foreknowledge of specific details of the 9/11 attacks, resulting in tens of millions of dollars of traceable gains? Why has Sibel Edmonds, a former FBI translator who claims to have knowledge of advance warnings, been publicly silenced with a gag order requested by Attorney General Ashcroft and granted by a Bush-appointed judge? How could Flight 77, which reportedly hit the Pentagon, have flown back towards Washington D.C. for 40 minutes without being detected by the FAA's radar or the even superior radar possessed by the US military? How were the FBI and CIA able to release the names and photos of the alleged hijackers within hours, as well as to visit houses, restaurants, and flight schools they were known to frequent? What happened to the over 20 documented warnings given our government by 14 foreign intelligence agencies or heads of state? Why did the Bush administration cover up the fact that the head of the Pakistani intelligence agency was in Washington the week of 9/11 and reportedly had $100,000 wired to Mohamed Atta, considered the ringleader of the hijackers? Why did the 911 Commission fail to address most of the questions posed by the families of the victims, in addition to almost all of the questions posed here? Why was Philip Zelikow chosen to be the Executive Director of the ostensibly independent 911 Commission although he had co-authored a book with Condoleezza Rice? Those who are demanding deeper inquiry now number in the hundreds of thousands, including a former member of the first Bush administration, a retired Air Force colonel, a European parliamentarian, families of the victims, highly respected authors, investigative journalists, peace and justice leaders, former Pentagon staff, and the National Green Party. As Americans of conscience, we ask for four things: An immediate investigation by New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer Immediate investigation in Congressional Hearings. Media attention to scrutinize and investigate the evidence. The formation of a truly independent citizens-based inquiry. Given the importance of the coming election, we feel it is imperative that these questions be addressed publicly, honestly, and rigorously so that Americans may exercise their democratic rights with full awareness. In closing, we pray and hope for the strength to approach this subject with wisdom and compassion so that we may heal from the wounds inflicted on that terrible day. Signed, Signatories Note: All organizations are mentioned for identification purposes only. Individuals have signed this statement as an act of their own conscience, not to signify organizational endorsement. Update 9/11/2009: Signatories removed.

Posted by Janice Matthews, current Director, 911Truth.org

Following recent media-generated controversy over Obama appointee Van Jones' signature on this Statement, he and two other signatories have requested their names be removed. That has been done. Virginia Deane Abernethy, Ph.D., anthropologist, author, Population Politics Ed Asner, actor, activist Marshall Auerback, international portfolio strategist for David W. Tice & Associates, Inc. Catherine Austin Fitts, Asst. Secretary of Housing in the first Bush administration Keidi Obi Awadu, aka The Conscious Rasta, talk show host, LIBRadio Michael Badnarik, Libertarian candidate for President Byron Belitsos, publisher, Origin Press, author Planetary Democracy Philip J. Berg, Esquire, former deputy attorney general, Pennsylvania Medea Benjamin, activist, author, co-founder, Global Exchange and Code Pink Dennis Bernstein, investigative reporter, radio host of KPFA's Flashpoints Steve Bhaerman aka Swami Beyondananda, author, political comedian Brad Blanton, Ph.D., psychotherapist, author, Radical Honesty Saniel Bonder, spiritual teacher and author, Great Relief Dr. Robert Bowman, USAF Lt. Col. (Rtd.), founder, Institute for Space and Security Studies John Buchanan, author, candidate for the Republican Party Presidential nomination, 2004 Gray Brechin, Ph.D., author, environmental historian, professor, UC Berkeley Fred Burks, presidential interpreter for Bush, Clinton, Cheney, and Gore Norma Carr-Rufino, Ph.D., author, professor of management, San Francisco State University Angana Chatterji, Ph.D., scholar-activist and professor of anthropology Paul Cienfuegos, co-founder, Democracy Unlimited of Humboldt County David Cobb, attorney, national presidential candidate, US Green Party John Cobb, Ph.D., theologian, co-author, For the Common Good Ernest Callenbach, founder/editor, Film Quarterly, author, Ecotopia Kevin Danaher, Ph.D., author, speaker, co-founder, Global Exchange Stephen Dinan, author, Radical Spirit Ronnie Dugger, journalist/author, co-founder, Alliance for Democracy Daniel Ellsberg, author, Secrets: A Memoir of Vietnam and the Pentagon Papers (Name removed by request 9/9/2009) Richard Falk, Professor Emeritus of International Law, Princeton University Michael Franti, musician, filmmaker, human rights worker Janeane Garofalo, actress, comedienne, talk show host, Air America Radio Jim Garrison, Ph.D., president, State of the World Forum, author, America as Empire Bruce Gagnon, Chair, Global Network Against Weapons & Nuclear Power in Space Ric Giardina, author, consultant, speaker, former Director of Trademarks and Brands for Intel John Gray, Ph.D., #1 bestselling author, Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus Stan Goff, 25-year Army Special Ops veteran, author, Full Spectrum Disorder Melvin Goodman, senior fellow, Center for International Policy, author, former Senior Analyst, CIA, professor, National War College Morton Goulder, Deputy Secretary for Intelligence and Warning under Nixon, Ford, and Carter David Ray Griffin, Ph.D., theologian, author, New Pearl Harbor Doris "Granny D" Haddock, campaign finance crusader, NH Democratic candidate for Senate Thom Hartmann, radio host; author, Unequal Protection Richie Havens, singer, songwriter, performer, artist (Name removed by request 9/9/2009) Randy Hayes, founder, Rainforest Action Network, US National Director, Direction Conservation Richard Heinberg, author, The Party's Over, core faculty, New College of California (Name removed by request 9/10/2009) Rob Kall, editor, OpEdNews.com, president, Futurehealth, Inc. Georgia Kelly, executive director, Praxis Peace Institute Sean Kelly, Ph.D., author, professor of philosophy and religion, CA Institute of Integral Studies John Joseph Kennedy, Democratic Write-in Presidential Candidate for 2004 Mimi Kennedy, actress, Dharma and Greg, progressive activist Faiz Khan, M.D., Triage Emergency Physician on 9/11, Assistant Imam David Korten, author, When Corporations Rule the World Frances Moore Lappe, author, Diet for a Small Planet; founder, Small Planet Institute Scott M. Legere, 25 year radio broadcaster as Scott Ledger, Tampa FL Rabbi Michael Lerner, editor, TIKKUN Magazine, author, Healing Israel/Palestine Michael Levine, bestselling author of Deep Cover, journalist, 25-year veteran of the DEA Joanna Macy, Ph.D., eco-philosopher, author Enver Masud, founder, The Wisdom Fund, author, The Truth About Islam John McCarthy, former Special Forces Captain, president, Veterans Equal Rights Protection Advocacy Ray McGovern, former CIA analyst, co-founder, Veteran Intelligence Professionals for Sanity Cynthia McKinney, five-term Congresswoman from Georgia Ralph Metzner, Ph.D., author, professor, co-founder, Green Earth Foundation Mark Crispin Miller, media critic, author, professor, New York University Joseph W. Montaperto, New York City Fire Department Leuren Moret, geoscientist, radiation specialist, environmental commissioner Ralph Nader, Independent candidate for President Craig Neal, author, co-founder, The Heartland Institute, former publisher, Utne Reader Jeff Norman, executive director, Tour of Duty Jenna Orkin, Esquire, World Trade Center Environmental Organization Kelly Patricia O'Meara, investigative journalist, public relations Michael Parenti, Ph.D., author, Superpatriotism and The Terrorism Trap Edward L. Peck, former US Ambassador and Chief of Mission to Iraq, former Deputy Director to the White House Task Force on Terrorism Peter Phillips, Ph.D., professor, Sonoma State University, director, Project Censored Henri Poole, Internet pioneer, board member, Free Software Foundation Robert Rabbin, author, speaker, creator of TruthForPresident.org Paul H. Ray, Ph.D., sociologist, author, The Cultural Creatives John Renesch, business futurist, author, Getting to the Better Future John Rensenbrink, professor emeritus, Bowdoin College, co-founder, US Green Party John Robbins, author, founder, EarthSave International William Rodriguez, 9/11 rescue effort hero, founder, Hispanic Victims Group Neal Rogin, Emmy-award winning writer, performer, social observer Allen Roland, Ph.D., psychotherapist, published author and peace activist Rosemary Radford Ruether, professor of feminist theology, Graduate Theological Union Michael Ruppert, publisher/editor, From The Wilderness, author, Crossing the Rubicon Chris Sanders, founder, Sanders Research Associates Karl W. B. Schwarz, President, CEO, Patmos Nanotechnologies, LLC Peter Dale Scott, Ph.D., Professor Emeritus, author, Drugs, Oil, and War Firefighter Kevin Shea, FDNY Hazmat Operations Michelle Shocked, singer/songwriter, activist Indira Singh, risk management and computer systems consultant J. Michael Springmann, attorney, former Foreign Service Officer, US Department of State Douglas Sturm, Ph.D., university professor emeritus, Bucknell University Marjorie Hewit Suchocki, Ph.D., theologian, author Chuck Turner, Boston City Council James W. Walter Jr., venture investor, philanthropist, founder of Walden Three Dan Whaley, E-commerce pioneer, founder of GetThere.com, acquired for $750M Burns H. Weston, J.S.D., Professor of Law Emeritus, Director, Center for Human Rights, U-Iowa Howard Zinn, professor, historian, author, A People's History of the United States Family Members Joanne Barbara, wife of FDNY Asst. Chief of Dept. Gerard Barbara Gayle Barker, sister of William A. Karnes, WTC Michele Bergsohn, wife of Alvin Bergsohn, Cantor Fitzgerald Derrill Bodley, father of Deora Bodley, passenger on Flight 93 Kathryn C. Bowden, sister of Thomas H. Bowden, Jr. WTC1, 104th floor Janet Calia, wife of Dominick Calia, Cantor Fitzgerald, WTC1 Maggie Cashman, wife of William Joseph Cashman, United Flight 93 Lynne Castrianno Galante, sister of Leonard Castrianno, 1WTC, 105th floor Elza Chapa-McGowan, daughter of Rosemary Chapa, Pentagon Bruce De Cell, father-in-law of Mark Petrocelli North Tower, 92nd floor Ralph D'Esposito, father of Michael D'Esposito, WTC, 96th floor Loisanne Diehl, Surviving Spouse, Michael D. Diehl, WTC2, 90th floor Adina D. Eisenberg, sister of Eric Eisenberg, WTC Jonathan M. Fisher, son of Dr. Gerald Paul "Geep" Fisher, Pentagon Michael J. Fox, brother of Jeffrey L. Fox, Tower 2, 89th floor Laurel A. Gay, sister of Peter A. Gay, AA Flight 11 Irene Golinsky, wife of Col. Ronald F. Golinski USA RET, Pentagon Lori, Jerry, and Beatrice Guadagno, sister and parents of Richard Guadagno, Flight 93 Kristen Hall, daughter of fallen firefighter Thomas Kuveikis 9/11 Kurt D. Horning, father of Matthew D. Horning, WTC Tower One, 95th floor Jennifer W. Hunt, wife of William C. Hunt, Euro Brokers John Keating, son of Barbara Keating, passenger on AA Flight 11 L. Russell Keene II, father of Russ Keene III, WTC2, 89th floor, KBW Peter Kousoulis, sister died in WTC Paul & Barbara Kirwin, parents of Glenn Davis Kirwin, Cantor Fitzgerald 105th floor Barbara Krukowski-Rastelli, mother of William E. Krukowski, NYC firefighter Laura and Ira Lassman, parents of Nicholas C. Lassman, died in WTC, Tower One Johnny Lee, husband of Lorraine Greene Alicia LeGuillow, mother of Nestor A. Cintron III Francine Levine, sister of Adam K. Ruhalter, who died on 9/11 Bob McIlvaine, father of Robert McIlvaine, WTC, Merrill Lynch Mary McWilliams, mother of FF Martin E. McWilliams- Engine 22 Daryl J. Meehan, brother of Colleen Ann Barkow, WTC 1, 105th floor Elvira P. Murphy, wife of Patrick Murphy, WTC 1 Natalee Pecorelli, sister of Thomas Pecorelli of Flight 11 James L Perry, M.D and Patricia J. Perry, parents of John W. Perry, Esq., NYPD Officer 9/11 David Potorti, brother of James Potorti, North Tower, WTC, Marsh & McLennan Terry Kay Rockefeller, sister of Laura Rockefeller, North Tower, WTC Grissel Rodriguez-Valentin, wife of Benito Valentin, WTC1, 94th floor Alissa Rosenberg-Torres, widow of Luis Eduardo Torres, post-9/11 mother, writer Elaine Saber, mother of Scott Saber Julie Scarpitta, mother of Michelle Scarpitta, WTC Building 2, 84th floor Paula Shapiro, mother of Eric Eisenberg, WTC2 Elizabeth Turner, wife of Simon Turner, lost on 11th September 2001 Adele Welty, mother of Firefighter Timothy Welty, FDNY, Squad 288 Joan W. Winton, mother of David Winton, WTC, South Tower, 89th floor David Yancey, husband of Vicki Yancey, American Airlines Flight 77 Nissa Youngren, daughter of Robert G. LeBlanc, flight 175 Late Signatories (starting toward 200 ...) Rita M. Haley, President, National Organization for Women, New York Chapter Immortal Technique, Harlem-based hip-hop artist with Viper Records, Revolutionary I&II; Bob Kirkconnell, served in the U.S. Air Force 27 years, reaching the rank of Master Sergeant Dennis Kyne, former Army air medic, 18th Airborne Corps during Gulf War I, musician, author, "Support the Truth" Paul Landis, author, "Stop Bush Now!" Eric H. May, former Army military intelligence officer and media essayist Charles Shaw, Editor, Newtopia Magazine, National Peace Action Coordinator, National Green Party Peter Erlinder, professor, William Mitchell College of Law, past-President National Lawyers Guild Daniel Robert Rezac, 2004 Vice-Presidential Write-In Candidate, former Aviator & Armor Officer, Army National Guard, B.S.B.A. Joel Horwitz, lost beloved cousin in WTC 1 Jessica Murrow, lost husband Stephen Adams, Beverage Manager, Windows on the World, WTC 1 Ellen Mariani, lost husband Neil on Flight 175 Jean Hunt, disabled survivor of Pentagon attack Ralph & Brigitte Sabbag, lost son Jason in WTC 2 Take action! Send this information to your congresspeople and journalists, demanding attention Help New York citizens and 9/11 family members, beginning Thursday, Oct. 28th, by signing an online petition in support of their formal complaint to be filed with New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer. Petition at www.justicefor911.org Stay informed here at www.911truth.org and get active in local groups.

Disclaimer

The views expressed in this article are the sole responsibility of the author, who is solely responsible for its content, and do not necessarily reflect those of 911Truth.org. 911Truth.org will not be responsible or liable for any inaccurate or incorrect statements contained in this article.