Arizona Board of Education votes to reject Common Core standards
PHOENIX - The Arizona Board of Education has voted to reject Common Core, but for the time being leave its standards in place.

The Board voted 6-2 Monday morning.

Superintendent of Public Instruction Diane Douglas was at the meeting and motioned for the vote. Eliminating Common Core is part of her education plan she unveiled earlier this month.

Arizona Board of Education votes to reject Common Core standards. Vote is 6-2. #abc15 pic.twitter.com/E1pgw7moRF — Nick VinZant (@NickVinZant) October 26, 2015

Board members discussed the issue for about 45 minutes before voting.

"The board is just saying, 'We can take care of Arizona's children and this is a very proud day for Arizonans," said Douglas.

"This will send a clear message to the citizens of Arizona and the nation that Arizonans are smart enough, engaged enough, and collaborative enough to control the education of our own children."

Board member Reginald Ballantyne said, "Clearly I am going to vote no. I'm just really getting weary of this conversation which really has no effect on what we are trying to do without children, or on our educators or on our parents."

"I don't think this is philosophical, I think this is political, I'm growing tired of this nonsense."

The vote means Arizona will reject the federal education standard and will eventually have to develop its own standards.

"We recognize this vote was symbolic, but any action that moves us closer to repealing Common Core is a positive," according to a statement from the Governor's Office. "The governor has made it clear that it's time to replace Common Core with Arizona standards and wants to see the board proceed with its process."

There will not be any immediate changes as a result of the vote. Instead, a committee has already begun to meet to discuss what Arizona's education standards will consist of.

The Board and Douglas have been at odds ever since she tried to fire the executive staff in February.

Last month the Board filed a lawsuit against Douglas to force her to give remote computer access to board investigators and to re-direct web traffic to the board's new website.

Ongoing friction between Douglas and the board that sets state school policy led the board to move its staff out of Douglas' offices.

The lawsuit seeks a declaration that Douglas is breaking the law by failing to execute board policies and seeks an order requiring her to comply.

Stay with abc15.com, ABC15 Mobile and ABC15 News for updates.