U.S. Senator Introduces Legislation to Provide Congressional Oversight of CFPB
The proposal follows multiple legislative actions in the House of Representatives focusing on CFPB accountability and oversight.

A bill to provide Congressional oversight of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is in the early stages of consideration in the U.S. Senate.

U.S. Sen. David Perdue (R-Georgia) recently introduced the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Accountability Act of 2015 to bring the bureau under the Congressional appropriations process and provide critical Congressional oversight, according to a news release on Perdue’s website. Currently, the CFPB operates under the Federal Reserve.

Dodd-Frank established the CFPB’s budget at as much as 12 percent of the Fed’s annual operating expense, according to the news release. That is roughly $600 million per year without any Congressional oversight over the agency’s spending.

Perdue’s legislation announcement follows the inclusion of an amendment to bring the CFPB under the Congressional appropriations process in the Senate’s final 2015 budget resolution. Perdue introduced the amendment in March.

“Right now, the CFPB is a rogue agency that dishes out malicious financial policy and creates new rules and regulations at whim without real Congressional oversight,” Perdue said in the news release. “The American people, through Congress, deserve a closer look at the CFPB and how its actions will impact consumers.”

Legislation focusing on CFPB oversight and accountability has made progress in the U.S. House of Representatives.

In March, the House Financial Services Committee approved 11 bipartisan bills, including the Bureau Advisory Commission Transparency Act sponsored by U.S. Rep. Sean Duffy (R-Wis.) and others to implement changes at the CFPB. Duffy’s proposed legislation earned bipartisan support and was passed by the House of Representatives by a 401-2 vote in April and sent to the Senate.

The House Republicans also passed a budget proposal that would expose the CFPB to the congressional appropriations process and legislative control of its funding.

In April, the House passed the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection Advisory Boards Act sponsored by U.S. Rep. Robert Pittenger (R-N.C.) This legislation creates a Small Business Advisory Council, Community Bank Advisory Council, and Credit Union Advisory Council to advise the CFPB on matters that affect these businesses. It also places a cap on the amount of funding the CFPB director can request in fiscal years 2020 and 2025. The House passed the legislation by a 235-183 vote. This bill also now sits with the Senate and was referred to the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs.

ACA International is urging the U.S. Senate to consider legislation to reform the CFPB. In March, the Board of Directors voted unanimously to support legislation that increases accountability and transparency at the CFPB, including changing the CFPB structure from a single director to a bipartisan commission, funding through congressional appropriation, and the creation of an Inspector General for the CFPB.

Perdue’s legislation to subject the CFPB to Congressional appropriations is now referred to the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs.

Follow ACA on Twitter @ACAIntl or Facebook for news and event updates. ACA’s LinkedIn Group includes news updates, member discussions, event promotions, jobs and more. Visit the group page and request to join today.