America's Health Insurance Plans
The health reform law imposed a new sales tax on health insurance that increases the cost of health care coverage. The amount of the tax was $8 billion in 2014 and increase by 41 percent for 2015. The tax will total more than $145 billion over the next ten years.

Bipartisan Legislation to Repeal the Health Insurance Tax & #Driveto218

Repealing the health insurance tax is an important step policymakers can take to make health insurance premiums more affordable and would provide immediate financial relief to those impacted by the tax.

AHIP supports legislation in the House and Senate to fully repeal the health insurance tax. Bipartisan legislation in the House, introduced by Rep. Charles Boustany (R-LA) and Kyrsten Sinema (D-AZ), has achieved support from a majority of representatives (218). In the Senate, the Jobs and Premium Protection Act, introduced by Sen. Orrin Hatch (UT) and Sen. John Barrasso, would fully repeal the health insurance tax.

In order to raise awareness about the importance of garnering support for this legislation, join the conversation on Twitter using the hashtag #repealtheHIT.

Impact of the Health Insurance Tax

According to an analysis by the actuarial firm Oliver Wyman, the total impact of the tax will mean that an individual purchasing coverage on his or her own for 2015 will pay $170 in higher premiums and small businesses will pay an additional $530 for each family they cover. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has said that this tax will be “largely passed through to consumers in the form of higher premiums.”

The Oliver Wyman analysis also estimates the effect of the new tax on insurance market segments and public programs:

The health reform law includes a $145 billion tax on health insurance. The tax started at $8 billion in 2014, increased by 40 percent in 2015, and will nearly double over the course of four years to $14.3 billion in 2018. The tax will continue to increase based on premium trend each year.

According to an analysis by Oliver Wyman, repeal of the health insurance tax will save consumers on average: $514 per year (individual), $688 per year (small group), and $719 per year (large group) for family coverage; $360 per year for each senior with Medicare Advantage; and $152 per year for each Medicaid enrollee.



An updated report by Oliver Wyman, “Annual Tax on Insurers Allocated by State,” estimates the impact this tax will have on individual market consumers, employers, and Medicare Advantage beneficiaries in all 50 states, as well as the impact on state Medicaid managed care programs. AHIP has also developed infographics showing the state-by-state impact of the tax.



(click thumbnail to view larger images)

This tax will add a financial burden on families and small businesses at a time when they can least afford it, and it should be repealed. The health insurance tax will also be assessed on dental coverage which will increase the cost of this important coverage. AHIP has launched Time for Affordability to raise awareness of how the health insurance tax and other provisions will affect premiums.