American Institutes for Research
Adolescence is a time of significant growth and development as young people transition into adulthood. Too many lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) youth and those questioning (Q) their sexual orientation or gender identity experience physical and emotional abuse and other challenges at home, in school, and in their communities. Research shows that family and peer rejection are critical factors in the mental health and well-being of LGBTQ youth.

AIR works with a range of youth-serving agencies to improve policies, services, and care for LGBTQ youth. Through research and evaluation, we work to improve available services and health and mental health outcomes. Applying findings from current research, our strategies promote safety, success, and well-being for LGBTQ youth and their families. We provide training and technical assistance to federal, state, and local agencies in health, behavioral health, public health, education, child welfare, homelessness and housing, and juvenile justice with the goal of strengthening and integrating systems serving LGBTQ youth.

Key Work

A new guide provides information for educators, human service providers and allies about supporting the health and well-being of children and youth who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, questioning, intersex and/or two-spirit (LGBTQI2-S) and their families.

On July 10, 2013, the LGBT, Questioning, Intersex, and Two-Spirit Learning Community of AIR’s Technical Assistance Partnership for Child and Family Mental Health hosted a webinar, Ending LGBT Youth Homelessness: A Call to Action, to raise awareness and share solutions.

What can communities and systems do to create positive outcomes for LGBT youth? AIR has identified key concepts, data and research as well as the connection between stigma and well-being for LGBT children and youth. This action planning tool assists organizations in identifying prioritized strategies, goals and actions towards implementing these standards of care and incorporating them into day-to-day practice.