The Kardashians donate whopping sum to Las Vegas mass shooting victims
The Kardashian family has a net worth in the hundreds of millions, and they’re using their wealth to step up in a big way for those in need. The reality TV family banded together to raise $1 million to the families of victims of the Las Vegas mass shooting.

Earlier today, we announced that the Kardashian family will be donating $1 million to the victims of Las Vegas mass shooting, considering both the bereaved and the surviving victims.

Also, to benefit those impacted by the shooting, the Kardashian family will be hosting a “Day of Giving” on October 7. A “Day of Giving” will begin on Friday morning with other American celebrities and continue throughout the day on E!News. Across our social platforms, there will be a #DayofGiving call-to-action to donate to the victims of Las vegas shooting, with those dollars going to benefit those most impacted, the statement read.

“Our hearts go out to everyone in the devastating path of this historic mass shooting,” said Kim Kardashian. The most decorated family said it’s hard to fully appreciate the impact, in part because people are still recovering from the historic tragedy. But we know several people have been bereaved or victimized and now face the daunting challenge of putting lives and communities back together fearsomely, and we’re using our unique resources and reach to help those in need.”-the family continued.

“Las Vegas we are praying for you,” Khloé Kardashian tweeted immediately after announcing the family’s donation.

More than 50 people were killed and more than 500 more injured in a terrifying massacre Sunday night. It’s being reported by outlets as the deadliest mass shooting in the history of the United States.

A gunman, now identified as 64-year-old Stephen Paddock, opened fire on a country-music festival from a hotel window inside the nearby Mandalay Bay. Paddock shot and killed himself; Las Vegas Metro Police officers found him dead in the room.

Our thoughts and prayers remain with the people of Las Vegas and again it’s our most fervent prayer we get enough security to make life fright-free again in the Nevada city.