Amazon.com: Sex Trafficking: Inside the Business of Modern Slavery (9780231139618): Siddharth Kara: Books
If you are seeking knowledge regarding sex trafficking and are afraid that you have absolutely no idea what it is. Then this is the book you need. Siddharth Kara a passionate young man takes a journey around the world right after his graduation from Duke University to understand and explore the truth of sex trafficking and modern day slavery. Siddharth formed a team of three other capable young students and travelled across the globe, interviewing people in brothels, massage parlors etc giving them a voice they never had. In order to explain the existence of this heinous crime against humanity Siddharth brilliantly exposes the reader to the economy of this trade. In his book he shared the amount of money that can be made by the pimps and traffickers through sex slaves as well as the cost of their freedom. He basically did a cost analysis of the sex trafficking industry. This approach of his showed that pimps and traffickers only exist to commit such acts to satisfy the high demand of sex in the consumer market. If there weren't such demand then there wouldn't be traffickers kidnapping people to provide such services.

Siddharth provided very valuable information in his book regarding the ways it actually takes place. He discussed the routes, methods of recruitment and rationale for human trafficking. The reader goes inside the trade and feels like witnessing it all by him/herself. The author and his team are amongst the few who are actively involved in abolishing sex trafficking worldwide, but the issue seem to be constant as there are many within us who are corrupt. As I quote Maya telling her story in this book "... There were hundreds of girls in this bungalow, many from Nepal. One day I tried to escape. I complained to police, but they did nothing." (pg. 125). This shows that the victims barely have anywhere to go or anyone to look up to, their own families refuse to take them back as did Maya's. Reading this book made me realized how privileged I am and how careful we all need to be. We all should look out for each other and try to help abolish sex trafficking as much as we can.

Following is the link to the author's website, in case one wants to know more about him or help him abolish modern day slavery:

http://siddharthkara.com