Clinton’s VP pick Kaine: Promoting jihadis in America in exchange for cash
Kaine’s record on the Islamic threat here in America is far, far worse than that.

Breitbart has reported that Clinton’s V.P. pick Tim Kaine is among the top anti-Israel senators. He is the top recipient of PAC funds from George Soros’s anti-Israel group, J Street. He distinguished himself as one of eight senators to walk out on Benjamin Netanyahu’s historic speech to a joint session of Congress warning against the so-called Iran deal.

Subsequent to receiving substantial campaign contributions from ideologically-aligned organizations, he appointed a radical jihadi to the Virginia Immigration Commission. Esam Omeish runs a group described by federal prosecutors in a 2008 court filing “as the overt arm of the Muslim Brotherhood in America.” Omeish is the V.P. of a radical mosque that had the al-Qaeda operative Anwar Al-Awlaki as its imam and two of the 9/11 hijackers and Nidal Hasan, the perpetrator of the Fort Hood shooting, in the congregation. Omeish is still a board member, even as he serves on the Virginia Immigration Commission.

Omeish was also chairman of the board of a New Jersey mosque with terrorist ties, including an imam whom the Department of Homeland Security wants to deport for having links to Hamas. As if that weren’t enough, Omeish pledged in a video to help Palestinians who understand that “the jihad way is the way to liberate your land.”

When a state delegate wrote a letter to then-Governor Kaine warning him that the MAS has “questionable origins,” a Kaine spokesperson said the charge was bigotry.

Kaine also has close ties with Jamal Barzinji, whom the Global Muslim Brotherhood Watch describes as a “founding father of the U.S. Muslim Brotherhood.”

He first came on to the FBI’s radar in 1987-1988 when an informant inside the Brotherhood identified Barzinji and his associated groups as being part of a network of Brotherhood fronts to “institute the Islamic Revolution in the United States.” The source said Barzinji and his colleagues were “organizing political support which involves influencing both public opinion in the United States as well as the United States Government” using “political action front groups with no traceable ties.” (snip) Barzinji was nearly prosecuted but the Obama Justice Department dropped plans for indictment. Barzinji played a major role in nearly every Brotherhood front in the U.S. and was vice president of the International Institute of Islamic Thought (IIIT), which came under terrorism investigation also.

What is truly chilling about Kaine’s association with known terrorists is that the indictment of Al-Arian says the jihadist’s strategy was to “seek to obtain support from influential individuals, in the United States under the guise of promoting and protecting Arab rights.”

The quotes about Brotherhood operative Barzinji’s aspirations to use civil rights advocacy as a means to influence politicians are especially relevant when you consider that video from the event honoring Barzinji shows Kaine saying that it was his fourth time at the annual dinner and thanked his “friends” that organized it for helping him in his campaign for lieutenant-governor and governor and asked them to help his Senate campaign.

Like Hillary, Tim Kaine’s affection for jihadists is a quid pro quo: he gives them cover and appointments to positions of power, and they give him money.

(snip) The Barzinji-tied New Dominion PAC donated $43,050 to Kaine’s gubernatorial campaign … The PAC has very strong ties to the Democratic Party in Virginia, with … almost $257,000 in donations. This likely explains why Barzinji’s grandson served in Governor McAuliffe's administration and then became the Obama Administration's liaison to the Muslim-American community. The Middle East Forum’s Islamist Money in Politics database shows another $4,300 donated to Kaine’s Senate campaign in 2011-2012 by officials from U.S. Muslim Brotherhood entities …. Another $3,500 came from … Barzinji’s IIIT organization.

The New York Sun sees Kaine as one of the few senators who fully backed the Obama-Hillary Middle East disaster, including the open disrespect and hostility to our ally, Israel.

Can it be a coincidence that of all the millions of Americans Secretary Clinton could have picked as her running mate, she chose, in Senator Kaine, one of the eight Democrats who boycotted Prime Minister Netanyahu’s address last year to a joint meeting of Congress? Not a chance. It’s one marker of the fact that for all Mrs. Clinton’s protestations of support for the Jewish State, it would be a fool’s wager to count on her when the chips are down.

Hillary’s choice of Tim Kaine reveals her intentions as president to continue the Obama policy of promoting the Muslim Brotherhood and Iran and betraying Israel. The choice of Kaine also reveals Hillary’s reckless disregard for homeland security. She has chosen a man who is willing to cozy up to well known terror-promoters here in America in exchange for cash.

The media wants us to think Donald Trump is dangerous. This is the face of danger: Clinton-Kaine, importers of jihadi terror to America.

Correction: It was originally stated that the appointment was made "in exchange" for contributions. Because that was an inference, the wording has been changed to "subsequent to receiving substantial cmapiagn contributions from ideologcally-aligned sources"