WATCH – Lou Dobbs EXPOSES Obama’s TREASON On National Television
Lou Dobbs thinks he is on to something and if he right, our former president could find himself answering allegations of treason!

“Barack Obama, who many claim will be creating a shadow government to frustrate the policy goals of this administration, we’re looking at something that’s coming very close to, it seems to me, sedition,” Dobbs stated.

Not only has Obama come forward to say that he is “heartened” by the protests against the order that temporarily banned immigrants from seven countries, but he is allegedly creating a shadow government in order to keep his implementations in this government.

Many believe the location of the shadow government will be a scarce two miles from the White House and will be aided by a non-profit that catered to Obama’s presidency, which is still up and running despite the Democrat no longer being in office.

Obama is trying to lead the liberals and Democrats in opposing Trump and the orders he passes to improve this country, which is treasonous. Obama is no longer our president — he does not have the right to undermine the current president.

The American people have spoken — we elected Donald Trump as the president of the United States over Obama’s “groomed-for-the-position” Hillary Clinton, and now because the Democrats have lost their power, they are trying to steal it back behind closed doors.

They retreated after the election results came through, going off to lick their wounds and come up with another plan, but so far, all of them have failed. The protesting and rioting went belly-up real fast as did the recounts in Michigan, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania. And now, with Democrats calling for Trump’s impeachment, they are clearly losing their minds.

They have confused Trump for Bush and Korea for Crimea, clearly cracking under the pressure. Now, with the rise of rumors of this shadow government led by Obama, it seems they won’t stop until they once again have power in this country — by any means necessary, including treason. It is uo to us to spread the word and expose this!

They are trying to disrupt the betterment of this country, trying to stop it from being truly great again, but the question is why? Why would they want to destroy America? It boggles the mind that our own politicians were leading America to ruin.

And now there are opposing its rebirth. The media threaten that Trump’s America will be Nazi-like, racist, sexist, homophobic, but that’s not the way it is at all. Our president is all for diversity and differences — he may not agree with all of those differences, but he supports people as Americans regardless.

The liberals don’t want Trump to make this country better, and they are trying to do it in a way that forces Trump to tighten the noose around his own neck, so that they’re not the ones with blood on their hands at the end of the day. That’s why the American people need to stand against the Democrats and their back-alley antics!

We need to oppose the mainstream media, the protesters, and now Obama’s alleged shadow government. We elected Trump for a reason, and we cannot let the Democrats get their way in legislation and Supreme Court rulings. Trump is our president, and it’s going to remain that way for at least four years!

What do you think about Dobbs’ comments about Obama’s shadow government? Please share this story on Facebook and tell us because we want to hear YOUR voice!