Ann Coulter - April 22, 2009 - NELL HUSBANDS MARTIN COULTER
Mother's political activism saved me on more than one occasion. At the 2004 Republican National Convention in New York, I was taking my parents to the parties and, at one of them, Herman Cain walked up to me and told me he was a big fan even though I probably didn't know who he was.Cain was the former president and CEO of Godfather's Pizza who was then running for the U.S. Senate from Georgia. I had seen him on Fox News' "Cavuto" a million times -- but I couldn't remember his name for the life of me.Luckily for me, Mother was standing next to me and she piped in, "I know who you are -- I donated to your campaign." Thank you, Mommy!Mother probably contributed hundreds of thousands of dollars to various conservative outfits over the years -- all in her little $20 checks -- especially to any organization that claimed it was going to stop Hillary. In fact, if they mentioned Hillary in their letter, Mother sometimes made it $25.My brothers and I always figured we'd have no inheritance, but there would be a lovely memorial to Oliver North somewhere.Mother may have thought her most notable characteristic was her Republican activism, but, for the rest of us, it was her overwhelming, unconditional love. She was a little love machine, making even the crabbiest people smile wherever she went.Every time she'd see me, sometimes after just a few days' absence, she'd hug me as if I had been lost in the Himalayan Mountains for the past 20 years. Father would drily remark, "I think your mother likes you."On Mother's birthday last year, I had a dinner party for her with Rush Limbaugh, Conrad Black and my friends Peter and Angie. Mother was always delighted to be with people talking about politics. Actually she told me that, lately, she was delighted to be around any conversations that didn't involve who had a doctor's appointment or who had died that day.So I let her stay up until 3 a.m. that night, well past her bedtime. Mother was so happy that after I had her all tucked in and the lights out, I heard her singing herself to sleep.Even on the rare occasions when I'd be cross with her, she'd completely forget about it, and within 10 seconds would be telling me what a wonderful, precious daughter I was. My brother Jimmy found out recently that she'd even forgotten that he had caused her to miss Reagan's first inauguration by getting in a car accident the night before we were leaving -- and she never should have forgiven that.Everyone wanted my mother to be his mother. (The "his" in that sentence is grammatically correct and Mother would never let us forget it.) I'm sure everyone thinks he has the perfect mother, but we really did.Since I was a little girl, friends, relatives and neighbors would bring their problems to Mother. She had a rare combination of being completely moral and completely nonjudgmental at the same time, the exact opposite of liberals who have absolutely no morals and yet are ferociously judgmental.You could tell Mother anything, get good counsel and not end up feeling worse about yourself.Several of Mother's New Canaan friends sent us notes last week, calling her a "gentle lady" and remarking that she never had an unkind word for anyone. As a family member, I can assure you that, much to our annoyance, she really did never have an unkind word for anyone. I mean, except Democrats, but not anyone she knew.Whenever the rest of us would be making fun of someone -- trust me, always for good and sound reasons -- Mother would somehow manage to muster up a defense of the miscreant. Father would always smile and say, "Your mother defends everyone."She was, in fact, such a "gentle lady," that I had to go to her doctors' appointments and hospital visits with her and be her Mother Lion. If officious hospital administrators had told Mother to get off a gurney, go outside in the pouring rain and stand on one foot for three hours before the doctor would see her, she'd thank them profusely and apologize for being such a bother.When she began her final decline last fall, she had to go to her Connecticut doctor one time without me. She wasn't getting any better after a chemo treatment. I had been worrying about her appointment all day, but when I called her that night, she immediately turned the subject to me and asked me how my book was going.I insisted on knowing if she had seen the doctor and she perked up and brightly told me that, oh yes, she had seen him, he had all my books in his office, he was worried about Obama, too, and he has such accomplished children! One of them was excelling in hockey ...Before she launched into a spirited discussion of his children's extracurricular activities and triumphs on the athletic field, I had to ask her, "Mommy, did the doctor say anything about why you're feeling lousy?"It turned out, of course, that it was the ovarian cancer -- as well as the massive amounts of poison she had been receiving to kill the cancer over the past five years. That was the beginning of the end.Now I'll never be able to introduce my Mother to friends and surprise them with her charming Southern accent.And I'll never see my mother's beautiful face again, the face that once got her voted "prettiest girl" at the University of Kentucky. I've been looking at her across the room in doctors' offices over the past few years, thinking to myself: There will come a point when you won't see that face again, at least not for the next several decades here on Earth.Her face always looked like home to me. My whole life, as soon as I'd see my mother's face I'd know I was safe, whether I was a little girl lost in a department store or a big girl with a problem, who needed her mother.Thanks to the doctors at Memorial Sloan-Kettering and mother's fighting Kentucky spirit, we got to see that face much longer than anyone ever expected.So now she's with Daddy and Jesus. Every single day since Daddy died last year, Mother would say how much she missed him and gaze at his photo, telling us what an amazing man he was and repeating his little expressions and jokes. Even though I miss her, I'm glad they're together again.I don't know about Jesus, but I think Daddy was getting impatient. But Mommy was always running a little bit late.COPYRIGHT 2009 ANN COULTERDISTRIBUTED BY UNIVERSAL PRESS SYNDICATE1130 Walnut, Kansas City, MO 64106