(HZ) World Predictions 2016
Dateline: Various, see script - Various, see script

Restrictions: Horizons clients and AP Lifestyle, Health and Technology clients Only/ Part no access Russia/EBU

It's the year the White House will receive a new President, the conflict in the Middle East is set to continue to dominate, while in Rio athletes will take part in the 2016 Olympic Games.

2016 is the year of the 'Fire Monkey' according to Chinese tradition.

47. Various of facilities at Olympic Park and Olympic Logo

46. Pull-focus of rubbish and sea water on the sand of Copacabana beach

Question: "Anything more that you'd like to add?"

"There were so many opportunities when you look at the growth of hotels in the city, the prospects for tourism in the city, what happened to poor areas concerning the urbanisation of favelas and slums in Rio. There's a bunch of things that we achieved in the past few years that makes me very proud."

43. Pull out of demonstrators next to barricade shouting UPSOUND: "Vila Autodromo will stay"

"The reason we won the bid against cities like Madrid, like Tokyo, like Chicago was not because we had better infrastructure than them, it was the contrary. What we said to the IOC, to the International Olympics Committee was; 'if you want the Olympics to mean change don't go to these developed cities, please come to Rio'."

36. Various of people celebrating, dancing and singing, after Rio de Janeiro was chosen as host of 2016 Olympics

"The main concern we have are natural disasters because the fire from the sun will hit the earth, which will cause a major drought. We have suffered a lot of floods in the past years and the next year it will be drought, especially in the south eastern part of China."

"2016 is the year of 'fire monkey'. According to the Chinese tradition it is a year of 'Bing-Shen'. 'Bing' is the fire of the sun, which is immense and drastic. 'Shen' means gold. So the year of 'Bing-shen' is like fire smelting gold. Although there is a Chinese old saying that 'true gold can stand melting by the fire', the 'fire' of the sun is still quite destructive. So for the whole world, not only for China, the year 2016 is not an ideal year."

31. Various of Dong Yilin, Fortune Teller and Yi-Ching Master, sitting his the office

"The conflict is not completely secured, there may be surprises in the form of a sudden eruption of fighting, shelling of this locality, of that locality."

28. Various of Putin meeting members of the public

"He (Putin) clearly has no time for US supremacy, he wants to see the end of it, but it doesn't mean that he's plotting everywhere in the world."

21. Various of missile cruiser Moskva arriving at the shore north of Latakia for air defence of the region

++AP CANNOT INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY THE DATE, LOCATION OR CONTENT OF THIS FOOTAGE++

"That arsenal is there not for show. I think Mr Putin has made it very clear to everyone that he means business."

17. Tracking shot of burning building and people walking along street purportedly showing the aftermath of a Russian airstrike

++THE AP HAS MADE EVERY EFFORT TO IDENTIFY AND ACCESS THE UGC FROM THE CONTENT CREATOR, HOWEVER THE AP CANNOT ROUTINELY COMMUNICATE WITH MILITANT SOURCES++

++THIS VIDEO WAS POSTED ONLINE BY THE COMMUNICATIONS ARM OF THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP ++

++AP TELEVISION CANNOT INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY THE DATE AND AUTHENTICITY OF THIS MATERIAL++

++AP CANNOT INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY THE DATE, LOCATION OR CONTENT OF THIS FOOTAGE++

++AP CANNOT INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY THE DATE, LOCATION OR CONTENT OF THIS FOOTAGE++

++AP CANNOT INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY THE DATE, LOCATION OR CONTENT OF THIS FOOTAGE++

"She comes with a legacy of a strong foreign policy perspective that might actually help neutralize some of the calls for strength, and certainty, and power that the Republicans are going to be making."

"But instead of showing leadership, some candidates in this race are resorting to ugly, hateful rhetoric."

"It if does turn out to be Donald Trump or Ted Cruz, two of the people that seem very very likely right now based on the polling, to sort of catapult themselves into the nomination, then you will have a very classic liberal versus staunch conservative election."

7. Trump on stage saying, UPSOUND (English) "That's a Hillary (Clinton, Democratic presidential frontrunner) supporter (referring to protester who has just been led out of auditorium)."

6. Protester shouting at back of the auditorium, UPSOUND, off camera (English) Donald Trump: "Get him out." Crowd booing as protester is led out.

"Donald J. Trump is calling for a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States."

3. Republican presidential hopeful Ted Cruz hands paperwork to enrol in New Hampshire Primary to official, UPSOUND: (English) "Alright. So, declaration of candidacy."

These are the people who hope to be President. One day.

It's still too early to say just who will get the Republican presidential nomination.

But with Donald Trump in the mix, it's one of the most volatile and closely watched lead-ups to a US presidential election in decades.

Leonard Steinhorn, a Professor at American University in Washington D.C. says it's unclear who the Republicans will pick.

"It if does turn out to be Donald Trump or Ted Cruz, two of the people that seem very very likely right now based on the polling, to sort of catapult themselves into the nomination, then you will have a very classic liberal versus staunch conservative election."

Steinhorn says demographic changes are seeing more ethnic groups and young people eligible to vote, and that favours the Democrats.

But will Hillary Clinton's journey from first lady to Secretary of State end up being the perfect job interview?

Clinton is the frontrunner against two other presidential hopefuls, but will have to satisfy voter concerns about the economy and jobs, and national security.

"She comes with a legacy of a strong foreign policy perspective that might actually help neutralize some of the calls for strength, and certainty, and power that the Republicans are going to be making."

Steinhorn says the result of the election will hinge on which party can get people to turn out to vote.

His hunch is that Clinton could win if the Republicans nominate Trump or Cruz.

The US Presidential election is scheduled for 8 November 2016.

Foreign policy is likely to be a thorny issue.

In 2015 Russia was increasingly flexing its military muscle, with a bombing campaign against militants in Syria starting on 30 September.

Observers accuse Russia of using the strikes to help its ally, the Assad regime, and of causing the deaths of many civilians.

But Russia denies this, claiming positions held by the Islamic State group are being targeted to make sure there is no collateral damage.

The director of the Moscow Carnegie Centre, Dmitri Trenin will be closely watching how Russia's involvement in the Syria conflict develops.

He warns Russia's mission could even spread to Iraq.

"That arsenal is there not for show. I think Mr Putin has made it very clear to everyone that he means business."

That arsenal includes the Russian navy missile cruiser Moskva, which arrived near the port of Latakia in November.

Russia has called on the international community to support the government of Syrian President Bashar Assad and the regime's progress in its fight against rebels will be a key issue in 2016.

The prominent role in the conflict pits President Vladimir Putin's world view against the wishes of US President Barack Obama, who insists that Assad needs to leave power to end the long civil war.

Trenin says Putin doesn't have a specific plan to rebuild the world and undermine US supremacy.

"He clearly has no time for US supremacy, he wants to see the end of it, but it doesn't mean that he's plotting everywhere in the world," says Trenin.

The conflict in eastern Ukraine remains volatile heading into the New Year.

There have been accusations against Ukrainian forces and rebels of violating the September 1 cease fire.

Meanwhile, Russia has cemented its hold on the peninsula it annexed in March 2014.

President Putin received a warm reception when he visited the Crimean city of Sevastopol in August 2015.

Trenin says the Minsk agreement, intended to end the fighting in eastern Ukraine, could unravel if any parties launch a tactical offensive.

"The conflict is not completely secured, there may be surprises in the form of a sudden eruption of fighting, shelling of this locality, of that locality."

Beijing residents have suffered high pollution levels towards the end of the year, and it seems there are more difficult times ahead.

Fortune Teller and Yi-Ching Master, Dong Yilin, has been studying the Chinese zodiac.

Each year in the 12-year Chinese lunar calendar, in use for more than 2,000 years, is represented by an animal.

Dong says 2016 is the year of the "fire monkey".

"According to the Chinese tradition it is a year of 'Bing-Shen'. 'Bing' is the fire of the sun, which is immense and drastic. 'Shen' means gold. So the year of 'Bing-shen' is like fire smelting gold. Although there is a Chinese old saying that 'true gold can stand melting by the fire', the 'fire' of the sun is still quite destructive. So for the whole world, not only for China, the year 2016 is not an ideal year."

Dong says the economic situation in China will not be good in 2016, with investment channels being suffocated.

He's also seeing the potential for natural disasters.

"The main concern we have are natural disasters because the fire from the sun will hit the earth, which will cause a major drought. We have suffered a lot of floods in the past years and the next year it will be drought, especially in the south eastern part of China."

Brazil first learned it would be hosting the 2016 Olympic games in 2009.

They celebrated long into the night on Copacabana beach after the International Olympic Committee's (IOC) announcement.

Rio de Janeiro's mayor, Eduardo Paes, says the time was right for his city to win the Olympic prize.

"The reason we won the bid against cities like Madrid, like Tokyo, like Chicago was not because we had better infrastructure than them, it was the contrary. What we said to the IOC, to the International Olympics Committee was; 'if you want the Olympics to mean change don't go to these developed cities, please come to Rio'."

Families living next door to the Olympic Park have been resisting evacuation, despite many homes and businesses already being destroyed to pave way for the infrastructure necessary to hold the event.

But Paes says the changes will be worth it.

"There were so many opportunities when you look at the growth of hotels in the city, the prospects for tourism in the city, what happened to poor areas concerning the urbanisation of favelas and slums in Rio. There's a bunch of things that we achieved in the past few years that makes me very proud."

Paes has one final message for the international community.

"Come to Rio, enjoy the party".

It's no party for Olympic swimmers and boaters who will be competing in Rio's heavily polluted waterways.

Testing by the Associated Press showed none of the Olympic sites are fit for swimmers or boaters, according to experts.

Even water at the famous Capacabana beach is heavily contaminated.

The 2016 Olympics run from 5 August - 21 August 2016.

====

Clients are reminded:

(i) to check the terms of their licence agreements for use of content outside news programming and that further advice and assistance can be obtained from the AP Archive on: Tel +44 (0) 20 7482 7482 Email: info@aparchive.com.

(ii) they should check with the applicable collecting society in their Territory regarding the clearance of any sound recording or performance included within the AP Television News service

(iii) they have editorial responsibility for the use of all and any content included within the AP Television News service and for libel, privacy, compliance and third party rights applicable to their Territory.