Military Entrance Processing Station (MEPS)
23 March 2007

Effective date: 4 April 2007

RAR issue date: 13 September 2011

UNCLASSIFIED

Personnel Procurement

Military Entrance Processing Station (MEPS)

SUMMARY of CHANGE

AR 601-270

Military Entrance Processing Station (MEPS)

This administrative revision, dated 28 February 2013—

* Updates OPNAVINST 1100.4C CH-1 to OPNAVINST 1100.4C CH-2 (cover).

* Adds the multi-Service authentication block for the Air Force (title page).

This rapid action revision, dated 13 September 2011—

* Implements the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 by deleting all references to homosexual conduct, to separation for homosexual conduct, and to homosexual conduct being a bar to entry or induction into the Armed Forces (deleted para 9-21).

* Adds the word "forcible" (para E-4, bullet 34).

* Makes administrative changes (app A: corrected publication titles marked and obsolete forms marked; glossary: deleted unused acronyms and corrected titles/abbreviations as prescribed by Army Records Management and Declassification Agency).

a. Chapters 1 through 8 prescribe military entrance processing station (MEPS) operational policies and procedures applicable to recruiting activities of the military services and contain agency and command tasks for the operation and support of the MEPS.

b. Chapter 9 prescribes policies, procedures, and functions for the processing of Selective Service System (SSS) registrants. The primary mission of the MEPS is to—

(1) Provide aptitude testing and results, medically examine applicants in accordance with established physical standards prescribed in Department of Defense Instruction (DODI) 6130.4, and to perform background screening to ensure moral character provisions are met for enlistment in the military services according to the eligibility standards established by the services.

(2) Access into the military services those applicants accepted for enlistment or commissioning by the sponsoring military service.

Required and related publications and prescribed and referenced forms are listed in appendix A.

Abbreviations and special terms used in this regulation are explained in the glossary.

a. In accordance with DODI 1304.8, the Department of Defense (DOD) Executive Agent for the Military Entrance and Processing Command (USMEPCOM) will be the Secretary of the Army (herein to as the Executive Agent).

b. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, (OUSD) (P&R) will have the operational, realignment and reorganization authority for USMEPCOM.

c. Secretaries of the Department of the Army, Air Force, and the Navy, (for the Navy and the Marine Corps) and the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, through the Commandant of the Coast Guard will—

(1) Provide military personnel to staff the MEPS during peacetime and mobilization. Also, finance related pay and allowance costs, including permanent change of station travel and temporary duty (TDY) travel for service-unique purposes.

(2) Finance of costs for transportation, meals, and lodging of applicants and enlistees.

(3) Furnish recruiting services examination and enlistment (Regular and Reserve Components, including the Delayed Entry Program (DEP) workload projections (fiscal year and quarterly) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy (DASD (MPP)/Accession Policy (AP)).

(4) Provide the DASD (MPP) (AP) with basic eligibility criteria for enlistment instructions used to prepare enlistment documents, assign enlistees, and distribute enlistment documents.

d. Army installation commanders are responsible for ensuring that Headquarters (HQ) USMEPCOM and subordinate units are provided the following:

(1) Personnel (Army and civilian only) and administrative services support (including legal and pay).

(2) Logistical support, except where interservice support is obtained from other military services, in accordance with DODI 4000.19.

e. Commanders of Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, and Reserve Component recruiting activities will—

(1) Ensure that pertinent policies and procedures prescribed in this regulation are implemented uniformly.

(2) Provide quarterly recruiting objectives of each subordinate command (that is, brigade/battalion for Army or other service equivalent) to USMEPCOM Headquarters. The USMEPCOM staff will analyze these objectives and provide to sectors and MEPS for operational planning.

(3) Establish and maintain respective service-unique computerized job reservation systems located at each MEPS.

(4) Ensure the conduct and behavior of applicants and enlistees while being processed, to include behavior at meals and lodging facilities.

f. The Commander, USMEPCOM will command and control the sector headquarters and MEPSs. USMEPCOM is a jointly staffed DOD field operating activity under the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (OUSD) (P&R). The Commander, USMEPCOM will—

(1) Establish and maintain the Command's Reporting System for reporting peacetime and mobilization induction and accession data, and related information in accordance with the DOD accession policy.

(2) Ensure professional and technical guidance is provided to MEPS chief medical officers (CMOs).

(3) Perform review and analysis, develop necessary plans and programs, and submit Defense Health Program (DHP) budget requirements to the U.S. Army Medical Command (MEDCOM).

(4) Perform review and analysis, develop necessary plans and programs, and submit budget requirements, other than DHP, to the Executive Agent.

(5) Establish and maintain MEPS facilities at locations prescribed by DASD MPP and develop facility layouts, space, and equipment requirements.

(6) Inspect all MEPS according to USMEPCOM Regulation 20-1.

(7) Develop MEPS workload capabilities (testing, medical examination, and processing), staffing patterns, and personnel requirements. Publish and distribute joint tables of distribution and allowance, or changes thereto, to appropriate agencies and activities.

(8) Maintain geographic boundaries for the MEPS military entrance test (MET) site and high school testing.

(9) Design, implement, sustain and operate the necessary automated enterprise data processing system to support DOD accession policy.

(10) Initiate requests, as necessary, to include inter-service support agreements (ISAs), where appropriate, to obtain services (to include legal services) and logistical support for MEPS activities.

(11) Maintain liaison with commanders of the recruiting services and training commands of the military Services, Surface Deployment and Distribution Command (SDDC), Office of the Chief of Engineers, the Department of Army Assistant Chief of Staff for Installation Management (ACSIM), U.S. Army Medical Command (MEDCOM), U.S. Army Signal Command (USASC), and Information Integration and Analysis Center. Also, maintain liaison with the Chief, National Guard Bureau (NGB); Administrator, General Services Administration; Director, Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS), Director, SSS, and Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC).

(12) Establish policies, procedures, specifications, and standards for requesting negotiation of meals and lodging contracts according to USMEPCOM Regulation 715-4. Provisions for meals and lodging of applicants and enlistees while at the MEPS and undergoing processing or waiting shipment after enlistment will be made on a contract basis, except to the extent that in-house lodging and dining facilities are available that do not require the services or products of a commercial firm.

(13) Establish policies, procedures, specifications and standards for transporting MEPS enlisted applicants to the services designated duty station.

(14) Establish and maintain procedures as a trusted agent to authenticate applicants' identity prior to enlistment.

g. Commanders of USMEPCOM sectors will—

(1) Exercise direct command authority, consistent with Headquarters' policy, over the operation of MEPS within their respective geographical areas of responsibility.

(2) Supervise the operation of MEPS to ensure established policies and procedures are accomplished effectively and efficiently.

(3) Monitor MEPS personnel facilities, equipment supplies, administrative services, and logistical support requirements.

(4) Furnish monthly workload projections to the MEPS and monitor the flow of applicants into the MEPS for examination and enlistment.

(5) Maintain liaison with appropriate counterpart service recruiting commanders/directors, SSS Headquarters Liaison, and directors of local OPM regions to ensure maximum cooperation in connection with MEPS matters of mutual concern.

The functions of the MEPS are to—

a. Provide aptitude testing and medical examinations to applicants for accession into the active and Reserve components of the military service, including the United States Coast Guard; and provide the testing and examination results to the sponsoring service to identify applicants who meet the service, DOD mandated enlistment eligibility standards.

b. Enlist applicants accepted by the sponsoring military service.

c. Conduct quality review of enlistment documents prepared by MEPS and interview applicants for the purpose of assisting recruiting services in the prevention of fraudulent entry into the military services.

d. Prepare DD Form 4 series, (Enlistment/Reenlistment Document Armed Forces of the United States) in accordance with instructions from the Commander, USMEPCOM. Complete items 3 through 10 and 12 of DD Form 1966 series (Record of Military Processing-Armed Forces of the United States) regarding acknowledgment of service obligation according to the instructions from the Commander, USMEPCOM.

e. Capture and forward fingerprints to designated agencies to initiate the entrance national agency check (ENTNAC)/national agency check (NAC)/national agency check with Local Agency and Credit Check (NACLC).

f. Submit all social security numbers (SSNs) to the Social Security Administration (SSA) and Alien Registration Numbers to the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) for verification (USMEPCOM requirement).

g. Prepare DD Form 93 (Record of Emergency Data), except for Coast Guard. For the Coast Guard use CG Form 4113 (Record of Emergency Data).

h. Prepare orders and amendments for travel of enlistees to initial training reception activities or other duty stations designated by the sponsoring service.

i. Publish initial active duty for training (IADT) or active duty for training (ADT) orders for RC personnel when requested by the respective service.

j. Assemble and distribute enlistment documents according to instructions contained in personnel procurement directives issued by the sponsoring service. Assembly and sequence of documents will be in accordance with USMEPCOM Regulation 601-23.

k. Arrange transportation for enlistees to local transportation terminals and onward movement to stations designated by the sponsoring service.

l. Conduct enlistment qualification testing at sites outside the MEPS according to policies and procedures prescribed in this publication, in AR 601-222, and by the Commander, USMEPCOM.

m. Provide arrangements for lodging, meals, and local transportation if applicable, for applicants and enlistees while they are undergoing processing at the MEPS. If it is necessary to procure these services from commercial facilities, such procurement will be accomplished only through the supporting contracting offices. Contracting officers will accomplish the procurement according to the appropriate Defense acquisition regulation.

n. Maintain accountability of services rendered by contractors and vendors, and submit payment according to procedures established by the Commander, USMEPCOM.

o. Conduct medical examinations of individuals who are non-enlistment applicants, upon request from a military service or other Federal activity. These examinations will not adversely affect the accomplishment of the primary mission. The sponsoring activity will obtain parental or legal guardian consent to the medical examination if required (see para 3-11). The examinations will be scheduled in advance through coordination with the MEPS. Costs incident to the medical examination, including specialty consultations and laboratory evaluations ordered by the MEPS physician, will be paid from USMEPCOM operating funds on a non-reimbursable basis, unless reimbursement provisions are specified.

p. Ensure complete, timely, and accurate preparation, collection, and transmission of the individual's examination and enlistment records and related data according to the procedures established by the Commander, USMEPCOM.

q. Ensure reservists and prior-service applicants provide appropriate release or separation documentation to properly process onto active duty (AD).

r. Conduct orientation briefings concerning the operation of MEPS for recruiting personnel as appropriate.

s. Conduct testing with the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) according to AR 601-222/Chief Naval Operations Instruction (OPNAVINST) 1100.5/ AFJI 36-2016/Marine Corps order (MCO) 1130.52F/CG COMDTINST 1130.24A.

t. Perform accounting for appropriated funds, develop financial plans and programs, conduct financial review and analysis, and conduct management analysis to maximize operational efficiency in terms of funding resources.

u. Collect specimens and ship to DOD certified laboratories (selected and contracted by DOD) for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Antibody initial screening and confirmation testing, as necessary.

v. Conduct alcohol testing by breathalyzer during pre-accession medical examinations at MEPS and confirm all positive readings. Collect urine specimens and ship to DOD certified laboratories (selected and contracted or ordered by DOD) for initial drug screening and confirmation testing, as necessary.

w. Ensure that applicants, registrants and enlistees receive, when necessary, medical attention for medical emergencies or injuries occurring at the MEPS according to USMEPCOM regulations.

x. Provide the Education Services Specialist to chair the Education Subcommittee of the Interservice Recruitment Committee.

The functions of local area recruiting activities are to—

a. Schedule applicants on a daily basis for medical examination, ASVAB testing, enlistment, meals, and lodging. Ensure the projected schedules support MEPS requirements for evenly distributed workload demands. Project enlistees to ship by the 15th of the month prior to the actual ship month; confirm shipper projections by name one working day prior to shipping.

b. Conduct preliminary screening of applicants to ensure those who are obviously physically unfit for military service (such as current history of epilepsy or diabetes), ineligible for ASVAB testing or retesting, or are non-English speaking, or not scheduled for an examination. The DD Form 2807-2 (Medical Prescreen of Medical History Report) will be completed by each individual who requires medical processing at the MEPS. The DD Form 2807-2 should be completed by the applicant with the assistance of the recruiter, parent(s), or guardian, as needed. Use of this form will also facilitate efficient, timely, and accurate medical processing of individuals applying for military service. The form is designed to assist recruiters in the medical prescreening of applicants. At a minimum, the DD Form 2807-2, once completed by the individual, will be submitted one processing day in advance, to the MEPS that is projected to process the individual. If support documentation (for example, private physician's paperwork, treatment records, consultations, and so forth) is required to augment the MEPS Chief Medical Officer review, a minimum of 2 processing days in advance is required, depending on the documentation; MEPS will inform service liaison of examinees' processing status following the completion of DD Form 2807-2. Applicants with prior service will submit all pertinent separation documents along with the DD Form 2807-2.

c. Ensure individuals with prior service submit a DD Form 214 (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty) member copy 4 (must indicate RE-codes), DD Form 215 (correction to DD Form 214) or NGB Form 22. If a Reenlistment Eligibility Data Display (REDD) Level 2 printout is used, then it must be submitted in accordance with USMEPCOM policy. In rare instances when the above documents have not been issued or the documents do not capture the most recent term of service; MEPS may accept a Discharge Order for processing prior service applicants. For those applicants who are currently serving in one of the services (Active or Ready Reserve) a DD Form 368 (Conditional Release) and supporting medical documents are required in lieu of the DD Form 214. These documents will be presented to the MEPS medical section for review with the DD Form 2807-2 in advance of the physical examination. The MEPS practitioner will determine if additional separation records are needed to afford or complete MEPS medical processing, as appropriate. The appropriate service medical waiver review authority may also request additional records.

d. Ensure all non-US citizens have a permanent resident card with a valid alien registration number.

e. Ensure noncitizen applications have a Lawful Permanent Resident card with a valid alien number for authentication.

f. Obtain parental or legal guardian consent for the medical examination(s) and review of medical record information of minors (para 3-11). Obtain parental or legal guardian signature certification on medical prescreening forms of minors (item 8 on DD Form 2807-2).

g. Arrange necessary transportation for applicants to the MEPS (or place of lodging when appropriate) or remote MET site and for return to their residence when applicable. During mobilization, the procedures outlined in chapter 9 apply.

h. Explain procedures that must be followed to receive meals and lodging at the contract facility. Explain that processing can be denied for applicants who violate the rules of conduct. Explain rules of conduct expected of applicants during their stay at contract lodging facilities, and provide each applicant with lodging information. The recruiting service will advise applicants of the services available at the lodging facility, including those for which a fee is chargeable to them. In the event that an applicant is identified as a suspect in a criminal offense occurring while processing or in the contract lodging facility, enlistment processing will be suspended pending completion of an investigation conducted by the local police. If the local police choose not to initiate an investigation, an inquiry by the recruiting service will be conducted. A copy of the findings will be provided to the MEPS Commander for review and consideration.

i. Assume responsibility for applicants/enlistees who, as a result of misconduct, medical emergency, family problem/emergency, legal problem, or any other problems not a direct result of MEPS processing, cannot continue processing or are delayed from shipping to their AD station.

j. Explain the processing procedures and ensure that applicants are properly prepared for the medical evaluation. This includes any information or pamphlet developed by USMEPCOM for distribution to the examinees. Ensure the applicant provides any medical records or documents regarding illness, hospitalization, injuries, treatment, or surgery, and so forth, that may be required or requested by the MEPS examining practitioner. Stress to applicants the importance of reporting for examination on schedule in a rested condition and in appropriate dress (para 3-6). Inform the examinees that the exam may take more than one day.

k. Identify applicants who require special examinations or testing necessary to determine qualification for specific enlistment programs. Furnish the name of the test site location and the date testing occurred when applicants have been previously tested on the student or enlistment ASVAB. Identify prior-service applicants and specify medical fitness standards to be applied. If no MEPS medical processing is required, obtain appropriate service waiver of MEPS medical processing and inform the MEPS.

l. Determine the eligibility of applicants for particular service programs, including enlistment grade or rank, according to the service personnel procurement directives.

m. Ensure applicants and enlistees with military training or school start date commitments are sent to the MEPS for shipment in a timely manner. Inform the MEPS Medical Section of any new medical information that was not previously disclosed and/or any interval medical history change since the time of the last MEPS medical evaluation and provide additional medical documentation to the MEPS as requested.

n. Furnish all applicable data necessary for preparation of assignment, travel, and AD orders for applicants scheduled to enlist.

o. Maintain enlistment documents pertaining to members of the U.S. Army Reserve Alternate Training Program (U.S. Army Recruiting Command only).

p. Forward necessary enlistment documents in sufficient quantities and sequence to the MEPS for distribution. Document assembly and sequence are identified in USMEPCOM Regulation 601-23.

q. Support the Student Testing Program prescribed in AR 601-222/ OPNAVINST 1100.5/ AFJI 36-2016/ MCO 1130.52F/CG COMDTINST 1130.24A.

r. Conduct officer direct commissioning program.

s. Attend the Recruiter Orientation conducted at the MEPS within 90-days of arrival, if assigned as a new recruiter.

t. Furnish all applicable enlistment waiver codes in items 17 and 18 of DD Form 1966 Series (Record of Military Processing-Armed Forces of the United States).

MEPS will operate on a 5-day workweek, excluding Federal Holidays. Upon request of one or more of the recruiting services through the Inter-Service Recruitment Committee (IRC), Commander USMEPCOM may authorize the operation of MEPS on Saturdays. This will be dependent on mission requirements and funds available in coordination with the stakeholders. MEPS will not open during 3-day Federal holiday weekends.

The IRC serves as the coordinating body through which harmonious relationships between local recruiting organizations and MEPS are maintained. The IRC will serve as a forum for the coordination discussion, and resolution of areas of mutual concern; however, it does not have the authority to make operational decisions for the MEPS.

a. Committee functions. The IRC considers all matters of mutual interest affecting the accomplishment of the recruiting and MEPS missions, to include—

(1) Coordination of all aspects of the Armed Services Student Testing Program, according to AR 601-222/ OPNAVINST 1230.lB/ AFJI 36-2016/ MCO 1130.52F.

(2) Dissemination of MEPS policies and procedures concerning enlistment qualification testing and the medical and administrative processing of applicants.

(3) Establishment of processing quotas, when required, and applicant projection requirements for the MEPS and MET sites. Reserve Components, to include the Army National Guard, whose recruiting service is separate from their Active Component will be entitled to a percentage of MEPS processing seats consistent with their percentage of total projected accessions for their respective service. Available processing seats not reserved may be used by either an Active or a Reserve Component on an as-needed basis.

(4) Exploration of procedures for more efficient processing of applicants.

(5) Exchange of data on projections, no-shows, walk-ins, medical pre-screening performance rates, pre-enlistment interview disclosures, recruiting production status and retest request, for the purpose of improving applicant processing procedures.

(6) Establishment of working level and ad hoc subcommittees, as required. Each IRC shall establish an education subcommittee composed of the MEPS Education Services Specialists (ESS) and Service Education Services Specialists or operations officers. This subcommittee will meet with the same frequency as the full IRC to discuss issues involving the Student Testing Program.

(7) Coordination of liaison activities with local and State educational officials, as required.

b. Committee's composition. There is an IRC at each MEPS. The IRC is composed of the commanders of the Army Recruiting Battalion, Army National Guard State(s) Recruiting and Retention Manager, Navy Recruiting District, Marine Corps Recruiting Station, Air Force Recruiting Squadron, MEPS and Recruiter-In-Charge of the Coast Guard Recruiting Office or Recruiting Detachment and MEPS. Reserve Components will be invited to IRC meetings as nonvoting members. The chair should be rotated on an annual basis among the voting members of the IRC. There is also an Education Subcommittee, chaired by the MEPS Education Service Specialist (ESS), to discuss and resolve Student Testing Program (STP) issues and brief the IRC at every meeting on those issues as well as the status of the STP.

c. Convening frequency. The IRC will formally convene not less than quarterly with more frequent meetings encouraged as necessary. Committee representatives of any military service can call a meeting of the committee at any time, consistent with prudent judgment and the availability of service representatives. The minutes of each IRC meeting will be recorded and distributed within 10 working days to each voting and nonvoting IRC member and each member of the appropriate Recruiting Commander/Operations Conference (RC/OC).

d. Duties of the IRC chairperson. The chairperson's duties include—

(1) Coordination of dates and locations for meetings as agreed upon by members.

(2) Establishment of the meeting agenda and schedule from input provided by members and representatives.

(3) Initiation of invitations, to appropriate organizations and individuals involved in any aspect of recruiting or MEPS matters, to attend meetings.

(4) Preparation and distribution of IRC minutes.

e. Voting. The IRC is ruled by majority vote. When practical, the Commander from each recruiting service and MEPS will attend IRC meetings. Each recruiting service member and each MEPS have one vote on matters before the committee. The MEPS commander is a voting member. Reserve Components are non-voting members and are represented during voting by their active service counterparts. Approval of the MEPS commander must be obtained on those matters concerning MEPS resources, capabilities, or mission. A dissenting service may forward the issue to the RC/OC.

f. Resolution of disagreements in the IRC. The IRC provides commanders of recruiting and processing activities a forum to raise and resolve issues affecting accomplishment of the recruiting mission and MEPS processing mission. It is expected that such issues will be resolved locally by direct coordination. When satisfactory resolution is not possible, referral to the RC/OC is appropriate. However, the IRC concept is not intended to abridge any commander's function and authority to accomplish assigned missions. If agreement cannot be reached by the IRC the military service that introduced the issue will document the committee action and forward the issue to the RC/OC for resolution. Issues which cannot be resolved by the RC/OC will be referred through HQ, USMEPCOM, ATTN: J-3/MOP to the stakeholders' meeting for resolution.

The Recruiting Commanders/Operations Conference (RC/OC) provides interface between the functions of recruiting and processing above that of the local operational level. The objective of the RC/OC is to improve the working relationships among members and to enhance the mission accomplishment of the recruiting mission and MEPS processing missions. The RC/OC provides a continuing means of resolving those problems of policy implementation, coordination and standardization within the assigned geographic boundaries of RC/OC members.

a. Committee functions. The RC/OC will consider all matters of mutual interest affecting the accomplishment of the recruiting and MEPS missions, to include—

(1) Coordination of MEPS support requirement for the recruiting services located within the geographical boundary of each USMEPCOM sector.

(2) Exchange of recruiting and MEPS-related information of mutual interest.

(3) Resolving issues that could not be satisfactorily resolved at the local IRC operational level.

b. Committee's composition. There is a RC/OC for each sector. The RC/OC is composed of commanders of USMEPCOM sectors, Army recruiting brigades, Army National Guard national area recruiting managers, Navy regions, Air Force groups, Marine Corps districts, and Coast Guard regions. In addition, the following will be invited to attend and participate: equivalent level commanders of the Reserve Components; recruiting and retention advisory committee members; Chief, Air National Guard recruiting and retention branch (Air National Guard Readiness Center); and Coast Guard recruiting service personnel. The respective sector commander will be the chair. The RC/OC is normally organized along the geographical boundaries of the USMEPCOM sectors and will be identified by the sector designation, for example, Eastern Sector. Because of disparate boundaries, membership in more than one committee on the part of recruiting commanders may be required, and further subdivision is authorized to accommodate peculiar situations.

c. Convening frequency. The RC/OC will formally convene at least twice annually with more frequent meetings encouraged. Committee representatives of any military service can call a meeting of the committee at any time consistent with prudent judgment and the availability of the service representatives. Committees are encouraged to rotate locations of meetings with the services acting as hosts in their respective areas or in third-party locations such as training centers. The service that hosts the RC/OC meeting must provide clerical assistance for recording minutes of the meeting.

d. Duties of the RC/OC chairperson. The chairperson's duties include—

(1) Coordination of dates and locations of meetings as agreed upon by members.

(2) Establishment of the meeting agenda and schedule from input provided by members and representatives.

(3) Initiation of invitations to appropriate organization and individuals (involved in any aspect of recruiting or processing matters) to attend meetings.

(4) Preparation and distribution of RC/OC minutes to committee members and HQ USMEPCOM, ATTN: MOP.

e. Voting. The RC/OC is ruled by majority vote. When practical, the commander from each recruiting service, to include the National Guard, and USMEPCOM sector will attend the meetings. Each will have one vote on matters before the committee. When more than one recruiting service representative is a member, the senior officer present from that service will provide the vote for that service. Reserve Component representatives will be nonvoting members and represented during voting by their active service counterparts. Approval of the sector commander must be obtained in those matters concerning MEPS resources, capabilities, or mission.

f. Resolution of disagreements. In cases where agreement cannot be reached by the RC/OC, service dissents may be forwarded through HQ USMEPCOM, ATTN: J-3/MOP to the Stakeholders' meeting for resolution according to paragraph 3-4.

g. Information products. Sector commanders will keep voting and nonvoting RC/OC members abreast of MEPS matters through the transmittal of management data and operational policies, as required.

The Stakeholders provide interface between the functions of recruiting and processing at the command level.

a. Committee functions. The Stakeholders will consider all matters of mutual interest affecting the accomplishment of the recruiting and USMEPCOM missions. Issues which cannot be satisfactorily resolved at the RC/OC level will be acted upon by the Stakeholders.

b. Committee composition. The committee will consist of the commanders of the recruiting services, Training Commands and the Commander, USMEPCOM.

c. Convening frequency. The Stakeholders meeting will formally convene at least once annually.

The Training Commander/Operations Conference (TC/OC) provides interface between the functions of recruiting, reception/training and processing at the Operations Officer level.

a. Committee functions. The TC/OC will consider all matters of mutual interest affecting the accomplishment of the recruiting services, reception training centers and USMEPCOM missions. Issues identified at the RC/OC may be addressed at the TC/OC as well.

b. Committee composition.. The committee will consist of Operations Officers or their representatives from the Service Reception Training centers along with medical representatives, recruiting services HQ Operations Officers, MEPCOM sector representatives, HQs USMEPCOM MOP and MMD representatives.

c. Convening frequency. The TC/OC will formally convene at least once annually.

Applicants will be scheduled for processing, including ASVAB testing, on a by name and social security number (SSN) basis according to procedures established by HQ, USMEPCOM and in coordination with the IRC and local MEPS procedures. Examining and/or enlistment requirements and time of arrival will be furnished for each applicant by the appropriate recruiting service.

Applicants being processed at the MEPS will be dressed in a manner decided by the IRC. Applicants undergoing a medical examination or medical inspection will be required to wear underclothing (shorts for males and brassieres and underpants for females). Applicants who do not meet clothing standards will be denied processing and returned to the recruiting service liaison.

Projections by name, SSN, or number may be required, dependent upon HQ USMEPCOM and local MEPS standing operating procedures (SOPs) in conjunction with the IRC. At the Military Entrance Test (MET) sites not requiring projections, notification by the recruiting services to the MEPS will be made only when there will be no applicants for a specific session, or when the site capacity of 25:l examiner/proctor ratio will be exceeded. Notification will be made to the MEPS no later than 1200 on the day prior to the session in question. For OPM-administered MET sites, the MEPS will notify OPM at a time determined by mutual agreement, on the day prior to canceled sessions.

Engagement in recruiting interviews with applicants is not authorized within the MEPS, meal and lodging facilities, MET sites, or during school testing. Recruiting activity may be conducted only in respective service guidance counselor or liaison offices.

Policies, functions, and procedures for the enlistment qualification testing and medical examination of applicants for enlistment, and related matters, are in chapters 7 and 8. Enlistment qualification testing or medical examination of an applicant without an SSN is not authorized. Testing or processing applicants for enlistment when they are in an intoxicated condition (alcohol or drugs) is not authorized. MEPS will stop processing applicants that are belligerent or disrespectful to MEPS staff or other applicants during processing.

The following guidance is provided to the MEPS when reviewing the DD Form 1966/5 (Section VI-Parental/Guardian Consent For Enlistment):

a. Parents or guardian(s) signature(s) are required to process a minor applicant for enlistment (for example, medical examination, enlistment). If only one parental signature can be reasonably obtained, it must be stated in accordance with service standards on DD Form 1966/5 (Section VI) why only one parent has signed the consent of minor enlistment. Medical examination is not authorized if either parent objects or if a legal guardian objects; the recruiting services will not project a minor applicant to process at the MEPS if a parent or guardian objects.

b. Minors with divorced parents require the signature of the parent assigned sole custody or, if joint custody was awarded, the signature of either parent.

c. It is the service's responsibility to complete item 40, "Verification of Single Signature Consent" statement on the DD Form 1966/5, which is necessary to explain why only one parent has signed the consent form. The medical examination is not authorized if this section is not completed, when required.

d. The applicant can file a petition in state court to be declared emancipated, which means the applicant legally becomes an adult at age 17. Attach any court document(s) regarding the emancipation to DD Form 1966/5 and process the applicant if otherwise eligible.

e. Marriage will automatically emancipate a minor applicant in most states. The recruiting service will only project such minors who are emancipated by marriage.

a. General. Examination and processing records accomplished or prepared at MEPS contain personal information and, therefore, will only be released to authorized personnel according to the Privacy Act of 1974 (section 522a, Title 5, United States Code (USC) and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996)). The use of Government facilities and personnel for the purpose of compiling materials for use by commercial enterprises is prohibited.

b. News media interviews and/or photographs. Interviews with or photography of applicants and enlistees by news communications media are encouraged, provided—

(1) All media visits are coordinated with and approved by the USMEPCOM Public Affairs Officer and the MEPS commander.

(2) Applicants and enlistees fully understand they are not obligated to talk with media representatives but may volunteer to do so. All applicants and enlistees interviewed or prominently visually featured must have completed a release consent form, USMEPCOM Form 360-1-2-R-E, 1 Feb 1999, prior to the activity. The consent form will be maintained in the MEPS media file. Minors must have parent's or legal guardian's consent prior to participating.

(3) News media be instructed that the views expressed by the applicants or enlistees are their personal views and opinions and are not endorsed by any military service, USMEPCOM, or DOD.

(4) Requests for media visits or interviews with recruiting service personnel and/or applicants be coordinated in advance by the service chain of command with the HQ USMEPCOM Public Affairs Office. Interviews with recruiting service personnel and that service's applicants will take place in the service liaison area to avoid disruption of MEPS workflow. Requests for background film or video footage (B-roll) in MEPS common areas must be approved in advance.

(5) Interviews and photographs not be conducted while applicants (or enlistees) are actually engaged in medical examination and enlistment qualification testing. Simulation of medical examination and enlistment qualification testing may be made, with HQ, USMEPCOM Public Affairs Officer's prior approval. For example, a blood draw simulation should not show the applicant's face or other distinguishing characteristics.

(6) Photographs of applicants reflect personal dignity and decorum. News media representatives will not normally be permitted to photograph, film, or videotape an actual enlistment ceremony. However, the USMEPCOM Public Affairs Officer may approve exceptions, provided the photography does not disturb the conduct of the ceremony or reduce its dignity.

c. Visitors to MEPS. The general public, especially relatives and friends to applicants for enlistment, are encouraged to visit MEPS. They will not be permitted to visit processing and examining sections while in active operation. The enlistment ceremony is a meaningful event, both for the enlistee and their guests. Capturing the event through video or still photography is authorized to the extent practical. Oath of Enlistment officers will use discretion to ensure that photography is done so as not to interfere with the solemnity of the ceremony.

Army, Air Force, Navy and Marines.Requisition and distribution of blank DOD, Department of the Army (DA), and standard form (SF) will be made according to AR 25-30 and DA Pamphlet 25-30, section I. Requisitions for necessary forms issued by the Department of the Air Force, Department of the Navy, and Headquarters Marine Corps will be submitted according to AR 25-30.

MEPS files will be maintained and disposed according to AR 25-400-2. Documents relating to the examination of individuals will be maintained in the MEPS examination files located in a restricted access room. Access to the files room will be restricted to MEPS personnel on a "need-to-know" basis, as determined by the MEPS commander. These individuals will be designated, in writing, and this document must be posted at the files room entrance. The same applies for electronic files.

DOD and other federal agencies have reciprocal working relationships, whereby persons not qualified for military service may be referred to federal or state agencies for training, schooling, employment or rehabilitation opportunities. The MEPS will furnish medical results and enlistment qualification test scores when recruiting services request these scores for their referral purposes. The responsibility for obtaining consent from the applicant to release medical results and/or enlistment qualification scores rests with the sponsoring recruiting service.

Applicants for enlistment must comprehend English well enough to complete processing requirements. Applicants identified during ASVAB confirmation testing interviews, enlistment qualification testing, medical processing or MEPS pre-enlistment interviews as non-English speaking, will be referred to the section chief available (testing, medical, or operations officer) for evaluation. If indicated, a recommendation for the termination of processing will be submitted to the MEPS commander. If processing is terminated by the MEPS commander (or operation officer or test control officer), the notation "non-English speaking applicant Reevaluation Believed Justified (RBJ) after 90 days" will be recorded in the ASVAB score record, DD Form 2808 (Report of Medical Examination), DD Form 1966 Series, and USMEPCOM integrated resource system (USMIRS) as appropriate, and the applicant will be returned to the sponsoring service. Further enlistment processing will require a waiver of MEPS examination and/or interview requirements contained in this regulation. Waiver must be obtained through recruiting channels from the appropriate military department.

a. Administration of MEPS personnel will be governed by pertinent laws and regulations of the service in which they are members. Command control includes the authority and direction necessary for effective and efficient accomplishment of assigned functions.

b. Performance evaluation reports will be prepared according to directives issued by the respective services. Rating schemes will be published as directed by Commander, USMEPCOM.

c. Commander, USMEPCOM will administer military justice for military personnel assigned to USMEPCOM.

MEPS will be staffed by military personnel of the military services and civilian employees provided by the Department of the Army, according to DOD Directive 1145.2.

Assignment qualifications for officer and enlisted personnel are listed in appendix D.

a. Military personnel assigned or attached to USMEPCOM whose personal conduct merits disciplinary action, or who are derelict in performance of duty, will be considered for expeditious relief or reassignment from USMEPCOM.

b. Procedures for relief of unsatisfactory personnel are listed below.

(1) MEPS commanders will—

(a) Initiate requests for relief according to service regulations and USMEPCOM policy.

(b) Inform the individual in writing of the contemplated relief action. If the relief is based upon a report of investigation or other written statements, furnish copies to the service member.

(c) Permit sufficient time, usually not more than 10 days, for the service member to rebut any comments or allegations. A negative reply will be required.

(d) Ensure Marine Corps and Navy personnel submit special fitness/evaluation reports according to service regulations.

(e) Prepare a letter to the sector headquarters with detailed statement of the circumstances leading to the request, including specific and typical instances of inadequate performances or a specific detailed description of a single significant event that precipitated the request. Also include a statement describing efforts taken to rehabilitate the individual. Provide a letter of notification to the individual as well as the individual's reply. Forward the request to the sector headquarters.

(2) Sector commanders will—

(a) Ascertain that the relief action is prepared according to this regulation and is administratively correct.

(b) Make a recommendation on the request pertaining to Navy and Marine Corps personnel, approve or disapprove the request on Army and Air Force Personnel.

(c) Forward the relief action request to HQ USMEPCOM, ATTN: J-1/MHR no later than 48 hours after receipt of the administrative review.

(3) The Commander, USMEPCOM will—

(a) Forward the request to the appropriate service.

(b) Request immediate reassignment of the relieved individual.

(c) Requisition a replacement when required.

(4) The service headquarters will assign a replacement expeditiously after notification of a relief action.

The Commander, USMEPCOM, will provide to both MEPS-assigned personnel and service liaison and guidance counselors assigned to each MEPS the following support services. The basis for determining the number of USMEPCOM-assigned personnel is the USMEPCOM Manning Authorization Document (UMAD). The basis for determining the number of service-specific counselor and liaison personnel is a service-specific manning document for each MEPS.

a. Office space, will be in conjunction with the Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA) (Assistant Chief of Staff for Installation Management (ACSIM)) or the General Services Administration. The square footage is determined by both the average applicant load at that MEPS and that MEPS' manning document. Each MEPS has an authorized square footage assigned to it by agreement with HQDA, ACSIM.

b. The Command's Reporting System network terminals and laser printers. Typically, each service's liaison office has one set of equipment provided to it within each MEPS. The integrated resource system (MIRS) is commonly known as an automated applicant processing system. No special or service-unique computer or network equipment will be provided by USMEPCOM.

c. Expendable supplies. Copier equipment will be procured by USMEPCOM for each MEPS for shared use by USMEPCOM-assigned and service liaison and counselor personnel physically located at each MEPS. Acquisition for copier equipment will be based on the combined copier volume generated by the MEPS and service liaisons and counselors. The copier size acquired will be based on actual workload and will be exclusively provided by and accounted for by HQ USMEPCOM using guidelines prescribed in AR 25-30. Copiers will be located throughout the MEPS for easy access by all users as determined by the MEPS commander.

d. Common furniture, other than that provided by USMEPCOM, is not authorized.

e. Telephone and limited data links.

a. Facilities for the aptitude testing of applicants outside of the MEPS will be designated by the MEPS commander through coordination with voting and nonvoting members of the IRC, according to procedures prescribed by HQ USMEPCOM. The function for locating, identifying, and coordinating the use of facilities outside the MEPS will be shared by all members of the IRC. Procedures for the administration and protection of enlistment qualification tests are prescribed in USMEPCOM regulations and will be strictly followed. Provisions for travel of applicants while traveling to and from MET sites are the responsibility of the recruiting services. This responsibility includes providing meals.

b. The following standards will be used to provide adequate MET site facilities and equipment:

(1) Ensure suitable desks or tables and chairs for examinees. Writing surfaces will be flat and smooth. The space allotted to each individual must be wide enough to accommodate a test booklet and a separate answer sheet. Chairs with writing arms are not considered adequate for this purpose.

(2) Ensure freedom from distracting noises, properly illuminated, adequately ventilated, and maintained at a comfortable temperature.

(3) Ensure a secure storage area for electronic equipment and test materials.

Plans for the efficient and orderly conduct of processing workloads, daily hire of fee-basis practitioners when needed, and meals, lodging, and transportation arrangements will be established based on the projections for examination and enlistment requirements furnished by the recruiting service. Consideration must be given to the overall workload requirements and arrival schedules. The recruiting services will make every effort to meet their projections. Processing of non-projected individuals will be at the discretion of MEPS Commander and in accordance with USMEPCOM policy.

MEPS Commanders will—

a. Supervise the total Command's Reporting System, to include the preparation and distribution of enlistment documents, forms, and military orders.

b. Establish procedures for the reception of applicants and ensure adherence to these procedures.

c. Establish and enforce procedures for safeguarding controlled testing materials, equipment and completed answer sheets.

d. Provide applicant examination results to sponsoring recruiting service.

e. Ensure a commissioned officer/warrant officer administers the Oath of Enlistment and signs the DD Form 4 series.

f. Ensure the enlisting officers delete enlistment data from the Command's reporting system for applicants that decline to take the Oath of Enlistment.

g. Ensure arrangements are made for the movement of enlistees from MEPS to reception or initial duty stations designated by the sponsoring recruiting service.

h. Monitor to ensure complete, timely, and accurate preparation and collection of applicant information is transmitted in accordance with DOD procedures on a daily basis to external agencies.

a. The sponsoring service functions include—

(1) Financing all costs incident to transportation and messing between the applicant's or enlistee's home and MEPS.

(2) Providing necessary transportation between the arrival terminal and lodging facility or the MEPS, unless provided by contract lodging facility.

(3) Providing round-trip transportation for those applicants sent to the MEPS for enlistment into the DEP or Reserve Components.

(4) Providing return transportation to the point of initial acceptance for applicants found disqualified for military service, those who are qualified but not enlisted, and those whose qualification status is yet to be determined.

(5) Providing transportation between the applicant's home and MEPS when the medical consultation is required but, cannot be performed on the same day as the medical examination and the applicant cannot be held over to receive the consultation the following day.

b. MEPS will furnish local transportation incident to the processing of applicants on a non-reimbursable basis between the MEPS and facility utilized for medical consultation. In accordance with USMEPCOM 715-4, Chapter 2-3a and b, transportation requirements between transportation terminals and the MEPS and to and from the lodging facility while undergoing processing at the MEPS will be included in the cost of lodging. No separate contract line item is required.

c. The sponsoring service will refer all eligible prior-service enlistees contemplating shipment of household goods, mobile homes, or privately owned automobiles to the transportation office of the supporting military installation or initial AD station.

d. If an enlistee absents himself or herself from the MEPS without authority prior to shipment or fails to appear for the departure of the enlistee's transportation, the MEPS will notify the recruiting service and the projected unit of assignment. Initiation of disciplinary, separation or apprehension action, if appropriate, is a function of the initial receiving activity or recruiting service; these actions are not responsibilities of MEPS.

e. The sponsoring service will take responsibility of accessed applicants that are delayed transportation at the request of the service.

a. Recruiting services are responsible for the preparation of the Standard Form 86 (Questionnaire for National Security Positions). Preparation can be manual or by using the DOD approved electronic version of the SF 86 (Electronic Personnel Security Questionnaire).

b. Recruiting services are responsible for receiving national agency check with local check (NACLC) security background investigation results from background investigation agency.

c. The MEPS is responsible for—

(1) Electronically transmitting fingerprints daily to the appropriate background investigation agency.

(2) Providing results of FBI fingerprint searches to the respective service as they become available.

MEPS will interview applicants (before the Oath of Enlistment is administered to DEP applicants and Reserve and National Guard accessions) for the purpose of assisting recruiting activities in preventing fraudulent entry into the military services. Any additional information obtained from applicants which may have a bearing on their qualifications for military service will be furnished to the appropriate MEPS officer and/or sponsoring recruiting service for resolution. Specific interview requirements and procedures will be established by the Commander, USMEPCOM, in coordination with recruiting service commanders.

MEPS will interview applicants in a manner similar to that of the pre-enlistment interview for a quality check before enlistment in an Active component from a DEP status. The pre-accession interview does not apply to Reserve and National Guard enlistees returning to MEPS for shipping. Additional interview requirements and procedures beyond those of the pre-enlistment interview will be established by the Commander, USMEPCOM, in coordination with recruiting service commanders.

a. The Oath of Enlistment will be administered in an auspicious, dignified ceremony, conducted only in the English language by the enlisting officer. Provisions for administrative discharge due to fraudulent entry and the general meaning of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) article 83 (Fraudulent Enlistment or Appointment) will be explained before the ceremony, along with DOD separation policy concerning restrictions on personal conduct in the military services. UCMJ article 85 (Desertion) and UCMJ article 86 (Absent without leave) will be explained before shipping. In accordance with section 502, Title 10, United States Code (10 USC 502), any commissioned officer of the armed forces may administer the Oath of Enlistment. No exceptions to this statutory requirement will be granted. Each person will be advised that he or she has the option to swear or affirm and that the words "so help me God" may be omitted.

b. Applicants will not be permitted to sign the DD Form 4/1, 4/2 and 4/3 (Enlistment Agreement) prior to the oral administration of the oath. The enlistment agreement is legally binding after the oath has been taken, notwithstanding the applicant's failure to sign. If the applicant refuses to sign the enlistment agreement after administration of the Oath of Enlistment, the enlisting officer will so note on the enlistment agreement and return the applicant to the sponsoring recruiting service where the matter will be resolved according to recruiting service policies.

The recruiting services provide MEPS with the necessary information required for the preparation of enlistment, travel, and AD orders. For all non-prior service applicants, MEPS will use a standardized orders format prescribed by the Commander, USMEPCOM. Orders and amendments to orders for prior service enlistees will be prepared according to appropriate service directives.

a. Policy and procedures for the movement of personnel are contained in the DTR 4500.9-R, Defense Travel Regulation. The recruiting services provide for the proper scheduling of individuals for MEPS enlistment and AD processing so the individuals' movement to training installations is accomplished in a timely manner. Consideration will be given to passenger standing route orders (PSRO), reception processing, and training and school start schedules.

b. PSROs issued by SDDC, in coordination with each MEPS, will govern the travel of enlistees to initial duty stations. The PSRO prescribes the mode of transportation, carrier, time, and route for repeated travel between two points. The following principles are applicable in establishing and executing a PSRO:

(1) Enlistee travel will not be scheduled between 2400 and 0600 hours. PSROs will be arranged for the enlistees so that any wait at a transportation terminal will not exceed 3 hours, wherever possible.

(2) The mode of transportation specified in the PSRO will be the most economical among the available routings and within the time constraints in (1) above. The cost of delay in commencing travel (including meals, lodging, lost productive time, and necessary expenses en route) are factors to be added to the basic fare in comparing the economy of various modes.

(3) Although any overnight travel should be utilized only on rare occasions, enlistees traveling overnight by rail will be provided sleeping accommodations. Overnight travel by air or bus will not be used without authorization from HQ USMEPCOM. However, local problems which arise during processing remain the prerogative of the MEPS Commander to solve on an as needed basis.

Special category applicants, as defined by USMEPCOM require special processing consideration.

a. The MEPS commander, in concert with the IRC membership, will establish policies to offer special category processing (by appointment) which is consistent with HQ USMEPCOM policy.

b. The sponsoring service will select the type of processing desired for its special category applicants. To receive special category processing, the service must coordinate with the MEPS medical section before projecting the applicant. The recruiting service will project the applicant as a special category processor on the USMEPCOM Form 727-E (Processing List) in accordance with local MEPS policies and will assign a service sponsor.

a. Policy is prescribed in AR 601-222 for the DOD enlistment, student and overseas testing programs.

b. HQ, USMEPCOM, as the DOD operating agency, has the function for publishing regulations or pamphlets prescribing operational procedures for the DOD enlistment, student and overseas testing programs.

c. The USMEPCOM published regulations will—

(1) Be applicable to all military recruiting services, MEPS, and users of MEPS facilities, including MET sites.

(2) Ensure quality control standards are met according to applicable directives.

(3) Be provided to all service accessions policy agencies and recruiting headquarters.

Services requesting exceptions to policy will direct the request to their respective service representative on the Joint Service Manpower Accession Policy Working Group (MAPWG).

a. Reproduction of controlled testing materials governed by this regulation is prohibited without the prior written approval of HQ, USMEPCOM (J-3/MOP TD).

b. At no time will controlled testing material, or information extracted there from, be released to any individual or agency not authorized access to such materials. Individual test scores will not be released to any non-MEPS individual or agency except as otherwise authorized.

c. Agencies requesting release of test materials or scores, as an exception to policy, will forward such requests in writing and through channels to HQ USMEPCOM, ATTN: J-3/MOP TD, who will forward as appropriate to Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Military Personnel Policy) for review and approval/disapproval. The request will include—

(1) A statement of the reason for the "need to know."

(2) Anticipated use of test scores or testing material.

(3) The number and types of test scores or testing materials desired.

(4) Safeguard procedures to be used for controlling and protecting the test materials, test scores and names of examiners involved.

a. Until an appropriate investigation is concluded, military, DOD civilians and contract test administrators will be suspended from testing duties whenever credible information or reports of an investigation reveal that they may have—

(1) Furnished controlled test material, test questions or answers to an unauthorized person.

(2) Been derelict in connection with protecting test materials.

(3) Been found with unauthorized possession of test materials.

b. If warranted, the individual will be referred to the commander or supervisor for consideration of appropriate disciplinary action under the UCMJ, DA or OPM regulations.

a. The military services are responsible for operation of the Overseas Testing Program, in accordance with AR 601-222.

b. Commander, USMEPCOM will provide support to the overseas testing areas by designating specific MEPS to support testing outside of the Continental United States.

(1) The designated MEPS will—

(a) Enter applicant test data from the USMEPCOM Form 680-3A-E (Request for Examination) into the computerized records system.

(b) Determine if the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) scores indicate a need for confirmation testing.

(c) Determine if inappropriate retesting took place.

(2) HQ USMEPCOM will work issues regarding testing policy procedures and responsibilities with the Military Services Overseas Program Managers.

Special purpose tests are given at the request of the services to determine qualification of applicants for specific occupational specialties or special enlistment programs. MEPS are authorized to administer the tests listed in appendix C and additional tests approved by MAPWG. Special purpose tests may not be administered at MET sites.

Applicants tested at MET sites who fail to obtain minimum requirements as established by the sponsoring service will not be sent to the MEPS for further processing. If circumstances prevail where an applicant is in medical processing and the test scores reveal that the applicant has not met service standards, the medical processing will continue.

Medical examinations of applicants forwarded by the recruiting services and Selected service registrants will be accomplished under MEPS control. The quality of medical examinations will not be compromised for any reason. When required, MEPS medical personnel may request specialty consultations and other medical services; these consults and/or services will be obtained from other military, federal, or civilian medical facilities. However, the MEPS physician makes the final determinations of the applicant's and registrant's medical qualification for military service. Applicable charges for consultation services are payable from Defense Health Program (DHP) funds made available to USMEPCOM when said consults are obtained for the purposes of determining whether or not an applicant meets qualification standards or if requested by Service Medical Waiver Authority in order to make a waiver determination. Payment for services provided by Federal agencies will be made according to charge statements provided for this purpose.

The medical standards for initial appointment, enlistment and induction are found in DODI 6130.4, less height, weight, and body fat standards which are administrative in nature, service-specific and are contained in applicable service publications and posted on the USMEPCOM Intranet. The standards for prior-service enlistees may be the initial entry standards or retention standards in accordance with applicable service guidelines.

a. Non-prior service males and females. Medical fitness standards for initial appointment, enlistment or induction in the military services are prescribed by DODI 6130.4. All services will develop service-specific guidance consistent with this DODI.

b. Prior service males and females. Medical fitness standards for prior-service personnel are prescribed in the publications listed for the following services:

(1) Army. AR 40-501, chapter 3, applies if reenlistment is accomplished within 6 months of discharge from active duty Army or if the individual is a current member of a USAR or ARNG unit (see AR 601-210, chap 3, table 3-1). Current drilling members of the USAR and ARNG may be processed and projected as "No Medical Required". These members must have a physical that is within 5 years of application for enlistment onto AD. All other applicants must meet the procurement standards of AR 40-501, chapter 2.

(2) Navy and Marine Corps. NAVMED P-117, Navy's Manual of the Medical Department (MANMED), chapter 15 as applicable.

(3) Air Force. AFI 48-123, attachment 2 applies to all individuals who have separated from AD with any of the regular Armed Services, but who are reenlisting in the regular Air Force or the Air Force Air Reserve Components (ARC) when no more than 6 months have elapsed between separation and reenlistment.

(4) Coast Guard. COMDTINST M1020.8F.

Requirements for obtaining parental or guardian consent to the medical examination of a minor are contained in paragraph 3-11. The recruiting services must ensure that the documentation for the processing of minors meets established service standards and is supplied to the MEPS before medical and/or enlistment processing begins.

Medical examinations will consist of a medical history and clinical evaluation, laboratory findings, and other measurements and findings, as prescribed in DODI 6130.4 and USMEPCOM Regulation 40-1. Further evaluation may be required to ascertain whether an applicant meets special requisites for enlistment under certain programs. Prior-service applicants will be medically examined as required by the respective services. Item numbers specified in this section refer to item numbers on the DD Form 2808, unless otherwise noted.

Since parts of the medical examination require the examinees to undress to undershorts for men and bra and underpants for females, all examinees must have these items when reporting for examination. When required to undress, provisions will be made for securing clothing. Personal items, such as watches and billfolds, will be retained by the applicant (on his or her person) or at the applicant's option, placed in a locker. Gowns will be provided for females. A MEPS female technician will always be present when female applicants are undergoing the physical examination and are undressed.

Clinical evaluations and diagnostic determinations are a responsibility of the examining practitioner under supervision of the Chief Medical Officer. These responsibilities will not be further delegated. The examining practitioner will carefully evaluate medical history information furnished by the applicant and provide a detailed summary in item 30, DD Form 2807-1. These responsibilities will not be further delegated. Orthopedic/neurological screening, designed to conduct en masse evaluation of an applicant's strength, mobility and coordination will not exceed six applicants per examining practitioner. A thorough examination which meets the same objectives of the orthopedic/neurological examination may be accomplished on an individual basis when feasible or practical. Applicants will be scheduled to allow sufficient time for thorough evaluation by the examining practitioner. Routine tests and measurements will be performed by enlisted or civilian medical technicians.

The clinical evaluation comprises items 17 through 72 of DD Form 2808. The examining practitioner will consider each step of the clinical evaluation individually and carefully and make proper judgment by using accepted medial principles and procedures in conducting the medical examination.

This examination consists of specific movements, maneuvers and positions designed to detect abnormalities in posture and gait, limitations of joint motion, deformities, lack of muscle strength, impairment of coordination atrophy, absence of muscle or digits, skin abnormalities, scars and other abnormalities (see USMEPCOM 40-1). It will be conducted in a well-lit room so as to permit clear observation. Male applicants will remove all clothing except undershorts. Female applicants will remove all clothing except bra and underpants. If conducted en masse, the series of movements comprising the orthopedic/neurological examination may be demonstrated by an enlisted or civilian technician, but will be observed closely by a physician for abnormalities. The physician will properly evaluate and annotate all abnormalities.

The mere possibility that a psychiatric condition will arise later in military service should not be sufficient reason, in itself, for disqualification; however, such a possibility should be considered in light of other findings (such as conviction of juvenile court or adjudication of serious offenses, drug abuse history, and other background information made available to the chief medical officer) and DOD and USMEPCOM policy and guidance.

a. Miscellaneous data fields. Unless specifically required, DD Form 2808 items 47, 48, 52a, 56, 59, 60, 62, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, and 72, will not be routinely completed by the MEPS, unless required by USMEPCOM 40-1. Only MEPS medical staffs are authorized to make entries on the DD Form 2807-1 and DD Form 2808. Prerecording of any findings on DD Form 2808, before factual results are known, is not authorized.

b. Urinalysis. Urine reagent strips will be used to routinely determine the sugar and protein content of urine and annotated in items 45a and 45b.

c. Height and weight. The individual's height will be measured barefoot and recorded in inches as prescribed by service regulation. Weight will be measured in undershorts for men and bra and underpants for females and recorded as prescribed by service regulation. When required by the applicable service, body fat content will be determined and recorded in item 55 on the day of the initial physical exam.

d. Pulse and blood pressure. Pulse and blood pressure will be routinely accomplished in a sitting position, in accordance with USMEPCOM Reg 40-1 and recorded in items 57 and 58 of the DD Form 2808.

e. Vision. The Armed Forces Vision Test (AFVT) will be used for testing vision. Instructions for use of this instrument are contained in the instruction manual. If an applicant wears vision correction devices, their specific refraction will be determined by use of the auto refractor. The use of the lens-measuring instruments is no longer acceptable in accordance with USMEPCOM/MMD policy. Any further testing, to include manifest refractions, will be done in accordance with USMEPCOM Reg 40-1. Depth perceptions using the AFVT, will be conducted as required by USMEPCOM 40-1, but are not considered disqualifying for entry into the Armed Services.

f. Color vision. Although there is no current DODI standard for color vision, the Pseudoisochromatic Plates (P/P) color vision test will be administered to all examinees. Army applicants who fail the P/P test will be administered a red/green color vision test, either with the Famsworth Lantern color perception test (FALANT) or by the Armed Forces Vision Tester or other means as prescribed by USMEPCOM 40-1. All Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard applicants will be further tested with the FALANT. No other tests besides the P/P test for color vision are authorized for Air Force applicants.

g. Hearing. Hearing tests will be accomplished by use of the automatic audiometers in sound-treated booths. Booths and audiometers must be calibrated according to current directives.

h. Pregnancy testing. Pregnancy testing will be performed on all female applicants during all physical examinations and all physical inspections incident to enlistment and reenlistment. Initial results will be recorded in block 46. Repeat tests will be recorded in block 73 or 80, along with the height, weight and body fat, if appropriate.

Based on the clinical examination, significant medical defects, whether disqualifying or not, will be summarized in DD Form 2808, item 77, as prescribed by USMEPCOM 40-1. These diagnoses will be as specific and detailed as possible. Statements such as "disqualified for cardiovascular disease," "disqualified; psychiatric case," and so forth, are too general to be of value and should be avoided. The part or parts of the body affected will be specified whenever the diagnosis is not sufficient to localize the condition, as in cases of amputation, paralysis, aneurysm or ulcers. Manifestations or symptoms of a condition should not be used instead of a diagnosis, except in those cases where definite diagnosis is not possible or feasible without extensive or expansive consultation. When needed, extension of comments in this block should be continued in block 88.

Item 74b will be competed by the MEPS Chief Medical Officer or a supervised fee-basis physician who has privileges to profile. Utmost care will be taken to ensure accurate entries under the physical profile. The MEPS profile is an accession profile implying an applicant has met accession standards and is not necessarily equivalent to a fitness for duty profile used by the Army or Air Force for its members.

The applicant's qualifications for military service will be indicated in item 74a. All findings will be evaluated in terms of the standards prescribed in paragraph 8-2 of this regulation. If the applicant were found qualified, even though defects were stated in item 77, he or she will be informed of his or her medical fitness for military service. When applicable and in accordance with USMEPCOM policy, the DD Form 2808 will be reviewed to ensure that additional requirements of the policy sponsoring service, or requirements necessary to ascertain whether the applicant meets special requisites for specific enlistment programs have been accomplished. When an applicant is found to be medically unfit for military service, he or she will be informed by the examining physician concerning the disqualifying condition. If the condition is potentially progressive and requires further evaluation and/or treatment, the applicant will be advised to seek the services of a family physician or local health agency. The applicant will sign in item 75 reflecting the fact that the applicant has been informed of the condition requiring further evaluation. Additionally, the appropriate timeframe for follow-up will be circled. Applicants whose medical fitness cannot be immediately determined will be advised that they will be informed of their qualification for military service by the sponsoring recruiting service.

The practitioner who performed the medical history will sign item 82. The profiling physician will sign line 84. If a practitioner different from the profiling physician completed any other portion of the examination, he or she will sign in item 82. The Chief Medical Officer or other profiling physician will sign in item 84 after the applicant has been profiled and the examination completed. The typed, stamped or printed name of the physician will precede the signature.

Completed and signed DD Form 2808 and DD Form 2807-1 will be reproduced in the required number of copies, using suitable reproduction equipment to provide legible, permanent copies. Any copies of the above forms, made prior to completion of the physical qualification process, will be clearly marked as working copies. These copies are not acceptable for inclusion into the applicant's final package which is sent to the recruit training centers.

Applicants for enlistment and individuals processing through a MEPS under a commissioning program who have undergone a medical examination of the prescribed scope within 2 years and who have been found qualified, will undergo a physical inspection when processing for entry on AD or ADT in the military services, if more than 72 hours has elapsed from the initial examination or from a subsequent inspection. When processing for entry into the DEP or into the Reserve and National Guard (unless for ADT), if more than 30 days has elapsed from the initial examination or from a subsequent inspections, a physical inspection will be done. A physical inspection is not required for individuals entering on AD under a commissioning program and when authorized to proceed from school or their home directly to a duty station.

An applicant previously found qualified for military service will undergo a complete medical examination prior to enlistment, induction or appointment (commissioning) if more than 24 months have elapsed since the last complete examination was accomplished. The date of the last examination is the date shown in Item 1 of DD Form 2808. Applicants appearing for reexamination because of previous disqualification for a remedial or temporary medical condition will undergo a physical inspection if the previous examination was conducted within 2 years. The physical inspection will place emphasis on the previously disqualifying defect. The MEPS commander may, in consultation with the CMO, authorize medical reexamination when findings reflected on a previous DD Form 2808 and/or DD Form 2807-1 are inconsistent or in conflict with findings noted during the physical inspections. Portions of the examination may need to be repeated or re-evaluated as appropriate. If an individual who has already reported to initial entry training and was separated and returns to the MEPS within two years to again attempt access into a military service, the physical examination will be repeated with the former examination becoming an attachment to the reexamination. Separation documentation will be provided to the MEPS as requested and in accordance with HQ USMEPCOM policy.

Final determination of an applicant's medical fitness for military service will normally be made by the MEPS CMO on the basis of the examination conducted at the MEPS. Whenever there is doubt as to whether or not an applicant meets the minimum medical requirements for military service, determination of acceptability can be made by the USMEPCOM Command Surgeon or other HQ USMEPCOM physician in accordance with USMEPCOM policy. The final determination will be recorded in Item 74a (and Item 74b and Item 76 as appropriate) of the DD Form 2808 with proper authentication.

Applicants for enlistment in the U.S. Army who are reenlisting after a break in service that does not exceed 6 months may use DA Form-1811 (Physical Data and Aptitude Test Scores Upon Release from Active Duty) in lieu of a medical examination, provided there has been no change in the individual's physical condition since separation, no new diseases or injuries have been acquired, and the individual signs a statement to that effect. The applicant will prepare a DD Form 2808, enter in the Item 73 "Notes" section the following statement: "I have (have not) had any new diseases or injuries since my separation physical examination, and there has been no change in my medical condition" and sign the statement. A medical inspection will be accomplished and entries made in Item 77. If an exception is noted, a complete medical history and examination will be accomplished.

This chapter will be implemented upon direction of the Secretary of Defense.

This chapter prescribes policies, procedures, and functions for processing Selective Service System (SSS) registrants for induction into the military services.

Agency and command functions for the operation and support of MEPS activities are prescribed in paragraph 1-4. Additional functions pertinent to induction processing are listed below.

a. The OUSD (P&R) will submit military induction requirements to the Director, SSS.

b. The Executive Agent will develop and promulgate—

(1) Induction plans, program requirements, policies, and procedures in coordination with DOD agencies; the Director, SSS; and other Federal activities, as appropriate.

(2) Programs, budgets and finances MEPS operating costs incident to the examination and induction of registrants. (The responsibility for costs incident to transportation meal, and lodging requirements for individuals in registrant status is prescribed in para 9-4.)

c. Mobilization personnel requirements. Services currently accepting personnel for induction will—

(1) Submit fiscal year and monthly induction estimates to OUSD (P&R).

(2) Submit, through Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC) to the SSS, lists of personnel separated from the respective services prior to completion of their military obligation.

d. The Commander, USMEPCOM will—

(1) Maintain liaison with the National Headquarters, SSS and major training activities of the military services.

(2) Establish and maintain an automated induction system for reporting registrant examination results, inductee accession data, processing the SSS Delivery List and related information, as required.

(3) Furnish MEPS daily workload capacity and flow patterns, for registrant processing purposes, to the National Headquarters, SSS.

e. The MEPS commander will—

(1) Ensure examination of SSS registrants and determines their medical, aptitude, moral, and administrative qualifications for military service.

(2) Ensure induction of qualified registrants into military service as allocated by OSD.

(3) Arrange transportation for inductees to duty designated by the respective service.

(4) Submit registrant examination results and inductee accession information via the Command's Reporting System.

(5) Maintain liaison and coordinates activities with SSS MEPS Liaison Personnel (MLP).

f. SSS MEPS Liaison Personnel (MLP) will—

(1) Serve as the representative assigned by SSS to a designated MEPS.

(2) Serve as a liaison to the MEPS commander on all SSS related matters or problems that arise during the processing of SSS registrants, and perform the duties prescribed according to the latest USMEPCOM-SSS memorandum of understanding.

The Selective Service System will operate in either of two methods. In the "One Step Mode", SSS will deliver a fixed number of registrants to each MEPS daily. The MEPS will process them by administering the ASVAB, conducting the physical examination and inducting them into their respective services. The MEPS will arrange transportation for inductees to their respective service training sites. Registrants who have filed claims for reclassification which are pending before a Selective Service Board or registrants not qualified due to medical, moral or other reasons will be returned home pending disposition of their case. In the "Two Step Mode", SSS will deliver a fixed number of registrants to each MEPS daily to have their aptitude, medical, moral, and administrative qualifications determined. The MEPS will process them as in the "One Step Method". All registrants will then return home. They will return to the MEPS for induction at a later date as determined by SSS and the respective services. During the interim, medical or moral problems will be adjudicated.

Policies and procedures for the use of contract facilities and the control and accounting of services rendered by contract vendors are prescribed in paragraphs 1-4f(12). Policies and procedures contained in paragraph 6-9 concerning the movement of enlistees are also applicable to inductees. The responsibility for budgeting and financing transportation meals and lodging requirements for registrants and inductees is as follows:

a. Registrants. The SSS will provide registrants with travel warrants for transportation to the MEPS. MEPS personnel will assist registrants in completing SSS travel claim forms for reimbursement of unanticipated expenses and will mail them to the SSS for processing. Listed below are the categories of travel and the agencies accountable for providing travel assistance:

(1) From residence to MEPS-SSS.

(2) While at MEPS-USMEPCOM.

(3) Return to residence when found disqualified for service (including those found disqualified due to temporary or remedial conditions)-SSS. Registrants completing the examination under the two-step process will be provided a charter bus run by SSS. Registrants who are returned to residence under the one-step process will be provided travel by the MEPS with reimbursement by SSS.

(4) Sent for examination only (from residence to MEPS and return to residence)-SSS.

(5) When qualifications for service are undetermined (this status will only be used for those registrants that remain under the physical control of the MEPS for three days or less)-USMEPCOM. If the registrant's qualification cannot be determined within three working days the registrant will be considered temporarily unacceptable for service and returned to residence-USMEPCOM with reimbursement by SSS.

b. Inductees. The responsibility for arranging the necessary transportation meals, and lodging for registrants, inductees, and enlistees is as follows:

(1) Registrants.

(a) From residence to MEPS-SSS.

(b) While at MEPS-MEPS, with reimbursement by SSS.

(c) From MEPS to residence-MEPS.

(2) Inductees. The MEPS.

(3) Enlistees. Service for which the individual is enlisting.

The SSS delivery list is an alphabetical listing of registrants ordered to report for induction processing. It is prepared by the SSS and electronically transmitted to USMEPCOM as required. USMEPCOM in turn transmits the list to the MEPS 10 days prior the registrant's scheduled reporting date. The list contains the date the induction processing orders were issued and the date and time each registrant is scheduled to report for induction processing. It also contains each registrant's full name, and SSN, if available. Conscientious objectors are identified by codes as are registrants ordered for examination only or being rescheduled for processing.

Registrants reporting to MEPS are initially received by MEPS personnel. The tasks to be performed at the initial reception area include collecting orders to report for induction, posting the SSS delivery list, and determining if registrants have a problem requiring SSS MEPS Liaison Officer (MLO) involvement. Registrants will also be given an orientation briefing that will cover the processing steps, meals and lodging arrangements while at the MEPS, instructions for completing travel reimbursement requests where applicable, and conditions under which they will be released from the MEPS.

Persons between the ages of 18 and 26 who have not completed their AD obligation under the Military Selective Service Act may volunteer with the SSS for induction. Persons between the ages of 17 and 18 may volunteer for induction with the consent of the parent or guardian. This is contained on the Application for Voluntary Induction, and will be considered as consent to medical examination.

Registrants on the SSS delivery list who can verify prior-service when they report to the MEPS will be referred to the SSS MLP for clarification of their status. Reenlistment eligibility (RE) codes which are not disqualifying for induction are listed at table 9-1. The respective service will update this table accordingly. recruiting services need to validate these lists. RE codes not listed in table 9-1 are disqualifying for induction purposes. Registrants with unverified claims will be processed by the MEPS. A request for verification of prior-service or a copy of DD Form 214 will be prepared (via automated, telephonic, or manual methods) for registrants claiming prior-service if they are found otherwise qualified for induction. Such requests will contain the exact name under which the individual served, SSN, organization from which last discharged, and the type of discharge received. If exact dates of service are not known, approximate dates will be given. Requests will be submitted for the types of service and to the appropriate agency (figure 9-1). Recruiting services need to validate POCs/addresses.









Figure 9-1. Points of contact for prior-service personnel

Conscientious objectors will be classified Class 1-A-0 (Conscientious Objector Available for Noncombatant Military Service Only), and will be allocated as prescribed in this regulation. If the individual refuses, at any time, to be processed, the individual will be treated as an uncooperative registrant according to paragraph 9-11.

The Director, Selective Service System, will establish procedures to process registrants living abroad as the situation warrants.

Registrants who are uncooperative will be withdrawn from the group. However, every effort will be made to complete the processing of these registrants. Registrants who refuse to take part in some or all of the required processing, testing, or examinations will be counseled as to the seriousness of their actions, and advised that persistence in such refusal constitutes a refusal to submit to induction which is a felony under Military Selective Service Act. The registrant will be informed that conviction of such an offense may result in the punishment of imprisonment for not more than five years or a fine of not more than $250,000 or both. If the registrant persists in refusing to take part in the required processing, the following action will be taken:

a. MEPS personnel who witness a refusal to be processed will prepare a signed, dated statement detailing the time, place, date, person, and circumstances involved in the refusal. The statement will be witnessed by at least two MEPS personnel who will authenticate the statement.

b. A letter of notification of refusal to cooperate will be prepared. The content and distribution of the letter will be as prescribed in figure 9-2 except that in lieu of reference to refusal to be inducted, a description of the facts concerning the registrant's refusal to cooperate will be included.

c. The registrant will be released from further processing.

Registrants of prominence are individuals who by their personal ability in athletics, entertainment, business, Government, or other professions or activities are prominent members of their community. Additionally they may be members of families that are prominent in the area. These individuals will be processed as prescribed according to directions from Commander, USMEPCOM and the Director of the Selective Service System.

The Health Care Personnel Delivery System (HCPDS) (DOD directive under development) provides procedures for registration and induction of physicians, dentists, nurses and other health care personnel in the event of a national emergency. The standby procedures would be implemented at the direction of Congress and may include entrance processing of both men and women at Military Entrance Processing Station (MEPS). The first health care registrants may report to MEPS as early as 90 days after the implementation decision.

Registrants will be advised of the following:

a. Federal law provides employment reinstatement rights to persons who leave positions (other than temporary) for the purpose of complying with the SSS induction notice and who are found not qualified for military service.

b. If registrants left their jobs for the purpose of being inducted and are found not qualified for military service, they should make application for their jobs at the next regularly scheduled work period following return to their residences. The law permits normal travel time from the MEPS to the person's residence.

c. If any difficulty is encountered in reclaiming a former job, communication should be made immediately with the nearest office of Veteran's Employment and Training Service, U.S. Department of Labor.

a. Individuals will be screened to ensure that only those qualified are processed for entry into the military services. Registrants are unacceptable when they have exhibited a record of convictions or other adverse adjudication (both adult and juvenile) reflecting frequent difficulties with law enforcement agencies, criminal tendencies, a history of anti-social behavior, alcoholism, other drug abuse, sexual misconduct, or questionable moral character. This will be accomplished by a Security Interview and ENTNAC.

b. Each registrant will be interviewed (either single or in a group) to determine if they meet the moral standards for induction. They will be asked if they have been convicted of any law violations by local, State or Federal authorities. This will include any and all traffic violations, and any adverse juvenile adjudication action. An example of each of the four categories in appendix F will be presented. They will also be asked if they are currently the subject of a criminal charge filed and pending against them by local, State or Federal authorities. Those who indicate a criminal law violation will complete a DA Form 4711 (Statement of Law Violations). See paragraph 9-15d below for further details. The DA Form 4711 will then be examined to determine if a waiver, as required by paragraph 9-18, is necessary.

c. An ENTNAC will be conducted on all inductees as outlined in paragraph 9-45.

d. Those registrants indicating past law violations will complete a DA Form 4711. It will be locally reproduced on 8 1/2 x 11-inch paper. The inductee will provide as complete a record as possible, detailing the exact circumstances of the violation(s), and final disposition of the charges. If the registrant meets the requisites for a waiver, the DA Form 2981 (Application for Determination of Moral Eligibility for Induction) will be completed. Applicants will be advised that these charges will be verified with the appropriate law enforcement agency.

Information furnished by judicial, police, and probation officials or other civil authorities (including character and employment references) will not be released to any person not having an official use for the information. All personnel will refrain from releasing the nature or source of any adverse information. When law enforcement or court officials refuse to release information concerning a registrant's offense record without their written consent, the registrant will be asked to provide written authorization. If verification cannot be obtained from other sources, the registrant's alleged record will be treated as unverified. Registrants will be advised at the time of the moral waiver interview that they can aid the reviewing authority in making a proper decision by providing a letter of character reference from reputable citizens. Further, registrants will be advised that the list of character references may be mailed (or hand-carried) to the MEPS if the references are properly identified and the list forwarded within the required time. Upon receipt of information from law enforcement agencies and/or courts, or probation or parole officials that they have no record of the alleged offenses, the notation "alleged offenses cannot be verified-no waiver required" will be recorded on DD Form 1966 series. However, if the registrant alleges any offense that requires a waiver and the offense can be waived, a waiver will be initiated as an alleged offense.

a. Police checks. The MEPS will check with municipal, county, and State law enforcement agencies and appropriate courts, probation or parole officials, and correctional facilities to verify the disposition of adult felony offenses, alleged by the registrant or revealed by other reliable sources, and to determine the extent of rehabilitation. DD Form 369 (Police Record Check) will be used to make a check with law enforcement agencies. In states where records of offenses are centrally maintained, city and county police checks are not required, unless the registrant alleges recent conviction of an adult felony offense or that charges are pending. Otherwise, police checks will be made with municipal, county, and State law enforcement agencies in the following areas:

(1) Where the offense was alleged to have occurred.

(2) Where the registrant claimed residence and/or employment in the previous year.

(3) From other appropriate law enforcement agencies when receipt of a police check indicates that the case was handled by a different law enforcement agency.

b. Inquiries to courts. When there is an indication that charges against a registrant were disposed of judicially, an inquiry will be forwarded to the court concerned. In some jurisdictions, it may be possible to obtain this information from a probation or parole office or correctional institution instead of the court clerk. (For example, information concerning juvenile court records may be available only from juvenile probation or parole offices or correctional institutions.) In such cases, it is not necessary to send requests to both the court clerk and probation or parole officer.

c. Probation or parole officer's evaluations. In cases where police checks, the registrant, or other reliable sources indicate that the registrant was placed on probation or parole, an evaluation from the probation or parole officer should be obtained.

d. Correctional facility's evaluation. In the case of a registrant committed to a correctional facility (such as a reformatory, boys' school or ranch), a report will be requested from that facility.

e. Employer references. When the registrant indicates gainful employment (including part-time) in the previous year, the address of the employer will be requested to verify the employment and provide an evaluation of the registrant.

f. School evaluation. When the registrant attended school in the past 2 years, an evaluation from an official (such as a dean, principal, vice-principal, or counselor) or the last school the registrant attended will be requested when employer, probation, or parole evaluations are not available.

g. Offenses occurring in foreign countries. To the extent possible, efforts should be made to verify the disposition of charges which were actually or allegedly brought against the registrant by foreign countries. Registrants who are or allege they are subject to parole, probation, suspended sentence, or conditional release imposed by a foreign court will not be rendered unacceptable, and will be considered for waiver as though they were not subject to such civil restraint. Unverified offense records will be processed as outlined in h below.

h. Burden of proof. The burden of proof for registrant claims to bar induction such as unverifiable criminal offenses, and drug use, rests with the registrant. If the registrant does not have accompanying proof of the above claims, processing to determine overall qualification will be continued and, if otherwise qualified, the registrant will then be placed in the appropriate RBJ status. These registrants will be instructed to obtain documentation of their claims and bring them when they are recalled to the MEPS. These registrants will further be instructed that failure to provide documentation will invalidate their claims.

Applications for moral waivers will be submitted on DA Form 2981 (Application for Determination of Moral Eligibility for Induction). The completion of all required items, as outlined below, is necessary to permit proper evaluation of the qualifications for military service of registrants.

a. Item 1. Include aliases (also known as). Also, include the date of birth.

b. Items 2 and 3. Self-explana