The Art of the Apology, written by Business Ethics Expert Lauren Bloom
Lauren Bloom is the founder and CEO of Elegant Solutions Consulting, a consulting firm dedicated to helping professionals, business and association management executives build trust with their clients, customers and members by “walking the ethics talk” in their daily practices. She is the author of the book, “The Art of the Apology” and the e-book, "Elegant Solutions: A Practical Guide to Resolving Dilemmas While Preserving Your Business Relationships". An internationally-recognized expert on professional ethics and governance, Lauren has appeared as a keynote speaker and on panels across North America and in Europe. She brings a practical, humorous approach to the serious business of developing and maintaining high ethical standards in a post-Enron world. Her paper on the "Development of Processes to Set and Enforce Ethical Standards Within Professions" was recently published in the Proceedings of the 2006 International Actuarial Congress in Paris, France. Lauren graduated from Yale College with a B.A. in English in 1979. In 1985, she received a J.D. from the Columbus School of Law, Catholic University of America, where she was valedictorian of her graduating class. She also holds an advanced degree in Labor Law with distinction from Georgetown Law Center. Lauren began her legal career at the Justice Department as a trial attorney, soon moving into private practice and specializing in standard-setting, enforcement and governance for nonprofit associations. Beginning in 1992, Lauren spent more than fourteen years as General Counsel of the American Academy of Actuaries, where her practice focused on teaching professionals how to incorporate high ethical standards and principles of good governance into their professional activities. Lauren played a pivotal role in the development and enforcement of the U.S. actuarial profession’s code of conduct and standards of qualification and practice. She also consulted with the International Actuarial Association on its project to develop the first international standards of practice for actuaries. She is widely published in the actuarial profession’s publications, and continues to speak to actuarial firms and association meetings around the United States. Lauren lives in Springfield, VA. She is a Certified Compliance and Ethics Professional, by the Society of Corporate Compliance and Ethics in Minneapolis, MN. Lauren serves on the Boards of Directors of the Institute of Management Consultants USA and a local community theatre troupe, and appears regularly in films and professional and community theatre productions around the greater Washington, DC area.