NJ Assembly Majority Office
Cracking Down on Untraceable Firearms, Continuing to Improve School Bus Safety, Boosting Veterans' Access to College, Higher Penalties for Violating Wage/Hour Law, Prohibiting Sale of Asbestos Products & Increasing Fines for Not Buckling Kids Properly in Car Seats Top Panel Agendas Also: Joint Education Committee with Senate Discussing DOE's Plan Moving Forward After PARCC & Assembly Agriculture Committee Discusses NJ Department of Agriculture's Recent Changes to School District Food Service Contracts



For More ** MEDIA ADVISORY - Thursday, September 20 ** Wimberly to Host Assembly Housing and Community Development Public Hearing on Foreclosure & Vacant Property Concerns Assembly Housing and Community Development Chair Benjie Wimberly will convene a hearing at Kean University on Thursday to discuss the issues of foreclosure and vacant properties in the state. The committee will receive testimony from invited speakers and the public.







For More McKeon Bill Requiring Use of Minority, Women-Owned Financial Institutions Clears Committee A bill sponsored by Assemblyman John McKeon (D-Essex, Morris) requiring the Director of the Division of Investment in the Department of Treasury to attempt to use qualified minority and women-owned financial institutions for the state's brokerage and investment management services cleared the Assembly Financial Institutions and Insurance Committee Thursday.



"Qualified minority and women-owned financial institutions have services that are as professional and on a par with any other, and we should always consider them for the state's brokerage and investment needs," said McKeon. "When given the opportunity, women and minority-owned businesses can thrive, excel and make significant contributions to our state."



For More Conaway, Lampitt & Murphy Bill to Require Depression Screenings for Students Clears Assembly Panel

Measure Hopes to Address Alarming Rise in Teen Depression & Suicide



Legislation sponsored by Assemblyman Herb Conaway, M.D., Jr., Pamela Lampitt and Carol Murphy to require annual depression screenings for certain public school students to address the rise of teen depression and suicide was released Thursday by an Assembly panel.



"Teens today are navigating a very different world. The stressors that arise around puberty are now intensified by social media, which can be used to bully and make young people who are already susceptible to social pressure feel like they are not measuring up," said Conaway.



For More McKeon Bill Promoting Walkable Communities Near Public Transit Systems Approved by Assembly Panel An Assembly committee approved Thursday legislation sponsored by Assemblyman John F. McKeon establishing the "New Jersey Transit Villages Act" that would encourage individual municipalities to influence land use patterns, densities, and the general character of their communities improving the overall quality of life for their residents.



For More DeAngelo Bill to Boost Jobs, Workforce Training For Military Veterans in STEM Fields Clears Committee Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Wayne DeAngelo to support the development of manufacturing jobs and workforce training for New Jersey veterans in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics was approved Thursday by an Assembly panel.



For More Quijano, Kennedy & Vainieri Huttle “Tiny Home Pilot Program” Clears Committee Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Annette Quijano, Jim Kennedy, and Valerie Vainieri Huttle establishing a “Tiny Home Pilot Program” was approved by the Assembly Housing and Community Development Committee on Thursday.



“This program provides an inexpensive, efficient way to house our homeless community along with New Jersey residents in need of affordable housing,” said Quijano (D-Union). “The number of people that fall into these categories in our state is currently unreasonably high. Tiny homes provide for a reasonable alternative solution for the families and communities in New Jersey.”



For More Swain & Tully Bill Authorizing County-Municipality Shared Services Clears Committee Legislation sponsored by Assemblywoman Lisa Swain and Assemblyman Chris Tully authorizing a county government to adopt an ordinance appointing a construction official to enforce the “State Uniform Construction Code Act” was approved by the Assembly Housing and Community Development Committee on Thursday.



“The goal of this bill is to provide an additional opportunity for counties and municipalities to work together,” said Swain (D-Bergen/Passaic). “Allowing towns to enter into a cost-saving shared services program is beneficial to both counties and their municipalities by increasing access to resources which will enable projects to get done in a timely, efficient manner.”



For More Reynolds Jackson & Wimberly Bill to Expand LLC Liability for Landlords Clears Committee Legislation sponsored by Assemblywoman Verlina Reynolds Jackson and Assemblyman Benjie Wimberly to expand liability of residential landlords associated with limited liability companies (LLCs) and other commercial entities was approved by the Assembly Housing and Community Development Committee on Thursday.



“The ultimate purpose of this bill is to strengthen the relationship between tenants and their landlords,” said Reynolds Jackson (D-Mercer). “Separating individuals from an LLC will help to promote accountability and transparency among the two parties and will ultimately make for a more pleasant renting or property owning experience.”



For More Lampitt, Schaer, & Mukherji Bill Requiring Increased Transparency on Mandatory Student Fees at Colleges Gets Assembly Panel Approval Legislation Assembly Democrats Pamela Lampitt, Gary Schaer, and Raj Mukherji sponsored to increase transparency surrounding the collection and use of student fees at New Jersey colleges and universities gained approval from the Assembly Higher Education Committee on Thursday.



“Too often, a term bill will just say ‘campus fee’ or ‘school fee’ without any explanation of how the money will be used, and there’s an expectation that students will just pay,” said Lampitt (D-Camden/Burlington). “When many students are taking on unbearable debt in order to pay for higher education, they at least deserve to know how these fees are spent.”



For More Conaway, Murphy & Singleton Stress Need for Depression Screenings for Young People to Combat Teen Depression & Suicide

7th Legislative District Team Sponsoring Bill to Address Rise of Teen Depression & Suicide



Noting the alarming rise in teen depression and suicide, Assemblyman Herb Conaway, Jr., M.D., Assemblywoman Carol Murphy and Senator Troy Singleton (all D-Burlington) on Thursday highlighted the need to screen young people for depression, and discussed how a bill they are sponsoring could help identify warning signs of depression so they could be addressed before it is too late.



Their bill, which was released today by the Assembly Health and Senior Services Committee chaired by Conaway, would require depression screenings for public school students in grades 7-12.



"The data is startling," said Conaway. "The worst part is that many young people are not diagnosed until they become adults, which means they have spent their formative years battling a disease that can be managed with proper diagnosis and intervention."



For More Coughlin, Vainieri Huttle, Lampitt, Danielsen, Downey, Quijano & Jasey Bill to Expand Health Coverage for Behavioral Health Care, Enhance Enforcement and Oversight of Mental Health Parity Clears Assembly Committee Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Craig Coughlin, Valerie Vainieri Huttle, Pamela Lampitt, Joe Danielsen, Joann Downey, Annette Quijano and Mila Jasey to expand health insurance coverage for behavioral health care services and enhance enforcement and oversight of mental health parity cleared the Assembly Financial Institutions and Insurance Committee Thursday.



The bill (A-2031) would require plans to provide coverage for medically necessary behavioral health care services and to meet the requirements of a 2008 federal law, which prevents certain health insurers that provide mental or substance use disorder benefits from imposing less favorable benefit limitations on those benefits than on medical or surgical benefits, commonly referred to as mental health parity.



For More Calabrese Bill Requiring Criminal Background Checks for Certain DOBI Employees Clears Assembly Committee A bill sponsored by Assemblyman Clinton Calabrese (D-Bergen, Passaic) requiring criminal history background checks for certain Department of Banking and Insurance (DOBI) employees cleared the Assembly Financial Institutions and Insurance Committee Thursday.



The bill (A-4059) requires the Commissioner of Banking and Insurance to conduct a criminal history record background check, including a name and fingerprint identification check, of each DOBI employee handling sensitive personal, financial and proprietary information.



For More

Murphy Bill to Create Commission to Review Life Sentences for Juvenile Offenders Clears Assembly Panel

Recent US & NJ Supreme Court Rulings Have Raised Questions About Constitutionality of Life Sentences for Juveniles



An Assembly panel on Thursday released a measure sponsored by Assemblywoman Carol Murphy to create a commission to review life sentences for juvenile offenders given recent court rulings that have questioned the appropriateness of these sentences.



"In certain circumstances, long-term sentences can be an appropriate response to serious, violent crimes committed by an adult. But there is legitimate concern about the fairness of life sentences for juvenile offenders," said Murphy (D-Burlington).



For More Greenwald on the Passing of Former Assemblyman Peter Barnes II (TRENTON) - Assembly Majority Leader Lou Greenwald issued the following statement on the recent passing of former state legislator Peter Barnes II :



"It was an honor to serve with Peter Barnes II in the Assembly. It was even more an honor to know him personally and his family. Peter was the real deal. A stalwart legislator, he was a champion for the people of New Jersey not only on environment matters but for many issues critically important to bettering the lives of residents. There was no one better to have on your side when you're in a fight to do the right thing for the state.



For More Lopez Named New Environment and Solid Waste Committee Vice-chair Assembly Speaker Craig Coughlin has named Assemblywoman Yvonne Lopez as the Assembly Environment and Solid Waste Committee Vice-chairwoman.



“I am honored to serve as the Vice-chair of the Environment and Solid Waste Committee, especially at such a critical time when we must be proactive in protecting our environment,” said Lopez (D-Middlesex). “It is a responsibility for us as legislators to play a significant role in making New Jersey a clean and healthy place to live, as well as preserving all of the resources our state has to offer. I look forward to tackling the many environmental concerns that are affecting New Jersey residents throughout our state.”



For More Jasey Statement on Delay of New Recess Requirement for Elementary Schools Assemblywoman Mila Jasey (D-Essex/Morris) on Tuesday issued the following statement in response to the decision by the Department of Education to delay the implementation of the new recess requirement for elementary schools until the 2019-2020 school year.



“The law requiring recess for all elementary school students, which was signed by Governor Murphy on August 10th, with the expectation that it would go into effect at the start of this school year, has been delayed until September, 2019. While I am disappointed in this turn of events, I am gratified that the governor signed the bill and that the public support for it was so overwhelming. I encourage school districts to embrace the intent of this law and commit resources to ensure that recess is available to all students. Let kids play!”



For More Speaker Coughlin Statement on Passing of Former Assemblyman Peter J. Barnes, Jr Assembly Speaker Craig Coughlin (D-Middlesex) issued the following statement Tuesday on the passing of former Assemblyman Peter J. Barnes, Jr.



"I want to extend my deepest condolences to the Barnes family on the passing of former Assemblyman Peter J. Barnes, Jr. Peter was the true definition of a gentleman; a man of great integrity who led an exemplary life of public service. A former FBI agent, he brought his law enforcement experience to the Assembly where he championed legislation to help keep New Jersey safe. He represented Middlesex County and New Jersey honorably and dutifully. New Jersey lost one of its very best today."



For More Speaker Coughlin Statement on Sept. 11 Anniversary Assembly Speaker Craig Coughlin (D-Middlesex) issued the following statement today commemorating the 17th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks:



"Today is not just another day on the calendar. Today's date is etched in the hearts and minds of all Americans. It is still difficult to comprehend the senseless loss of human life and the extent of human cruelty. Our sense of security was shaken perhaps like never before or since. Today we mourn once again for those lost 17 years ago. .."



For More Tucker, McIver Host “Teach a Girl to Lead” Session



Shared Journeys, Experiences as Elected Officials; Girls Participated in a Mock Campaign

Assemblywoman Cleopatra G. Tucker (D-Essex); Councilwoman LaMonica McIver, Newark Municipal Council, Central Ward; Newark Municipal Council President Mildred C. Crump; and Dawn Haynes, Vice-chairperson, Newark Public Schools Board of Education led a Rutgers Center for American Women and Politics (CAWP) Teach a Girl to Lead™ session on Saturday.



The program featured conversation and empowerment during which these leaders shared their journeys and experiences as female elected officials. A total of 15 girls ages 10-14 participated in the fun-filled session which was held at the office of Assemblywoman Tucker.



For More Zwicker, Freiman Help Host Prescription Drug Disposal Event at Hunterdon Healthcare Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals Donates 5,000 Drug Deactivation Pouches



Assembly Democrats Roy Freiman and Andrew Zwicker yesterday joined other elected officials, healthcare executives, law enforcement officers and community leaders for a prescription drug disposal event at Hunterdon Healthcare featuring 5,000 drug deactivation pouches that were donated by Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals.



For More *SATURDAY ADVISORY* Tucker, McIver to Host Teach a Girl to Lead

Will Share Journeys, Experiences as Elected Officials;



Allow Girls to Participate in a Mock Campaign



For More Lampitt Statement on New Teacher Evaluation Rules

New Standards Reduce Weight of PARCC Scores on Teacher Evaluations



Assembly Education Committee Chair Pamela Lampitt (D-Camden/Burlington) issued the following statement Wednesday in response to new rules announced by the Murphy administration to reduce the weight of PARCC test scores on teacher evaluations:



"New Jersey has some of the most exceptional educators which is why our schools consistently rank among the best in the nation. However, without proper evaluations for teachers, it is much harder to ensure that our children are receiving the high quality education they deserve. While education has placed an overemphasis on standardized testing in recent years, these assessments still serve as a critical tool in gauging student growth, and are one of the only objective measures in assessing teacher performance "



For More Lagana, Swain & Tully Asking District 38 Residents to Provide Public Comment on Westmoreland Well Field Contamination Senator Joseph Lagana, Assemblywoman Lisa Swain and Assemblyman Chris Tully (D-Bergen/Passaic) are encouraging residents in the 38th district to provide public comment to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on how they have been affected by contaminated groundwater at the Westmoreland Well Field in Fair Lawn.



“The contaminants of the groundwater at the Westmoreland Well Field pose long term health risks for the residents of Fair Lawn and our district as a whole,” said Swain. “Completing the remediation of this well field as quickly as possible is our highest priority. With the help of our constituents, we will be able to convey how vital it is for us to work with the EPA to get this issue resolved.”



For More *THURSDAY ADVISORY* Zwicker, Freiman to Help Host Prescription Drug Disposal Event at Hunterdon Healthcare



Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals Will Donate 5,000 Drug Deactivation Pouches



Assemblyman Roy Freiman, (D-Somerset, Mercer, Middlesex, Hunterdon)



Assemblyman Andrew Zwicker, (D-Somerset, Mercer, Middlesex, Hunterdon)



For More Houghtaling & Downey Introduce Bill to Help Alleviate Medical Debt for Residents Assembly Members Eric Houghtaling and Joann Downey introduced legislation on Monday designed to assist New Jersey residents facing debt collection for unpaid medical bills.



“Medical bills should not consume someone’s life,” said Houghtaling (D-Monmouth). “It is only fair that patients are provided with feasible methods to pay off their debt.”



For More Houghtaling & Downey Hold First Annual Kids Congress Event Assembly Members Eric Houghtaling and Joann Downey held their first annual Kids Congress events on Monday and Tuesday, with over twenty local children in attendance.



The Monmouth County legislators treated children to two days of fun and learning through group activities and educational games. Nearly two-dozen children spent their morning learning how a bill is made, who their representatives are, and testing their knowledge of U.S. Government through games and activities. Kids Congress was hosted at the Eastern Branch Library in Shrewsbury and at the Ocean Township library.



For More Holley Introduces Bill Calling for Marketing Campaign to Increase Participation in School Breakfast, Lunch Programs Nearly 540,000 New Jersey Students Qualify for Free or Low-Cost Meals



Assemblyman Jamel C. Holley (D-Union) introduced legislation Monday that would require the Department of Agriculture, in consultation with the Department of Education, to create a targeted marketing campaign for the purpose of increasing student participation in the federal School Lunch and Breakfast Programs.



"There are approximately 540,000 New Jersey students living in families who qualify for the nutritious, well-balanced meals that are offered in these free and low-cost programs," said Holley. "A marketing campaign geared toward eligible children and their families would help ensure that as many students as possible receive nutritious meals that can help them remain focused on learning while in school, not on being hungry. The facts are clear: children are less likely to learn when they are hungry, because they just can't focus."



For More Benson Statement on Bill to Make Major Investment in Career/Technical Education & School Security & Water Infrastructure Now Law Assemblyman Dan Benson (D-Mercer, Middlesex) issued the following statement on the "Securing Our Children's Future Bond Act" becoming law: "Making this necessary investment in career and technical education programs will help us maintain and attract high-demand industries that are the engine of New Jersey's economic growth.



For More Wimberly, Reynolds Jackson Bill Creating Specialty License Plates for Renowned Sorority Signed into Law Legislation sponsored by Assemblyman Benjie Wimberly and Assemblywoman Verlina Reynolds Jackson to create a New Jersey specialty license plate for the renowned sorority, Delta Sigma Theta, was signed into law by the Governor on Friday.



“Specialty license plates allow residents to proudly exhibit their support for a worthy cause, a hobby or an organization,” said Wimberly (D-Bergen/Passaic). “Delta Sigma Theta would be added to the state list of national service organizations that residents can represent with a specialty license plate. Its members who live and work in New Jersey will now have another way to show pride in an organization with a long, esteemed presence in America.”



For More Lopez Applauds Legislation Focused on Seat Belt, School Bus Safety Becoming Law Assemblywoman Yvonne Lopez (D-Middlesex) issued the below statement Saturday following the signing of legislation promoting seat belt and school bus safety into law:



"Today, New Jersey leads by example in requiring by law the use of 3-point seat belt systems in school b The bus crash that took place on May 17th in Paramus shocked our entire state - and prompted the legislature to take action in order to prevent another tragedy like it from ever happening again.



For More Lopez, Benson, Swain and Tully Bill Focused on Seat Belt, School Bus Safety Signed Into Law Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Yvonne Lopez, Daniel Benson, Lisa Swain and Chris Tully requiring new school buses to be equipped with 3-point lap and shoulder safety belts was signed into law by the Governor on Saturday.



"Children's safety should always be our priority," said Lopez (D-Middlesex). "This is a clear way for us to improve the safety of our students, so it is absolutely a step we should take."



For More Wimberly on Signing of Bill A-4249 Into Law Assemblyman Benjie Wimberly (D-Bergen, Passaic) issued the following statement on the signing of his bill A-4249:



"New Jersey is facing a shortage of primary care physicians throughout the state and urban centers like the City of Paterson are taking the biggest hit. The creation of a "Safety Net Graduate Medical Education Subsidy" will help to address health disparities among medical staff in hospitals within New Jersey's low-income and undeserved communities.



For More Greenwald, Moriarty & Murphy Bill to Create New Jersey Civic Information Consortium Now Law Legislation Assembly Majority Leader Louis D. Greenwald and Assembly Democrats Paul Moriarty and Carol Murphy sponsored to establish a New Jersey Civic Information Consortium was signed into law on Friday.



"New Jersey's reliance on New York and Philadelphia media outlets for information means that a lot of our residents' news is coming not from their neighbors, but rather outside reporters who may be unfamiliar with the links between the state's past and its present," said Greenwald

(D-Camden/Burlington). "Local news is the lifeblood of a community. It adds local context to stories and keeps those in power accountable. Supporting it is undoubtedly in the public's best interest."



For More McKeon & Jasey Bill "Tommy's Law" to Establish NJ Transit Policies Signed into Law Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats John McKeon and Mila Jasey to require New Jersey Transit to put in place policies in case a person is injured or killed in an accident involving motor buses and rail or light rail vehicles was signed into law on Friday.



The new law (formerly bill A-3904) is known as "Tommy's Law "in memory of Thomas Ryan, age 27, who tragically died when he was struck by a train traveling approximately 70 mph at the main street station in Ramsey located in Bergen County.



For More McKeon Statement on Recent Federal Actions to Dissuade States from Easing Tax Burden under SALT Limitations Assemblyman John F. McKeon (D-Essex, Morris) issued the following statement Friday:



"The SALT cap is grossly unfair to taxpayers who live in the states with some of the highest property taxes in the country.



For More Mazzeo, Andrzejczak, Zwicker, Land, Benson & Downey Bill to Require Schools to Maintain Narcan Supply Now Law Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Vince Mazzeo, Bob Andrzejczak, Andrew Zwicker, Bruce Land, Dan Benson & Joann Downey to require schools to maintain a supply of an opioid antidote was signed into law by the Governor on Friday.



“The harsh reality is that opioids are killing thousands of people in this country, many of them young people,” said Mazzeo (D-Atlantic). “Narcan has been proven to save lives. Having it readily available in schools can help ensure that our schools are ready to respond in every emergency situation.”



For More Pintor Marin, Tucker & DeAngelo Bill Authorizing Assessments, Bonds to Fund Replacement of Lead-Contaminated Water Lines Signed into Law

Law Aims to Ensure Safer, Cleaner Drinking Water for Thousands of Homes



Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Eliana Pintor Marin, Cleopatra Tucker and Wayne DeAngelo authorizing municipalities to levy special assessments, and issue bonds, to replace certain lead-contaminated water service lines, has been signed into law.



"This law will put us one step closer to ensuring that our drinking water is safer to drink and lead free," said Pintor Marin (D-Essex). "In Newark alone, there are approximately 15,000 homes in which the water service lines connecting the property to the city's main water line are lead. This can lead to contaminated home drinking water."



For More Jasey, Lopez & Sumter Bill to Ensure New Jersey's Participation in 2020 Federal Decennial Census Now Law Legislation sponsored by Assemblywomen Mila Jasey, Yvonne Lopez and Shavonda Sumter to establish the "New Jersey Complete Count Commission," which will help ensure the state's full participation in the 2020 federal decennial census, has been signed into law.



"Because federal funds, grants and support to states, counties and communities are based on population totals and breakdowns by sex, age, race and other factors, communities benefit the most when the census counts everyone," said Jasey (D-Essex/Morris). "We need all hands on deck in New Jersey to ensure that our communities are fully represented in the 2020 census."



For More Downey Praises 22 Years of TANF, but Says it Must Extend Reach Assembly Human Services Committee Chairwoman Joann Downey (D-Monmouth) released the following statement Friday on the 22nd anniversary of President Bill Clinton signing a law creating the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) block grant and drastically restructuring cash assistance for families with children living in poverty:



"Wednesday, August 22 was the 22nd anniversary of the implementation of TANF. TANF, or the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, has provided hundreds of thousands of disadvantaged residents living in poverty over the years, providing a temporary safety net for those in need of the most support.



"Over time, however, the reach of monetary assistance has declined significantl.."



For More Joint Legislative Environment Hearing in Toms River Opens Discussion on Single-Use Plastics and Plastic Waste in New Jersey (TOMS RIVER) - The Assembly Environment and Solid Waste Committee met jointly with the Senate Environment and Energy Committee on Thursday at the Toms River Municipal Complex Building to discuss single-use plastics and plastic waste, the harmful effects they have on the environment and how New Jersey can minimize and eventually end our reliance on single-use plastic items.



"Each day, Americans use 500 million plastic straws, and each year, Americans use 100 billion plastic bags and throw away 25 billion Styrofoam coffee cups," said Assembly Environment and Solid Waste Committee Chairwoman Nancy Pinkin (D-Middlesex). "All of this waste inevitably ends up sitting in landfills or polluting our oceans, killing over one million seabirds and 100,000 marine animals every year and it contributes to global warming. Climate change is a real, serious threat, and it is an issue we must work to tackle swiftly and decisively for the sake of our children and grandchildren."



For More Greenwald, Lampitt & Mosquera "Jake's Law" Bill to Create Inclusive Playgrounds to Better Serve NJ Families with Disabilities Now Law (TRENTON) - Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Lou Greenwald, Pamela Lampitt and Gabriela Mosquera to make playgrounds in New Jersey inclusive and capable of catering to children and parents with different types of disabilities was signed into law Thursday.



For More Lampitt Statement on Betsy DeVos Considering Federal Funds to Put Guns in Schools Assembly Education Committee Chair Pamela Lampitt (D-Camden/Burlington) on Thursday issued the following statement concerning reports that U.S. Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos is considering allowing states to use federal grant money to buy guns for schools.



"After the horrific events in Parkland earlier this year, the Assembly and Senate Education Committees moved to learn what more we could do to improve school security in our state. After hearing hours of testimony from students, administrators, parents, members of law enforcement, and other community members, we identified many strategies to make our students safer. Throughout this process, not one person offered the suggestion of arming teachers.



For More **FRIDAY ADVISORY** Assemblyman Schaer, Mayor Lora, HHS Regional Director Ferreri & Other Elected Officials Hold Press Conference to Promote Release of New Medicare Cards in NJ



New Cards Will Help Prevent Fraud



Assemblyman Gary Schaer, Passaic City Mayor Hector Lora, and United States Department of Health & Human Services Regional Director Anthony Ferreri will be joined by Congressman Bill Pascrell, Assemblyman Clinton Calabrese, Clifton Mayor James Anzaldi and Jersey City Mayor Steven Fulop in Passaic on Friday to promote the release of new Medicare cards to help protect seniors against fraud.



Nearly 60 million Americans are receiving updated Medicare cards which will now have a random identification number in place of the individual's Social Security number.



New Jerseyans are receiving their cards this month.



For More Quijano Applauds the Closing of State Maintained Lands to Bear Hunting This Season Assemblywoman Annette Quijano (D-Union) issued the following statement regarding the recent action by the Governor to close state forests, parks, recreation areas, historic sites, wildlife management areas and natural areas to bear hunting for the 2018 season:



"I applaud the efforts of the Governor to limit bear hunting this season. Until we have a more humane management plan in place, we should not condone this activity, at the very least, on state-owned lands.



For More Mazzeo Bill Rescheduling Tax Appeal Process Now Statewide Option Legislation sponsored by Assemblyman Vincent Mazzeo allowing New Jersey counties to operate under alternative real property tax assessment dates was signed into law by the Governor on Friday.



“The goal of this piece of legislation is to put an organized, efficient program in place that will ultimately save money for both municipalities and their taxpayers,” said Mazzeo (D-Atlantic). “The current tax assessment calendar can impose a significant burden on towns that are unable to plan for potential refunds on excess property taxes; or on residents, who may end up having to pay a refund. This law will help to do that math in advance.”



For More Coughlin Bill to Begin Preparations for Observance of America's 250th Anniversary Now Law

Plans Also Include Commemoration of NJ's 1st Constitution Adopted in 1776



Legislation sponsored by Assembly Speaker Craig Coughlin (D-Middlesex) to begin planning the commemoration of the 250th anniversary of the United States and the anniversary of New Jersey's first constitution was recently signed into law.



"New Jersey played a central and crucial role in the events of the Revolutionary War. Considered the Crossroads of the American Revolution, the state hosted the most battles during the war. In fact, George Washington spent much of his time as Commander-in-Chief in New Jersey," said Speaker Coughlin. "This history deserves to be celebrated with great fanfare."



For More Houghtaling, Downey & Egan Bill Expanding Issuance of Alcoholic Beverage Licenses Now Law Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Eric Houghtaling, Joann Downey and Joseph Egan to help revitalize shuttered military bases in Monmouth County by providing additional liquor licenses was signed into law by the Governor on Friday.



“By allowing additional alcoholic beverage licenses to be distributed in our municipalities, we are bringing an ample amount of opportunities to Monmouth County,” said Houghtaling (D-Monmouth). “It will promote small businesses, encourage tourism, and create jobs for our constituents.”



For More DeAngelo Bill Clarifying Training Requirements for HVACR Contractors Signed into Law Legislation sponsored by Assemblyman Wayne DeAngelo clarifying training requirements of certain HVACR contactors was signed into law by Governor Murphy Friday.



“HVACR is an incredibly lucrative and necessary field, and this law is designed to encourage people with a certain set of hands-on and entrepreneurial skills to get involved,” said DeAngelo (D-Mercer/Middlesex). “We need talented individuals filling the skills gap we currently have, and I believe this law will help remedy this.”



For More Jasey Bill Package to Help Reduce the Financial Burden of Higher Ed on Students & Families Now Law A two-bill legislative package sponsored by Assembly Higher Education Committee Chair Mila Jasey to promote college affordability has been signed into law.



"Combined, these measures both inform students and their families of what it takes to graduate in four years, and asks institutions to be mindful of ensuring it is possible for students to earn a degree in four years, which will ultimately save on tuition costs, resulting in less debt and less stress," said Jasey (D-Essex/Morris).



For More MEDIA ADVISORY – Thurs. Aug. 23

Chairwoman Pinkin Announces Joint Assembly and Senate Environment Hearing on Thursday August 23 to Discuss Single-Use Plastics and Plastic Waste The Assembly Environment and Solid Waste Committee will be meeting with the Senate Environment and Energy Committee on Thursday, August 23 to hear testimony and discuss the issues of single-use plastics and plastic waste and what the state can do to address the matter, announced Assembly Environment and Solid Waste Committee Chairwoman Nancy Pinkin on Friday.



“Climate change is an ever growing concern and millions of tons of plastic waste end up in our oceans each year. While we do realize the challenge, we are lagging behind many countries and fellow states. On Thursday we will hear from experts and discuss how to harmonize realistic standards and a clean and sustainable future for New Jersey,” said Pinkin (D-Middlesex).



The joint meeting will be held Thursday, August 23 at 10:00 AM in the Municipal Complex Building, 33 Washington Street, in Toms River.



For More McKeon on NJ Transit Hearing Assemblyman John F. McKeon issued the following statement on the joint transportation hearing today:



"NJ Transit has taken a tremendous hit over the last eight years with underfunding and decrease in staff and now, commuters are paying for it.



For More Jones Statement on NJ Transit/Legislative Transportation Hearing Assemblywoman Patricia Egan Jones (D-Camden, Gloucester) issued the following statement on today's joint transportation committee hearing:



On Testimony from NJ Trait:

"There must be a long-term plan in place for these major changes, four and five years ahead, to be able to inform commuters ahead of time of rail closings, especially if the station is to be closed for months."



For More Chairman Benson Statement on Joint Transportation Hearing Assemblyman Dan Benson (D-Mercer, Middlesex) issued the following statement on the joint Transportation hearing:



"Today's hearing made clear that incessant delays and increased cancellations are unacceptable to our NJ Transit riders and taxpayers.

For More Mazzeo & Armato Fight for Alternate Solution to Atlantic City Rail Line Suspension Assemblyman Vince Mazzeo and John Armato (D-Atlantic) issued the following statement regarding the Joint Senate and Assembly Transportation hearing Thursday:



“Today, we brought constituents to Trenton with us who could personally speak of the hardships they have experienced with New Jersey Transit. They also expressed the concerns they have, including how they will get to work, doctor appointments and school once the transportation they rely on every day is suspended. We will continue to fight for the transportation needs of our constituents.”



For More Zwicker, Coughlin Bill to Reinstate, Change Name of NJ Commission of Science and Technology Now Law Legislation sponsored by Assemblyman Andrew Zwicker and Speaker Craig Coughlin to re-establish the former New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology as NJ Commission on Science, Innovation and Technology was signed in to law Wednesday by the Governor. For More Vainieri Huttle, Mukherji, Benson Bill to Require Issuance of Hospital Maternity Care Annual Report Card Becomes Law Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Valerie Vainieri Huttle, Raj Mukherji and Daniel Benson to help families make better decisions on which hospital to have their baby was recently signed into law by the Governor.



Earlier this year, a national nonprofit patient advocacy group released a 2018 Maternity Care Report discussing the highlights and some of the concerns of maternity care throughout the country. New Jersey was found to have high rates of obstetrical complications, including a higher than average percentage of caesareans performed. United States has one of the highest rates of maternal mortality of any developed country.



For More Greenwald & Coughlin Bill Permitting Public-Private Partnership Agreements for Building & Highway Infrastructure Projects Now Law Legislation sponsored by Assembly Majority Leader Lou Greenwald and Speaker Craig Coughlin permitting certain government entities to enter into public-private partnership agreements with private entities for undertaking certain building and highway infrastructure projects was signed into law by the Governor on Tuesday.



“Public-private partnerships have produced enormous benefits to our state colleges and universities in the form of infrastructure improvements. We’ve seen private-public partnerships help Montclair State University build a new dormitory and The College of New Jersey build a mixed use campus town. I want to see the same results in our public schools, highways, and government buildings as a benefit to our taxpayers,” said Majority Leader Greenwald (D-Camden/Burlington). “Now is the time to use these successes and empower the private sector so that we can address our state’s infrastructure issues and ensure these projects are completed in a structured, timely and cost efficient manner.”



For More Pinkin, McKeon, Reynolds-Jackson & Murphy Bill to Ease Financial Burden of Infrastructure Upgrades Now Law Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Nancy Pinkin, John McKeon, Verlina Reynolds-Jackson and Carol Murphy to help make the cost of financing infrastructure improvement projects more manageable for municipalities has been signed into law.



The law (A-4173) makes certain changes to the New Jersey Infrastructure Bank's (NJIB) enabling legislation. Specifically, the law provides that each bond, note, or other obligation issued by the NJIB for a combined sewer overflow project will mature not later than 45 years from the effective date thereof, as opposed to the typical 30 years for other environmental infrastructure projects. This change will allow municipalities to obtain less expensive financing for those projects.



"The changes that will be implemented under this law will help ease the financial burden of undertaking costly infrastructure projects," said Pinkin (D-Middlesex), who chairs the Assembly Environment and Solid Waste Committee. "The easier we make it for municipalities to finance these projects, the better the service they will be able to provide to residents."



For More Wimberly Statement on Discrimination from Jenkinson’s Boardwalk Staff Assemblyman Benjie Wimberly (D-Bergen/Passaic) issued the following statement regarding discrimination from the Jenkinson’s Boardwalk staff on Friday:



“The incident involving the staff at Jenkinson’s Aquarium Gift Shop in Point Pleasant last Friday was both disgraceful and unacceptable. It will not be tolerated in New Jersey, especially when directed towards children."



For More Jones, Lampitt & Taliaferro Bill to Allow NJ Voters to Vote by Mail in all Elections Now Law

Current Law Only Allows Vote by Mail-in Ballot for General Elections



Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Patricia Egan Jones, Pamela Lampitt and Adam Taliaferro to allow New Jersey voters to vote by mail in all elections has been signed into law.



The new law changes existing law to enable a qualified voter to vote by mail-in ballot in all future elections. Currently, a voter may only vote by mail-in-ballot in general elections.



"This gives people, especially seniors and those with mobility restrictions, more options to vote, which is a good thing," said Jones (D-Camden/Gloucester). "We want people to have every possible chance to exercise their right to vote. The more engaged people are the better we will be as a state and country."



For More Land, Andrzejczak, DeAngelo, Mazzeo Bill to Help Veterans' Organizations Reduce Costs of Public Utilities Now Law (TRENTON) - The Governor signed into law Friday legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Bruce Land, Bob Andrzejczak, Wayne DeAngelo and Vincent Mazzeo to require public utilities to charge veterans' organizations a residential rate for service delivered to a property at which a veterans' organization primarily operates.



For More Lopez Praises Continuation of Puerto Rico Relief Efforts Assemblywoman Yvonne Lopez (D-Middlesex) issued the following statement on Friday following the Governor’s signing of the revision of the reciprocity process for out-of-state professionals into law.



“Today, I am proud that New Jersey continues to lead as an example with the signing of A-1531, which revises the reciprocity law and will make life a bit easier for our Puerto Rican professionals who want to contribute and thrive in this state.”



For More Armato, Freiman and Jasey Bill Providing Funds for Acquisition of Lands for Recreational and Conservational Purposes Now Law Legislation sponsored by Assembly Members John Armato, Roy Freiman and Mila Jasey providing funds to the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) to acquire land for New Jersey was signed into law by the Governor on Friday.



“We owe it to our taxpayers to preserve our natural and historic sites so they can enjoy them for years to come,” said Armato (D-Atlantic). “We must make New Jersey not only the best state to live and work in, but also to play in.”



For More Reynolds-Jackson, Chiaravalloti and Andrzejczak Bill Appropriating Funds for Capital Projects and Park Development Signed into Law Legislation sponsored by Assembly Members Verlina Reynolds-Jackson, Nicholas Chiaravalloti and Bob Andrzejczak appropriating funds to the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) to provide funding for capital projects and park development on lands administered by the DEP’s Division of Parks and Forestry and Division of Fish and Wildlife was signed into law by Gov. Murphy on Friday.



“We owe it to our taxpayers to make New Jersey as enjoyable to live in as possible,” said Reynolds-Jackson (D-Mercer/Hunderton). “And that doesn’t just mean economically, but also in a way that allows our residents to enjoy our beautiful nature to the fullest.”



For More Zwicker, Lopez & Mukherji Legislation to Help Displaced Professionals from Puerto Rico on Mainland Now Law

Measure Revises Law on Out-of-State Licenses to Include Professionals from Storm-Ravaged Island



Legislation sponsored by Assembly Democrats Andrew Zwicker, Yvonne Lopez and Raj Mukherji to recognize the professional licenses of displaced Puerto Rican doctors, nurses, teachers and other professionals who relocated to New Jersey following Hurricane Maria has been signed into law.



"Prior to Hurricane Maria, New Jersey had one of the highest populations of Puerto Ricans on the mainland. Following the hurricane, we've seen more of our fellow Americans from the island seek safety with family and friends here," said Zwicker (D-Hunterdon/Mercer/Middlesex/Somerset). "As they settle into their new lives in New Jersey, we can and should ensure that men and women from Puerto Rico are treated just as professionals moving here from any state would be, so they're able to continue in their professions and support their families here."



For More Andrzejczak, Land and Mazzeo Bill Providing Additional $1.2 Million to Shellfish and Marine Fisheries Management Signed into Law Legislation sponsored by Assemblymen Bob Andrzejczak, Bruce Land and Vince Mazzeo providing a supplemental appropriation of $1.2 million to the Shellfish and Marine Fisheries Management for the Bureau of Marine Fisheries in the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) for this coming fiscal year was signed into law Friday by Governor Murphy.



“This will undoubtedly provide a big boost for tourism and for fishermen in South Jersey,” said Andrzejczak (D-Cape May/Atlantic/Cumberland). “By protecting our coast and our bays and the life they contain, and by ensuring we sustain our abundant shellfish population, we are allowing for fisheries and industries reliant on tourism to thrive for years to come.”



For More Speaker Coughlin Statement on Report from Economic and Fiscal Policy Working Group (TRENTON) - Assembly Speaker Craig Coughlin (D-Middlesex) on Thursday issued a statement following the release of a report from the Economic and Fiscal Policy Working Group.



The group was convened back in February to study tax and fiscal policies in the state and make recommendations on how to improve them.



"Affordability is a real issue for New Jerseyans. I commend the panel for their commitment and contributing their time and expertise towards this noble effort to address property taxes and other critical issues facing our state "



For More Greenwald & Pintor Marin Statements on Report from Economic and Fiscal Policy Working Group Assembly Majority Leader Lou Greenwald (D-Camden/Burlington) and Assembly Budget Committee Chair Eliana Pintor Marin (D-Essex) issued the following statements on Thursday following the release of a report from the Economic and Fiscal Policy Working Group.



The group was convened back in February to study tax and fiscal policies in the state and make recommendations on how to improve them.



Assembly Majority Leader Lou Greenwald



"We convened this panel of experts to think outside of the box and develop creative ways to make New Jersey government at the state and local level more efficient and reign in property taxes among other things. These are hindrances that impede the state's ability to grow and provide proper relief to taxpayers..."



For More Chairman Benson Announces Joint Transportation Hearing on Aug 16 with Senate to Discuss NJ Transit Delays and Closings (TRENTON) - The Assembly Transportation and Independent Authorities Committee Chairman Daniel Benson announced a joint hearing will be held next Thursday with the Senate Transportation Committee to receive testimony and discuss the recent closures, cancellations, and delays afflicting NJ Transit riders.



"Many residents will be affected by recently announced Atlantic City station closures and riders have already been impacted by the inconvenient delays and cancellations currently happening throughout the system. On Thursday, we will hear from stakeholders and discuss what is being done to safely resolve commuters and the traveling public's concerns," said Benson (D-Mercer, Middlesex).



For More Speaker Coughlin Commends NJ Supreme Court Decision on Job Banding Rule Assembly Speaker Coughlin (D-Middlesex) on Wednesday commended today's decision by the New Jersey Supreme Court on the Christie-era job banding rule:



"This is a win for public workers and New Jersey.



"All three branches of government play a critical role in upholding our democracy.



"The attempt by the former Christie administration to sidestep the Legislature when promoting employees went against the intent of the Legislature as expressed in the Civil Service Act, and was brazenly unconstitutional. I'm glad that the NJ Supreme Court agreed."



For More Verrelli Sworn in to Represent 15th District Long-time public servant Anthony Verrelli has been sworn in as the 15th legislative district representative in the New Jersey General Assembly.



"I am honored and excited about the opportunity to continue my public service work as a member of the Legislature," said Verrelli. "I am a life-long Mercer County resident. I have served in municipal and county government. I have more than 20 years of experience in labor, and fighting for the rights of workers. I look forward to using these different experiences, and working with my colleagues to serve the residents of the 15th legislative district and the rest of the state."



For More Swain, Tully & Benson Introduce 7-Bill Package to Strengthen NJ Law Concerning School Bus Drivers and Student Rider Safety (TRENTON) - Assembly Democrats Lisa Swain, Chris Tully and Assembly Transportation Chairman Daniel Benson recently introduced a comprehensive seven-bill package addressing school bus safety concerns and strengthening protections for New Jersey students on school buses.



The bill package was prompted by incidents occurring earlier this year involving buses from Paramus and on Route 206 near Cherry Hill. The Assembly Transportation Committee held a hearing in June immediately following the Paramus school bus accident and invited various state and local representatives to provide testimony on current state school bus regulations.



For More McKeon Statement On Trump Fuel Standard Rollback Assemblyman John F. McKeon (D-Essex, Morris), a member of the Assembly Environment and Solid Waste Committee, released the following statement on the Trump administration's proposal to roll back critical fuel economy standards for cars and trucks:



"The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Department of Transportation (DOT) proposal to roll back Obama-era fuel economy and greenhouse gas emissions standards that have proven successful is deeply disappointing and misguided.



For More Downey Statement on Allegations of Abuse at Bellwether Behavioral Health Group Homes News Report Alleges Abuse & Neglect in Group Homes Run by Company



Assembly Human Services Committee Chair Joann Downey (D-Monmouth) issued the following statement Friday in response to a news report detailing allegations of abuse and neglect at Bellwether Behavioral Health group homes:



"I am deeply troubled by the allegations of abuse and neglect at Bellwether. These individuals have severe disabilities that require thoughtful and compassionate care. They were sent to Bellwether because their families believed that that is what they would get. My heart breaks for them, bur more so for the victims who endured such inhumane treatment "



For More Calabrese Joins Fight against 3D-Printed Guns Assemblyman Clinton Calabrese today joined Sen. Bob Menendez, Cliffside Park Police Chief Richard Gaito and gun safety advocates in support of the fight against 3D-printed guns.



"These guns are simple to assemble, easy to conceal and difficult to trace. Even more troubling, anyone can make them," said Calabrese (D-Bergen/Passaic). "This is a recipe for disaster."



For More Pinkin on State Environmental Lawsuits Announced by AG, DEP Assembly Environment Chair Says: 'Eight years without taking this type of legal action and fighting for residents is eight years way too long.'



Assembly Environment Chair Nancy Pinkin (D-Middlesex) issued the following statement on Wednesday's announcement by the Attorney General and the Department of Environmental Protection of multiple civil enforcement actions aiming to clean up contaminated properties:



"I'm pleased to see New Jersey back in the 'environmental enforcement business.' Seeking Natural Resource Damages for the environmental harm caused to New Jersey's communities and holding companies accountable for taxpayer money spent to fix contamination is absolutely necessary. By doing this, we make sure it is known that protecting public health and ridding our state of pollution are New Jersey's top priorities.



For More McKeon: AG Lawsuits Make Environmental Enforcement a Priority Assemblyman John F. McKeon (D-Essex, Morris) commended Attorney General Gurbir S. Grewal and Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) Commissioner Catherine R. McCabe for filing six separate lawsuits against companies that have polluted several properties throughout the state, as well as groundwater and waterways:



"Companies who have put New Jersey residents' health at risk by polluting properties and waterways around the state must be held accountable..."



For More Assembly Democratic Bill to Establish Loan Program for N.J. Wineries Advanced by Assembly Panel Sponsored by Houghtaling, Andrzejczak, Mazzeo, Taliaferro



Legislation aiming to help New Jersey's burgeoning winery industry create jobs and economic development was advanced Monday by the Assembly Appropriations Committee.



The bill (A-1046) -- sponsored by Assembly Democrats, Eric Houghtaling, Bob Andrzejczak, Vince Mazzeo, and Adam Taliaferro - directs the EDA, in consultation with Department of Agriculture, to establish a loan program for certain vineyard and winery capital expenses.



For More

Caputo: Sports Betting is Soaring in NJ Conaway & Murphy Announce Legislation to Screen Students for Depression



For all previous Assembly Majority videos, please click here.

Contact Us