The Office of the Attorney General of Vermont
Home Issues » Gun Laws Gun Laws SELECTED VERMONT LAWS GOVERNING THE USE AND POSSESSION OF FIREARMS The following are selected Vermont statutes dealing with the use and possession of firearms. For a complete listing of Vermont's firearm statutes, please consult the Vermont Statutes Online, at

http://www.leg.state.vt.us/statutes/statutes2.htm. Vermont's hunting laws and regulations can be found at http://www.vtfishandwildlife.com/. Title 13: Section 4003. Carrying dangerous weapons

A person who carries a dangerous or deadly weapon, openly or concealed, with the intent or avowed purpose of injuring a fellow man, or who carries a dangerous or deadly weapon within any state institution or upon the grounds or lands owned or leased for the use of such institution, without the approval of the warden or superintendent of the institution shall be imprisoned not more than two years or fined not more than $200.00, or both. § 4004. Possession of dangerous or deadly weapon in a school bus or school building or on school property (a) No person shall knowingly possess a firearm or a dangerous or deadly weapon while within a school building or on a school bus. A person who violates this section shall, for the first offense, be imprisoned not more than one year or fined not more than $1,000.00, or both, and for a second or subsequent offense shall be imprisoned not more than three years or fined not more than $5,000.00, or both. (b) No person shall knowingly possess a firearm or a dangerous or deadly weapon on any school property with the intent to injure another person. A person who violates this section shall, for the first offense, be imprisoned not more than two years or fined not more than $1,000.00, or both, and for a second or subsequent offense shall be imprisoned not more than three years or fined not more than $5,000.00, or both. (c) This section shall not apply to: (1) A law enforcement officer while engaged in law enforcement duties. (2) Possession and use of firearms or dangerous or deadly weapons if the board of school directors, or the superintendent or principal if delegated authority to do so by the board, authorizes possession or use for specific occasions or for instructional or other specific purposes. (d) As used in this section: (1) "School property" means any property owned by a school, including motor vehicles. (2) "Owned by the school" means owned, leased, controlled or subcontracted by the school. (3) "Dangerous or deadly weapon" has the meaning defined in section 4016 of this title. (4) "Firearm" has the meaning defined in section 4016 of this title. (5) "Law enforcement officer" has the meaning defined in section 4016 of this title. (e) The provisions of this section shall not limit or restrict any prosecution for any other offense, including simple assault or aggravated assault. Section 4005. While committing a crime A person who carries a dangerous or deadly weapon, openly or concealed, while committing a felony or while committing an offense under section 667 of Title 7, or while committing the crime of smuggling of an alien as defined by the laws of the United States, shall be imprisoned not more than five years or fined not more than $500.00, or both. Section 4006. Record of firearm sales All pawnbrokers and retail merchants dealing in firearms shall keep a record book in which they shall record the sale by them of all revolvers and pistols, and the purchase by them of all second-hand revolvers and pistols. Such record shall include the date of the transaction, the marks of identification of the firearm, including the manufacturer's name, the caliber, model and manufacturer's number of the firearm, the name, address, birthplace, occupation, age, height, weight and color of eyes and hair of the purchaser or seller. Such purchaser or seller shall sign his name to the record and the pawnbroker or merchant shall-preserve such record book forsix years after the date of last entry and shall permit all enforcement officers to inspect the same at all reasonable times. A person, partnership or corporation-who violates a provision of this section shall be fined not more than $100.00. Section 4007. Furnishing firearms to children A person, firm or corporation, other than a parent or guardian, who sells or furnishes to a minor under the age of sixteen years a firearm or other dangerous weapon or ammunition for firearms shall be fined not more than $50.00 nor less than $10.00. This section shall not apply to an instructor or teacher who furnishes firearms to pupils for instruction and drill. Section 4008. Possession of firearms by children A child under the age of sixteen years shall not, without the consent of his parents or guardian, have in his possession or control a pistol or revolver constructed or designed for the use of gunpowder or other explosive substance with leaden ball or shot. A child who violates a provision of this section shall be deemed a delinquent child under the provisions of chapter 11 of Title 33. Section 4009. Negligent use of gun A person who carelessly or negligently wounds another person by gunshot shall be imprisoned not more than five years or fined not more than $1,000.00, or both. Section 4010. Gun silencers A person who manufactures, sells or uses or possesses with intent to sell or use, an appliance known as or used for a gun silencer shall be fined $25.00 for each offense. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the use of possession of gun silencers for military purposes when so used or possessed under proper military authority and restriction. Section 4011. Aiming gun at another Any person who shall intentionally point or aim any gun, pistol or other firearm at or towards another, except in self-defense or in the lawful discharge of official duty, shall be punished by fine not exceeding $50.00. Any person who shall discharge any such firearm so intentionally aimed or pointed shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than one year or fined not more than $100.00, or both. Section 4012. Reporting treatment of firearm wounds (a) Every physician attending or treating a case of bullet wound, gunshot wound, powder burn, or any other injury arising from or caused by the discharge of a gun, pistol, or other firearm, or whenever such case is treated in a hospital, sanitarium or other institution, the manager, superintendent or other person in charge shall report such case at once to local law enforcement officials or the state police. The provisions of this section shall not apply to such wounds, burns or injuries received by a member of the armed forces of the United States or state of Vermont while engaged in the actual performance of duty. (b) A person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $100.00. Section 4013. Zip guns; switchblade knives A person who possesses, sells or offers for sale a weapon commonly known as a "zip" gun, or a weapon commonly known as a switchblade knife, the blade of which is three inches or more in length, shall be imprisoned not more than ninety days or fined not more than $100.00. Section 4014. Purchase of Firearms in Other States Residents of the state of Vermont may purchase rifles and shotguns in another state, provided that such residents conform to the applicable provisions of the Gun Control Act of 1968, and regulations thereunder, as administered by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, and provided further that such residents conform to the provisions of law applicable to such purchase in the state of Vermont and in the state in which the purchase is made. Section 4015. Purchase of firearms by nonresidents Residents of a state other than the state of Vermont may purchase rifles and shotguns in the state of Vermont, provided that such residents conform to the applicable provisions of the Gun Control Act of 1968, and regulations thereunder, as administered by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, and provided further that such residents conform to the provisions of law applicable to such purchase in the state of Vermont and in the state in which such persons reside. Section 4016. Weapons in Court (a) As used in this section, (1) "Courthouse" means a building or any portion of a building designated by the supreme court of Vermont as a courthouse. (2) "Dangerous or deadly weapon" means any firearm, or other weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or inanimate, which in the manner it is used or is intended to be used is known to be capable of producing death or serious bodily injury. (3) "Firearm" means any weapon, whether loaded or unloaded, which will expel a projectile by the action of an explosive and includes any weapon commonly referred to as a pistol, revolver, rifle, gun, machine gun or shotgun. (4) "Law enforcement officer" means a person certified by the Vermont criminal justice training council as having satisfactorily completed the approved training program required to meet the minimum training standards applicable so that person pursuant to 20 V.S.A. 2358. (5) "Secured building" means a building with controlled points of public access, metal screening devices at each point of public access, and locked compartments, accessible only to security personnel for storage of checked firearms. (b) A person who, while within a courthouse and without authorization from the court, (1) carries or has in his or her possession a firearm; or (2) knowingly carries or has in his or her possession a dangerous or deadly weapon, other than a firearm, shall be imprisoned not more than one year or fined not more than $500.00, or both. (c) Notice of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be posted conspicuously at each public entrance to each courthouse. (d) No dangerous or deadly weapon shall be allowed in a courthouse that has been certified by the court administrator to be a secured building.