Another View on Gas Drilling in the Context of Climate Change
I’ve received a “Your Dot” contribution on gas leaks and global warming from Louis A. Derry, an associate professor in the earth and atmospheric sciences department at Cornell University. It’s a critique of one element in “Gangplank to a Warm Future,” an Op-Ed article by Anthony R. Ingraffea, a professor of engineering at Cornell who is a prominent foe of expanded gas drilling using the bundle of methods commonly known as “fracking.”

You’ll find it below. But first here’s a little context. In a visit to Cornell last fall to give a lecture on energy and climate, I spent time with both researchers, along with several other scientists there focused on aspects of gas drilling and methane’s environmental impacts. It was clear that there was a very wide range of views — particularly on the impact of gas leakage on climate — that resulted largely from different interpretations of the same data.

I don’t recall hearing anyone discount the importance of cutting gas leakage from wells, pipelines and other gas (and oil and coal) operations. That’s been a prime interest of mine since 2009. But it’s important for the public to know what is, and isn’t, firmly established to make wise decisions on relevant policies.

Read on for Derry’s piece, which includes some technical terms that I’ll explain in brackets (For starters, CH4 is methane, the main constituent of the fuel we know as natural gas, and of course CO2 is carbon dioxide).

I hope this post doesn’t induce the reaction I got when discussing similar questions after a Long Island screening of the anti-fracking film “Gasland II” with the director, Josh Fox, the actor Alec Baldwin, and another journalist, Karl Grossman. “You’re putting me to sleep,” an attendee yelled (watch the video at the preceding link to see how this moment played out; Baldwin clearly won the day, as Randy Olson wrote in a fun “review.”)

Please read Derry’s piece below, and Ingraffea’s, and see if they clarify your thinking on natural gas and other energy options in the context of global warming:

The Op-Ed piece by my colleague Tony Ingraffea again raises the issue of how much (if any) climate benefit may be obtained by shifting to natural gas and away from coal as an electrical power source. A simple top-down analysis, based on global scale changes in carbon dioxide and methane, provides some insight into the potential impact of U.S. shale gas production and displacement of coal on global climate. U.S. shale gas production began to ramp up around 2007 (the earliest data available from the Energy Information Administration), increasing from 1.99 trillion cubic feet to 8.50 trillion from 2007 to 2011 (latest data available from the agency). The global atmospheric methane value (from the Mauna Loa Observatory) increased from 1796 to 1836 parts per billion (volume) over the same interval. Let’s assume a 3 percent leak rate during shale gas production. Then U.S. shale gas production could account for about 12 percent of the global methane increase over that time (it scales at approximately 4 percent of global increase per 1 percent leak rate). The actual leak rate is poorly known, but in any reasonable case U.S. shale gas production is a small, but not trivial, contributor to the global methane increase over the last several years. More than 80 percent (perhaps more than 90 percent) of the increase in methane must come from other sources. What are the climate impacts of this increase? Using standard expressions for calculating the approximate change in radiative forcing resulting from the increase in different greenhouse gas concentrations (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2001; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Annual Greenhouse Gas Index), we can compare the climate impact of increasing CO2 and CH4. [Radiative forcing is the amount of imbalance between energy reaching the Earth and radiating into space.] Over the same 2007-2011 interval, the calculated increase in forcing from methane is 0.008 watts per square meter. In comparison, the increase in forcing from carbon dioxide is 0.107 watts per square meter, or a factor of 13 greater. Even if one accepts the estimates advocated by some of a higher “global warming potential” for methane by a factor of approximately three, the increase in climate forcing by methane is significantly smaller than for carbon dioxide. [Global warming potential is a measure of the comparative capacity of various gases to trap heat.] Using the more standard approach as proposed by the I.P.C.C., the increased 2007-2011 climate forcing from methane is less than 8 percent of the increase in CO2 forcing. Of that 8 percent, only about 1 percent can be related to U.S. shale gas production. Although some of the numbers remain uncertain, the basic result is robust. Methane, and in particular shale gas methane, is not a major contributor to climate change. Further, as is well established, CO2 has a much longer lifetime in the environment than does CH4, and will have climate impacts over a much longer time scale. The 800-pound climate gorilla has been, and remains, carbon dioxide. For me, the picture is pretty clear. Displacing coal emissions with gas emissions is beneficial from a climate standpoint. Total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions decreased by 2.6 percent from 2010 to 2011, for example, and part of that decrease is the result of fuel switching. Gas is without any question advantageous from a standpoint of the other environmental damage caused by coal emissions, including heavy metals like mercury, cadmium, uranium and lead, particulates, and sulfur dioxide. However, it should also be very clear that gas production has both local environmental costs and contributes to climate change. Demonstrating that the overall environmental damage is less than that from coal does not imply that gas production and use is cost-free, and the sooner we reduce our dependence on fossil fuel sources of energy of all kinds the better. Coal is worse — that doesn’t mean that gas is great.

In another response to Ingraffea, “Methane Leakage Not a Deal Breaker for Natural Gas,” Alex Trembath and Max Luke of The Breakthrough Institute make some additional points that are worth reading, including: