AUL Releases “The New Leviathan”: The Mega-Centers Report, How Planned Parenthood Has Become Abortion, Inc.
“At Planned Parenthood, abortion sales are UP and other services are DOWN,” observed AUL’s Dr. Charmaine Yoest. “This is as a result of a move to create abortion mega-centers to mass produce abortions at an even deadlier rate.”

WASHINGTON, D.C. (06-24-15) – “Over the last 45 years, Planned Parenthood has become the expert in making money from ending lives,” observed Americans United for Life President & CEO Dr. Yoest, in releasing AUL’s “Mega-Center Report,” entitled “The New Leviathan” (available here) which details how the billion-dollar abortion profiteer has increased its profits and market share, even as fewer U.S. women seek abortions. “Unlike the national trend observed by the Associated Press last week, the Centers for Disease Control, and everywhere else that abortions are on the decline, at Planned Parenthood abortion sales are up – meanwhile its overall patients and other services are down. This is as a result of a move to create abortion mega-centers to mass-produce abortions at an even deadlier rate.”

This analysis created by AUL attorneys and experts, the Mega-Center Report documents how Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA) has gobbled up the abortion market, aggressively displacing unaffiliated abortion clinics in favor of its large facilities in urban centers, so that it can increase the number of abortions performed. “Mega-centers” (centers or offices of at least 10,000 square feet) have opened in at least 18 cities since 2004.

“Planned Parenthood’s mega-centers strategy coincides with its increasing share of the U.S. abortion market: from performing 1 in 5 abortions to 1 in 3,” noted Dr. Yoest. In fact, far from emphasizing healthcare, PPFA decreed that as of January 2013 ALL of its affiliates must perform abortions.

In contrast to its growing abortion business, during the era of mega-center expansion, Planned Parenthood’s overall client base has declined by 10 percent. Simultaneously, cancer screening and prevention services at PPFA’s centers have been cut by more than 50 percent.

“Planned Parenthood deceptively holds itself out as protecting women’s health, as it cuts legitimate health care in favor of abortion sales, while lobbying for more taxpayer largesse,” said Dr. Yoest.

Planned Parenthood’s ability to open mega-centers and take over the abortion market has been enabled by hefty taxpayer funding. PPFA affiliates’ reported revenue from taxpayer dollars has increased from $272.7 million in its 2004-2005 fiscal year, to an average of $536.6 million in each one of the past 4 years. According to PPFA’s most recently released annual report, 41% of Planned Parenthood’s $1.3 billion in revenue came from the American taxpayer.

This report – the third installment in Americans United for Life’s ongoing expose of the nation’s largest abortion provider – spotlights Planned Parenthood’s indisputable status as America’s largest abortion provider. Building on the information released in The Case for Investigating Planned Parenthood and The Planned Parenthood Exhibits, AUL continues to detail how Planned Parenthood exploits women and profits from abortions.

“The time is now for Congress to defund Planned Parenthood and invest taxpayers’ hard-earned money in real healthcare that saves lives and safeguards women’s health,” said Dr. Yoest.

To learn more, click here.