McCain toughens tone on immigration as 2016 approaches

CLOSE

Sen. John McCain, who could face a conservative primary challenger in his 2016 re-election bid, has taken what some say is a tougher attitude toward border issues. (Photo: Michael Schennum/The Republic)

U.S. Sen. John McCain on Wednesday sparred with Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson over border security in the latest sign of the Arizona Republican's toughening attitude on immigration in advance of a potentially competitive primary.

McCain was the lead Republican negotiator on the bipartisan "Gang of Eight" comprehensive immigration reform bill that passed the U.S. Senate in 2013. The following year, McCain was formally censured by Arizona Republican Party as too liberal on immigration, "amnesty," and other issues. In April, he announced he is running for a sixth term in 2016 and a conservative primary challenger is expected.

This year, McCain and U.S. Sen. Jeff Flake, R-Ariz., attached an amendment to the Senate's budget resolution that would speed the removal of children and other Central American immigrants who cross the U.S.- Mexico border illegally.

On April 23, McCain voted against the confirmation of new U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch because he disagrees with her position that President Barack Obama's executive action on immigration was reasonable and constitutional.

At a Wednesday hearing of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, McCain challenged what he characterized as Johnson's suggestion that a drop in Border Patrol apprehensions of unaccompanied migrant children from El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala from October to March should be celebrated.

McCain held up a graph that showed there were 19,707 such apprehensions in the same period a year ago.

"I am not suggesting that this constitutes victory," Johnson responded.

"The fact is you're being disingenuous when you say that things really are a lot better," McCain shot back. "9,800 is not satisfactory to anybody in my state."

McCain also grilled Johnson on how many of the unaccompanied minors who cross the border actually show up to their immigration court hearings. Johnson said he didn't know.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"I wonder why you wouldn't know that number," McCain said. "I think the American people and this committee need to know that because you and I know that the percentage is very small."

The law "is being perverted" if most young immigrants enter the country and don't show up for their court dates, McCain added.

For some, McCain's tougher tone is reminiscent of a hard turn toward more border enforcement that he took in 2010, when he faced former U.S. Rep. J.D. Hayworth, a border hard-liner, in his primary. In crushing Hayworth, McCain ran a memorable TV ad in which he and Pinal County Sheriff Paul Babeu walked along the border and McCain called for the completion of "the danged fence."

His hardening positions have been noticed by his critics on the right and by his immigration-reform allies on the left.

"I'm going to give McCain credit — he is a true comprehensive immigration reformer," said Frank Sharry, executive director of the liberal-leaning, pro-reform organization America's Voice who was critical of McCain's previous pivots to the right in 2010 and as a candidate for the GOP's 2008 presidential nomination. "And yes, every few years he leans right to stave off the yipping dogs of the far right of the Arizona Republic Party. Given how much he has put into immigration reform, I think it's time for those of us on the left to cut him some slack."

For his part, McCain has always maintained that he has stayed consistent on border security. In an April interview with The Arizona Republic, McCain pointed to the Gang of Eight bill, which as passed by the Senate would have made an unprecedented $46.3 billion investment in border security. The legislation attempted to balance border security with a pathway to citizenship for millions of undocumented immigrants who have settled in the country.

"Border security is still of paramount importance," McCain told The Republic. "As you know, we passed legislation through the Senate that had very strong provisions for border security, and I was one of the authors of that legislation. And the goal was 90 percent control and 100 percent situational awareness, which we could have achieved if it had been passed through the House of Representatives."

National "tea party" groups have been trying to persuade U.S. Rep. Matt Salmon, R-Ariz., to enter the 2016 Senate primary against McCain. State Sen. Kelli Ward, R-Lake Havasu City, has taken formal steps toward a possible McCain challenge, forming an exploratory committee to test the waters.

Ward's website says she "believes in legal immigration and a secure border" and "that states have the right to protect themselves if the Federal government will not." The website also says Ward supported Senate Bill 1070, the state's tough 2010 immigration law which has been watered down by the U.S. Supreme Court, although she was in not in the Arizona Legislature at the time.

"No amnesty for those who have broken our laws — no economic, educational, or medical incentives," Ward's website says.

Nowicki is The Republic's national political reporter. Follow him on Twitter at @dannowicki and on his official Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1GQrxso