Inspectors rip Phoenix VA hospital again for delayed care
The report portrays Phoenix VA schedulers, clinicians and administrators as confused and in conflict about scheduling policies despite more than two years of reform efforts that focused on retraining.

This is the Carl T. Hayden VA Medical Center at Seventh Street and Indian School Road in Phoenix. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

Patients in the Phoenix VA Health Care System are still unable to get timely specialist appointments after massive reform efforts, and delayed care may be to blame for at least one more veteran's death, according to a new Office of the Inspector General probe.

The VA watchdog's latest report, issued Tuesday, says more than two years after Phoenix became the hub of a nationwide VA scandal, inspectors identified 215 deceased patients who were awaiting specialist consultations on the date of death. That included one veteran who "never received an appointment for a cardiology exam that could have prompted further definitive testing and interventions that could have forestalled his death."

The report portrays Phoenix VA clerks, clinicians and administrators as confused and in conflict about scheduling policies despite more than two years of reform and retraining.

Last year, a team of experts from the Veterans Health Administration came to Phoenix and gave instruction to 325 employees. "Despite VHA providing facility-wide scheduling and consult management training in April 2015," says the OIG report, "staff were not managing or scheduling consults according to that training."

Inspectors also found the backlog of specialty consults has increased despite dramatic increases in medical staffing and outside referrals. Consults include appointments, lab tests, prosthetics, specialist advice, teleconferencing and other patient services.

"More than two years after the Phoenix VA Health Care System became ground zero for VA’s wait-time scandal, many of its original problems remain, and this report is proof of that sad fact," said Rep. Jeff Miller, R-Fla., chairman of the U.S. House Committee on Veterans’ Affairs. "Although the report’s extensive use of confusing bureaucratic parlance makes digesting the IG’s findings a tedious chore, it's clear veterans are still dying while waiting for care … and the work environment in Phoenix is marred by confusion and dysfunction."

Scheduling chaos in Phoenix

In August 2015, the report says, the Phoenix VA Health Care System had 34,769 open consults. As of July 2016, there were 38,000.

In sometimes convoluted language, the OIG report essentially describes the Carl T. Hayden VA Medical Center as a facility in scheduling chaos. "PVAHCS continues to have a high number of open consults because providers are not always receiving and reviewing consults to their clinics timely, staff had not scheduled patients' appointments in a timely manner (or had not rescheduled canceled appointments), a clinic could not find lab results, and staff did not properly link completed appointment notes to the corresponding consults. As a result, patients attempting to get care at PVAHCS continued to encounter delays ..."

The OIG interviewed 58 Phoenix VA employees, but no patients or family members.

Inspectors found that medical center staffers "inappropriately discontinued" nearly a quarter of the consults in files they audited — a tactic that has been used to produce fraudulent wait-time data.

One example: Inspectors checked 30 Chiropractic Service consults from early 2015 and discovered all of them were improperly canceled by employees. As a result, "28 patients had not received the requested chiropractic care."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Another example: A vascular care patient who was supposed to have an appointment in 2013 waited more than 300 days for care. Meanwhile, numerous other vascular patients got delayed treatment in part because their printed lab results were lost or misplaced.

Phoenix VA officials did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Revolving door of leadership

The VA OIG has conducted six Phoenix inquiries during the past two years. The latest was launched after an employee filed multiple accusations with the House Committee. That included claims that patients died awaiting care and staffers canceled appointments to hide the fact that veterans had died while appointments were pending.

Similar Phoenix allegations ignited the 2014 national scandal over veterans' health care that led to the replacement of Secretary Eric Shinseki and passage of a $15 billion reform law.

The complainant gave inspectors a report listing 87 Phoenix patients who died with open consults. Inspectors eventually identified 215 patients who died while medical services were pending.

Miller said VA performance "will never improve until there are consequences up and down the chain of command for these and other persistent failures. Unfortunately, given that this report is largely devoid of clear lines of accountability to those responsible for Phoenix VAHCS’s current problems, it is unlikely these issues will be solved anytime soon.”

The medical center at Seventh Street and Indian School Road is hub for a care system that serves 85,000 veterans and includes numerous satellite clinics. PVAHCS has been in turmoil for more than two years, with a revolving leadership door. Since former Director Sharon Helman was suspended and eventually fired, the facility has had six other leaders, including RimaAnn Nelson, who started work this week.

Nelson's appointment came under immediate fire from some members of Arizona's congressional delegation because she previously served as director of a troubled VA hospital in St. Louis.

Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., reacted angrily to the latest development. “Today, we have even more reason for outrage over the poor leadership, under-staffing and lack of communication and coordination at the Phoenix VA," she said. "… Unfortunately, this IG report comes right on the heels of yet another deeply flawed executive being sent to ‘lead’ the Phoenix VA. So here’s my message to the VA’s top leaders: Stop sending your problems to Phoenix, and start fixing ours.”

Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., who Kirkpatrick is challenging in November's election, offered similar remarks on his website, saying the manipulations are "simply unacceptable. … We should all be alarmed that more than two years after the scandal in care first erupted at the Phoenix VA, such reprehensible behavior continues to take place, putting the health of our veterans at risk."

In a press release, Deputy Secretary Sloan Gibson said the VA has irrefutably improved veterans' care nationwide, and Nelson is "uniquely suited to continue to build upon the progress already being made in Phoenix. She has a record of taking on difficult challenges and improving service to our veterans.”

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/2dGOULC