USS Forrestal fire: John McCain barely escaped death 50 years ago
CLOSE

The front page of The Arizona Republic on July 30, 1967, carries the story of the tragedy on the USS Forrestal. (Photo: The Arizona Republic)

John McCain's service in the Vietnam War is mostly remembered for the more than five years that he spent as a prisoner of war after he was shot down over Hanoi on Oct. 26, 1967.

But three months earlier — 50 years ago on Saturday — the future Republican senator from Arizona survived a harrowing naval disaster on the USS Forrestal, a episode that for most of those involved would be a life-defining moment but for McCain was just an earlier chapter of his story.

In a 2007 interview with The Arizona Republic, McCain suggested that, decades after the fact, the inferno on the Forrestal that killed 134 people, wounded many more and nearly wrecked the aircraft carrier, haunted him more than getting blown out of the sky.

"To be honest with you, the Forrestal fire seems to be a more impactful date I remember more than that of when I was shot down," McCain said at the time.

On July 29, 1967, the Forrestal was in the Gulf of Tonkin.

McCain, then a 30-year-old lieutenant commander in the Navy, was in the cockpit and getting ready to take off in his A-4 Skyhawk when a Zuni missile accidentally fired from an F-4 Phantom on the deck.

There is a lingering question about whether it hit McCain's plane or one next to it. McCain maintained in a 1999 book it was his, but the Navy's post-fire investigation apparently concluded it was a plane to his right, according to 2008 research by the website FactCheck.org. The missile didn't immediately explode. At least one bomb fell off a plane and 200 gallons of aviation fuel spilled onto the deck, catching fire.

McCain exited the cockpit. His flight suit caught fire as he jumped through the flames, according to his first-person accounts.

Explosions started as the plane's bombs detonated. McCain was wounded by shrapnel. The carrier became engulfed in what is still considered the worst combat-related U.S. naval disaster since World War II.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"The crew's heroics kept her afloat," McCain recalled in "Faith of My Fathers," his memoir published as he was gearing up to run for president in 2000. "They fought the inferno with a tenacity usually reserved for hand-to-hand combat. They fought it all day and well into the next, and they saved the Forrestal."

On the 50th anniversary of the USS Forrestal fire, we honor the brave American heroes who perished that dark day https://t.co/inuuPN1jzZpic.twitter.com/S8kEFi9cEo — John McCain (@SenJohnMcCain) July 28, 2017

The disaster was a major news story and made the cover of the Aug. 11, 1967, issue of Life magazine with the headline "Inferno at Sea."

McCain subsequently transferred to the aircraft carrier USS Oriskany. He took off from the Oriskany on the day he was downed by a surface-to-air missile fired by the North Vietnamese.

McCain, 80, is now serving his sixth Senate term and is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee. On Monday he will start targeted radiation and chemotherapy treatment for an aggressive form of brain cancer that was disclosed July 19.

"I still remember joining other aviators as we escaped our aircraft; jumping to the burning flight deck below and rolling through burning jet fuel to avoid the heat and flame," McCain said Friday in a written statement marking the 50th anniversary of the Forrestal tragedy. "While some of us were fortunate to make it out of the fire, many of the ship’s crew came charging in poised to fight back."

McCain recalled the "awesome courage on display that day" during the nearly 18-hour battle against the blaze.

“By honoring those who perished during catastrophes such as these, we begin to understand the true costs of war," McCain said in the statement. "The profession of arms is inherently dangerous. Driving warships across oceans to foreign shores is dangerous. The coordinated ballet of Naval aviation flight operations is dangerous. But the cost of not engaging in these operations is overwhelmingly greater."

Nowicki is The Republic's national political reporter. Follow him on Twitter, @dannowicki.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/2w8yW6c