Can Sheriff Joe Arpaio win re-election in the face of a criminal-contempt referral?
CLOSE A federal judge said Friday that he will refer Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio to the U.S. Attorney’s Office to be charged with criminal contempt of court.

Sheriff Joe Arpaio (Photo: Robert Hanashiro/USA TODAY NETWORK)

With less than two weeks to go before the primary, Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio's re-election campaign suddenly faces an exceedingly rare political handicap for a lawman: a possible criminal charge.

U.S. District Judge G. Murray Snow on Friday referred Arpaio and several aides to the U.S. Attorney's Office for potential contempt prosecution for violating previous court orders in a racial-profiling case.

The latest slap from the federal judge heightens speculation that the polarizing sheriff could be in for the toughest race of his 23-year career, handing his Republican challengers a late-in-the-game primary gift — and a cudgel for the Democratic contender in the fall if Arpaio, as expected, survives the Aug. 30 primary.

Dan Saban, one of Arpaio’s three GOP primary opponents, called Friday for the sheriff's resignation. He argued that the cloud of potential prosecution will cost Republicans the office if Arpaio advances to the general election.

“It’s time to do the honorable thing and step down,” said Saban, a former Buckeye police chief. “He’s soiled the badge.”

But Paul Penzone, the lone Democrat in the sheriff's race, would rather go head to head with Arpaio on Nov. 8.

“I want the voters of this community to make the strongest statement, that they are no longer willing to tolerate his defiance of the law and disrespect for our community,” said Penzone, a former Phoenix police sergeant. “Voters (must) ask themselves: Why would they ever be willing to accept a breach of the law, a waste of taxpayer dollars and incompetent leadership from someone who holds an office so critical to our safety?”

Sheriff's Office taken to court

Civil-rights activists took the Sheriff's Office to court eight years ago, accusing it of profiling Latinos during traffic stops and workplace raids, and detaining them without probable cause that they had committed a state crime. Snow has already held Arpaio and top aides in civil contempt in that case for failing to implement changes to remedy the situation.

A criminal prosecution would seek to prove that the failures to follow the judge's orders were intentional.

The case hasn't stopped Arpaio from waging his seventh campaign for sheriff or amassing a $4 million campaign war chest. While his supporters argue he has been unfairly targeted by President Barack Obama's administration for his "get tough on immigration" position, he has routinely overcome opposition in the past, often using the immigration-enforcement issue as a rallying cry. There are no signs his message has changed this time around.

“The sheriff and his office welcome an independent and unbiased review by the U.S. Attorney's Office,” Arpaio campaign spokesman Chad Willems said. “Once again, the judge has timed his decisions curiously to coincide with elections. That seems like an attempt to damage the sheriff politically.”

The battle lines are clear, Willems said.

“When this is boiled all down, the voters will make a decision who they agree with more when it comes to fighting illegal immigration: Sheriff Joe Arpaio or Barack Obama,” he said. “If that’s the question before voters, Joe Arpaio will win that decision handily.”

Criminal contempt vs. government officials

But that won't be the only question facing voters. The wild card is how severely they will perceive Snow's unusual action.

Initial research on criminal-contempt referrals suggests they rarely are used in the justice system nationwide, and prosecution success is spotty. In most cases, criminal contempt appears to be used against government officials and others who violate court orders, refuse to testify or withhold evidence. A few prominent examples:

During President Bill Clinton’s administration, a special prosecutor in the so-called Whitewater real-estate investments case charged Clinton associate Susan McDougal with a host of crimes that included criminal contempt for refusing to testify about whether Clinton had lied. She was convicted on that offense and others, and was sentenced to 18 months in prison.

In 2008, U.S. Special Counsel Scott Bloch, who was responsible for protecting whistleblowers, came under investigation for misconduct and pleaded guilty to criminal contempt for withholding information from Congress.

In 2012, the U.S. House of Representatives voted to hold then-Attorney General Eric Holder in contempt for refusing to turn over executive-branch documents related to Operation Fast and Furious, the botched Arizona criminal investigation that targeted gun smuggling into Mexico. In 2014, a federal judge refused to find Holder in contempt.

Perhaps the most prominent criminal-contempt case involved attorneys in the U.S. Justice Department's Public Integrity Section. Several prosecutors were accused of gross misconduct while trying to convict the late and former Alaska Sen. Ted Stevens. Stevens was indicted in 2008 on charges of getting improperly discounted work done at his residence. At trial, the judge found that prosecutors repeatedly withheld key evidence and deceived the court. He threatened a criminal-contempt referral, but did not file one. The lawyers were investigated internally. One took his own life. Two others were disciplined but had their sanctions overturned in an administrative proceeding.

At this stage, it is unclear if the U.S. Attorney's Office in Arizona will handle Arpaio's case or refer it to the Justice Department's Public Integrity Section. In either event, prosecutors could decline to pursue charges. If they do charge, victory is not assured in court. And regardless of how it proceeds, a resolution is not assured before the general election, meaning voters might have to make a judgment before prosecutors or the court are able to act.

'The man is a hero'

Though recent polls show the 84-year-old easily winning his Republican primary, that's not the case in the general election. If Arpaio faces Penzone in the fall, polls by two independent firms and the Democrat’s own campaign show the race virtually a toss-up.

“I believe there are voters that supported him in the past who will decide it’s not in the interest of the county to support a sheriff whose defiance has potentially criminal implications, no different than those he incarcerates,” Penzone, 49, said.

Mesa retiree Jane Bergner is one of them.

The former English teacher and her husband once loved Arpaio for his toughness with criminals. They cheered his use of Tent City, the outdoor detention center, because they believed prisoners shouldn’t enjoy better conditions than deployed U.S. military.

"We highly respected that idea," said Bergner, who was introduced to Arpaio through his frequent appearances on cable-television news.

But the couple’s high opinion of Arpaio changed when they moved from Missouri to the Valley six years ago.

“Oh my god, we had no idea what was really going on in his office," Bergner said. She learned from local news coverage of his years of fighting with Maricopa County supervisors and the millions in taxpayer money spent on lawsuits.

The judge’s criminal-contempt referral is another strike.

Now, Bergner is urging friends to support Penzone. She gave Penzone's campaign $100 in May.

"I cannot tell you how disappointed we are in Sheriff Joe," she said.

One of Penzone’s biggest weaknesses, however, is raising money.

As of June, Penzone had about $140,000 on hand. Arpaio had $4 million, enough to blanket the television airwaves with devastating attacks.

The sheriff’s successful fundraising draws heavily from out-of-state donors. They applaud his tough talk about illegal immigration on Fox News, or more recently, on the prime-time stage of the Republican National Convention.

Jim Butkovic, an 80-year-old from Illinois, is one of them.

“All those bleeding-heart liberals in Washington and there in your state (of Arizona), they’re going after the sheriff because he’s doing the job he’s supposed to do,” Butkovic said. “Part of that job is stopping these good people down south from coming here illegally.”

Butkovic was shocked to learn that a judge held Arpaio in contempt and speculated he must have been appointed by Obama. But Snow is a Republican who was appointed by President George W. Bush.

Butkovic said he still supports Arpaio.

“This man deserves applause and praise rather than ridicule and resistance. … He’s trying to defend the Constitution as best he can,” Butkovic said. “The man is a hero.”

Arpaio's appeal may be going downhill

But out-of-state supporters like Butkovic can’t fill out a ballot. And Arpaio’s local appeal appears to have taken a slide.

His share of the popular vote in past elections dropped from a dominating 66 percent in 2000 to just 51 percent in 2012. Democratic challengers facing off with him rose from 26 percent of the vote four election cycles ago to 45 percent in the last election.

For the first time this year, the ballot will feature only candidates from the two major parties, meaning third-party challengers will not siphon away votes. Both Penzone's and Arpaio's campaigns argue it could benefit them.

One staunch supporter who thinks the court case could impact Arpaio's campaign is former Senate President Russell Pearce, a fellow immigration hardliner who pushed through the controversial immigration-enforcement law known as Senate Bill 1070.

Pearce thinks the media have misconstrued the truth, so Arpaio "certainly has some damage control (to do) with folks that have been misinformed. Clearly, he has a challenge. But I wouldn’t run from that if you’re doing what’s right.”

And illegal immigration could resonate strongly with the electorate in Arizona, where Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump until recently was polling well in part because of his similar stance on the issue.

Arpaio may also employ personal attacks against opponents as he has done in the past.

But political strategist Jason Rose, a friend of the sheriff's, suggested Arpaio should try a softer approach instead.

“I think humility will serve him well” by surprising voters, Rose said.

Rose said an Arpaio TV ad could easily tout his achievements: “I’m proud of our innovations. I’m proud our crime is at low levels. But I’ve also made some mistakes along the way. I’m proud of looking out for you. I’ve done a lot more things right than wrong.”

But it will be hard to avoid the court case if the sheriff's opponents use it to attack him. They can point to tens of millions of dollars spent by taxpayers defending the sheriff in lawsuits, as well as the distractions of legal battles and crusades against illegal immigration that caused major criminal cases to go uninvestigated.

Kelly McDonald, a Phoenix political-communications expert, suggests a simpler argument: “It’s time for a change in leadership.”

“That narrative has to be clear, it has to be simple, to mobilize the voters,” McDonald said. “It’s not about women or minorities, but (that) everyone in the county who pays taxes that fund his office should be aggrieved by his behavior.”

Even in the face of mounting odds, however, McDonald warns: “I would never count Joe Arpaio out. He has proven himself to be a survivor time and time again.”

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/2bLlrDq