What we know about David Katz, the alleged Jacksonville shooting gunman from Maryland
Authorities in Jacksonville, Fla., have identified a Maryland man as the perpetrator of a mass shooting Sunday during a video game tournament.

“The single suspect in this case is a white male,” Jacksonville Sheriff Mike Williams said at a news conference Sunday night. “We believe the suspect to be 24-year-old David Katz of Baltimore, Maryland.”

Katz is believed to have opened fire during a “Madden 19” qualifying tournament at a Chicago Pizza around 1:30 p.m. He killed two people and left 11 others wounded before killing himself.

Here’s what we know about Katz:

A Baltimore man has been identified as the gunman who opened fire at a Jacksonville, Fla., Madden video game competition Sunday. David Katz, 24, had been participating in a tournament for the Madden football game franchise, and was among those pronounced dead at the scene. Federal authorities were at a home near in Baltimore's Inner Harbor on Sunday night as part of an investigation. (Kenneth K. Lam) (Kenneth K. Lam)

» No motive is known for the Jacksonville shooting. The Los Angeles Times reported that Katz had been eliminated from the tournament before he began his rampage.

» People in the online gaming community said Katz had played under the game tag “RavensChamp” and “Bread.”

» Jacksonville Sheriff Mike Williams said Monday that Katz legally purchased the two handguns he used in the shooting from a licensed dealer in the Baltimore area.

» Local FBI and ATF officials are assisting the Jacksonville sheriff’s office with the investigation. They were at a home tied to Katz in the 1200 block of Harbor Island Walk near Baltimore’s Inner Harbor on Sunday night.

» He was raised in Columbia by parents Richard and Elizabeth Katz. At the time of their divorce in 2005, Richard Katz was a prominent engineer who designed electronics for NASA spacecraft. Dr. Elizabeth Katz worked as a toxicologist for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in Rockville.

» Katz was a 2011 graduate of Hammond High School in Howard County. He also attended the University of Maryland previously, but was not a enrolled this semester, university President Wallace Loh said. He enrolled beginning in September 2014, and majored in environmental science and technology, a university spokeswoman said. He did not live on campus.

» As an adolescent, Katz displayed psychological and behavioral problems, according to court records. He was hospitalized at Sheppard Pratt Health System in Towson for psychiatric treatment in 2007. By age 12, he was taking Risperdal, an anti-psychotic drug to treat schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, his father said in court records. He often missed school and resisted treatment.

» A decade before Sunday’s shooting, a psychologist told lawyers that Katz was not likely to harm other people but could target his mother, with whom he lived as a teenager.

» In 2009, Elizabeth Katz called 911 on her son, telling the operator, “He has been abusive for over two years,” according to a transcript. David Katz later called 911 on his mother, claiming that she came at him with a knife.

» According to one local gamer, Katz sometimes attended a weekly game night at a sports bar near M&T Bank Stadium.

» Katz had previously won several tournaments and boasted of his prowess in an interview posted to YouTube.

» In a video circulating social media, an announcer is heard introducing Katz by commenting on his intense focus and standoffish attitude. “David Katz keeps to himself. He’s a man of business. … He’s not here to make friends.”

» Authorities say they’ve found Katz’s car, and that they have video of the incident.

» Katz is believed to have stayed in the Jacksonville area the night before the shooting, possibly at a hotel.

Baltimore Sun reporters Tim Prudente, Justin Fenton, Hallie Miller and Talia Richman contributed to this article.

ctkacik@baltsun.com

twitter.com/xtinatkacik