Economic impact of NBA All-Star Game may have been overestimated
The projected $268.5 million economic impact of February's NBA All-Star Game at Cowboys Stadium was overestimated for some cities and in some spending categories, a review of tax data and industry research suggests.

Michael Casinelli, the consultant who prepared the All-Star economic forecast, said he stands by his work.

But he acknowledged that city-by-city breakdowns of spending are less likely to be accurate than estimates for the entire region.

The consultant's firm, Marketing Information Masters, also prepared the report projecting that next year's Super Bowl at Cowboys Stadium would generate $612 million in spending, a record for the game. Economics professors have said that number is too high, but the head of the local Super Bowl host committee said he was not concerned because the Texas comptroller's office has verified most of the study.

The estimates for the All-Star Game and the Super Bowl are important because the research is the basis for complying with a state law that allows cities and host committees to receive state tax refunds - $13.3 million for the NBA All-Star Game - to help pay for the cost of staging the events.

For the state's calculations for the tax refunds, the report estimated $152 million in direct spending by people traveling to the All-Star Game from outside Texas. The $268.5 million figure was the entire spending estimate associated with the All-Star Game.

But a hotel industry report provided to the Dallas Convention & Visitors Bureau raised questions about at least one of the economic impact study's major estimates.

A report from STR Global said that on game day and the three days before it, $10.5 million was spent in the Dallas hotels that account for almost all the city's lodging revenue. That's less than half the $22 million the consultant's study expected for Dallas.

The study's projections also estimated All-Star-related rental car revenue at $13.5 million. But actual February spending on all car rentals at D/FW International Airport and Love Field was $21.8 million. That means the All-Star Game would have accounted for 62 percent of car rentals at the airports in February.

Research difficult

Casinelli, founder of Marketing Information Masters, said benefits could have been more widespread than he expected, perhaps lessening the spending boost to some cities and increasing it in others. He said it's difficult to research an event never before held here at a venue open less than a year.

"What I'm hearing [from critics] is you have to be absolutely 100 percent accurate on a future prediction when nothing is 100 percent accurate on a future prediction," said Casinelli, who has an MBA but is not an economist.

The comparisons are not precise between what Casinelli estimated on behalf of the NBA All-Star Game local organizing committee and the reported tax dollars.

Although most spending probably occurred over that long weekend, the study includes money generated in the two months leading up to the game. That could include site visits by NBA staff and broadcast crews and people preparing for parties and fundraisers.

The hotel numbers are also missing revenue from the smallest hotels, which account for a small percentage of the city's total.

The Texas comptroller's office reviews the economic impact figures and sets the amounts of tax refunds to cities and host committees from the Major Events Trust Fund. The trust fund in the past has helped pay for a Super Bowl and NBA All-Star Game in Houston.

Officials with the comptroller said they are now requesting some of the Dallas NBA All-Star host committee's data to see the projections lived up to reality.

This is a new step that was added to the comptroller's responsibilities during the last legislative session, said Robert Wood, the agency's director of local government assistance and economic development.

Hotel revenue

Hotel revenue figures compiled by the comptroller give the closest comparisons to spending estimates in the NBA All-Star report. If that study's hotel spending estimate of $22 million was correct, spending associated with the game would have accounted for about 52 percent of Dallas' $42.3 million in hotel revenue for February.

The story was the same in other cities in the All-Star report. The projection for Arlington would account for 75 percent of that city's hotel revenue for February. In Fort Worth, it was more than 40 percent; in Irving, nearly 30 percent; and in Grapevine, 17 percent.

The study included spending breakdowns for cities with All-Star events or blocks of rooms reserved by the NBA. A few of these comparisons were first reported last month by WFAA-TV (Channel 8).

Terdema Ussery, president and CEO of the Dallas Mavericks and the All-Star local organizing committee, said he has not reviewed the postgame numbers. But he said that he doesn't have any indications the estimates were wrong.

"I don't have any concerns at the moment because I don't have a basis [for concerns]," Ussery said.

The head of the Super Bowl XLV host committee also said he's not worried about the projections for that game. President and CEO Bill Lively said the committee hired an experienced consultant with a good reputation with the NFL and state comptroller and is relying on that expertise. He also said many of the assumptions in the report have been verified by the comptroller's office.

"We wouldn't have any way to know if that data were accurate," Lively said about the committee's reliance on experts.

Dollars outside Dallas

Casinelli, who has been creating economic projections for Super Bowls, All-Star games and college football bowl games for more than 30 years, said a combination of higher occupancy rates and higher prices can make a disproportionately large impact.

Casinelli speculated that some All-Star spending projected for Dallas could have gone to Plano or other cities not broken out separately in his report.

"It's harder for me to defend, if you will, numbers within individual cities than the overall total," he said.

Also, Casinelli said rental car comparisons should include the entire market and not just the two largest airports. He also warned that government data is error prone and could throw off some calculations.

Phillip Jones, president and CEO of the Dallas Convention & Visitors Bureau, said he doesn't know how the Marketing Information Masters report compares with tax data that has been released since then.

"They're relying on the best data available and one of the best firms in the country that do these studies all over," Jones said. "I think the accuracy is pretty close."

A top Fort Worth tourism official said spending on hotels for the All-Star Game was a fraction of the All-Star report's projections. David DuBois, president and CEO of the Fort Worth Convention & Visitors Bureau, estimated the impact was in the tens of thousands of dollars instead of the estimated $6.56 million.

"Due respect to whoever put this together, it doesn't match up with our reality," he said.

Still, DuBois said he's grateful for the extra revenue the game generated in his city.

Other factors

Supporters of hosting big sports events often argue there is more than just tax receipts to consider.

Detroit was widely believed to have improved its image after it hosted the Super Bowl in 2006. Glendale, Ariz., officials continue to pursue Super Bowls despite admitting that the one in 2008 cost far more than what was collected in taxes, according to Arizona news reports.

Victor Matheson, an economics professor at the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Mass., has researched the impact of sports on local economies and said consultants' studies are hit-and-miss.

"They try to predict the number of people who are going to be there and how much they are going to spend," he said. "That does a pretty good job of counting up the economic activity that does occur. But it does a particularly poor job of counting up activity that doesn't occur."

Matheson said other important factors to consider are local dollars spent at that event instead of elsewhere; people staying at home to avoid crowds; and some of the money immediately leaving the area to go into the coffers of out-of-state corporations.

Casinelli is equally skeptical of what he called "alarmist" university academics. He said deferred spending eventually makes its way back into the local economy and doesn't disappear. Casinelli said he works with data about numbers of people who attended these events in the past, spending surveys, economic forecasts and insider information from the leagues. But he warns that every estimate will have flaws and needs to be adjusted.

"There is never enough data," he said. COMPARISON LIMITS

The Marketing Information Masters study breaks down spending projections in common categories, including lodging, restaurants, alcohol sales and retail. Taxes, however, aren't always categorized as neatly and precisely. Here's how the comparisons were made and their limitations.

Lodging: The state comptroller provides monthly, city-by-city reports on spending for hotel and motel rooms. Businesses that generate less than $500 per month or $1,500 per quarter in state room taxes are allowed to report quarterly, but those account for a tiny fraction of the total in Dallas and other large cities.

Car rental: The state does not report car rental tax revenue for each city. Those numbers were available from D/FW International Airport and Love Field. Some visitors might take taxis or shuttles to their hotels and rent a car later. That couldn't be factored in to the calculations.

Alcohol: The study estimated spending on alcohol, but the state reports city-by-city revenue only on sales at businesses with a mixed beverage license. That includes bars, restaurants and other venues that serve a full selection of alcohol, including hard liquor. The numbers don't include sales at restaurants or bars that serve only beer and wine and don't include alcohol purchased for off-site consumption. .

Sales tax: Entertainment, retail, other, food and merchandise categories in the study could all be subject to sales tax. The local sales tax numbers encompass so many different items and the study's categories are so general that there isn't enough information to make a comparison. A LOOK AT THE TOTALS The NBA All-Star weekend featured events in Dallas and Arlington the weekend of Feb. 14. Here's a look at some of the economic impact numbers from a study by Marketing Information Masters and actual spending for all of February. Projected Actual Overall economic impact $268.5 million Unknown Dallas lodging $22 million $42.1 million Dallas alcohol $24.2 million $22.6 million* North Texas car rentals $13.5 million $21.8 million** *Includes only those bars and restaurants serving hard liquor;

does not include package stores and establishments selling beer and wine only **All car rentals at D/FW International Airport and Love Field SOURCES: Dallas Morning News research; Texas comptroller's office