Bill White for Texas
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Wednesday, June 9, 2009

Career politician's false attacks and new lows

Bill White issued the following statement in response to career politician Perry's false attack.

"Rick Perry is manufacturing phony issues in an attempt to hide from debates. I had no financial interest in BTEC during the time of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The water supply for more than half a million people and our refineries was at risk. I was a part of a crisis team that took action, and I think the proof is in the results." White said.

"Perry took no issue with my leadership in the wake of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita until this election year. Career politician Rick Perry is doing anything to avoid a debate because he doesn't want to talk about how he's nearly doubled state spending, doubled state debt and how Texas is facing an $18 billion dollar shortfall, the largest in Texas history."

Lynchburg Reservoir Crisis and BTEC timeline



2003



December 2003: Bill White resigns from the WEDGE Group and BTEC board after being elected Houston's mayor. White has no involvement with, or financial interest in BTEC.



NOTE: White had a deferred compensation account related to his time at WEDGE Group. Income from before 2004 was placed in an account, invested in stocks and mutual funds, and distributed per formula each year. There was no business relationship after 2003. This is a well known fact because the Republican Party filed a false complaint regarding Bill White's deferred compensation.



2005



September 24, 2005: Hurricane Rita hits the Texas Gulf Coast. When Rita hit the coast it was a Category 3 hurricane. Earlier in the Gulf, Rita had reached Category 5 strength.

September 24, 2005: Hurricane Rita knocked out power to the critical Lynchburg Reservoir pumping station. Entergy supplies the only power link to the pumping station.

NOTE: The Lynchburg Reservoir supplies water to more than 600,000 residents and more than 75 industrial and manufacturing customers. The reservoir has a 5 day supply of water. The Coastal Water Authority manages the pumping station. http://www.chron.com/CDA/archives/archive.mpl?id=2005_3906670



September 24, 2005: Judge Robert Eckels and Tax Assessor-Collector Paul Bettencourt brought the major problem to Bill's attention through a phone call from Paul Bettencourt. Bill White, an energy expert, is called upon to help solve the crisis.

NOTE: At the time Hurricane Rita hit, the region was dealing with the largest evacuation in U.S. history due to Rita and the influx of nearly 200,000 Hurricane Katrina evacuees from New Orleans.



September 24-25, 2005: A crisis team was formed at the Houston Emergency Center. Public works professionals looked for emergency power sources to avoid a shutdown of water and sewer systems and refining industries. Many mobile generators were in Southern Louisiana at the time, assisting in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. Early estimates predicted it would take 10 days to get the 10 megawatts of power needed to the Lynchburg Resevoir pumping station.



September 24-25, 2005: White called the Secretary of Energy, the White House, FEMA, and Centerpoint Energy. At the time nobody had a solution to a mobile power supply. Bill White put the crisis team in touch with BTEC. BTEC has provided power services for military contractors in Iraq and are experts in power generation.



September 24-25, 2005: 2 solutions were developed in tandem to solve the problem.

1) Centerpoint would provide the needed connection within Entergy's service area (outside Centerpoint's service area). Centerpoint employed 75 full-time experts to work on the solution. 2) BTEC led an effort to acquire a portable 10 megawatt power supply of diesel generators. Reaching out to several suppliers, BTEC reached this portable agreement solution with the Coastal Water Authority, the manager of the pumping station.

September 27-28 2005: Centerpoint made the connection to the pumping station in the "11th hour," according to Mike Marcotte, Director of Public Works for the City of Houston. BTEC provided temporary assistance on-site in case Centerpoint's connection failed.



2006



September 2006: The Sterling Group buys interest in BTEC. Sterling Group asks Bill White to join investment in BTEC.

December 2006: Bill White becomes an investor in Sterling Group's interest in BTEC.