Industries at a Glance: Apparel Manufacturing: NAICS 315
Apparel Manufacturing: NAICS 315

About the Apparel Manufacturing subsector

The apparel manufacturing subsector is part of the manufacturing sector.

Industries in the Apparel Manufacturing subsector group establishments with two distinct manufacturing processes: (1) cut and sew (i.e., purchasing fabric and cutting and sewing to make a garment), and (2) the manufacture of garments in establishments that first knit fabric and then cut and sew the fabric into a garment. The Apparel Manufacturing subsector includes a diverse range of establishments manufacturing full lines of ready-to-wear apparel and custom apparel: apparel contractors, performing cutting or sewing operations on materials owned by others; jobbers performing entrepreneurial functions involved in apparel manufacture; and tailors, manufacturing custom garments for individual clients are all included. Knitting, when done alone, is classified in the Textile Mills subsector, but when knitting is combined with the production of complete garments, the activity is classified in Apparel Manufacturing. North American Industry Classification System

The apparel manufacturing subsector consists of these industry groups:

Apparel Knitting Mills: NAICS 3151

Cut and Sew Apparel Manufacturing: NAICS 3152

Apparel Accessories and Other Apparel Manufacturing: NAICS 3159

Workforce Statistics

This section provides information relating to employment in apparel manufacturing. These data are obtained from employer or establishment surveys. The following tables present an overview of the industry including the number of jobs, data for occupations common to the industry, and projections of occupational employment change.

Employment

(Source: Current Employment Statistics)

Employment by Occupation

(Source: Occupational Employment Statistics)

Projections

For projected (future) employment estimates, see the National Employment Matrix, which includes employment estimates by industry and occupation for apparel manufacturing.

(Source: Office of Occupational Statistics and Employment Projections)

Earnings and Hours

This section presents data on employee earnings and weekly hours. The latest industry averages of hourly earnings and weekly hours are shown. In addition, recent hourly and annual earnings are shown for occupations commonly found in apparel manufacturing.

Earnings and Hours of All Employees

(Source: Current Employment Statistics)

Earnings and Hours of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees

(Source: Current Employment Statistics)

Earnings by Occupation

(Source: Occupational Employment Statistics)

Work-related Fatalities, Injuries, and Illnesses

This section presents data for the industry on the number of workplace fatalities and the rates of workplace injuries and illnesses per 100 full-time workers in apparel manufacturing. An injury or illness is considered to be work-related if an event or exposure in the work environment either caused or contributed to the resulting condition or significantly aggravated a pre-existing condition.

Data series 2014 2015 2016 2017 Fatalities Number of fatalities 1 1 Blank cells indicate no data reported or data that do not meet publication criteria.



(Source: Injuries, Illnesses, and Fatalities)

Prices

This section provides industry-specific pricing information. The producer price index measures the percentage change in prices that domestic producers receive for goods and services. The prices included in the producer price index are from the first commercial transaction. The import price index reflects the percentage change in prices paid to foreign producers for their goods and services within the U.S., while the export price index measures the percentage change in prices received by U.S. producers for goods and services sold outside the U.S.

Data series Back

data Feb.

2019 Mar.

2019 Apr.

2019 May

2019 Producer price index 115.7 115.5 115.6 116.4 Percent change from previous month 0.3% -0.2% 0.1% 0.7% Import index 112.1 112.1 112.0 112.1 Percent change from previous month -0.2% 0.0% -0.1% 0.1% Export index Percent change from previous month

(Source: Producer Price Indexes, International Price Program)

Workplace Trends

This section presents data on the number of establishments in apparel manufacturing. Also included in this section is information on productivity, presented as the rate of change in output per hour of workers in the industry.

Establishments

Data series Back

data 1st quarter

2018 2nd quarter

2018 3rd quarter

2018 4th quarter

2018 Number of establishments Private industry 6,685 6,741 6,774 6,733 Local government State government 1 1 1 1

(Source: Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages)

Productivity

(Source: Productivity and Costs)