FAQ
Although the OES survey methodology is designed to create detailed cross-sectional employment and wage estimates for the U.S., States, metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas, across industry and by industry, it is less useful for comparisons of two or more points in time. Challenges in using OES data as a time series include changes in the occupational, industrial, and geographical classification systems, changes in the way data are collected, changes in the survey reference period, and changes in mean wage estimation methodology, as well as permanent features of the methodology.

Changes in occupational classification The OES survey used its own occupational classification system through 1998. The 1999 OES survey data provide estimates for most of the nonresidual occupations in the 2000 Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) system. The 2004-2009 OES data provides estimates for all occupations in the 2000 SOC. The May 2010 data provides estimates for most occupations in the 2010 SOC (for more on the 2010 occupations, see below). Because of these changes, it may be difficult to compare some occupations even if they are found in both classification systems. For example, both the old OES system and the 2000 SOC include the occupation "computer programmers." However, estimates for this occupation may not be comparable over time because the 2000 SOC has several computer-related occupations that were not included in the older classification system. Workers in newly classified occupations, such as systems software engineers and applications software engineers, may have been reported as computer programmers in the past. Therefore, even occupations that appear the same in the two systems may show employment shifts due to the addition or deletion of related occupations.

Changes in industrial classification In 2002, the OES survey switched from the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). As a result, there were changes in many industry definitions. Even definitions that appear similar between the two industry classifications may have differences because of the way auxiliary establishments are treated. For example, under SIC the industry "grocery stores" included their retail establishments, warehouses, transportation facilities, and administrative headquarters. Under NAICS, the four establishment types would be reported in separate industries. Only the retail establishments would be included in the NAICS industry for "grocery stores." The change in industrial classification also resulted in changes to the occupations listed on the survey form for a given industry. In 2008, the OES survey switched to the 2007 NAICS classification system from the 2002 NAICS. The most significant revisions are in the Information Sector, particularly within the Telecommunications area. Beginning in 2010, Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) data is included in the Federal Government estimates.

Changes in geographical classification Beginning with the May 2015 estimates, the OES program has implemented redefined metropolitan area definitions, as designated by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and based on the results of the 2010 decennial census. As of May 2016, OES data are available for 394 metropolitan areas, 38 metropolitan divisions that make up 11 of the metropolitan areas, and 167 OES-defined nonmetropolitan areas. Prior to implementing the new area definitions, OES data were available for 380 metropolitan areas, 34 metropolitan divisions, and 172 OES-defined nonmetropolitan areas.

In May 2005, the OES survey began using metropolitan area definitions based on the results of the 2000 decennial census. Prior to 2005, OES had data for 334 metropolitan areas. Data for nonmetropolitan areas are not available before May 2006.

In between the major revisions in May 2005 and May 2015, additional changes to the metropolitan area definitions may have been designated by OMB and implemented by OES. When revised metropolitan area definitions are implemented, the specific geographic composition of existing metropolitan areas may change. (For example, additional counties may be incorporated into an existing area.) Therefore, even if a given metropolitan area is present under both sets of definitions, data for that area may not be directly comparable before and after the revision.

Changes in the way the data are collected In the past, employment in some occupations in an industry may have been reported in a residual category rather than in the specific occupation. In order to limit the length of most survey forms to 24 pages, the forms list only the occupations that are likely to be found in the employer's industry. Prior to 2001, if an employer had an occupation that was not included on the form, the respondent may have reported the worker in an "all other" or residual category or in a related occupation. Currently, the employer is asked to report detailed occupational information for workers that cannot be placed in one of the occupations listed on the form on a separate page. This change may have the effect of showing increased employment in occupations not on the form for a particular industry. In addition, changes to the occupations listed on forms may cause employers to classify workers differently.

Changes in the survey reference period In 2002, the reference months for the OES survey were changed from October, November, and December to May and November in order to reduce seasonal influences. Industries or occupations that have seasonal employment variations between the two sets of reference months will show employment shifts due to the change in the time of year the data were collected.

Changes in mean wage estimation methodology In 2002, the method of calculating mean wages was changed for occupations with any workers earning above $70 per hour in order to remove a downward bias in mean wage estimates. The result of this change may be seen as higher mean wage estimates for some occupations. However, the median and percentile wage estimates would not be affected by this change.

Permanent features of OES methodology The OES methodology that allows such detailed area and industry estimates also makes it difficult to use OES data for comparisons across short time periods. In order to produce estimates for a given reference period, employment and wages are collected from establishments in six semiannual panels for three consecutive years. Every six months, a new panel of data is added, and the oldest panel is dropped, resulting in a moving average staffing pattern. The three years of employment data are benchmarked to represent the total employment for the reference period. The wages of the older data are adjusted by the Employment Cost Index. This methodology assumes that industry staffing patterns change slowly and that detailed occupational wage rates in an area change at the same rate as the national change in the ECI wage component for the occupational group.

The use of six data panels to create a set of estimates means that sudden changes in occupational employment or wages in the population or changes in methodology show up in the OES estimates gradually.

Given the above changes, it is difficult to make conclusive comparisons of OES data over time. However, comparisons of occupations that are not affected by classification changes may be possible if the methodological assumptions hold.

The OES program is considering changes in methodology that would make data useful for time-series comparisons, at least at more aggregated levels, but these are only in early stages of discussion. The Bureau of Labor Statistics at present does not use or encourage the use of OES data for time-series analysis. Where users choose to make such comparisons, we would caution them to note the changes in survey procedures and the limits of the methods used with a pooled sample.