New Jersey progressive politics and news
Christie's last Jersey 'gift' of the year by: Marie Corfield promoted by Rosi Nothing like closing out the year with a Bang! Just when I thought Governor Christie couldn’t say or do one more callous, elitist thing; just when I thought he couldn’t give the middle class, the working poor, the unemployed, minorities, seniors, women, children, taxpayers, teachers, public schools, students, public employees, the LGBT community, hourly-wage workers, Sandy survivors, commuters, Dreamers, people in dire need of medical marijuana (did I leave anyone out?) any more of a kick in the craw, he saves the last, big shiv for the end of the year. Commenting on Comptroller Matthew Boxer’s departure next month, Christie said: “He needs to go make some money. He’s got a family. At $140,000, he can’t put aside the money he needs to do it. It’s well below his market value.’’ Hellooo… Anyone else out there working below their ‘market value’? Anyone else not able to put aside the money they need to provide for their family? Yes, I thought so. Thanks to the governor there are millions of us. I wonder when he will be championing our cause for a better paying job? For the record, I don’t know Mr. Boxer, and my beef is not with him. He was appointed six years ago by Gov. Corzine, and apparently has done an admirable job. Good for him! I truly hope he finds a great job in the private sector that will allow him to provide for his family in the way he sees fit. We should all be so fortunate. I have no knowledge of his personal finances, but I do know that $140K a year is a comfortable salary for a family of four in New Jersey. But if he needs to move on to a higher paying job, so be it. I wish him good luck in his search. But, for the governor of the state with the highest unemployment rate in the region, stagnant job growth and an insultingly low minimum wage (which will change on Wednesday) to single out Boxer as somehow struggling while the rest of us are oh... I dunno... ringing in the New Year with a delightful 1928 Krug and $2600 Knipschildt truffles is the height of pomposity, and should be a glaring red flag (as if there aren’t enough already) as to how a POTUS Christie would operate. There's More... :: (3 Comments, 268 words in story)

[Advertisement] Is the Wolf Guarding the Hen House? by: deciminyan After vetoing a bill that would have had an independent entity audit the costs of Sandy cleanup, Governor Christie asked the State Comptroller, Matthew Boxer, to determine whether AshBritt, a company steeped in GOP influence is performing ethically and effectively. Boxer will also audit other companies involved in Sandy recovery.



Boxer, an attorney, was appointed by Jon Corzine to a six year term which will expire in January, 2014 - the same time that either Christie is sworn in for a second term or more hopefully, Barbara Buono is sworn in as Governor. I've met Matt Boxer a few times, and I believe he is a man of integrity and some of the work that his office has done has helped save money and improve efficiency among state agencies. But this is not about Boxer's efficacy in his job. There are two problems with appointing Boxer to evaluate AshBritt. First, Boxer is a high-ranking member of the Christie administration. Given the political and ethical allegations against AshBritt, even if Boxer's investigation is impeccable, there will always be a shadow over the conclusions. Only an audit team truly independent from Christie's influence would have the credibility that is required in this situation. Second, auditing Sandy relief is a big job. We're talking about billions of dollars here. Has anyone in the mainstream media asked whether Boxer's existing staff has the resources to handle this? Will additional auditors be added to his office? Or will other investigations get the short shrift, enabling other financial shenanigans and inefficiencies to go unreported? Why aren't the mainstream media asking these questions? If the Governor can't stand the heat of a truly independent investigation, perhaps he should get out of the kitchen. Discuss :: (2 Comments)

Heated Senate Hearing on Halfway Houses Starts at 2:00 PM by: Bill Orr The long-awaited Halfway House drama starts at about 2:00 PM with a hearing of the Senate Legislative Oversight Committee. There were many warnings of problems culminating in the N Y Times series Unlocked. Now the investigation begins. Key scheduled witnesses will include:

Comptroller Matthew Boxer whose June 2011 audit revealed serious problems and provided 26 recommendations for changes. A key question is what changes have been made?

John Clancy, CEO of Community Education Centers, whose firm received last year $71 million of the $105 million our government spent on such facilities. His operation came under withering criticism in the NY Times articles and is now believed to be in financial distress.

Gary Lanigan, Commissioner of the Department of Corrections, who since 2010 was reponsible for monitoring CEC and other halfway houses. Members of the Senate committee are: Robert Gordon - Chair, Barbara Buono - Vice-Chair, Thomas Kean, Joseph Kyrillos, Teresa Ruiz, and Paul Sarlo. In firstamend07's diary, he asks whether the event will be "fight or fluff." The Democrats have lots of ammunition, but some of the witnesses will be wily and obfuscate, while Republicans will try their best to protect their governor who has praised and enabled CEC. For more information see CEC Investigation: Our Leaders Take Action - Part VII. The debate will become heated so make some popcorn and listen to both sides on the legislative website. Deciminyan will be live Tweeting up a storm @bluejersey. This is open thread... Discuss :: (7 Comments)