Desperate New NRSC Medicare Scare Ad Recycles False Attack to Hide Ernst’s Risky Proposals
ON SCREEN: Darlene Blake, Des Moines, IA BLAKE: I had worked all my life with the security of knowing that Medicare was going to be there and take care of my medical needs as I became older. ON SCREEN: Bruce Braley voted to cut $716 Billion from Medicare. BLAKE: Bruce Braley voted to cut 700 billion dollars from Medicare to support Obamacare. BLAKE: That’s just not fair. We paid in. We paid for it. That should be there for us. It’s hurting a lot of people.

FACT: ERNST’S RECYCLED MEDICARE SCARE ATTACK IS FALSE AND HAS BEEN DISCREDITED MANY TIMES OVER IN IOWA AND NATIONWIDE KCRG: Claim That Braley Cut $716 Billion From Medicare Is “Mostly False.” In September 2012, KCRG reported, “Claim: ‘$716 billion. That’s how much Bruce Braley voted to slash from Medicare to pay for ObamaCare.’ This $716 billion plays prominently in Republican ads and speeches across the country. It comes from a July analysis from the Congressional Budget Office and the Joint Committee on Taxation that predicts the health law will reduce Medicare spending by $716 billion from 2013-2022. So is this number a cut to Medicare? No, it’s not, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonpartisan health policy research group… Our score We score the NRCC ad as mostly false. While the $716 billion figure is correct, it’s not a cut to existing Medicare programs or benefits.” [KCRG, 9/16/12] Politifact: The Claim That The ACA Cut $700 Billion From Medicare Is “Mostly False.” In August 2012, Politifact wrote, “Romney said, ‘There’s only one president that I know of in history that robbed Medicare, $716 billion to pay for a new risky program of his own that we call Obamacare.’ The only element of truth here is that the health care law seeks to reduce future Medicare spending, and the tally of those cost reductions over the next 10 years is $716 billion. The money wasn’t ‘robbed,’ however, and other presidents have made similar reductions to the Medicare program. We rate this statement Mostly False.” [Politifact, 8/12/12] FactCheck.org: “The Opposite Is True” With GOP Claim That ACA Cuts Medicare. In 2012, FactCheck.org wrote, “Republicans claim the president’s $716 billion ‘cuts’ to Medicare hurt the program’s finances. But the opposite is true. These cuts in the future growth of spending prolong the life of the Medicare trust fund, stretching the program’s finances out longer than they would last otherwise.” [FactCheck.org, 8/24/12] FactCheck.org: It’s “Simply Not True” That Obamacare Raided Medicare. In 2012, Factcheck.org wrote, “So, campaign claims that imply that Obama has taken money out of Medicare, and Medicare won’t ever get it back, are simply not true. At an Aug. 21 campaign stop in West Chester, Pa., Ryan said Obama and the Democrats ‘turned Medicare into a piggy bank to fund Obamacare. They took $716 billion from Medicare to pay for their Obamacare program.’ On the other hand, he added, Republicans are ‘being candid with our current seniors’ and ‘saying stop the raid on Medicare.’” [FactCheck.org, 8/24/12] Washington Post: Claims That ACA Cuts Medicare “Don’t Age Well,” “Miss Important Context And Details.” The Washington Post wrote, “While it is correct that anticipated savings from Medicare were used to help offset some of the anticipated costs of expanding health care for all Americans, it does not affect the Medicare trust fund. In fact, the Obama health-care law also raised Medicare payroll taxes by $318 billion over the new 10-year time frame, further strengthening the program’s financial condition. Under the health-care law, spending does not decrease in Medicare year after year; the reduction is from anticipated levels of spending in future years. Moreover, the ‘cuts’ did not come at the expense of seniors, even though the ad suggests that by having the voiceover refer to cuts to ‘our Medicare.’ … Unlike wine, tired talking points don’t age well. None of these claims are outlandish, but they miss important context and details. In the past they have earned Two Pinocchios, and that is what this ad earns as well.” [Washington Post, 6/7/14] KCRG: Claim That Braley Put Iowa Seniors At Risk Of Losing Their Medicare Benefits Is “Not True.” In September 2012, KCRG reported, “Claim: ‘64,000 Iowa seniors at risk of losing part of their Medicare benefits.’ Not true, Damiano said. The NRCC is referring to cuts slated for Medicare Advantage, a program in which private insurance companies contract with the federal government to provide benefits, said Andrea Bozek, the group’s deputy communications director… Federal payments to Medicare Advantage would be reduced by about $156 billion, Kaiser Health News reports. The cuts would come from insurance companies and providers, not beneficiaries. So Iowa’s Medicare Advantage recipients would be safe unless providers decide not to offer services because of reduced compensation… Our score We score the NRCC ad as mostly false. While the $716 billion figure is correct, it’s not a cut to existing Medicare programs or benefits.” [KCRG, 9/16/12] Politifact: Medicare Reductions Come From Payments To Providers, Not Seniors. In 2012, Politifact wrote, “Romney said, ‘on Medicare for current retirees, (Obama) is cutting $716 billion from the program.’ That amount — $716 billion — refers to Obamacare’s reductions in Medicare spending over 10 years, primarily paid to insurers and hospitals. But the statement gives the impression that the law takes money already allocated to Medicare away from current recipients.” [Politifact, 10/3/12] FACT: THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT STRENGTHENS MEDICARE. Washington Post: “Medicare’s Financial Stability Has Been Strengthened By The Affordable Care Act” – Official Forecast Says Program’s Hospital Costs Will Remain Solvent Until 2030, Four Years Later Than Expected. In July 2014, The Washington Post reported, “Medicare’s financial stability has been strengthened by the Affordable Care Act and other forces that have been subduing health-care spending, according to a new official forecast that says the fund covering the program’s hospital costs will remain solvent until 2030 — four years later than expected a year ago.” [Washington Post, 7/28/14] Because Of The ACA, Iowans On Medicare Have Saved More Than $120 Million On Prescription Drugs. According to the Department of Health and Human Services, “In Iowa, people with Medicare have saved nearly $120,207,518 on prescription drugs because of the Affordable Care Act. In 2013 alone, 46,339 individuals in Iowa saved over $37,465,256, or an average of $809 per beneficiary.” [HHS.gov, accessed 9/2/14] Because Of The ACA, 414,107 Iowans With Traditional Medicare Used One Or More Free Preventive Service In 2013. According to the Department of Health and Human Services, “With no deductibles or co-pays, cost is no longer a barrier for seniors and people with disabilities who want to stay healthy by detecting and treating health problems early. In 2013 alone, an estimated 37.2 million people benefited from Medicare’s coverage of preventive services with no cost-sharing. In Iowa, 414,107 individuals with Medicare used one or more free preventive service in 2013.” [HHS.gov, accessed 9/2/14] FACT: ERNST SUPPORTS PLANS TO END MEDICARE AS WE KNOW IT. In 2011, Ernst Voted Against Opposition Of Paul Ryan’s Changes To Medicare Ernst Voted Against A Senate Resolution Expressing Opposition To Paul Ryan’s Medicare And Medicaid Proposals. On June 27, 2011, Ernst voted against adoption of SR 15, “A Resolution opposing proposed Congressional changes to the Medicare and Medicaid programs… the United States House of Representatives has recently adopted House Concurrent Resolution 34 encompassing the budget proposal of Budget Chairman Paul Ryan which would make fundamental changes to the Medicare and Medicaid programs…BE IT RESOLVED BY THE SENATE, That the Senate respectfully expresses its opposition to the budget proposal encompassed in House Concurrent Resolution 34 and any proposals to change the Medicare or Medicaid programs that are projected to lead to fewer Americans, especially those most vulnerable due to age, disability, or poverty, being able to obtain or retain health care coverage.” The resolution was adopted by a vote of 26-21. [Senate Vote on SR 15, Iowa State Senate Journal, 6/27/11; Senate Resolution 15; HCR 34, introduced 4/11/11] Wall Street Journal: GOP Plan Would “End Medicare.” According to the Wall Street Journal, “The plan would essentially end Medicare, which now pays most of the health-care bills for 48 million elderly and disabled Americans, as a program that directly pays those bills.” [Wall Street Journal, 4/04/11] NPR: Key Part of GOP Plan Is “Ending Medicare.” According to NPR, “Ending Medicare as we know it is a key part” of the GOP budget plan. [NPR, 4/04/11] Former Bush CMS Director: GOP Plan “Gets Rid of” Medicare. Tom Scully — former Bush administration director of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said: “It gets rid of — and I would do that — gets rid of the current Medicare program where the government is the insurance company and the government sets the prices.” [TPM, 6/14/11] Ryan Budget Would Raise Medicare Eligibility Age To 67 Beginning In 2033. In April 2011, The Congressional Budget Office wrote in their analysis of the Ryan Budget: “Starting in 2022, the age of eligibility for Medicare would increase by two months per year until it reached 67 in 2033.” [Congressional Budget Office Ryan Budget Analysis, 4/25/11] And In 2014, Ernst Criticized The Ryan Budget Because It Didn’t “Go Far Enough” Ernst Said The Ryan Budget “Doesn’t Go Far Enough… Let’s Go Further.” During an April 10 forum sponsored by the Simpson College Republicans, Ernst responded to an audience question regarding her stance on the 2014 budget proposal from Rep. Paul Ryan (R-WI), responding, “I think we’re moving in the right direction, but we don’t have enough significant cuts within the budget. There is I believe it was an estimated $5 trillion of savings that will be shown in that budget, the Paul Ryan budget. It’s a start. It’s a start. But it’s not as much as I would like to see. It does call for the repeal of Obamacare because it does defund Obamacare, which is wonderful. That’s where we need to be going. But it doesn’t go far enough. And yes, I’m going to go see him tomorrow night, and I admire him very much. Let’s go further. Let’s go further.” [Simpson College Republicans Forum, 4/10/14] (Video) Ernst On Ryan Plan: “We Have To Get There Faster.” According to an April 2014 report from the Waterloo-Cedar Falls Courier, “All of the candidates except Jacobs said they would not have voted for the U.S. House-approved budget proposal by U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., because it did not do enough to tackle the nation’s budget deficit and national debt. ‘We have to get there faster. I agree with Scott that we have to get there faster,’ Ernst said.” [WCF Courier, 4/25/14]