Political Science
Corwin Smidt, Director of the Paul B. Henry Institute, Professor, Political Science

(Fall 2011 in the Netherlands on a Fullbright grant at the Roosevelt Center for Dutch-American Studies where he will hold the "Dow-Fulbright Distinguish Research Chair")

(616) 526-6233

smid@calvin.edu

Office: DeVos Center 261E

Educational Background

Professor Smidt earned a bachelor of arts in political science and history from Northwestern College (Iowa) in 1968. He went on to earn a master of arts (1971)and Ph.D. (1975) from the University of Iowa in political science. Professor Smidt joined the political science faculty at Calvin in 1977 after a two-year stint at Quincy College.

Academic Interests

American Politics, Media and Politics, Parties and Elections, Public Opinion and Voting, Religion and Politics

Recent Activities

Corwin Smidt has been elected to the governing council of the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion. He will serve a three-year term, spanning the 2009, 2010 and 2011 meetings of the organization. The society was founded in 1949 and fosters collaboration among scholars from a range of discipline, including sociology, religious studies, psychology, political science, economics and more.

Additional Information

Professor Smidt is the author of 13 books, 59 book chapters, 33 scholarly essays and 27 other publications. Published in November 2008 Professor Smidt co-wrote the book Pews, Prayers, and Participation: Religion and Civic Responsibility (with James Penning, Stephen Monsma, Douglas Koopman, and Kevin Den Dulk). He also recently co-published the book Church, State and Public Justice: Five Views (InterVarsity Press, 2007) in which he speaks on the mission of the church and the purpose of the government in solving social injustices from a reformed perspective. In March 2008 Professor Smidt received a $96,800 grant from the Bradley Foundation for the research project “Religion, Civic Responsibility, and Renewing the American Experiment: Stage Two.” He continues to serve, as he has since 1997, as the director of the Paul B. Henry Institute for the Study of Christianity and Politics. For a detailed list of his publications, please download his curriculum vitae.

Use Google to search for Professor Smidt's frequent quotations in a variety of news sources.

Prof. Smidt and students in Hungary blog about their experiences

Curriculum vitae (118 KB )