Campaign For Liberty — OB allows Palestinians to settle in US
OB allows Palestinians to settle in US

Posted by susan3j4 on 02/28/09 1:59 PM



[Newer: I want a Divorce] [Older: Con Con -- pro or con?]



Obama Signs Presidential Determination Allowing Palestinians Loyal to Hamas to Resettle In US



www.thefederalregister.com/d.p/2009-02-04-E9-2488



Posted on Sunday, February 08, 2009



President Barack Obama has signed an executive order presidential determination allowing hundreds of thousands of Palestinians to settle in the United States at American taxpayers' expense. Sure, what can go wrong when we allow hundreds of thousands of people who have been, as Mark Steyn memorably described, "marinated" in a "sick death cult," who voted for Hamas, and 55% of whom support suicide bombing/murders in the United States .

By executive order, President Barack Obama has ordered the expenditure of $20.3 million in migration assistance to the Palestinians. Egypt won't take them. Jordan won't take them. Syria won't take them. Saudi Arabia won't take them. All of the Arab countries - every one of them - has allowed the Palestinians to fester for over 60 years. Meanwhile, generation after generation have become more and more radicalized. Their lives are unproductive - they "live" to die as martyrs - yearning for the rewards of the world beyond.



The "presidential determination" will allow hundreds of thousands of Palestinians with ties to Hamas to resettle in the United States . The determination was signed on January 27 and appeared in the Federal Register on February 4.



President Obama's decision, according to the Register, was necessitated by "the urgent refugee and migration needs" of the "victims."



Few on Capitol Hill took note that the order provides a free ticket replete with housing and food allowances to individuals who have displayed their overwhelming support of the Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas) in the parliamentary election of January 2006.



Let's review some of Barack Obama's most recent actions since he was inaugurated a little more than two weeks ago:

* His first call to any head of state as president was to Mahmoud Abbas, leader of Fatah party in the Palestinian territory.

* His first one-on-one interview with any news organization was with Al Arabia television.

* He ordered Guantanamo Bay closed and all military trials of detainees halted.

* He ordered all overseas CIA interrogation centers closed.

* He withdrew all charges against the masterminds behind the USS Cole and 9/11.

* Today we learn that he is allowing hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refuges to move to and live in the US at American taxpayer expense.

Anyone else seeing a pattern here?









Categories: Education

Tags:



No comments yet.



You must be a member to post comments. [Become a member] [Login]