Clinton: New York criminals get guns from Vermont
ALBANY — Hillary Clinton ratcheted up her attacks on Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders' gun control record Monday, telling a private gathering of state legislators near the State Capitol that many of the guns used by New York criminals come across the border from the Green Mountain State.

“She said she wants to work to get illegal guns off the street and said it's been part of her work as an elected official to strengthen laws to keep America safe. She said that it's going to be coming out in the very near future that many of the catastrophes that have taken human lives in the State of New York have been the product of guns coming over the border from Vermont,” said State Sen. Tim Kennedy, a Democrat from Buffalo. “That's the first I heard it. I think it caught everybody's attention and we're looking forward to learning more about it.”

Clinton, who represented the Empire State for eight years in the U.S. Senate before she was tapped as President Obama's first secretary of state, has been hammering Sanders' record on gun control in states — including New York — with major urban populations.

On Sunday, Clinton told worshipers at the Christian Cultural Center in Brooklyn's Canarsie neighborhood that there was a “big difference” between her and Sanders on the issue, and that he “has voted with the National Rifle Association and the big gun lobby.”

Sanders has said that he was reflecting the views of a more rural constituency as a legislator.

Monday afternoon's speech was delivered to a closed audience of Democratic lawmakers, lobbyists and other party stalwarts in the ballroom of a hotel just down the block from the august State Capitol. Reporters listening from the nearby lobby could hear the crowd of over 100 people cheering at various points during Clinton's remarks, but the specific words were made inaudible by an Ace of Base remix playing from the hotel sound system and, eventually, a closed ballroom door.

Several other attendees confirmed to POLITICO that Clinton seemingly opened a more direct line of attack on Sanders, though she stopped just short of holding the former Burlington mayor responsible for gun violence here.

“She said that many of the guns that are found to be involved in crimes in this state are found to have their origins in Vermont,” said Assemblyman Kevin Cahill, a Democrat from Kingston. “The implication was just that many of the guns that are involved in crimes in this state come from Vermont. That was the implication I got. She also talked about the Charleston loop hole, which she said Senator Sanders supported, which she doesn't.”

Carl Heastie, the State Assembly speaker and until recently the chairman of the Bronx Democratic Committee, said, “She did mention that [Vermont] doesn't have gun laws, and she brought that up when she was contrasting her position on guns and votes in Senate with Senator Sanders.”

Clinton's stop in Albany was part of a swing through the Capital Region as she barnstorms the state ahead of New York's April 19 primary — a contest which polls show has grown increasingly tighter. Clinton enjoys the near unanimous support of elected and party leaders, including Gov. Andrew Cuomo.

Cuomo and Clinton rallied together in Manhattan Monday morning to celebrate Cuomo's signing of a law that will create a system of paid family leave and increase the minimum wage to $15 in some parts of New York.