Introduced version
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED

AN ACT

relating to state assessment instruments administered in grades

three through eight in public schools.

BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:

SECTION 1. Section 39.023(a), Education Code, is amended to

read as follows:

(a) The agency shall adopt or develop appropriate

criterion-referenced assessment instruments, that are established

empirically to be valid and reliable by an entity that is

independent of the test developer and the agency, and designed to

assess essential knowledge and skills in reading, writing ,

mathematics, social studies , and science. Except as provided by

Subsection (a-2), all students, other than students assessed under

Subsection (b) or (l) or exempted under Section 39.027, shall be

assessed in:

(1) mathematics, annually in grades three through

seven without the aid of technology and in grade eight with the aid

of technology on any assessment instrument that includes algebra;

(2) reading, annually in grades three through eight;

[ (3) ] [ writing, including spelling and grammar, in

grades four and seven;

[ (4) social studies, in grade eight;

(3) [ (5) ] science, in grades five and eight; and

(4) [ (6) ] any other subject and grade required by

federal law.

(a-1) Criterion-referenced assessment instruments shall be

designed to measure only readiness standards as identified by the

agency for the purposes of determining passing rates for use in the

school accountability ratings. The agency may also include

supporting standards in the assessment for diagnostic and reporting

purposes only and may not use the results of items related to

supporting standards for accountability rating purposes.

(1) In (a-1) "readiness standards" shall mean only

those standards that are essential for success in the current grade

or course

(2) In (a-2) "supporting standards" shall mean

standards that are referenced or introduced in the current grade or

course and are readiness standards in another grade or course

SECTION 2. Section 39.023(r), Education Code, is added to

read as follows:

(r) Assessment instruments shall be designed and

administered as follows:

(1) For grades 3 through 5 the assessment shall be

designed such that 85% of students complete the assessment within

120 minutes.

(2) For grades 6 through 8 the assessment shall be

designed such that 85% of students complete the assessment within

180 minutes

(3) The maximum time allowed for the test shall be 8

hours and it shall be administered in one calendar day.

SECTION 3. This Act applies beginning with the 2013-2014

school year.

SECTION 4. This Act takes effect immediately if it receives

a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as

provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution. If this

Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this