Council on Foreign Relations
False Dawn: Protest, Democracy, and Violence in the New Middle East

The much-anticipated transitions to democratic political systems in the Middle East have not materialized. Despite the enthusiasm surrounding the uprisings in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and other countries, a rather different reality of instability and repressive politics has emerged in the region. In my forthcoming book, False Dawn: Protest, Democracy, and Violence in the New Middle East, which will be published by Oxford University Press in 2017, I argue that the Arab revolts of 2010–2011 and Turkey's Gezi Park protests in 2013 represented a collective false dawn. While some uprisings failed to overthrow entrenched social and political orders, other states face potential break-ups in the absence of strong institutions. Still other countries are either experiencing a consolidation of authority that is blunting political opposition or struggling to find a formula that will allow them to escape political stalemate. Since the uprisings, observers have often asserted that there is "no going back" in the Middle East, meaning a return to pre-uprising politics. That is surely true, but it does not imply—as so many have assumed—a democratic future for the region. Rather than a particularly difficult moment on the path in the transition to democracy, the Middle East's present uncertainty, violence, and authoritarianism is also its future.

Turkey: A Case Study in Democratic Reversal

Just a decade ago, Turkey seemed on track to becoming a full-fledged liberal democracy. The Justice and Development Party (AKP) came to power in 2002 and oversaw a period of dramatic political reform. By the time the European Commission recommended, in 2004, that Ankara begin pursuing EU membership, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan was earning praise for having discovered a Turkish "third way," in which Islamists pursued political and economic reform without sowing dangerous social divisions. A decade later, however, Turkey's democratic transition is over. Although more Turks are voting and engaged in politics than ever before—thanks to AKP reforms that have helped produce a growing middle class—over time, the government has increasingly restricted their ability to contest its decisions. Pressure on journalists, restrictions on freedom of expression, police brutality, and limits on social media have all become hallmarks of Turkish politics. Overall, Turkish leaders have used the quasi-democratic institutions of the political system to advance an anti-democratic agenda. My work on Turkey—articles, blog posts, and roundtable meetings—aims to identify the trends in Turkish politics and what they may mean for the broader region.