Soda tax rollout leaves Chicago-area shoppers grumbling, confused
Cook County's long-delayed tax on sweetened beverages took effect Wednesday amid confusion, leaving retailers grumbling and shoppers plotting soda runs to neighboring counties.

The penny-per-ounce tax applies to both sugar- and artificially sweetened drinks. That goes beyond just pop — bottled and canned beverages, diet soda, ready-to-drink sweetened coffees and teas, sports and energy drinks, and juice products that aren't 100 percent juice also are taxed.

The tax, originally set to begin July 1, already has shoppers feeling inconvenienced and operators recovering from weeks of uncertainty due to a legal battle that delayed its implementation.

Sarah McBride, of Cicero, was fueling up at a truck stop in Northlake on Wednesday morning and picked up a Coke to start her day.

"I don't even want to buy any products here anymore," she said as she cleaned the windshield of the AT&T truck she drives for work. "I'm going to have to make adjustments to stop outside of my home area just to get pop for me and my kid. That's ridiculous."

McBride's sister lives in Gurnee, and McBride plans on shopping when she visits her this week after work.

"Instead of visiting my family, I'm going to make time to go shopping while I'm out there because they don't have the tax," said McBride, 42. "I have a teenager, I mean, c'mon. I buy cases ... at least twice a week. I'm going and getting a lot of pop."

Cook County’s long-delayed tax on sweetened beverages took effect Wednesday amid confusion, leaving retailers grumbling and shoppers plotting soda runs to neighboring counties. (Grace Wong / Chicago Tribune) Cook County’s long-delayed tax on sweetened beverages took effect Wednesday amid confusion, leaving retailers grumbling and shoppers plotting soda runs to neighboring counties. (Grace Wong / Chicago Tribune) SEE MORE VIDEOS

The lead-up to the so-called soda tax has been filled with conflict. Health groups and county officials cheered its implementation as retailers and beverage industry groups railed against what some consider a confusing and unconstitutional charge. An ongoing court battle delayed the rollout of the tax about a month.

Cashiers at Sunset Foods' single location in Cook County spent Wednesday morning notifying customers when they were buying a newly taxed item, said Courtney Mayszak, registered dietitian nutritionist for the grocery chain.

"The people that cashiers have talked to so far mostly have expressed disgust for Illinois and Cook County in particular," she said.

Some customers have removed items from their carts, she said. Others were confused at who was implementing the tax, thinking it was an extra charge Sunset Foods was collecting.

The grocery chain expects the tax to have a much greater effect around holidays, when people who don't normally drink soda buy the stuff for guests, Mayszak said. Sunset Foods is directing customers buying large amounts of sweetened beverages to its four other locations outside Cook County.

Some retailers experienced hiccups in implementing the tax.

Walgreens, for example, "inadvertently coded some of our products incorrectly within our system that applies taxes during the checkout process," spokesman Phil Caruso said in an email.

"We are working to resolve this complex issue as soon as possible," Caruso said. "This is a complex rollout affecting nearly 3,000 beverages we offer in Cook County. For example, we have 23 different Diet Coke products alone that needed to be recoded."

Meanwhile, a receipt from the Whole Foods Market in Streeterville showed the store didn't collect the tax on two 12-ounces cans of pop purchased Wednesday afternoon.

Whole Foods did not respond immediately to a request for comment.

Some shoppers, such as 40-year-old Kevin Ahrens of La Grange, have no issue with the tax. Ahrens, who was shopping at a Mariano's in Western Springs, said his family members mostly drink water and the tax doesn't affect their habits at all.

But Kortney Burns, of Western Springs, said Pepsi and ginger ale often occupy her grocery cart. She bought pop the day before to prepare for the tax.

"I think it's ridiculous, especially since it's only for Cook County," the 42-year-old said. "If you're on a money crunch or something and you have a budget, 20 cents is still 20 cents."

Though purchases made with food stamps will be exempt, some Chicago residents said they had concerns the tax will unfairly hit low-income shoppers.

"Everyone has to pay it, whether you make $100,000 per year or $20,000 per year," said Bucktown resident Chris Schluter as he walked out of Aldi carrying a half-gallon of chocolate milk, which isn't subject to the tax.

Schluter said he doesn't consume a lot of sugary drinks, but he said he'd likely stock up on 2-liter bottles of Diet Coke when he's in the suburbs visiting family.

"I'm going to actively try not to buy in the city," he said.

The county, however, is depending on the tax revenue. It had been expecting the tax to bring in $67.5 million this year and $200.6 million in 2018.

The county lost about $20 million from not being able to collect the tax in July, said Frank Shuftan, a spokesman for Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle. It will have to make up that money in order to balance the budget, and that could mean layoffs. Shuftan said a small number of employees have already been laid off, but he couldn't provide an exact figure.

Health-focused groups, such as the Illinois Alliance to Prevent Obesity, hailed the tax, hoping the extra cost will discourage sugar consumption.

"We're gratified that Cook County is at the forefront of a national movement to create a healthier population," the group said in a news release.

In recent years, the overall volume of carbonated soft drink consumption has been declining as consumers across the nation continue to look toward options that are seen as healthier.

To varying degrees of success, companies like Coca-Cola and PepsiCo have diversified their portfolios to include products other than soda pop, such as water, juice and tea.

But soda still drives big sales for Coca-Cola, PepsiCo and Dr Pepper Snapple, which collectively held an 84 percent market share in off-premise carbonated soft drink sales last year, according to Euromonitor data.

And those companies are not relinquishing the fight against soda taxes. After spending millions of dollars opposing similar taxes in Philadelphia and Berkeley, Calif., the American Beverage Association — the industry trade group representing those companies — has funded the Can the Tax coalition of local business groups and retailers fighting to repeal the tax in Cook County.

A look at the numbers behind Cook County's new soda tax. How will the tax work and how much will it cost consumers? (Phil Geib / Chicago Tribune) A look at the numbers behind Cook County's new soda tax. How will the tax work and how much will it cost consumers? (Phil Geib / Chicago Tribune) SEE MORE VIDEOS

On Tuesday, a group of retailers announced that it's appealing a Cook County Circuit judge's decision to dismiss the lawsuit that temporarily blocked the tax.