Chicago's history as a sanctuary city
Chicago's path to being a sanctuary city began more than 30 years ago. What follows is a look back at the leaders and laws that have shaped Chicago's involvement with the sanctuary movement.

Church congregation begins taking in refugees The Wellington Avenue Church congregation votes to join the sanctuary movement -- becoming just the second church in the U.S. to harbor refugees who entered the country illegally. The movement, which has roots in the medieval tradition of churches providing sanctuary for those fleeing persecution, was aimed at providing a safe haven for Central Americans running from political repression and violence in their home countries. They were refused asylum here because of U.S. support for the governments of El Salvador and Guatemala. About 20 Chicago-area churches became sanctuaries in the 1980s. Salvadorans wear masks to hide their faces during a visit to Wellington Avenue United Church of Christ on Aug. 9, 1982. (Chicago Tribune)

Group becomes national leader in sanctuary movement Recognized for its work in organizing and transporting refugees from El Salvador to a network of welcoming churches around the U.S., the Chicago Religious Task Force on Central America becomes the national clearinghouse for the sanctuary movement. The group distributes books on the sanctuary movement and holds rallies in downtown Chicago to bring awareness to the issues facing Central American refugees. Members of the Chicago Religious Task Force on Central America protest outside the Federal Building on Sept. 16, 1983, in Chicago. (Chicago Tribune)

Chicago's chief legal officer: Don't assist the feds A week after 18 workers driving cabs were arrested, Corporation Counsel James Montgomery recommends Chicago not cooperate with federal immigration authorities in arresting immigrants living in the U.S. illegally unless subpoenas are obtained. Chicago's Immigration and Naturalization Service Director A.D. Moyer criticizes Montgomery's suggestion.

Mayor encourages 'equal access by all persons' to city services, licenses Mayor Harold Washington signs an executive order ending the city's practice of asking job and license applicants about their U.S. citizenship and halting cooperation by city agencies with federal immigration authorities. Mayor Harold Washington says he took an oath to obey the laws and raises his hand before signing the executive order enhancing Chicago's sanctuary status on March 7, 1985. (Chicago Tribune archives)

'Operation Taxicab' rounds up immigrants suspected of living in U.S. illegally Calling cabdrivers who are living in the U.S. illegally "a serious menace," the city's immigration director, Moyer, orders spot checks of drivers' identification at airports and other hangouts. Dubbed "Operation Taxicab," 129 drivers are arrested in a single day -- 51 could later prove they were in the U.S. legally. Though there was no federal law prohibiting employers from hiring workers in the country illegally, Moyer blames Mayor Washington's earlier executive order for opening the door. An abandoned cab is towed following a raid by immigration agents at the Merchandise Mart taxi stand on Dec. 17, 1985. (Chicago Tribune)

Feds offer immigrants ways to gain legal status Less than 1 1/2 years after overseeing raids on taxi drivers in the U.S. illegally, Moyer details plans to open four centers to help immigrants with paperwork to become legal U.S. residents. The effort is part of the Immigration Reform and Control Act, a law passed by Congress and signed by President Ronald Reagan to offer a path to legal residence for people in the U.S. illegally since Jan. 1, 1982. A.D. Moyer, Chicago district director for immigration services, points out locations at a April 30, 1987, news conference where immigrants who are in the U.S. illegally can get help. (Chicago Tribune)

Sanctuary group urges 'hiring undocumented workers' The Chicago Religious Task Force, a national clearinghouse for the sanctuary movement helping Central American refugees, said in a Chicago Tribune story that it was planning to urge priests, nuns and "employers to break the law by hiring undocumented workers" in the Chicago area, where tens of thousands of the immigrants live.

Daley adopts Washington's sanctuary stance Shortly after taking office, Daley signs 13 executive orders including one that reaffirms "fair and equal access" to employment, benefits and licenses to all -- regardless of nationality or citizenship. Mayor Richard M. Daley signs an executive order on April 25, 1989. (Chicago Tribune)

Chicago Crime Commission asks for amendment The group asks Mayor Daley to amend the 1989 executive order to allow Chicago police to share citizenship information with the INS to help combat street gangs. Later, Daley says any information about a person involved in serious crimes would be turned over to the feds. (This provision would be added as part of the city's 2012 Welcoming City ordinance.)

City's sanctuary policy becomes law The City Council votes -- 44-0 -- to pass an ordinance providing all residents equal access "to the services, opportunities, and protection it provides or administers."

Woman seeks church refuge to avoid deportation, reviving sanctuary movement Ordered to be deported, Elvira Arellano and her U.S.-born son take refuge inside Adalberto United Methodist Church in Chicago's Humboldt Park neighborhood. She had been arrested in a post-Sept. 11, 2001, sweep of O'Hare International Airport, where she was working as a cleaner. Authorities discovered she had been using a fake Social Security number and had been previously deported to Mexico. Arellano would spend a year living in the church with her story receiving national attention. While awaiting a decision on her application for political asylum, Arellano is living in Humboldt Park with her partner and two sons. Elvira Arellano and her son, Saul, greet supporters at Adalberto United Methodist Church on Sept. 30, 2006. (Abel Uribe/Chicago Tribune)

Cook County won't fulfill ICE detainer requests In a vote of 10-5, the Cook County Board passes an ordinance to free immigrants suspected of living in the U.S. illegally who are jailed in both felony and misdemeanor cases despite federal immigration authorities' requests to detain them. The ordinance was based on a recent federal ruling in Indiana that determined ICE detainers are voluntary requests and not criminal warrants.

'Welcoming City' ordinance passes Building on an existing ordinance that prohibits agencies from inquiring about the immigration status of people seeking city services, this ordinance also prevents local police from detaining people solely on the belief that they are in the U.S. illegally, and cooperating with federal agents when they suspect status is the only reason the warrant has been issued. With its introduction in July 2012, Mayor Emanuel said the ordinance would "make Chicago the most immigrant-friendly city in the country." Mayor Rahm Emanuel after the City Council meeting on Sept. 12, 2012. (Nancy Stone / Chicago Tribune)

City Council urges President Obama to stop deporting 'individuals with no criminal history' The City Council passes a resolution encouraging Congress and President Barack Obama to pursue immigration reform. "Children and their families should not have to live in fear of government-forced separation," it stated.

Alderman pushes for Rauner to reverse decision on Syrian refugees Following the Paris terrorist attacks, 31 governors -- including then-Indiana Gov. and now-Vice President Mike Pence and Illinois Gov. Bruce Rauner -- sought to turn away Syrian refugees from their states. In a resolution reaffirming Chicago's sanctuary city status and "refuge for refugees from around the world," Ald. Ed Burke, 14th, says it's up to the federal government to make that decision. Fatima Adris and her son Osama Omarien, 2, were on hand when the City Council backed a resolution asking Gov. Bruce Rauner to reverse his decision on accepting refugees Nov. 18, 2015. (Nancy Stone/Chicago Tribune)

City workers, police can't use immigration status for intimidation Following Jianqing Klyzek's case, aldermen amend 2012's Welcoming City ordinance to require that reports of "physical abuse, threats or intimidation" against immigrants, in the U.S. legally or illegally, be sent to oversight agencies that cover the Chicago Police Department and other city agencies. Surveillance footage from the raid on July 31, 2013, shows Jianqing Klyzek, 32, shortly after Chicago police officers entered the Copper Tan and Spa. Klyzek says she was hit in the head by a Chicago police officer while she knelt on the floor. (Image from video via Klyzek's attorney)

Municipal ID program launches Suggested in 2015 by a City Council ordinance, Mayor Emanuel launches a program to give all Chicagoans -- including immigrants in the U.S. illegally, the homeless, the formerly incarcerated, young adults and the elderly -- official identification that will not convey information about national origin or legal status. New City Clerk Anna Valencia will oversee the program.

Following Donald Trump's election, Mayor Emanuel defends city's stance "Since the Presidential Election, there has been a sense of uncertainty among many immigrant communities in Chicago and across the nation. I want to assure all of our families that Chicago is and will remain a Sanctuary City," Mayor Emanuel said in a Nov. 13, 2016, news release. "Chicago has been a city of immigrants since it was founded. We have always welcomed people of all faiths and backgrounds, and while the administration will change, our values and our commitment to inclusion will not." Mayor Rahm Emanuel speaks during a news conference at Lurie Children's Hospital the day following his statement. (Antonio Perez/Chicago Tribune)

City looks for Rauner's backing of sanctuary status A resolution sponsored by Mayor Rahm Emanuel, new Democratic state Comptroller Susana Mendoza and 35 of the city's 50 aldermen calls on Governor Bruce Rauner to issue a statement of "support for cities that welcome our undocumented family members and neighbors and condemn any effort to strip the city of Chicago of federal funding." The resolution calls on Rauner to speak at a special council meeting "held solely for the purpose of discussing the president-elect's plans for cities that welcome and protect immigrants." Asked to respond to the specifics of the city resolution, a Rauner spokeswoman instead issued a general statement reiterating the governor's support for immigration reform.

Emanuel defends city from President Trump's threats In response to President Trump's signing of an executive order intended to block federal funding to sanctuary cities like Chicago, Mayor Emanuel says, "There is no stranger among us. We welcome people." The city's aldermen vote to reaffirm that Chicago protects all residents regardless of race, ethnicity, immigration status, criminal record, gender identity and sexual orientation. "You mess with one in Chicago, you mess with all of us," said Northwest Side Ald. John Arena, 45th. Mayor Rahm Emanuel presides over the meeting of the Chicago City Council on Jan. 25, 2017. (Nancy Stone/Chicago Tribune)

Chicago advocates condemn Trump's order on migrants Chicago immigration reform advocates and Muslim leaders denounced President Donald Trump's executive order to temporarily block refugees coming to the U.S. while the government reviews screening processes, calling it an effective ban on Muslims in America. In issuing the order, which calls for a four-month halt on all refugee admissions, an indefinite ban on Syrian refugees and a temporary moratorium on immigrants from seven Muslim-majority countries with terrorism concerns, Trump said he seeks to protect the nation from terrorist attacks. He called for a review of all screening procedures for those seeking immigrant visas to the U.S. Demonstrators converge in reaction to the executive order travel ban on Jan. 29, 2017, outside Terminal 5 of O'Hare International Airport. (Brian Cassella/Chicago Tribune)

'Safeguarding Sanctuary Cities Act' introduced in U.S. House Rep. Mike Quigley, of Chicago, and 32 Democrats introduce a bill that would "ensure that federal funds cannot be unduly withheld from any state or local authority that limits or restricts compliance with a voluntary immigration detainer request." This bill was introduced during a previous session of Congress but was not advanced.

Rauner doesn't take a position on Democrats' immigration plan Asked if he would support legislation to make it harder for federal authorities to access information about immigrants living in Illinois, Governor Bruce Rauner didn't reply yes or no, saying he is "very pro-comprehensive immigration reform" and wants the state "to continue to be welcoming and diverse." Legislation under consideration at the state Capitol would allow schools, medical facilities and places of worship to decline access to federal immigration authorities, and it would limit cooperation and communication between local police and immigration officials. The plans were introduced as part of a broader "sanctuary state" effort to extend statewide some protections like those in Chicago and Cook County, where local laws prohibit government workers and police officers from asking about residents' immigration status. The legislation is sponsored by Democrats, and their party controls the General Assembly. Pressed to provide his position on the sanctuary state idea Friday, Rauner declined. "I've answered it," he said. "I've said what I'm going to say." Gov. Bruce Rauner takes questions from members the Chicago Tribune Editorial Board on Feb. 1, 2017. (Abel Uribe/Chicago Tribune)

Former sanctuary seeker allowed to stay in the U.S. another year following ICE meeting Elvira Arellano, the twice-deported immigration activist whose year of living in a Humboldt Park church a decade ago made her a lightning rod in the immigration debate, was granted a reprieve and allowed to remain in the United States for another year. She is awaiting a hearing on her petition for political asylum, which she filed three years ago. Elvira Arellano, 42, was allowed to stay in the U.S. another year following her annual check-in with Immigration and Customs Enforcement in Chicago on March 15, 2017, the third such appointment since she returned to the U.S. in 2014. (Abel Uribe/Chicago Tribune)

U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions says sanctuary cities could lose federal funding Attorney General Jeff Sessions says he is "urging states and local jurisdictions to comply with these federal laws." He says the Justice Department will require compliance with immigration laws in order for the cities to receive grants through the Office of Justice Programs. The Obama administration had a similar policy in place.

Justice Department rules intensify crackdown on sanctuary cities like Chicago The Justice Department escalated its promised crackdown on so-called sanctuary cities, saying it will no longer give cities coveted grant money unless they give federal immigration authorities access to jails and provide advance notice when someone in the country illegally is about to be released. In this file photo, Attorney General Jeff Sessions speaks in Columbus, Ohio on Aug. 2, 2017. (Jay LaPrete/AP Photo)

Emanuel sues Trump's Justice Department over sanctuary city policy Mayor Emanuel's Law Department files its much-touted lawsuit against President Donald Trump's Justice Department over its effort to withhold some grant funding from so-called sanctuary cities.

Sessions blasts sanctuary cities, singling out Chicago During a news conference in Miami, Sessions vowed to continue fighting cities that refuse to cooperate with immigration authorities -- aiming much of his frustration at Chicago.

Mother of 6 seeks sanctuary in a Chicago church to avoid deportation Francisca Lino, 50, a Bolingbrook resident and mother of six children -- five of them U.S. citizens -- is taking sanctuary in the same Chicago church that protected immigration activist Elvira Arellano. Lino was scheduled to meet with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials, but, instead, she held a West Side news conference at Adalberto United Methodist Church in Humboldt Park. Francisca and Diego Lino, left with their twin daughters Juliana, 15, middle and Judith in the room where Francisca is taking sanctuary. The Lino family along with their supporters gathered at Adalberto Church in Chicago's Humboldt Park neighborhood on Aug. 23, 2017 to announce that Francisca Lino, who was required to turn herself into immigration that day, will instead take sanctuary in the church. (Nancy Stone/Chicago Tribune)

Judge rules in city's favor on sanctuary cities, grants nationwide injunction A federal judge in Chicago blocked the Trump administration's rules requiring so-called sanctuary cities to cooperate with immigration agents in order to get a public safety grant.

Chicago judge refuses to change ruling on sanctuary cities U.S. District Judge Harry Leinenweber said Mayor Rahm Emanuel's administration could suffer "irreparable harm" in its relationship with the immigrant community if it were to comply with the U.S. Department of Justice's new rules requiring sanctuary cities nationaide to cooperate with immigration agents in exchange for receiving public safety grant money.

Lino's attorneys file a civil rights lawsuit They allege the U.S. government violated her Fifth Amendment rights and expeditiously deported her in 1999 without due process.

Emanuel wins legal victory in sanctuary city lawsuit The 7th Circuit Court of Appeals in Chicago upholds a nationwide injunction prohibiting Attorney General Sessions from requiring cities to give immigration agents access to immigrants in the U.S. illegally who are in their lockups, in order to get certain public safety grants. Following the ruling, Mayor Emanuel calls on President Trump's Justice Department to hand over grant money to Chicago.

Chicago sues Trump administration for withholding police funding The city has already sued over the matter, but now the DOJ has imposed a new round of restrictions, city officials say. Among other things, the new stipulations include requiring local police to inform immigration officials about immigrants in custody who have questionable legal status and allowing them to access the prisoners for questioning.

Judge: Feds can't dock sanctuary cities A federal judge sides with the city of Chicago in its sanctuary city lawsuit, ruling that the Trump administration does not have the authority to withhold federal public safety funding from the city if it limits its cooperation with the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials. Chicago Corporation Counsel Ed Siskel, shown in 2017 addressing the lawsuit against the Justice Department, called the July 27, 2018, ruling "another significant legal victory for Chicago." (Jose M. Osorio/Chicago Tribune)