Radicals' sons seek change from within
Yasser Najjar has been haunted by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict since he saw an Israeli commando team assassinate his father and mother when he was just 11 years old.

Najjar says his father, Mohammed Najjar, who helped plan the 1972 massacre at the Munich Olympic Games, was shot so many times that when his body was lifted "the bullets dropped out like hailstones."

Jihad Al-Wazir lives not far from Najjar in Gaza City. His father, Abu Jihad, once the No. 2 man in the Palestine Liberation Organization, was assassinated in the Tunisian capital in 1988.

Both commando teams were led by Israeli officer Ehud Barak, who later served as prime minister from 1999 to 2001.

Despite the traumas of their youth, these Palestinian men hold the hope of a peaceful coexistence with Israel. Both say they do not crave revenge, and neither has become a militant.

"My revenge will be to see the creation of a Palestinian state," Al-Wazir said.

Najjar and Al-Wazir are part of a new guard of junior officials and academics--many educated in the United States--who argue that the Palestinian Authority needs reforming.

The old guard, greedy and corrupted by power, has lost too many opportunities, they said.

Each is optimistic that like-minded people on both sides of the conflict will work out a pragmatic rather than a military solution.

"We need reforms. We need independent courts, an independent judiciary. We need habeas corpus, we must have people elected and not selected, institutions supervised and the corrupt brought to justice," Al-Wazir said.

"Believe me, my father was a pragmatic man who sponsored a Jewish-Palestinian peace conference in New York once. If he were alive today the divisions inside the [Palestinian Authority] would disappoint him, so would the jockeying for power and the graft," Al-Wazir said. "If he were alive there would be only one command, one security agency and not half a dozen with their own agenda."

Najjar, 40, is an economist with a master's degree from the United States. He has been shunted off to a liaison job with the European Community in the Palestinian Authority's Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation.

Al-Wazir, 52, has the title of assistant deputy director in the same ministry. He holds a master's degree from Marquette University and lived 11 years in the United States working with the emergency weather warning system.

The aura of their fathers, who are idolized by some Palestinians, seems to protect the two men despite the bluntness of their criticism.

"Sometimes I feel their radicals and our radicals are in cahoots," mused Al-Wazir. "How come each time [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon is in a corner there is a Palestinian suicide operation to save him?"

Similar ideas, considered public blasphemy on both sides, are expressed only in private.

Disheartening return

Both men are among Palestinians who lived a comfortable life abroad but considered it a duty to return to their homeland, even if it meant a far more modest existence.

"I came back to Gaza eight years ago because I wanted to see what my parents died for," Najjar said.

A socialist like his father, Najjar was outraged by what he saw.

"I regret I came back not because of the failure of the Oslo agreement but due to my disagreement with the Palestinian Authority," he said. "They have been too soft in allowing Israel to impose conditions and interfere in everything. The Israelis acted like someone who gives you a house but tells you that you can use the rooms only on Mondays and sleep with your wife only on Fridays.

"Israel has taken our dreams away, but so has the conduct of the Palestinian Authority," Najjar added. "Their officials had no right to become millionaires and take the money that belonged to the people. Ours is no longer a revolution or a cause with any hope. And that is the reason why people today blow themselves up to become martyrs."

Najjar predicts that a new movement eventually will sweep aside what he calls a "weak, corrupt and greedy" Palestinian Authority and deal with like-minded people on the Israeli side to reach a solution.

He has traveled many roads since the commandos broke into his parents' small Beirut apartment on April 10, 1973, and shot them in front of his eyes.

Israel sent the troops and secret police after Mohammed Najjar, a senior leader in the PLO extremist wing called Black September, because of his role in planning the attack in Munich. The PLO terrorists held Israeli athletes hostage in the Olympic village and killed 11 of them during a German rescue attempt at the airport.

Reliving shooting

When the commandos came, Najjar remembered, they shot his mother first as she tried to protect his father.

"You've killed her, you dogs," he recalled his father yelling.

"I don't think they meant to kill Mother, but she was so fierce. They really did want to kill my father though. I can still remember one of the masked men, who were dressed like women, shouting: `Keep shooting. He is still moving.'"

Afterward, King Hassan II of Morocco sent Najjar and his three siblings to Cairo. In time they separated: One sister married a Moroccan, another a German; the oldest brother, who had shinnied down a drainpipe to escape the commando raid, went to America. Najjar studied first in England and later in the United States, where he gained citizenship.

Al-Wazir was studying in London when the news of his father's death reached him. He tried to fly to Tunis, but all flights were canceled.

"Suddenly at Rome airport there was a plane for me, there was a Catholic cardinal there and someone from the government. Until today I don't know who provided the plane," Al-Wazir said.

Although both men lambaste the Palestinian Authority and clamor for reform, they still look to Yasser Arafat as a father figure and the only leader able to stop the infighting.

"Without him there would be chaos, and Sharon knows that," said Al-Wazir.

"We still eat water lemons and cheese together, even though our ideas now differ," Najjar said of Arafat. "My father and his family lived in a small flat, and my father owned only a small Fiat car. When they came to open our safe, they found just $600 in it. That was all we had.

"But now I see so many poor Palestinians and so many fat officials that I cannot look into peoples' faces without asking myself: `What did my father die for?'"