REV. JEREMIAH A. WRIGHT, JR.: Pastor inspires Obama's 'audacity' -- chicagotribune.com
"To show there is an independent form of thinking there about religion that stands on its own, that's really more life-giving than what you get from Europe," Cone said. "Black people who come from that approach have a very healthy understanding of who they are."



To bolster that pride, Wright takes members of his flock to different African nations every year. Wright also encourages youths in the congregation to attend historically black colleges and universities, sponsoring a scholarship fair each year.



The success of Trinity did not come without sacrifice.



"Growing up in the church was kind of bittersweet," said Wright's daughter Jeri, who developed a church publication into the nationally distributed Trumpet magazine. "That's when his daily life consisted of his service to God's people. I've always loved going to church and going to worship. At the same time I felt my church took my father from me."



She credits her mother, Janet, for helping her understand.



"It was my mother that taught us to separate the man from the ministry," his daughter said. "No matter what happened in our lives, she never wanted us to have any ill feelings toward the church or toward our father. `Yes, he is your father, but when he steps behind that sacred desk he is God's messenger, and never confuse the two.'ƒ|"



It was a harder lesson to live. Janet and Jeremiah Wright eventually divorced, --which the pastor describes as his greatest failure. He has since remarried and had another daughter, Jamila, and with his wife, Ramah, he sees a counselor regularly.



He hides none of this from his congregation, despite the persistent whispering since his divorce.



"He's not a hypocrite," Hopkins said. "You know what he says behind closed doors, he'll say in the pulpit."



"People expect him to be God. They expect him to be Jesus," said Jeri Wright said. "The reality is, he's human. He has the same hurt, the same pains, the same issues as those that come and sit under the sound of his voice every Sunday." That dose of reality is what keeps Lonnie Rashid Lynn Jr., known in the to hip-hop world as Common, coming back to Trinity.



"That's one of the greatest attributes I love about him," said Common, who grew up in the church. "He falls victim to the same things ¡K He brings balance to the pulpit. He didn't just create an image."



In his 1993 memoir "Dreams from My Father," Obama recounts in vivid detail his first meeting with Wright in 1985. The pastor warned the community activist that getting involved with Trinity might turn off other black clergy because of the church's radical reputation.



When Obama sought his own church community, he felt increasingly at home at Trinity. Before leaving for Harvard Law School in 1988, he responded to one of Wright's altar calls and declared a personal relationship with Jesus Christ.



Later he would base his 2004 keynote speech to the Democratic National Convention on a Wright sermon called "Audacity to Hope," --also the inspiration for Obama's second memoir, "The Audacity of Hope."



Though Wright and Obama do not often talk one-on-one often, the senator does check with his pastor before making any bold political moves.



Last fall, Obama approached Wright to broach the possibility of running for president. Wright cautioned Obama not to let politics change him, but he also encouraged Obama, win or lose.



Wright said, "Picture some kid who lives in Hyde Park or over in Ida B. Wells Homes or Washington Gardens, who will see Barack and say, `My God, I can be one day be that.' The amount of hope that it will give to kids who society has written off just in terms of them changing their concept of what is possible is going to be immeasurable for generations to come." ƒ| mbrachear@tribune.com