Illinois moves ahead with new testing plan, replacing ACT with SAT
It's official, according to the state: Testing giant ACT is out and the College Board's SAT is in, bringing a new college entrance exam into Illinois public high schools.

The College Board earlier won a three-year, $14.3 million bid to give its exam to all public high school juniors in Illinois, but rival ACT protested the award in December.

This week, ACT lost its administrative appeal, and the Illinois State Board of Education announced Thursday that it will begin negotiating a contract with the College Board. The nonprofit has been making inroads in the Midwest, though its SAT exam is more widely known on the East Coast.

ISBE officials said the state-funded SAT is supposed to be given this school year — free of charge to high school juniors — though there are complications because of the state's budget standoff and other issues. There are still no state dollars for statewide testing.

"We understand the uncertainty with implementation, and we are working to keep districts updated throughout this process. Testing dates are still being finalized," ISBE spokeswoman Laine Evans told the Tribune in an email.

More than 90 school districts have already signed up with ACT to give the test to their juniors this spring, at district expense, according to ACT spokesman Ed Colby.

Chicago Public Schools last month sent a letter to parents saying the district will administer the ACT to all juniors this spring. Districts from Hinsdale to Winnetka will be testing juniors with the ACT.

The ACT exam has long been popular in Illinois, with the test being given to high school juniors for the past 15 years. The company's contract with the state ended June 30, paving the way for a competitive process for a new contract.

ACT will continue reviewing the response to its protest and "investigate" its options, Colby said.

Meanwhile, the College Board issued a statement saying: "We are delighted that, with this decision, more Illinois students will benefit not only from an assessment that provides more information than ever before about a student's readiness, but directly links to resources that offer distinct opportunities to students, such as free, personalized online test practice through Khan Academy and college application fee waivers."

Some 143,000 public school juniors in Illinois, as well as students elsewhere in the country, are expected to take a revamped SAT as early as this spring. The new version eliminates penalties for guessing, focuses on areas of math that "matter most for college and career readiness" and other changes, according to the College Board. ACT and SAT scores are accepted at colleges and universities.

ISBE said it weighed the attributes of both exams and decided the SAT was better aligned with standards for what students should know in Illinois.

A panel of educators and other officials reviewed and scored the sealed proposals, and SAT won. The evaluators' scores prompted ACT's protest on a number of issues.

Among the concerns, "at least one evaluator appeared to be biased," ACT's Colby said. "What we don't know is the degree to which this evaluator might have influenced the others."

A Feb. 9 letter from the state's Chief Procurement Office noted that ACT's concerns about inconsistent scoring "are well-taken," and that one evaluator's scores were lower than all the others.

Even if those low scores were stricken, however, the College Board's proposal still would win, according to the letter. The officials who reviewed ACT's appeal tested a number of scenarios to see whether that outcome would change, but it did not.

The College Board was the winner, a decision that is now considered final under procurement rules.

On another issue, ACT argued that the College Board failed to disclose litigation that was required in the bidding process. The College Board in January apologized for the omission, saying it was a "simple human error" and said it would disclose the information "without delay."

Controversy has stirred for several years over a free college entrance exam for juniors. When the new Common Core PARCC exams for grade school and high school were launched, the state bumped the ACT from the roster of required tests, instead making it optional in 2015.

High school districts balked, saying a free college entrance exam has been popular with students and parents because kids can use the exam scores for college admissions.

In the summer of 2015, a new law took effect that required a college entrance exam to be included in the state testing cycle. But now, that exam will be the SAT, which will get a big boost in test participation under the College Board's new contract with Illinois.

Fewer than 6,000 high school graduates in 2015 took the SAT in Illinois, compared with about 157,000 who took the ACT.

Though few students have taken the SAT in the past, many Illinois parents and students are well aware of the College Board's Advanced Placement courses and exams, as well as the PSAT that can qualify students for merit scholarships.

drado@tribpub.com

Twitter @diane_rado