Measure allowing adoption agencies to discriminate against same-sex couples prompts outcry from Illinois lawmakers
They’re calling it the #LicenseToDiscriminate Amendment, but even that language isn’t strong enough for some Illinois lawmakers.

An amendment to a budget bill recently passed in the U.S. House Appropriations Committee would permit some religious adoption agencies the ability to block placement of children with same-sex couples, local elected leaders said at a news conference in Chicago on Monday.

Introduced by U.S. Rep. Robert Aderholt, R-Alabama, the amendment would allow religious groups such as Catholic Charities to run child welfare agencies, with the understanding that the religious child welfare agencies would then not place a child with LGBTQ families because it conflicts with their morals.

“The amendment I introduced seeks to prevent these governments from discriminating against child welfare providers on the basis that the provider declines to provide a service that conflicts with its sincerely held religious beliefs or moral convictions," CNN reported that Aderholt said in a statement.

For Illinois state Rep. Steven Andersson, R-Geneva, the amendment isn’t merely a #LicenseToDiscriminate. He said the way the amendment is worded makes it clear that discrimination is a requirement.

“That’s absolutely abhorrent to everything I believe about what the state of Illinois is, and indeed the United States,” he said during the Monday morning news conference in Chicago.

Andersson said the amendment is not representative of Republican values. Because it says families that don’t jibe with an organization’s “sincerely held belief and moral convictions” can be discounted on that basis, there’s no end to the ways these groups will go on to claim families are antithetical to their morals.

“The president quite frankly has led this charge,” Andersson said, adding: “It’s up to our Congress, that co-equal branch, to resist, to say no to this nonsense, to push back, and I call upon my Republican colleagues to do that because what is being spewed as a Republican value is not,” he said. “We are not about hate, we are about inclusion, we are about equal rights for all ... so I call upon my Republican colleagues to reject this and vote no on this.”

The amendment makes clear that states can choose not to comply. If a state did not comply, then the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services could withhold 15 percent of that state’s federal child welfare funding.

In Illinois, that’s the equivalent of $94 million, according to the Illinois chapter of Foster Care Alumni of America; foster care is one road to adoption.

Colleen Connell, the executive director of the ACLU of Illinois, said she believes past lawsuits show Illinois would not stand for such discriminatory practices.

“In many ways this defeats what it should be about, which is what’s in the best interest of the children,” she said.

She painted a picture in which a child or children lose their parents in a freak accident, such as a car crash. Under current law should such a tragedy occur, the children would be placed with a close relative, when possible. But that could change if the amendment becomes law.

“You could have a situation where a child ends up in foster care and the best people to care for the child — relatives — simply by virtue of being in a same-sex relationship, aren’t considered,” she said. “It’s a dangerous farce.”

Connell said in a state such as Illinois she’d expect the forfeiture of funds rather than acceptance of this kind of bullying by a vocal minority.

“We’re hoping this amendment will be stripped more out, but it’s really overall harmful to the children who are supposed to be the beneficiary of this bill.”

For his part, Aderholt also expresses concern about some of the same issues — discrimination and the need to focus on the best interest of the children.

A statement about the amendment on his website says: “The amendment I introduced seeks to prevent these governments from discriminating against child welfare providers on the basis that the provider declines to provide a service that conflicts with its sincerely held religious beliefs or moral convictions, and furthermore, it would require the Department of Health and Human Services to withhold 15% of federal funds for child welfare services from states and localities that discriminate against these agencies.”

State Rep. Kelly Cassidy, D-Chicago, who represents the 14th District, opened her remarks by saying she’s one of just a few openly homosexual lawmakers in Illinois and, beyond that, she’s the mother of three boys.

“It is time to put this nonsense aside and move forward. This is a time when we need more loving families, more than ever. We shouldn’t be closing doors on people who can and will provide loving homes for kids in need,” she said.

Cassidy said there is a need for those who support families like hers to step up and shut down this amendment. She also brought up Gov. Bruce Rauner, who recently made headlines for officiating the same-sex wedding of two male friends.

“Gov. Rauner: Step up. To the two men whose wedding he officiated: Ask your friend to step up. To my friends who supported this administration, who said to me, ‘They’re never going to do anything to hurt you,’ has it gone too far yet? Are we there yet? Have we hit bottom yet? This will hurt my community, my family, my friends. Enough is enough,” she said.

kdouglas@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @312BreakingNews