Gov. Bruce Rauner won't attend GOP convention or endorse Trump for president
Gov. Bruce Rauner won't attend the Republican National Convention or formally endorse Donald Trump for president as fallout from the controversial presumptive nominee reverberates throughout the Illinois GOP.

Aides to the first-term Republican governor said Rauner, who declined to back a candidate in what was once a crowded GOP presidential field, would remain focused on Illinois' troubled finances.

Rauner joins U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk in bypassing the July convention in Cleveland as Illinois' two highest-ranking Republicans seek to avoid the political minefield created by Trump, the real estate mogul and former reality TV show star.

Unlike Rauner, Kirk faces a high-stakes re-election contest in November against Democratic U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth. But Rauner does have some skin in the game on the fall ballot as he seeks to erode Democratic supermajorities in the legislature. The dispute between Rauner and Democratic House Speaker Michael Madigan has left the state politically stalemated without an operating budget for more than 10 months.

By skipping the national convention, Rauner also may be hoping to avoid any comparisons with Trump. Both are wealthy businessmen who campaigned as outsiders with no previous elected experience and an expressed desire to want to run government like a business.

Rauner's move has some risks. Incurring Trump's wrath on Twitter or in a speech could set in motion a weekslong narrative in Illinois, with gleeful Democrats seeking to take advantage. In March, Rauner told students in Wilmette that he was "horrified" by the rhetoric in the Republican presidential campaign, saying "it's ugly and it's nasty and it's weird."

Both Rauner and Kirk were entitled to special at-large delegate spots to the national convention, to be formally awarded at the state Republican convention in Peoria that starts May 19. By declining the delegate spots, both Republicans are avoiding having to cast a pledged vote for Trump's nomination, which is virtually assured after Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and Ohio Gov. John Kasich dropped out of the race this week.

Underscoring the politics behind Rauner's move, the governor's decision means he also will not accept the traditional role of heading up Illinois' 69-member convention delegation and the high-profile media appearances that come with it. At the same time, Rauner avoids any potential appearance with Trump, which some advisers said privately would not be helpful to the governor back home.

Rauner repeatedly had sought to stay out of the presidential race, though he did say that as leader of the GOP in Illinois, he would back the eventual nominee. But Rauner aides stressed there are various levels of "support," and that the governor would not be giving Trump a formal endorsement.

Paul Ryan says he can't support Donald Trump right now. May 5, 2016. (CBS Miami) Paul Ryan says he can't support Donald Trump right now. May 5, 2016. (CBS Miami) SEE MORE VIDEOS

Trump picked up 54 delegates by winning Illinois' March 15 primary, including the 15 at-large delegates made up of party officials who are pledged to vote for the winner.

Rauner's move came as Republicans nationally showed divisions over Trump's candidacy. U.S. House Speaker Paul Ryan, a Republican from Janesville, Wis., told CNN he was "just not ready" to back the presumptive nominee because he needed to unify, not divide, the party.

Trump created further controversy on social media by posting a picture of himself eating a taco bowl at Trump Tower in New York to celebrate Cinco de Mayo and adding, "I love Hispanics!" Trump has called for deporting people who are in the country illegally and building a border wall with Mexico to block "rapists" and "criminals" from entering the U.S.

Since Trump's decisive victory in Indiana's primary Tuesday, Democrats have intensified attempts to tie the controversial candidate to Republicans up and down the Illinois ballot this fall.

The Trump factor weighs most heavily on Kirk, U.S. Rep. Robert Dold, and state Comptroller Leslie Geissler Munger, who is running in a special statewide election to keep her appointed post. Regardless of Trump, the three already faced a big challenge since Democratic turnout rises in Illinois during presidential years, and the former bellwether state hasn't gone Republican for president since 1988.

But even in their desire to try to exploit Trump's controversies, some Democratic consultants were cautious. They noted the volatility of the electorate, how the White House race must still play out, and, ultimately, who turns out to vote in a likely contest against Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton.

"It's hard for me not to believe that at least, even at the most local level, the presidential race doesn't have some impact," said Democratic strategist Eric Adelstein, who noted the intense interest in the contest by even those who have been minimally politically active.

"For Donald Trump, any Republican running will be asked, 'Do you agree on the latest outrageous thing?'" Adelstein said. "The same is true about Hillary Clinton, who engenders strong opinions on each side."

Christopher Mooney, director of the Institute of Government and Public Affairs at the University of Illinois, said that while voter turnout in the fall is always a key issue, Trump's candidacy and the divisions he has caused in GOP ranks make it a paramount factor.

"If the right wing is particularly offended by Trump, it's not that they're going to vote for Hillary, they're not going to vote," Mooney said. "Certainly, some people won't vote the top of ticket and will vote down the ticket. But generally speaking, what drives people to the polls is the top of the ticket."

Though Kirk has worked to try to separate himself from Trump, he also has said he "certainly would" back Trump as the party's nominee.

Kirk campaign manager Kevin Artl noted the Republican's ability as a North Shore congressman to best GOP President George W. Bush's showing in 2004 by 17 percentage points and 2008 Republican presidential contender, Arizona Sen. John McCain by 16 percentage points.

"Sen. Kirk has always outperformed the top of the ticket because Illinois voters know and respect his thoughtful, independent leadership and personal brand of being a fiscal conservative, social moderate, security hawk," Artl said.

"Kirk is probably one of the better positioned Senate Republicans due to his brand and where he currently stands with key demographics like Hispanic voters and independent females," he said.

But Trump's candidacy creates an added problem for Kirk in taking on Duckworth. National polling has shown women as among the most significant demographic groups opposing Trump, and Duckworth is allied with Democratic women's groups, such as EMILY's List, sure to push the issue.