Obama's record on abortion hit -- chicagotribune.com
Seldom mentioned in the dust-up is that in 2005 Illinois lawmakers passed a version of the abortion bill that Obama and abortion opponents both support.



So what's the controversy? Ultimately, it may lie in the tug-of-war that is Illinois politics and some conflicting statements Obama has given over the years about why he opposed various versions of the bill.



The background: Abortions in which the fetus is born with brief signs of life are rare, occurring in some cases when a doctor administers drugs that cause premature labor. Such "induced labor" abortions account for less than 1 percent of abortions in the U.S., according to figures from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.



Since 1975, Illinois law has contained explicit protections for babies that might survive an attempted abortion. Abortion opponents say that law did not protect severely premature fetuses, which might survive briefly but could not live for long outside the womb. Other advocates say the law applied to all babies born alive.



"Illinois law always made it clear that in late-term abortions, if the fetus is born alive, that fetus has to be given every chance to survive," said Pam Sutherland, chief lobbyist for Planned Parenthood of Illinois.



In 2002, testimony from abortion opponents about the procedure's use at Advocate Christ Medical Center in Oak Lawn led the U.S. Congress to pass a federal law that is similar to the bills Obama voted on in Illinois.



Gotcha, Obama? Abortion opponents are highlighting a specific Obama vote in 2003, in which he came out against a "born alive" bill that was before the Illinois legislature.



Obama has said he opposed that bill because it lacked assurances that it would not affect women's existing rights to choose abortion. He said he would have supported the 2002 federal version of the bill because it had a provision saying it would not "expand or contract" the rights of fetuses prior to their birth.



That language was absent from most versions of the "born alive" legislation that Illinois lawmakers considered and rejected between 2001 and 2005. But last week, the National Right to Life Committee released newly uncovered records showing that in one committee meeting in 2003, Obama voted against a version of the bill that did contain the key language.



The committee said in a statement that the find "[sheds] new light on Senator Obama's four-year effort to cover up his real record of refusing to protect live-born survivors of abortion."



In an interview Saturday with David Brody of the Christian Broadcasting Network, Obama said he opposed the Illinois measure because the federal version "was not the bill that was presented at the state level."



In fact, records show that at one point the two bills were nearly identical in wording.



On the other hand: Supporters of abortion rights say Obama was right to oppose the 2003 bill, even though it had the same wording as the federal measure. The wording could have had a different effect at the state level, they say, by undermining Illinois' legal precedents on abortion.



Once more, the key is the 1975 Illinois abortion law, which contains language that's similar but not identical to the later bill. The 2003 bill could have affected the way courts interpret the 1975 law, which Planned Parenthood and the Illinois State Medical Society contended could have far-reaching implications.



The groups opposed the entire group of "born alive" bills that were introduced starting in 2001, saying they could ultimately threaten the physician-patient relationship and increase civil liability for doctors.



In 2005, Illinois lawmakers inserted an extra provision asserting that the law would not affect "existing federal or state law regarding abortion." The measure passed without opposition from Planned Parenthood and with the support of groups opposed to abortion.



Footnote: This isn't the first time Obama's record on "born-alive" legislation has raised questions. His opponent in the 2004 U.S. Senate race, Alan Keyes, said Obama's support for "infanticide" was the main reason he came from Maryland to challenge Obama for the seat. Keyes lost to Obama in a landslide.



jmanier@tribune.com