By Rauner's own standards, he's a miserable failure on jobs
During a televised debate in October 2014, then-candidate Bruce Rauner said that his opponent, incumbent Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn, was “a miserable failure on jobs. Illinois is one of the lowest job-creating states in America. He’s a failure, I’ll get results.”

Ah, but he did not get results.

Rauner won the election, but while in office, he made demands that were ignored, he picked fights with the Democrats who control the General Assembly and he presided over a costly, extended budget stalemate that worsened the state’s finances.

Job growth in Illinois, which in the last three years of the Quinn administration was 3.57 percent — compared with a 5.31 percent national job-growth rate over the same time — has fallen in the first three years of the Rauner administration to 2.29 percent, about half the 4.82 percent national job-growth rate.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics data show job growth in Illinois under Rauner has been lower than job growth in the neighboring states of Indiana, Kentucky, Missouri, Iowa and Wisconsin.

Illinois Working Together, a pro-labor coalition partial to Democrats, points out that if employment growth under Rauner had just continued at Quinn’s rate, we’d have 75,000 more jobs now in Illinois. And if we’d simply continued creating jobs at two-thirds the national rate, we’d have nearly 56,000 more jobs than we do now.

Hence my question for Gov. Rauner during his appearance Monday with GOP primary challenger Rep. Jeanne Ives of Wheaton in front of the Tribune Editorial Board:

Are you an even more miserable failure on jobs than Pat Quinn?

The answer is clearly yes. Rauner has failed to deliver, underperformed his predecessor and thus exposed the emptiness and hypocrisy of his attacks on Quinn as well as his own fecklessness.

But here’s Rauner’s actual answer:

“I’m a more passionate advocate (for jobs),” he said. “All the states around us have now changed their regulations to be much more pro-business and pro-growth. They are stealin’ our jobs. We are losin’ our jobs to Wisconsin and Indiana and Iowa and Kentucky. We are bleedin’ out our jobs.”

To interrupt: One Midwestern state Rauner fails to include in this list is Minnesota, a blue state where workers don’t have the right to freeload on union benefits that Rauner hopes will be granted here. Job growth there has been 90 percent higher in the last three years than it’s been in Illinois, and higher percentage-wise than in all our neighboring states.

Just sayin’.

Back to Rauner’s answer: “I’m tryin’ to get us to change,“ he said. “(Democratic House Speaker Michael) Madigan so far has blocked the changes. But we … are going to probably win in the courts. I will be able to bring about the same changes in Illinois that the other states around us have made through the court system, because I’m not patient, I’m not gonna wait for Speaker Madigan to do it with me. We’re going to get it done unilaterally.”

To interrupt again: Rauner is counting on the U.S. Supreme Court to issue anti-union rulings expanding the right to freeload (some call it the “right to work”), but if those rulings go as he hopes, unions will wither no matter who the governor is, and states will accelerate the race to the bottom for wages and regulations.

Back to the conclusion of Rauner’s answer to the editorial board: “This is an exciting time in Illinois. I’ve worked hard. We’ve grown about 120,000 net new jobs. It’s been hard work. Because Speaker Madigan’s legislators have blocked a lot of the reforms, but we’re gettin’ it done and you watch us boom when we get the rest of the changes made that we’re gonna win in the court system. Even if Madigan is still in power, which I hope he is not after November, we will get changes through the courts that will allow us to compete, and the companies will come from Indiana. They’ll come from Wisconsin and Texas and Tennessee. We will be a rapid growth state. That will happen.”

Actually, BLS says the Rauner years have seen 135,000 new jobs — more, in raw numbers, than any of the surrounding states and Minnesota, but still 61 percent lower than during the last three years under “miserable failure” Pat Quinn.

Rauner refuses to own that, and instead he doubles down on making promises. He owns nothing but his grievances and his obsession with Speaker Madigan, a compulsive affliction that became almost comical during the forum when he explained that the reason he was refusing to appear again in public with challenger Ives was that it would take focus from his bellyaching about Madigan.

And it’s true what you may have read elsewhere: Ives got the best of Rauner in every area — eloquence, knowledge of policy and pointed jabs — and showed herself to be far from a fringe candidate.

I’ll never vote for her — her social conservatism is a deal-breaker for me — but plenty of Republicans will, particularly those who take the time to watch the video of Monday’s forum at chicagotribune.com/gopgov.

Bruce Rauner, a miserable failure on his own terms, is in for the fight of his political life.

ericzorn@gmail.com

Twitter @EricZorn