Emanuel, Madigan pension blitzkrieg stalls
SPRINGFIELD — Mayor Rahm Emanuel, House Speaker Michael Madigan and Senate President John Cullerton on Wednesday tried to quickly push through a sweeping plan to raise Chicago property taxes and cut city worker retirement benefits, but hit the brakes when they ran into resistance.

The rapid rollout strategy was aimed at giving legislators little time to get cold feet and blunting labor union lobbying against the changes. But several Chicago lawmakers raised concerns, Democrats blamed Republicans for not getting on board, and the blitzkrieg approach failed — at least for a day.

The reprieve gives unions a chance to rally opposition while legislative leaders and the mayor regroup at a Capitol where rank-and-file lawmakers are still tender from taking a tough vote in December to repair the state’s government worker pension system over the strenuous objections of organized labor.

“The longer you let things linger, the more dangerous they get. The more vulnerable they are toward falling apart,” said Sen. Kwame Raoul, a Chicago Democrat and pension expert. “The mayor, the speaker, the Senate president, myself and other members who are paying attention to this closely need to be in the process of talking to individual members, conveying what’s at stake.”

The city pension bill surfaced in Springfield less than 48 hours after Emanuel first briefed reporters on the proposal, a plan that would require much of both city taxpayers, city employees and retirees.

A new wrinkle emerged Wednesday: a property tax increase still would help fund the pension system, but that tax hike would have to be approved by the Chicago City Council, not dictated by state lawmakers. The change, in theory, could make it easier for state lawmakers to vote for the bill.

“It will be solely up to the City Council to determine” whether property taxes will be increased, Madigan said. “I know they all will be very pleased to hear that. They've been liberated.”

If the bill becomes law, aldermen also might have to vote to get rid of a tax cap that the City Council imposed on itself more than 20 years ago, but the Emanuel administration couldn’t say late Wednesday. The cap limits annual total city tax increases to 5 percent or the rate of inflation, whichever is less.

In addition, the legislation would create a separate tax levy dedicated solely to pensions. The purpose is “to simply make separate and transparent the additional property tax levy that would pay for pension funds,” said Emanuel spokeswoman Kelley Quinn.

City officials hope the property tax hike would cover half the costs of increased city payments into the pension funds to make them financially healthy over 40 years. The rest would come from modest budget cuts, reduced retiree health care costs and money from other city funds that are in better shape.

In an unadvertised change, the legislation would prevent the municipal and laborers’ pension funds from contributing to retiree health care, as they now do. That’s in keeping with the mayor’s plan to phase out health-care subsidies for retired city workers.

That phase-out is being challenged in court. “The city seems instead determined to just dump the city retirees off their health care,” said Clint Krislov, the attorney who filed that lawsuit.

The heart of the plan was as Emanuel outlined on Monday: taxpayers who own a home with the city median value of about $250,000 would be hit with $50 tax increases each year for five years, starting with their 2016 tax bill.

Employees — excluding police officers and firefighters who were not part of the deal — would pay a 0.5 percentage point more each year from 2015 through 2019, until they reached 11 percent of their salary.

Retirees would not see their base pensions reduced, but would get smaller annual cost-of-living increases. They now get a compounded 3 percent increase on their previous year’s benefit payments. Under the new plan, it would be half the inflation rate or 3 percent, whichever is less, without compounding.

In addition, there would be no increases in 2017, 2019 and 2025. New retirees would see their first increase two years after retirement, instead of on their first anniversary.

Emanuel has said his proposal has support for employee unions, but they have not publicly embraced it. Madigan said that of the 31 unions representing workers in the laborer and municipal funds, only three are opposed. The Chicago Teachers Union, AFSCME and the Illinois Nurses Association have sharply criticized Emanuel for trying to make what they say are deep cuts to the benefits of many lower-income workers and retirees.

John Cameron, political director for AFSCME Council 31, said during Wednesday’s hearing that Emanuel’s plan would be a “sweeping diminishment” of retirees benefits while reducing their purchasing power by as much as 30 percent over the next 20 years.

“Further, it requires while their benefit is being cut that they pay more for less of a benefit,” Cameron said. “Diminishing the benefits of folks at the lower end of the income specter in the public employee workforce who have no Social Security to us is poor public policy and certainly not something that should be recommended by this chamber.”

Despite the union complaints, a House panel voted 6-4 to advance Madigan’s measure for quick consideration by the full chamber. In the Senate, Cullerton held a hearing to clear the way for approval should the bill arrive from the House on Wednesday. The sprint was on.

After the House committee vote, Madigan was asked a variation of the same question numerous times: What’s the rush?

“Why would you want to slow it down? Why would you want to do that?” Madigan said to reporters crowded around him. “What’s the problem with calling the bill today? What are you so concerned about?”

Emanuel, too, was asked about rushing the plan through the legislature and whether the reason was to avoid opposition from unions. Instead, the mayor chose to focus on the consequences if pension changes aren’t passed.