Our Mission - College of Human Medicine - Michigan State University
Michigan State University College of Human Medicine is committed to educating exemplary physicians and scholars, discovering and disseminating new knowledge, and providing service at home and abroad. We enhance our communities by providing outstanding primary and specialty care, promoting the dignity and inclusion of all people, and responding to the needs of the medically underserved. MSU College of Human Medicine Diversity and Inclusion Statements

ABOUT THE COLLEGE

Founded in 1964, Michigan State University College of Human Medicine is nationally recognized as one of the nation's pioneers of community-based medical education.

Among the 141 medical schools in the country, MSU College of Human Medicine ranks sixth when it comes to “social mission” for producing doctors who are minorities, practice primary care and work in underserved areas, according to a 2010 study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine.



The college’s footprint spans the state of Michigan. Clinical practice, research and undergraduate and graduate medical education takes place across six campuses through affiliations with local hospitals, physicians, and other health care providers. These community campuses are located in Flint, Grand Rapids, Lansing, Midland Regional, Traverse City and the Upper Peninsula Region.



Three pillar communities provide the college’s foundation for research and clinical services. Grand Rapids, the college’s headquarters, is home to centers for excellence in women’s health research and Parkinson’s disease research. Lansing is the central location for clinical services through the university’s health team and Flint offers programs and research in public health.



The headquarters for MSU College of Human Medicine is the Secchia Center medical education building at 15 Michigan Street NE, Grand Rapids. The campaign for the privately-funded, $90 million building was complete at the time of its grand opening, Sept. 10, 2010. The 180,000-square-foot, state-of-the-art medical education building is seven stories high, atop a five-story parking structure. In 2011, the building was awarded Gold LEED® certification.



Beginning in 2007, the college underwent one of the largest MD medical school expansions in the nation and doubled the size of its enrollment by fall 2013, educating approximately 800 future physicians.



First- and second-year medical students receive their preclinical education in either East Lansing on the campus of Michigan State University, or at the Secchia Center, in Grand Rapids. Each location has 200 preclinical students. Third- and fourth-year students receive their clinical education at any of 12 teaching hospitals in the college’s six community campuses throughout the state.

MSU College of Human Medicine sponsors 13 residencies and is affiliated with another 45 residencies in 13 teaching hospitals throughout the state of Michigan and is training approximately 1,000 residents each year. One out of every six residents and fellows training in Michigan is associated with the MSU College of Human Medicine.





The alumni population for MSU College of Human Medicine is more than 4,400 Spartan MDs.