Creflo Dollar denies endorsing Donald Trump & saying God told him Trump was His 'chosen candidate'
Megachurch pastor Creflo Dollar has denied reports that he has endorsed Donald Trump after reports emerged claiming he had said God told him in a dream that Trump was his chosen candidate.

(Reuters/FACEBOOK/CREFLO DOLLAR) Televangelist Creflo Dollar (L) and Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump (R)

The report on the megachurch pastor's Trump endorsement and dream from God was published by Wordondastreet.com and was picked up by other news outlets. It spread like wildfire on the internet and drew heated criticism.

The report quoted the pastor as saying: "God came to me in a dream last night and said that Trump is his chosen candidate. God apologized for the mixed messages he was sending. I now know that Trump has been touched by the hand of God."

The pastor also allegedly compared Trump to a core biblical figure, saying, "Trump is like John the Baptist, sent to prepare the world for the return of our Lord, Jesus Christ."

The televangelist's spokesperson denied the rumor and said that the pastor has not endorsed the Republican presidential nominee. He also said that the pastor "never endorses candidates" and "never has".

Dollar also issued a similar statement in his Facebook account saying that the allegations were false.

The post stated: "At World Changers Church International, I nor the ministry endorse any political party or candidate; nor do we advise our members who to vote for. Any reports stating that I have endorsed Donald Trump for President are false. I have not endorsed any candidate and do not plan to. This rumor originated on a satirical website and is 100% untrue."

Some followers on his Facebook page defended the pastor. One follower from Canada said that his pastor does not endorse any particular candidate nor instruct the church who to vote for or what party to choose. All that the pastor asks, he says, is for people to ask God for direction.

Another follower pointed out that World Changers is a 501 (c) 3 tax exempt organization and would not endorse any political candidate or party as the church would lose its tax status.

Creflo Dollar is Senior Pastor of World Changers Church International (WCCI), a mega-church with presence on six continents and has international fellowship churches.