Education board seeking objectivity in standards
The State Board of Education's proposed revisions for K-12 social studies curricula have come under fire from the radical left. Contrary to what an irresponsible media campaign would lead you to believe, the board has taken a few small steps in the direction of promoting objectivity in our educational standards, and it is their critics who are seeking to perpetuate a biased and one-sided treatment of our nation's history.

Studies have revealed how unbalanced America's humanities departments are. Democrats outnumber Republicans by a large margin. In the history department at the University of Texas at Austin, out of 50 registered voters, only one is a Republican. Moderate and conservative Democrats are also rare. This political slant is reinforced by the economics of scholarship: Academic historians have been trained and have invested their careers in a profession that counts as legitimate only those subfields that support the leftist orthodoxy. Military history, for example, has almost entirely died off; not a single professor of history at UT-Austin lists military history as a primary specialty, while dozens list sexuality, ethnicity and anti-colonialism. This bias expresses itself in the selection of events, persons and movements by textbook authors, who tell a simplistic narrative in which an ever more powerful federal government is the sole engine of progress and equality. Thus, robber barons, the New Deal and the civil rights movement are in, but the contributions of inventors and entrepreneurs, the decline of the family and the failures of welfare programs and public education are out. The new standards represent real progress. They don't go far enough in challenging orthodoxy, but they are a step in the right direction.

The board has strengthened the curriculum standards in ways that any scholar should recognize, adding the following:

• • Greater attention to the importance of the Declaration of Independence.

• • Inclusion of neglected Founders, including Jay, Carroll, Muhlenberg, Witherspoon, and Trumbull, representing the religious diversity of early America.

• • Inclusion of the fine arts and culture, and the contributions of scientists and inventors.

• • Emphasis on our common-law tradition, epitomized by the Commentaries of William Blackstone, the most widely used law textbook in our country for more than a century (used by everyone from Hamilton to Lincoln).

The opposition is relying on the big lie, offering example after example of misinformation. This cynical effort will fail to influence the vast majority of Texans for one simple reason: the Internet. Texans can go to the Texas Education Agency web site and read the new standards for themselves.

Opponents claim that the new standards neglect the contributions of women and ethnic minorities. In fact, the opposite is true: in every subject and at every level, the new standards increase their prominence. Just a few examples of the names added include Crispus Attucks, Jose Bernardo Guillermo de Lara, Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Wentworth Cheswell, Francisco Coronado, Bernardo de Galvez, Juan de Onate, W.E.B. DuBois, Carmen Lomas Garza, Henry B. Gonzalez, Raul A. Gonzalez, Maria Mitchell, Ellen Ochoa, Jose Antonio Navaro, Irma Rangel, Juan Seguin, Phillis Wheatley, Lulu Belle White, Diane Gonzales Bertrand, Simon Bolivar, Bessie Coleman, Tomie de Paola, Marcus Garvey, Lydia Mendoza, Kadir Nelson, Danny Olivas, and Raymond Telles.

The opposition has claimed, most preposterously of all, that the new standards eliminate Thomas Jefferson. To the contrary, the new standards place greater emphasis than ever on Jefferson's drafting of the Declaration of Independence. In fact, Jefferson's political philosophy is now covered in U.S. government instead of world history. This was a sensible change that critics have distorted for cheap political gain.

Much has been made of the board's substitution of “free enterprise system” for “capitalism” and of “representative” or “constitutional republic” for “democracy.” The board's language is more precise in both cases. The term capitalism was introduced by Karl Marx, referring to a system in which the owners of capital control absolutely both the government and culture. Whether America is or ever has been capitalist in that sense should be an open question — the Marxist answer shouldn't be imposed on students by the uncritical use of the word.

Similarly, scholars on both the right and left will agree that the Founders did not intend to create a democratic system, defined as a system in which the government always and immediately reflects the will of the majority. Our constitution includes many counterdemocratic institutions, including the Senate (in which unequal states receive equal representation) and federal judges, appointed for life. Students should be encouraged to reflect on whether, and to what extent, this republic has evolved in the direction of greater democracy.

This artificially inflated controversy points to a larger issue: The people must not develop the habit of blind deference to so-called academic experts. Listen to the experts, yes, but only when the experts employ their knowledge to develop persuasive arguments grounded in facts. Just as war is too important to be left entirely to the generals, so history education is too important to be left to the historians. It is through our conception of our history that we define ourselves as a country. The fundamental question is this: Shall we continue to have a government ruled by the people, or shall we instead yield to a self-perpetuating caste of quasi-official experts?

Koons is a professor of philosophy at the University of Texas. This article was written in his capacity as a private citizen and not as a representative of the university.