'Kelly File' EXCLUSIVE: Reporter Accuses Trump Campaign Manager of Assault
Reporter Files Complaint Accusing Trump Campaign Manager of Assault

New Info on 22 Top Secret Emails from Hillary's Private Server

New videos have surfaced after Breitbart reporter Michelle Fields filed a criminal complaint against Donald Trump's campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, claiming he bruised her arm at an event this week.

Friday night on The Kelly File, Megyn asked Fields about the incident, including questions about whether she actually ever saw the person who grabbed her.

Fields said the Trump campaign has "basically done a character assassination on me," linking to blogs with conspiracies about her and not telling the truth.

"Their statements continue to say there's no eyewitnesses, no pictures, no videos. They continue to lie."

She said the hate she has received as a result of the incident has been awful for her.

"This has to be, aside from my father's death, the worst experience that I've gone through. The hate that I’ve received, the email messages."

Fields said she thinks it's a shame that Breitbart's editors have "decided to come out against the facts" by publishing a piece that cast doubt on whether Lewandowski caused her injuries.

"I think the facts show that this happened," she said.

Megyn then questioned Trump campaign spokesperson Katrina Pierson about video surfacing of an event that the campaign has claimed "never happened.'

Pierson called Fields' allegations "absolutely false" and said that the reporter's story has changed a number of times.

Pierson said there's "a lot of confusion" surrounding the events of the incident, but emphasized that Breitbart raised the possibility of mistaken identity.

She said that she doesn't believe Lewandowski should be fired but if the claims turned out to be true, it would be Trump's decision.

"But because I don’t believe that happened, I don’t think that’s necessary."

Watch the interview with Fields above and Pierson's below.

Tantaros: The Lesson from Rubio's Failed Trump Attacks Is 'Be Yourself'

Rubio: Debates Are About Informing, Not Entertaining

'I Don't Have to Be Politically Correct': Trump Doubles Down on 'Islam Hates Us'