Gov. Perry raises profiteering allegations against White
Recommend ELECTION 2010 Gov. Perry raises profiteering allegations against White Share Email Close [X] Resources WHITE'S INVOLVEMENT WITH BTEC TURBINES The White campaign provided details on the candidate's dealing with the company. December 2003 After being elected mayor, Bill White resigned from the WEDGE Group and BTEC board. The WEDGE Group had a controlling interest in BTEC. White maintained no financial interest in BTEC or in the WEDGE Group. He had a deferred compensation account related to his time at the WEDGE Group that was invested in stocks and mutual funds and distributed by a formula annually. September 2005 Hurricane Rita struck, taking down power at the Lynchburg Reservoir pumping station. White was called in to help. Among other actions, he put the crisis team in touch with BTEC, which led an effort to get a supply of diesel generators under an agreement with the Coastal Water Authority. It also provided temporary on-site assistance. Gov. Rick Perry's campaign said the BTEC contract was worth $1.8 million. December 2006 The Sterling Group bought an interest in BTEC and asked White to join. White invested $1 million in the group's interest in BTEC 2007 White reported income of $524,582 from the BTEC investment. June 8, 2010 White said that to date, he nearly has recouped his original investment. Perry made the accusation in a press release and said that if the allegation was true, White should drop out of the governor's race. The accusation drew a sharp rebuke from White, who defended his record and called Perry's criticism a smokescreen to avoid a debate on issues important to Texas voters, including a looming budget shortfall of as much as $18 billion. The governor's accusations center on BTEC Turbines, on whose board White had served before taking office. White said he enlisted BTEC's help, as he did others' assistance, when Hurricane Rita knocked out power to a critical reservoir's pumping station. BTEC was awarded a contract by the Coastal Water Authority, a conservation district that provides untreated water to the cities of Houston, Baytown and Deer Park, as well as nearly 100 industrial customers. The Authority is governed by a seven-member board; four of those members are appointed by the mayor of Houston, three are appointed by the governor. Perry put the value of the contract at $1.8 million. White said he resigned from the BTEC board in December 2003, after winning his first term as mayor. In December 2006, White invested about $1 million in BTEC. He reported income of more than a half-million dollars on the investment on his 2007 tax return. White said that, to date, he has nearly recouped his original $1 million investment. White spokeswoman Katy Bacon said he had invested “on the same terms as other limited partners in the BTEC investment.” Dueling politicians White's camp said that he had no financial interest in BTEC at the time of the hurricane and brushed off Perry's criticism as the griping of a “career politician.” The city did not pay any money to BTEC during White's tenure, according to the city controller's office. “By his own admission, Bill White intervened regarding a contract given to BTEC, a company he had personal financial ties with, to provide generators for the Houston Coastal Water Authority following Hurricane Rita's landfall in 2005. If this is true, and Bill White did unethically steer taxpayer dollars to a company he had a personal financial stake in, I am calling on him to immediately resign from the race for governor,” Perry said in a statement. “For the mayor of Houston to engage in profiteering during a tragedy is unacceptable and local authorities should investigate this alleged violation of public trust, as well as any others that may exist. Bill White has an obligation to the people of Texas to address these allegations immediately,” Perry said. White's camp walked through the timeline of his interaction with BTEC and emphasized that he was called upon by other officials to help solve the crisis in the wake of the hurricane. “Rick Perry is manufacturing phony issues in an attempt to hide from debates. I had no financial interest in BTEC during the time of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The water supply for more than half a million people and our refineries was at risk. I was a part of a crisis team that took action, and I think the proof is in the results,” White said in a statement. “Perry took no issue with my leadership in the wake of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita until this election year,” White said. BTEC was purchased by two private equity firms in September 2006. One of them, the Houston-based Sterling Group, asked White to join in its investment in BTEC, according to the White campaign. John Olson, a former chief investment officer of Sanders Morris Harris who now is managing partner of Houston Energy Partners, said White's 50 percent return on investment in 2007 from BTEC is not out of the ordinary for private equity returns in those years. “Making a 50-percent return in one year is not unheard of or untoward in the private equity arena in those years, not at all,” Olson said. “Many firms did just that or far better.” White has called on Perry to have a debate on the issues, but Perry said he would not unless White released his income tax returns for his time in public service. After first releasing his 2009 return, White this week released the rest of his returns for his time as mayor, starting in 2004. More tax returns sought The Perry camp, however, still will not commit to a debate, saying it wants White to release his tax returns back to his time as deputy energy secretary in the Clinton administration. Perry has released his returns back to 1987, with the exception of his 2009 return. His spokesman said Perry had asked for an extension. Political scientist Bruce Buchanan of the University of Texas at Austin said raising such an issue is par for the course, but Perry's call for White to resign from the race ramps it up. “It does sound like hyperventilation,” Buchanan said. “It's not at all unusual in a case like this for one candidate to raise — in a rather more low-key way — the possibility of an ethical challenge. ... These kinds of things trouble people who worry about the influence of money in politics.” Two former board members of the Coastal Water Authority who served when Hurricane Rita hit, as well as two current staffers, did not return calls and e-mails seeking comment for this story. pfikac@express-news.net

bradley.olson@chron.com

Report item as: (required) X Obscenity/vulgarity Hate speech Personal attack Advertising/Spam Other Comment: (optional) Read all comments ( ) »