Trump: Cruz Never Denied His Father Was in Photo With Lee Harvey Oswald
2 Brave Officers Drove What They Thought Was a Bomb Away from Times Square

See Which Moment From Trump's Speech This Focus Group REALLY Liked

Donald Trump spoke in Cleveland this morning and took time out to discuss a photo purportedly showing Ted Cruz's father, Rafael Cruz, with Lee Harvey Oswald.

After declining to endorse Trump in his RNC address, Cruz said Thursday that he would not support a candidate who had attacked his wife and father.

Trump said in May, shortly before the Indiana primary, that a National Enquirer photo showed the elder Cruz and Oswald.

"What was he doing with Lee Harvey Oswald shortly before the shooting?" Trump asked.

Trump said today he needed to "clear up" the situation, saying he "knows nothing" about Rafael Cruz or Oswald.

He said the Enquirer would not have printed a phony photograph because they'd be sued if they did.

"Ted never denied that it was his father," said Trump, adding that the Enquirer should be "very respected," recalling the tabloid's reports on OJ Simpson and John Edwards' affair.

"If that was the New York Times, they would have gotten Pulitzer Prizes for their reporting," he said.

Trump said all he did was "point out" the photo and that the media tried to make it look like he was suggesting Rafael Cruz was involved in JFK's assassination.

Some political reporters reacted with surprise at seeing Trump bring up Oswald again on the morning after his big acceptance speech.

Oh my god. He's talking about Lee Harvey Oswald again. — Michael C Moynihan (@mcmoynihan) July 22, 2016

Just-nominated Trump talking Heidi Cruz, Lee Harvey Oswald, National Enquirer, OJ, and more. The man is what he is, not gonna change. — Byron York (@ByronYork) July 22, 2016

My jaw is dropped watching Trump castigate Cruz right now. Says no one ever denied that Rafael Cruz was in the photo with Lee Harvey Oswald. — Sopan Deb (@SopanDeb) July 22, 2016

Hegseth Confronts Flag-Burning Protesters: 'Why Do You Hate America?'

Krauthammer: Cruz's Speech 'Was the Longest Suicide Note in US Political History'

Michael Moore: 'Sorry to Be a Buzzkill, But I Think Trump Will Win'

Palin Rips Cruz: Refusal to Endorse Trump Is a 'Career-Ending' Moment