Federal judges reject Texas Voter ID law

WASHINGTON – A federal three-judge panel on Thursday blocked the Texas voter ID law passed by the Republican Legislature, saying the new restrictions would place an unfair burden on Latinos, racial minorities and the poor.

The ruling by the federal panel is the second blow to Texas in as many days. Another federal panel threw out a Texas redistricting plan earlier this week, saying the Republican leadership failed to show the maps did not discriminate against minorities.

In blocking the Texas voter ID law, the judges said the state enacted a law that would be "the most stringent in the country."

"It imposes strict, unforgiving burdens on the poor, and racial minorities in Texas," the judges said.

Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott and Texas lawmakers argued the new voter ID laws were needed to protect the integrity of elections in the state from fraud and impersonation.

Democrats and minority rights groups opposed the new law as a means to suppress turnout of the elderly, students, blacks and Latinos who voter overwhelmingly Democrat.

The three judges hearing a week-long trial in July voiced skepticism about the law's intent and whether it would discriminate against minorities.

"Texas, seeking to implement its voter ID law, bears the burden of proof and must therefore show that SB 14 lacks retrogressive effect," the judges wrote. "But as we have found, everything Texas has submitted as affirmative evidence is unpersuasive, invalid, or both. Moreover, uncontested record evidence conclusively shows that the implicit costs of obtaining SB 14-qualifying ID will fall most heavily on the poor and that a disproportionately high percentage of African Americans and Hispanics in Texas live in poverty. We therefore conclude that SB 14 is likely to lead to "retrogression in the position of racial minorities with respect to their effective exercise of the electoral franchise."

State Sen. Carlos Uresti, D-San Antonio, testified that some of his constituents in a sweeping border district between San Antonio and El Paso would have to drive up to 120 miles to receive Department of Public Safety-issued driver's license or identification card.

About 80 Texas counties have no DPS driver's license office, which could make it difficult for Texans without a driver's license to get a Voter ID card. Low income neighborhoods in metro areas also have few DPS offices.

Under the Voter ID law, all Texas voters would have to present one of the following forms of photo identification in order vote:

* Driver's license, election identification certificate, personal identification card, or concealed handgun license issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety;

* U.S. military identification card containing the person's photograph;

* U.S. citizenship certificate containing the person's photograph;

* or U.S. passport.

Lawyers for the state of Texas argued that the voter ID laws were similar to those that were passed and implemented in Indiana and Georgia.

Justice Department lawyer Matthew Colangelo, however, argued the bill was passed with intent to discriminate, and that voters would be disenfranchised "the day it goes into effect."

The bill was passed against a backdrop of huge Hispanic growth in the state that gave Texas four new congressional seats, Colangelo said.

Texas grew by 4 million over the past decade, according to the 2010 U.S. census. Roughly 90 percent of the growth was attributed to minorities, and Latinos alone accounted for 65 percent of the population growth.

The state Legislature passed the voter ID law in 2011 over objections from Latino groups who sided with the Justice Department in the lawsuit brought by the state when Justice denied preclearance of the new Texas voting rules.

Texas is one of 16 mostly southern states that must have changes to voting procedures or elections laws approved by the Justice Department under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act.

Texas is included in Voting Rights Act restrictions because of a history of past discrimination.

"I thank the DC Federal Court for standing up for voting rights and against discrimination and disenfranchisement," state Sen. Rodney Ellis, D-Houston, said. "Throughout this entire process, Texas consistently failed to produce information showing the law would not have a discriminatory impact on minority voters. The Voting Rights Act exists for this exact purpose: protecting the ability of all Americans to access the ballot box."

More than 13 million Texans cast ballots in the 2008 and 2010 general elections. There were four allegations of illegal voting, which resulted in one indictment, according to attorney general documents.

Abbott quickly issued a statement, saying his office would appeal the ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court.

"The Supreme Court of the United States has already upheld Voter ID laws as a constitutional method of ensuring integrity at the ballot box," Abbott said. "Today's decision is wrong on the law and improperly prevents Texas from implementing the same type of ballot integrity safeguards that are employed by Georgia and Indiana - and were upheld by the Supreme Court. The State will appeal this decision to the U.S. Supreme Court, where we are confident we will prevail."

gmartin@express-news.net