VA agrees not to censor prayer at Houston cemetery

The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs has agreed to settle a lawsuit over allegations of religious censorship at Houston National Cemetery, according to documents filed in federal court Thursday.

Local veterans and volunteer groups had accused VA and cemetery officials of banning them from using religious speech - including the words Jesus and God - during services at the cemetery.

The parties reached agreement on the case through mediation with former Texas Supreme Court Chief Justice Tom Phillips, according to the documents.

VA officials and attorneys representing the plaintiffs declined to comment until a judge signs off on it.

The documents state that VA will pay attorneys fees and expenses of $215,000, but the government admits no liability or fault, and stresses that some provisions of the agreement already were policy or practice at the department.

Under the settlement, VA would agree "not to ban, regulate or otherwise interfere with prayers, recitations, or words of religious expression absent family objection" and to allow veterans' families to hold services with any religious or secular content they desire.

VA also agrees not to edit or control private religious speech by speakers at VA-sponsored ceremonies or events and pledges to return a Bible, cross and Star of David to the cemetery's chapel, which must remain open and not be used for storage or referred to as a meeting facility.

The Bible, cross and star would be placed "on an open shelf within, but to the side of, the Chapel, where they would be accessible and available for use by families," the documents state.

Local members of Veterans of Foreign Wars District 4 and Houston National Memorial Ladies would resign their positions as official VA volunteers, according to the agreement. They would be free to provide their own texts of recitations to funeral homes so that veterans' families can decide if they would like these groups to provide any services at the cemetery.

VA would not interfere in the distribution of condolence cards or gifts containing religious messages or viewpoints and would not ban religious words in oral communications between the volunteers and veteran's families.

VA officials previously stated it was never department policy to ban those words, and that invoking the names of God or Jesus is not only allowed, but common at VA cemeteries across the country.

Protesters had called for VA to fire Houston cemetery director Arleen Ocasio, but her status is not addressed in the agreement.

lindsay.wise@chron.com