Top donors to Rick Perry's campaign for president

Former Texas Gov. Rick Perry has raised about $1 million from individual donors in his bid for president, as reported in his first filing with the Federal Election Commission in July.

The sum came from 605 contributions from folks across the country: 69 percent from Texas, 17 percent from California, and the rest mostly from the South.

RELATED: Rick Perry earns acclaim for toned down tactics, hitting back at Trump

Perry lags in the polls, apparently favored by about two percent of likely Republican voters, and he seems poised not to qualify for the first Republican primary debate in August. Still, many businesspeople have hit the maximum limits for contributions to the campaign with high hopes for a Perry presidency.

Federal election law limits those individuals' contributions to $2,700 per campaign. Because the primary and general elections count as separate campaigns, a donor can give twice that, $5,400, the second half of which may not be used unless and until the candidate wins the primary. A married couple may file a single contribution of $10,800.

However such limits do not apply to contributions to political action committees (PACs), organizations established to promote a specific candidacy but not technically affiliated with the candidate. PACs also don't have to identify and report contributors.

And while Perry raised just more than $1 million in individual contributions, his PAC raked in $16.8 million. So the list of individual donors can be seen as a representation of contributing demographics as opposed to incoming funds.

RELATED: Top local donors to the Cruz campaign

Perry's $1,049,028 million in individual contributions sets him dramatically behind his Republican and Democratic competitors, some of whom have been on the campaign trail longer than Perry. Jeb Bush reported $11.4 million; Ted Cruz reported $14.3 million; Bernie Sanders reported 15.2 million; and Hillary Clinton reported $47.5 million.

But in PAC contributions, which are reported to the media and not verified federally, Perry has slightly stronger standing. Compare his reported $16.8 million to Clinton's $15.6, Cruz's $38 million, and Bush's $103 million.

Ahead of the 2014 election, the Huffington Post reported PACs and super PACs were set to spend more than $600 million, with 61 percent of contributions over $500,000 each.

But only individual, and relatively small donors are reported in the federal filings. Among the more interesting points in Perry's report: 14 high-ranking employees of the Florida-based MCNA Dental company, including most of the corporate leadership, maxed out their primary donations to Perry. MCNA was not immediately available to comment.

RELATED: Rick Perry and Donald Trump get vicious in latest political sparring match

Click through our slideshow to see 25 of his top donors, where they're from and how they make their money.