Portman struggles to explain position on banning suspected terrorists from buying guns
U.S. Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio (Photo: AP file/John Minchillo)

WASHINGTON—Sen. Rob Portman said Tuesday he was open to legislation that would ban individuals on the FBI’s terrorist watch list from purchasing guns – an issue Democrats are pushing in the wake of Sunday’s mass shooting at an Orlando nightclub.

But how far the Ohio Republican would go on this hot-button issue, in this heated election year, is far from clear.

In December 2015, Portman voted against a Democratic amendment, crafted by Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif. that would have barred suspected terrorists from buying weapons. He and other Republicans instead rallied behind a GOP-crafted proposal that would have allowed federal officials to delay a gun sale for 72 hours and then try to get a court order to ban the sale, if prosecutors could show "probable cause" of terrorist activity or involvement on the part of the buyer.

The National Rifle Association strongly opposed Feinstein's provision and supported Cornyn's. Both measures failed.

Portman initially seemed to suggest that he was open to reversing his position and supporting the Feinstein amendment.

"I do believe that you should not be able to buy a weapon when you’re on the watch list,” Portman said during his weekly conference call with Ohio reporters. “I hope the entire Senate votes to say that if you’re on the terrorist watch list … that you should not be able to buy a weapon.”

Asked if that was a reversal from his 2015 stance, Portman said no—and then he seemed confused about what the 2015 provision did and didn’t do amid further questions from reporters.

Feinstein's bill would allow the attorney general to block the sale of firearms to known or suspected terrorists if there is a “reasonable belief” the weapons may be used to carry out an attack. Currently, convicted felons and fugitives are banned from buying guns, but suspected terrorists are not.

Portman at first said he voted against Feinstein’s proposal in 2015 because it only applied to people on the no-fly list—a narrower list of individuals who federal officials have designated as known or suspected terrorists. Those people are barred from flying to and from the United States.

After reporters pointed out that Feinstein’s bill applied to a broader segment of suspected terrorists, Portman paused and conferred with his staff. “I stand corrected if you guys are right about that,” he said. “I was told it was the no-fly list and it did not require” any investigation if someone claimed they were on the list improperly.

The Feinstein proposal included a provision allowing an individual to appeal to the Department of Justice if they felt there were mistakenly included on the list and thus barred from buying a gun.

Democrats plan to push for a new vote on Feinstein’s proposal later this week. On Tuesday, Portman said he hoped the Senate could reach some bipartisan consensus on the issue. But on Wednessay, his office seemed to add to the confusion by telling a New York Times reporter that his position was unchanged from 2015 and that he would oppose the Feinstein amendment.

Less than 24 earlier, Portman had refused to give a direct answer to the question of whether he would support the Feinstein bill.

“I’d need to look at it and see what the alternatives are,” he said.

USA TODAY reporter Donovan Slack contributed to this story.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/28CJ6L2