Portman, Strickland clash in Columbus debate
Buy Photo Sen. Rob Portman from Terrace Park (Photo: Enquirer file/Meg Vogel)Buy Photo

COLUMBUS — Republican Rob Portman and Democrat Ted Strickland tangled over gun control, immigration reform, and a spate of other hot-button issues on Monday in a raucous debate in their Senate contest.

In some ways, they did not stray far from their campaign themes; Portman called Strickand an ineffective congressman and an abysmal governor, making Ohio's troubles during the 2008 economic recession Exhibit A in his case. Strickland portrayed Portman as a captive of special interests, beholden to the Koch brothers and other deep-pocked donors who have poured millions of dollars into the Ohio race.

But there were some surprising twists and turns in Monday's showdown.

In perhaps his sharpest attack on Strickland, Sen. Portman accused the former governor of leaving Ohio “at the bottom of the heap” and going to Washington to become a well-paid lobbyist.

“That’s a big whopper,” Strickland responded. He noted he was never a registered lobbyist, nor did he earn the $400,000 salary that Portman cited.

At issue: Strickland’s job at a Washington liberal advocacy group called the Center for American Progress. He was president of that group’s action fund from March 2014 to April 2015, and earned about $200,000 in that role, according to Strickland's financial disclosure form.

Strickland tried to portray Portman as a wishy-washy lawmaker, calling him “a man who says one thing in Ohio and goes to Washington and does something else.”

He noted that Portman boasted about securing funding to combat the heroin epidemic in a massive spending bill, but then voted against that measure.

Portman has explained he voted against the $1.1 trillion spending bill because it included a raft of other items that lawmakers did not have time to carefully scrutinize. Portman also noted he helped pass a comprehensive anti-addiction bill and secured $37 million to help implement it.

“My legislation is making a difference already … to help turn the tide,” Portman said.

The heated exchanges came at the second debate, hosted by the Columbus Dispatch and WBNS-10TV, between the two candidates competing for Portman's Senate seat. Strickland is low on cash and down in the polls, but the former Democratic governor was more attack dog than underdog in the session.

Asked about gun control, Strickland said he could chart a middle course between supporting the Second Amendment and enacting “common-sense” gun control.

“Sen. Portman has opposed everything,” Strickland said, arguing that he would “stand up” to the NRA. “He will do whatever they ask of him,” the Democrat said of Portman.

Portman noted Strickland once bragged about his A+ rating from the gun lobby group and had described his own record on gun issues as “mixed and spotty.” Portman said he supports adding mental health records to the background check system for gun purchases.

On immigration, Strickland endorsed a comprehensive overhaul and a pathway to citizenship for people living in the U.S. illegally.

“I don’t want a two-tiered society,” Strickland said. “We’ve had this problem drag on and on."

Portman voted against a Senate bill that would have beefed up border enforcement and created a pathway to citizenship for the estimated 11 million people now here illegally. But in a surprise turn, Portman Monday said he supported granting legal status to those here illegally now.

“People (should) have a chance to come forward and get out of the shadows,” if they pay a fine and do not have a criminal record, he said. Portman appeared to stop short of supporting full citizenship.

Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton loomed large on the debate stage as well, with each Senate candidate on the defensive over their support for their party’s respective presidential nominees.

Asked about Clinton’s use of a private email server as secretary of state, Strickland noted she had apologized and conceded she’d made a mistake.

“I believe she is an honest person,” Strickland said. “It doesn’t mean she hasn’t made mistakes and she’s admitted those mistakes. I don’t believe there’s any evidence that she’s lied to the American people."

Portman was similarly put on the spot for backing Trump as he made a raft of offensive statements about minorities and women, only yanking his endorsement after a 2005 tape emerged showing Trump talking in vulgar terms about groping women without their consent.

"I didn’t make the decision lightly," Portman said. "He did win the nomination of our party."

What's next:

Portman and Strickland will have one final showdown, Thursday in Cleveland, at an event sponsored by the Cleveland City Club and Scripps ABC.

Check out the latest polls and fundraising numbers in the Ohio Senate race with USA TODAY's poll tracker.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/2eLbabK