Politics and Other Controversies -Democrats, Republicans, Libertarians, Conservatives, Liberals, Third Parties, Left-Wing, Right-Wing, Congress, President
Page 2 of 2 < 1 2 03-21-2019, 07:51 AM 1AngryTaxPayer Location: San Diego 34,067 posts, read 31,264,981 times Reputation: 18559 Advertisements Quote: phantompilot Originally Posted by You know the left has truly lost it when satire is indistinguishable from their actual platform and policies.



Is it any more ridiculous or reckless than letting foreigners vote or being a "sanctuary" for invaders? Take a stroll along the left coast and things thought satire 30 years ago are now very real. It's a real life Call of Duty Zombies episode.

03-21-2019, 07:59 AM Cape Cod Todd Location: Cape Cod 11,130 posts, read 7,819,261 times Reputation: 19485 Quote: Joey_salads_75 Originally Posted by Not a legit news source but this honestly wouldnt surprise me if real









I could see this really happening and I wouldn't be surprised either what with the way the Left is always questioning Police involved shootings where they never care about the officer and they jump to the collusion that the cop has to be racist.







In the Middle East our soldiers have a strict code the defines when they can shoot back at the enemy and in some cases they need to get permission.



It is easy to see how this approach could be mandated in the US.















It is also easy to see how fake news gets started. I could see this really happening and I wouldn't be surprised either what with the way the Left is always questioning Police involved shootings where they never care about the officer and they jump to the collusion that the cop has to be racist.In the Middle East our soldiers have a strict code the defines when they can shoot back at the enemy and in some cases they need to get permission.It is easy to see how this approach could be mandated in the US.It is also easy to see how fake news gets started. 03-21-2019, 08:04 AM Enigma777 Location: Florida 21,380 posts, read 8,996,657 times Reputation: 17409 Quote: Cape Cod Todd Originally Posted by I could see this really happening and I wouldn't be surprised either what with the way the Left is always questioning Police involved shootings where they never care about the officer and they jump to the collusion that the cop has to be racist.

In the Middle East our soldiers have a strict code the defines when they can shoot back at the enemy and in some cases they need to get permission. It is easy to see how this approach could be mandated in the US. It is also easy to see how fake news gets started. So you are simply speculating about a fictional event? I could see Trump nuking a country because they insulted him personally. It could happen. Or maybe we should look for FACTS now and deal with them, rather an alt-right fantasy of the future. Please register to post and access all features of our very popular forum. It is free and quick. Over $68,000 in prizes has already been given out to active posters on our forum. Additional giveaways are planned.



Detailed information about all U.S. cities, counties, and zip codes on our site: City-data.com.





Page 2 of 2 < 1 2 City-Data Forum Message

Quick Reply The following errors occurred with your submission Message: Posting Quick Reply - Please Wait

« Previous Thread | Next Thread »