Ohio schools chief Stan Heffner resigns under fire for conflict
COLUMBUS, Ohio -- Ohio Schools Superintendent Stan Heffner resigned on Saturday, under fire after the state inspector general found he lobbied improperly for a private education company he planned to work for.

Heffner gave no reason for the resignation, which is effective on Friday, in a two-sentence letter released by the state Education Department.

A report issued Thursday by Inspector General Randall Meyer said Heffner already had signed an employment agreement with Educational Testing Service when he testified before the state Senate Finance Committee in May 2011 for legislation that benefited the firm. Heffner was the interim state superintendent at the time.

He also had allowed the company to pay for his travel and had begun his move to San Antonio, Tex., for the job, the report found.

Heffner ultimately did not take the job because he was appointed full-time Ohio schools chief in July 2011.

Meyer's report also cited other improper acts, including Heffner's use of state staff and public property for personal purposes, and concluded there was reasonable cause that he violated ethics laws and created a conflict of interest.

The inspector general did not make a criminal referral, but urged the State Board of Education to consider disciplinary administrative action. He also forwarded his report to local prosecutors.

Ohio Democratic Party Chairman Chris Redfern repeated his call Saturday for a criminal investigation into possible theft in office, pay to play, and perjury.

Redfern, who earlier had called for the schools chief's suspension, said Gov. John Kasich should fire him, "instead of permitting Heffner to pick his own day of departure" and collecting an additional $4,500 in pay.

Kasich referred to the resignation as a "retirement" in a statement on Saturday, and called the decision "the right one." He said Heffner's "mistakes in judgment were unfortunate, but I respect him for always putting Ohio's students above everything else, including his own interests."

Deputy Superintendent Michael Sawyers will become acting superintendent.

The 19-member Ohio Board of Education, which hires and fires the superintendent, has its next scheduled meeting in September. A board spokesman said chairwoman Debe Terhar is working to set up an earlier meeting.

Terhar said in a statement that she was disturbed by the inspector general's findings and that Heffner showed a "woeful lack of judgment."

Heffner joined the Ohio Department of Education in 2004 after 15 years as superintendent of the Madison Local School District in Lake County.