U.S. attorney's office says Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald is not a target in county corruption investigation
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The lead prosecutor in the county corruption scandal said Saturday that Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald is not a target of the investigation.

The unusual disclosure by Ann Rowland comes a day after FitzGerald's name surfaced tangentially in courtroom testimony in the sentencing portion of Michael Forlani's trial and in the same week that FitzGerald said he was seriously considering a run for governor.

An FBI agent testified at the hearing that Forlani, an electrical contractor, used a smokescreen in 2008 to provide money to FitzGerald's campaign fund through two intermediaries.

"Ed FitzGerald is not a target of the investigation," a statement by Rowland said. "We have no evidence Ed FitzGerald knew Michael Forlani had anything to do with these contributions."

FitzGerald said it is unfortunate that his peripheral link to Forlani called for clarification.

"I think it was important in the interest of fairness because there have been some predictable and consistent attempts to try to mischaracterize my record," FitzGerald said. "I think the statement is significant and I think it puts those types of slanderous characterizations of me to rest."

FitzGerald, a former FBI agent in the Chicago office, said he did not contact Rowland's office to request she clarify why he was mentioned in court. He said he has no personal connection to any attorney or federal agent involved in the case.

When he was contacted on Friday about the court testimony, FitzGerald said he was shocked by it and didn't know that anybody donated to his campaign through intermediaries.

The contributions were made while Forlani, who faces up to eight years in prison after pleading guilty to racketeering and other corruption-related charges in the wide-ranging county corruption case, knew he was a potential target in the investigation.

An FBI agent said in court that Forlani gave $750 to the FitzGerald campaign through other people.

The instances were used as examples of how Forlani cloaked contributions to public officials.

FitzGerald's chief of staff said the county executive has already donated $250 of that money to a veterans charity group and FitzGerald said he will do the same with the rest.

FitzGerald, who was mayor of Lakewood at the time of the Forlani contributions, was elected county executive in 2010. The Democrat would have to run for re-election next year, but said he is exploring running against Ohio Gov. John Kasich, a Republican, instead.

Former federal prosecutor Peter Henning, who worked out of Washington D.C., said on Saturday the U.S. attorney's office rarely comments on whether a person is a subject of a federal investigation.

But the Wayne State University Law School professor said, "The government will go out of its way to say a public official had nothing to do with an investigation because of the potential taint.

"[Department of Justice] policy is very clear to not link people who have not been charged. I suspect they were caught by surprise [by the testimony] and the best way to handle that is to cut off further speculation."

Rowland has not given similar consideration to Cleveland City Council President Martin J. Sweeney, who has been named but not charged in county corruption cases, including Forlani's.

An FBI wiretap played in court Tuesday captured Forlani talking in 2008 about arranging for donations through intermediaries to Sweeney's leadership campaign fund before a council vote on an unspecified issue.

The ambiguous conversation between Forlani and developer John Ferchill mentions a $20,000 donation to Sweeney's fund and the number of votes needed for a piece of legislation to pass through City Council. Ferchill also has not been charged with a crime.

A year ago, during Jimmy Dimora's rackeetering trial, prosecutors played recordings of the former commissioner calling Sweeney on behalf of contractor Ferris Kleem to check on bids for a runway project at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport. On Friday, Kleem was sentenced to three years in prison for paying bribes to Dimora and former county auditor Frank Russo.

And last February during closing arguments in the Dimora trial, a photo of Sweeney was among those of 20 people who prosecutors said were considered key to the county racketeering case. When Dimora's trial opened, a similar pyramid of photos was displayed, but Sweeney's photo was not included.

Mike Tobin, a spokesman for the U.S. attorney general's office, could not be reached for comment Saturday about the Sweeney situation.