Rep. Betty Sutton has highest staff turnover rate in the U.S. House of Representatives
Copley Township Democratic Rep. Betty Sutton has the highest staff turnover rate in the U.S. House of Representatives, according to a study released Monday by a good-government group called the Sunlight Foundation.

The group's examination of House pay records for two years ending in the third quarter of 2011 found that just 19 percent of Sutton's staffers remained throughout the period. The average House offfice had a 64.2 percent retention rate during that time, the study found.

"Retention rates affect how well members of Congress can do their job, since they rely so much on their staff," the study said. "As any manger in the private sector knows, high turnover undermines organizational effectiveness. Hiring and training new staff takes substantial time, and institutional knowledge is frequently lost in the process."

In past interviews with The Plain Dealer over Sutton's high staff turnover rate, former Sutton staffers described her as a demanding employer who can be harsh when her expectations aren't met. They said the departures hurt her effectiveness because workers take their knowledge of issues with them when they leave. Sutton responded that her workers got picked off by other employers because they're talented, not because they're ill-treated, and that having ex-employees all over Washington is a positive thing for constituents "because it expands our network."

"I am thankful for the hard work each of my staff members does on a daily basis for the people of our district," Sutton said in a statement issued in response to the Sunlight Foundation study. "I am proud of the work we have done together in a very short period of time to write and pass legislation to provide our troops with fair pay when their tours of duty are extended, protect our families against tainted food, and save tens of thousands of jobs in our auto and related industries through our CARS Act."

Sutton wasn't the only Ohioan to make the group's list of offices with low staff retention rates. Beavercreek GOP Rep. Steve Austria, who announced his retirement after his congressional district was reconfigured, was #3 on the list, with a retention rate of 26.7 percent. Dayton area GOP Rep. Mike Turner had the thirteenth lowest rate: 37.5 percent.

Several Ohio members of Congress were among those with the House of Representatives' highest staff retention rates. Champaign County GOP Rep. Jim Jordan ranked fourth on the list, retaining 92.9 percent of his workers, and Cleveland Democratic Rep. Dennis Kucinich ranked 18th, with a 86.4 percent retention rate.

"In assessing these offices, we should note that this is based on only two years, for which House disbursement data is available," the study said. "A longer time frame would likley reveal different patterns."