Ohio Superintendent Stan Heffner improperly advocated for private education firm, inspector general finds
COLUMBUS, Ohio — Ohio Schools Superintendent Stan Heffner acted improperly when he testified last year in favor of legislation that benefited a private education company that he planned to work for, according to an Ohio inspector general's report released Thursday.

When he advocated for the bill as state superintendent in May 2011, Heffner already had worked behind the scenes to secure a position with a longtime Ohio vendor, Educational Testing Service. He also had allowed the company to pay for his travel and began his move to San Antonio for the job.

The inspector general did not make a criminal referral, although the report was forwarded to local prosecutors.

Ohio Democratic Party Chairman Chris Redfern called for Heffner's suspension and a criminal investigation into possible theft in office, pay-to-play and perjury.

A spokesman for Republican Gov. John Kasich said Heffner should not lose his job.

"He is doing a very good job as superintendent, but using official resources the way he did and demonstrating that kind of bad judgment is unacceptable," Kasich spokesman Rob Nichols said in an email. "Certainly some action is warranted, but right now it's the governor's own opinion that dismissal seems too far."

The inspector general concluded that Heffner's conduct met the definition in Ohio law of a "wrongful act or omission," meaning he failed to meet the standards of proper governmental conduct and subverted the process of government.

The inspector general recommended the State Board of Education, to which Heffner reports, consider administrative action. Heffner, who issued a statement apologizing for his conduct, said he will not resign in light of the report, education department spokesman John Charlton said.

Heffner was interim state superintendent at the time of his testimony before the Senate Finance Committee. The state school board hired him on a permanent basis a couple of months later with Kasich's support. Once he accepted the state's job offer, Heffner no longer pursued employment with ETS, Charlton said.

Heffner testified on legislation that included a provision to increase teacher testing requirements. The inspector general's report said the testing program would use tests provided by Educational Testing Service, which is headquartered in Princeton, N.J.

"By providing testimony to the legislature as the state's principal employee for leadership in education, in support of a bill that could and ultimately did benefit a corporation with which he entered into an agreement of employment, Heffner failed to meet the standards of proper governmental conduct," Inspector General Randy Meyer's report said.

The report also cited other improper acts.

It said that Heffner encouraged business associates to communicate with him on his state-issued cell phone, and that Heffner directed state workers to perform tasks in his private interest, such as arranging a personal business flight to South Dakota. Those things happened before he was the permanent superintendent.

In his statement issued Thursday, Heffner acknowledged he was wrong.

"I accept the findings of the Inspector General's report. I was wrong and I'm sorry for my lack of judgment. I've apologized to my staff, my friends and colleagues at the department, and the board. I have learned from my mistakes, and I will work with the board to take whatever steps they feel are necessary to resolve this matter and move forward," he said.

Debe Terhar, President of the State Board of Education, said in a statement that Heffner "demonstrated a woeful lack of judgement." She said the board will discuss the inspector general's report at its next meeting in September.

The Ohio Ethics Commission participated in the investigation and will monitor the education department's response, said Susan Willeke of the commission.

The commission, meanwhile, is looking into a separate matter involving Heffner and travel reimbursements from a company with which the education department has testing contracts. The department's legal counsel in May asked the commission to determine whether Ohio ethics laws prohibit the American Institutes for Research from covering Heffner's travel costs to conferences sponsored by its affiliates.

The inspector general's investigation started with a complaint filed in July 2011 by Rep. Debbie Phillips, a Democrat from Athens.

Phillips said the report, coupled with the matter in front of the ethics commission, is deeply troubling.

"Conflicts of interest and misuse of state resources are serious matters and today's findings have shown there are serious issues within the Ohio Department of Education that warrant further scrutiny," Phillips said in a statement.

Heffner began his education career in South Dakota. He has been with Ohio's Education Department since 2004, previously serving as the head of curriculum and assessment. He also was superintendent of the Madison School District in Lake County.

The full report below: