Businessman Ken Lanci says he's exploring a 2013 challenge to Cleveland Mayor Frank Jackson (updated)
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Ken Lanci, a wealthy businessman and philanthropist who spent hundreds of thousands of his own dollars on a failed bid for Cuyahoga County executive in 2010 , is considering a run against Cleveland Mayor Frank Jackson.

Lanci filed preliminary paperwork this week that allows him to raise and spend money on polling.

A nonpartisan primary will be held next September. The top two vote-getters will advance to the November election.

"I'm kind of testing the waters here, I guess," said Lanci, chairman and chief executive of Consolidated Graphics Group, a Cleveland printing company. "I want to gauge enthusiasm beyond the group of people pushing me to do this."

Lanci would not disclose who is encouraging his candidacy. But he said he has become frustrated with city leadership during Jackson's second four-year term.

"It’s not about politics," Lanci said. "I'm just trying to figure out how the hell to move things in a better direction because what we’re doing is not working."

Asked about Lanci’s interest in his job, the mayor, through a spokeswoman said: “Everyone has that right.”

Jackson, 66, easily won re-election in 2009 against former City Councilman Bill Patmon, now a state legislator. There have been few rumblings about high-profile challengers in 2013. Lanci, 62, has a home in suburban Brecksville but said he is leasing an apartment in downtown Cleveland to fulfill residency requirements if he goes through with a mayoral run.

Running as an independent in the county executive race, Lanci received about 12 percent of the vote, good for third in a six-way race won by Democrat Ed FitzGerald. Though the mayoral contest is nonpartisan, Lanci says he’s now a Democrat, as is Jackson.

Jackson, who recently sold a 15-mill school levy to voters, has faced few political setbacks in his seven years as mayor. Former Cuyahoga County Commissioner Tim Hagan, a Democrat who lost a 1989 race for mayor and a 2002 bid for governor against Republican incumbent Bob Taft, is underwhelmed by Lanci’s potential candidacy.

Said Hagan: “Ken Lanci has about as much chance of winning against Frank Jackson as I did against Bob Taft.”