Portman's stance on gay marriage gives momentum to group seeking to scuttle Ohio's ban
COLUMBUS, Ohio - A group leading a petition drive to legalize gay marriage in Ohio says it has gained new momentum since Republican U.S. Sen. Rob Portman's announcement last week that he supports marriage equality.

A proposed constitutional amendment being pushed by FreedomOhio aims to make same-sex marriage legal in the state while allowing religious groups to determine for themselves whether to perform the unions. The issue could make the ballot as early as November, the group says.

"The senator's coming-out in support of freedom to marry has absolutely re-energized the campaign," said Ian James, co-founder of FreedomOhio. "This is a monumentally huge step in Ohio, a battleground state, for the marriage equality movement."

Portman's turnaround could bolster conservative support for same sex marriage and help FreedomOhio garner the nearly 386,000 signatures it needs to place its measure on the ballot, James said. He added that the group had not yet decided whether to propose the amendment for this year's election.

"It will be a matter of making certain that we are best prepared," James said. "We need to take a look at the polls and make sure we have the resources to mobilize majority support."

A Washington Post-ABC News poll released Monday -- the same day former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton went public with her support of gay marriage -- shows 58 percent of Americans favor legalizing same-sex marriage. The numbers also reveal that those aligned with the GOP have slowly been reversing their stance on the issue. Republicans are 34 percent in favor of gay marriage, up from 24 percent in 2004.

James believes the upward trend is proof a widespread legalization of gay marriage is inevitable.

"This state, this country, is moving in the right direction. And it's moving fast," James said.

Citizens for Community Values, a conservative Cincinnati-based group that staunchly opposes gay marriage, disagrees.

"I can't look into the future, but I just don't ever see it happening," said Phil Burress, president of CCV. "This nation was founded on Judeo-Christian principles, and, like Judeo-Christian beliefs, every major religion is opposed to same-sex marriage. You can't allow same-sex marriage until you destroy all religions."

Burress led CCV, which asserts that homosexuality is a reversible lifestyle choice, in the 2004 effort that banned gay marriage in Ohio through a constitutional amendment.

Burress said Portman called him hours before the Republican senator's change-of-heart made headlines.

"I thought he was going to ask me for help, then he knocked me over when he said he was going to change his position publicly," Burress lamented, adding that he has been friends with Portman since the senator campaigned for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives two decades ago.

"He's put the party at risk because he will probably lose his seat," Burress said, adding that Portman soon will be listed on the CCV website as "unacceptable for public office."

"He has definitely put himself in the crosshairs for the next election. You can't win an election in Ohio without the evangelical vote."

Burress encouraged FreedomOhio to "bring it on."

"They think they have the momentum to win," Burress said. "The election will be decided by the grass roots efforts, which is where we are at our best."

FreedomOhio has until July 3 to submit its petition for the same sex marriage amendment to appear on November's ballot. The group would not disclose how many signatures it has collected since launching the campaign last April, but said it is on track to gather the requisite number before the July deadline.

On Twitter: @BlackwellTweets