Gov. John Kasich proposes $1 billion rebate for 210,000 employers from excess Ohio Bureau of Workers' Compensation funds
COLUMBUS, Ohio — Gov. John Kasich said today that he wants to return $1 billion in insurance premiums to 210,000 public and private employers in amounts ranging from $5 to millions of dollars.

Kasich said the rebates would come from the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation’s net assets, which exceed $8 billion and are more than enough to meet all of the state-operated insurer’s financial obligations.

"I would call this one of the most significant economic stimulus measures that we have seen," Kasich said during a news conference at a vintage T-shirt shop in the city’s hip Short North neighborhood. "This is essentially a billion dollar tax cut for our medium and small businesses."

The larger-than-expected assets were generated by strong investment management practices, Kasich said. The rebates, if approved by the bureau’s board of directors, could begin arriving in June or July.

"We’re very confident that this will happen and be approved," Kasich said.

The proposed rebate would have no impact on a lawsuit that recently resulted in a Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court judge ordering the bureau to pay $859 million to 264,000 employers as damages for charging excessive premiums, Kasich said.

The state has appealed the ruling. If the ruling is upheld, employers stand to receive refunds ranging from a few dollars to $2 million, according to attorneys.

Steve Buehrer, the bureau’s administrator, said the funds to pay the lawsuit damages have been "set aside" from the rest of the reserves while the bureau appeals. The bureau maintains that its actions were lawful and restitution is not warranted.

Earl Stein, the lead plaintiff in the coalition’s six-year legal battle, and co-owner of Corky & Lenny’s delicatessen in Woodmere, said in a prepared statement that, with excess billions available, the bureau should pay the damages it owes to the plaintiffs.

"It is encouraging to see Buehrer and [Kasich] recognize that the bureau’s $9 billion surplus belongs to Ohio’s job creators — not the BWC," Stein said. "Now is the time for the administration and the bureau to recognize that it continues to hold on to another $860 million that was illegally charged to 270,000 employers and comply with the court order to repay those funds."

Ryan Vesler, owner of the T-shirt shop, Homage, said he expects to receive a rebate of about $4,000.

"Every little bit helps," said Vesler, who founded Homage in his parents’ basement in 2007. "This will definitely make a difference."

The proposed rebate would not be unprecedented. From 1996 to 2005, the bureau issued dividends and rebates for private employers totaling $6.6 billion, and $1.4 billion for public employers. The last dividend was in 2004, granting a 20 percent cut in premiums. The largest dividend reduced premiums statewide by $1.3 billion, according to statistics provided by the bureau.

Other proposals offered by Kasich on Thursday included tripling investments in worker safety grants to $15 million, and lowering all workers’ compensation rates by 2 percent for private employers and 4 percent for public employers. The rate cut would be on top of a 4 percent cut last year, Kasich said.

"Our efforts to create a jobs-friendly climate are paying off, with more than 115,000 new jobs created in the last few years," Kasich said. "A billion dollars should have a very positive effect on jobs in Ohio."