Democrats say Attorney General DeWine meddled in sexual harassment investigation
COLUMBUS, Ohio -- Ohio Democrats on Thursday pounced on reports accusing Republican Attorney General Mike DeWine of improperly interfering with a sexual harassment investigation that may have involved a close friend.

Ohio Democratic Party Chairman Chris Redfern accused DeWine of halting the investigation to protect a long-time personal friend Redfern believes was the harasser.

"Essentially, the attorney general, the chief law enforcement officer in the seventh largest state in the union, involved himself in an internal sexual harassment investigation and then muscled into the investigation, compelling his subordinate to provide confidential information including the name of the informant," Redfern said.

The Sandusky Register first reported the allegations against DeWine, who is running for re-election this year. His campaign has been under increasing pressure of late after several unflattering news reports. The Dayton Daily News has reported allegations of pay-to-play schemes involving DeWine's office and vendors.

Democrats on Thursday assailed DeWine over the sexual harassment investigation. But a copy of the final investigative report, obtained by the Northeast Ohio Media Group, shows that the three-month-long investigation was already nearing its end when DeWine was formally interviewed.

An office spokeswoman said DeWine never asked the investigator to stop or change the investigation and no witness statements or other evidence were changed after DeWine's interview.

The investigation began in April 2013, when a long-time paid intern in the attorney general's office, turned down a permanent job offer there for "personal reasons."

The woman, a Case Western University law student at the time, told a supervisor in confidence that she did not accept the job because someone -- an "older" "high up" friend of DeWine -- was preventing her from taking the job. She was twice interviewed by human resources officers, each time reluctantly.

The investigation was referred to Franklin County Prosecutor Ron O'Brien for possible charges. DeWine called O'Brien to talk about the case.

The intern initially declined to cooperate with O'Brien. But when threatened with a grand jury subpoena, she told O'Brien under oath that she lied in previous interviews about details of the accused violator to hide his identity and did not want the investigation to continue. O'Brien concluded there was no crime to prosecute.

The sexual harassment claim was referred back to the Equal Employment Opportunity Compliance officer, who interviewed DeWine during her investigation. According to a witness statement, DeWine pressed EEOC officer Kristine Cadek for the name of a confidential informant who claimed to know the identity of the accused violator. Three days after DeWine's interview, Cadek closed the investigation.

Redfern said it was improper for DeWine to request the informant's name and to contact O'Brien, a fellow Republican.

Lisa Hackley, spokeswoman for DeWine, said that the call was a professional courtesy to notify O'Brien that the office was sending him the case.

Hackley said the office followed policy while investigating the claims. Per a human resources policy provided to Northeast Ohio Media Group, employees are required to report all incidents of sexual harassment to either the Equal Employment Opportunity officer or the director of human resources.

The intern's concerns were investigated by human resources, O'Brien and the EEO officer. At each step, the woman declined to name the employee who made her feel uncomfortable. Hackley said information provided by a confidential informant was vague and insubstantial but investigated as well.

"We're always monitoring agency-wide for any signs of it but we've had no complaints since," Hackley said. "We did the best with the information we had and took it seriously."

Hackley said DeWine was interviewed as part of a thorough investigation. DeWine spoke with the confidential informant, but that person did not have new information for the investigation nor a specific name of the alleged violator, Hackley said.

The intern changed her story in a follow-up interview with human resources officials, according to the final report. The intern declined to provide any information, including the name of the accused violator, to office officials after that interview.

Ohio Democratic Women's Caucus Chair Kathy DiCristofaro said DeWine's involvement in the investigation shows why women are often afraid to come forward when they've been sexually harassed.

"DeWine failed to allow independent investigators to do their jobs, and since the investigation was 'short-circuited,' we may never be able to get to bottom of what actually occurred between Mike DeWine's close friend and a former intern," DiCrisofaro said in a statement. "What we do know is that there is likely still a sexual harasser in the attorney general's office who has avoided punishment because this investigation went nowhere, and Mike DeWine's personal efforts protected him. Ohio women deserve answers on why AG DeWine was interfering again in an ongoing investigation."