That time he sought a guardian for the fetus of a disabled rape victim: Jeb Bush's Right Angle
Outside Florida, the Terri Schiavo case is probably what voters remember most about Jeb Bush. It's also completely consistent with his leadership on other social and cultural issues.

"Bush believed that religion was being pushed out of the public square, and during his time as governor, he did more to integrate religion and religious organizations into Florida politics and administration than any governor in Florida history," wrote Matthew T. Corrigan, a University of North Florida political scientist, in "Conservative Hurricane," his 2014 book on Bush.

A devout Catholic, Bush had an especially aggressive anti-abortion agenda.

His approach over eight years ranged from the relatively mild -- approving license plates with the phrase "Choose Life," for example -- to relentlessly far-right. After courts found a parental notification measure to be at odds with a privacy clause in the Florida Constitution, Bush and his supporters rallied voters behind an amendment that made an exception.

Bush had less luck with his 2000 ban on late-term abortions. There was every expectation that a federal court would find the move unconstitutional -- and one did -- but a spokesman for the governor at the time said Bush was eager to end "this gruesome procedure."

Undeterred, Bush intervened in several individual cases. In 2003, he requested a court-appointed guardian for the fetus of a mentally disabled woman who had been raped in a state group home. Abortion-rights advocates feared that Bush was attempting legal maneuvers to prevent an abortion and to establish legal protections for fetuses.

"This mother is severely developmentally disabled and cannot make decisions for herself or her child," Bush wrote in an email to a woman who questioned his involvement. "Having a guardian for each of them is more than appropriate given the uniqueness of this tragic case."

State courts again ruled that Bush was out of bounds. The woman gave birth, and her child eventually was adopted, Corrigan recounted years later in his book.

Bush's administration also aimed to prevent a 13-year-old girl who had been living in a state home from having an abortion. The 2005 case, also explored in Corrigan's book, brought more judicial pushback. Bush ultimately dropped the challenge.

On guns, Bush governed with a zeal that made the National Rifle Association proud.

In 1999, his first year in office, he signed the "10-20-life" bill. The law mandates 10-year prison terms for crimes involving a gun, 20 years if the gun is fired and 25 years to life if the gun injures or kills someone. This, Corrigan observed in his book, gave Bush and his allies "political cover to go to extraordinary lengths to protect the rights of legal gun owners."

Bush did. He expanded concealed-carry laws. He allowed guns in state parks and national forests. And, yes, he signed the nation's first stand-your-ground bill.

Such laws, championed by the NRA, permit citizens to use deadly force in self-defense without first attempting to retreat. Florida's version provoked strenuous debate after the 2012 death of Trayvon Martin, a teen shot and killed by George Zimmerman, a volunteer neighborhood watchman. Bush told reporters during a trip to Texas that year that the law should not be applied to the Trayvon case. But it's difficult to quantify how pertinent the law was to the jury's verdict. Zimmerman was acquitted of murder and manslaughter charges.

When it comes to defining his social conservatism as he explores a run for president, Bush appears most comfortable detailing his overhaul of affirmative action.

He signed an executive order in 1999 that ended race-based college admissions and state contracting under his One Florida initiative. The program required state colleges and universities to accept any student in the top 20 percent of his or her class. Bush believed that the stipulation would open opportunities for minorities in urban school districts.

"We ... eliminated affirmative action by executive order and replaced it with a leadership model that wasn't discriminatory but made sure that people that had a chance to go to universities -- African Americans and Hispanic kids -- did it," Bush told a crowd this month in Iowa. "And we had more African-Americans and Hispanics attending our universities."

Bush made similar remarks the week before at CPAC, the Conservative Political Action Conference. PolitiFact found the claim "mostly false," noting that while raw numbers for black students were up, percentages were down. "There's no hard evidence Bush's One Florida program had much to do with the enrollment changes," fact-checkers wrote.

The One Florida debate also exposed the rocky relationship Bush had with Democrats. In 2000, when two Democratic legislators showed up at the Capitol for a sit-in, Bush called their behavior "childish," "sophomoric" and "unbecoming" of a public official.

At another point, in a moment of pique he said was meant for reporters covering the sit-in and not the black lawmakers staging it, Bush barked to security: "Kick their asses out."

Return to slideshow.

Continue reading: A privatizing, charter school-founding 'Veto' Corleone.