Obamacare to make rates soar, state says in analysis attacked as deeply flawed
Updated

Washington -- Ohio’s insurance regulators are warning that some health policy premiums may skyrocket next year because of the Affordable Care Act.

But insurance experts and advocates for more comprehensive coverage counter that the Ohio Department of Insurance used confusing and misleading information to arrive at that conclusion. They say the department’s data make it impossible to even tell the price of actual premiums for Ohioans.

The department is headed by Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor, a Republican critic of the law known widely as Obamacare. She said last week that her department estimates the cost to cover health care insurance will rise an average of 88 percent in Ohio for 2014.

“We have warned of these increases since a state-specific study in 2011 indicated Ohio would be significantly impacted by the ACA,” Taylor said. “The department’s initial analysis of the proposed rates show consumers will have fewer choices and pay much higher premiums for their health insurance starting in 2014.”

This debate is over a relatively slim portion of the insurance market, individual policies that are sold by agents or brokers to one customer at a time. Only 350,000 out of 10 million people with medical coverage in Ohio had these kinds of policies in 2010, according to a study for the state by Milliman, Inc., a consulting firm.

The majority of Ohioans are insured in group plans, typically offered through their employers.

To compare today’s costs for individual policies with those likely in 2014, the state relied on 2013 estimates from the Society of Actuaries, using a study that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, or HHS, disputes as flawed.

The Society of Actuaries, based in Illinois, is an independent group serving professionals who measure and manage risk, and says it provided its estimates to help state officials nationwide project costs. CNN reported earlier this year that the society used an insurance company subsidiary to help calculate estimates, but the society stood by its work and said the analysis was reviewed by its membership.

HHS continued its criticism this week and, with other critics, said the state should have used actual 2013 figures rather than those from a study. Outside groups trying to replicate or better understand Taylor’s figures said they found it impossible and questioned some of the figures in the study.

According to the state, the actuaries’ study showed that the current monthly average cost to cover medical expenses for an individual health insurance plan is $223 in Ohio. By comparison, the state insurance department, which must approve rates, has received proposals from 14 insurance companies that would put the average monthly cost of coverage in 2014 at $420, Taylor said, for an 88 percent increase.

The state is reviewing these proposals now. Rates submitted to the department “must be adequate, non-discriminatory and actuarially sound,” said department spokesman Robert Denhard, but “the department cannot reject rates that meet those standards.”

Costs to provide insurance are not the same as what consumers may pay, but “it is expected that these increases in costs will also translate to significant premium increases for many Ohioans,” the department said in a news release Thursday.

Critics including HHS jumped on this conclusion, saying the state overestimated the price hike while glossing over other factors. A key one: the role that federal income tax subsidies will play to hold down buyers’ premiums.

Insurance buyers will be eligible for subsidies based on their incomes and the percentage that insurance consumes. Individual-market insurance tends to consume a bigger share than employer-subsidized insurance, so the subsidies for buyers may be larger.

Denhard said there was no way to calculate the subsidies, “as they will vary for each individual consumer.”

But a bigger problem with the comparisons, experts say, is that comparing today’s health insurance policies, especially those with low costs, with those that will be sold in 2014 is like comparing an efficiency apartment with a three-bedroom condo. Cheap policies today often require patients to pay steep deductibles and copayments when they need care. It can be hard for people with pre-existing conditions to even meet the medical qualifications to buy an individual policy.

That will change in 2014. Under the Affordable Care Act, insurers will not be able to turn away clients with pre-existing conditions. Policies will have to include a package of essential benefits, including maternity care. Older people are still likely to be charged more than younger people because of the differences in medical claims among age groups, but the law will limit the size of those price differences.

That latter provision could push up rates for young adults compared with what they pay now, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. But many policy buyers in that age range will qualify for subsidies, the foundation says, and the Affordable Care Act has an option for adults under age 30 to buy limited, high-deductible “catastrophic” policies that still provide no-cost preventive services, helping them temper their costs.

“There are so many variables there, and what the Ohio Department of Insurance did was oversimplify it,” said Kathleen Gmeiner, director of Ohio Consumers for Health Coverage. “What you are paying for in 2013 is a lot different from what you will be paying for in 2014.”

To Obamacare critics, that’s an important distinction too. They say consumers should have the freedom to get as much or as little insurance as they wish.

But pricing comparisons can break down when that is considered.

In making her comparisons, Taylor included two examples, both for health-care policies sold in 2013, both with substantial hikes likely in 2014. The cost of a policy with a $25,000 deductible (a deductible that was not listed in Taylor's release but which her department disclosed to The Plain Dealer when asked) was $131 a month this year for a 64-year-old woman in Franklin County (if she didn't smoke). Next year, the cost will jump to $593.53, an increase of 353 percent, according to Taylor's department.

If a 25-year-old male had the policy, his costs would now be about $30 a month, yet the cost will jump to $199 next year, a 571 percent hike.

The other policy example given by the insurance department had a $6,000 deductible -- also not disclosed in Taylor's materials but provided when asked. The 2014 costs for this policy will jump more by than 100 percent -- and by 285 percent for a 25-year-old male.



Critics of Obamacare including Taylor cite these hikes to support their case: a 353 percent price hike is colossal, and the 571 percent jump is even worse. Both these are much higher than even the 88 percent average for all single policies that Taylor mentioned.



But there are three problems with examples like these, analysts said. First, Gmeiner said that one insurance broker she spoke with did not even sell such a low-cost policy as the first one Taylor cited for a 25-year-old male.



Second, the substantially higher prices in 2014 will be offset with subsidies for many buyers, depending on their incomes.

The third problem illustrates the biggest difference in viewpoints. The high deductibles made these terrible policies, health care advocates said. Yet such policies are often the only kind available to people with preexisting conditions. That will change under Obamacare.



Discussing policies that have $10,000 deductibles and almost certainly require much higher premiums the following year if a person gets sick and actually files claims, Gary Claxton, a vice president at the Kaiser foundation, observed, “It’s not really what we should be calling health insurance.”