Ohio ethics panel passes on inquiry into John Kasich, JobsOhio and outside influence
COLUMBUS, Ohio -- The chairman of the Ohio Ethics Commission said Thursday there is no need for an ethics probe of Gov. John Kasich’s relationship to a company that received hundreds of thousands of dollars in state development tax credits.

Chairman Merom Brachman, noting that the commission is "anxious to not become a political theater,” said data provided by the governor shows conclusively there is no conflict of interest to investigate.

Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald, the Democratic challenger in the 2014 election, had asked for the review, framing it as an update to a previous complaint he made about conflicts of interest among officials at JobsOhio, a private, nonprofit company that serves as a developmental arm to the state.

Fitzgerald, in a letter to the commission, cited a story by the Associated Press which outlined Kasich’s connections with Worthington Industries, a steel manufacturer in Greater Columbus.

Kasich served on the company’s board of directors, for which he was paid about $611,000. He left the board prior to becoming governor. Some of his pay from 2005 to 2008 was deferred, according to a letter from the governor’s chief legal counsel. He received that deferred compensation in 2010, 2011 and 2012, the last two of those years being after he took office.

The AP noted that since Kasich took office, subsidiaries of the company, working with JobsOhio, have received more than $619,000 in tax breaks approved by the state.

“The manner in which this report details how Governor Kasich was both personally enriched and politically supported by a company receiving state assistance raises significant questions as to whether state ethics laws have been broken,” FitzGerald said in his letter.

JobsOhio, whose board is primarily appointed by the governor, negotiates with businesses in a bid to create jobs or bring them to Ohio and create jobs. It then makes recommendations to the state’s Development Services Agency for state aid.

The state makes the actual decision on awarding the aid. Tax credits are approved by an independent board, the Ohio Tax Credit Authority.

JobsOhio has been under fire from Democrats since its creation for a lack of transparency. And they have ratcheted up their criticism lately, questioning published reports that members of the JobsOhio board had connections with companies that received state aid.

FitzGerald asked the ethics commission to look into those connections earlier this month, but JobsOhio, by law, is beyond the reach of the Ethics Commission’s authority, a point that was reiterated today.

But given the detailed explanation in the letter from the governor’s counsel, Brachman said Thursday, there is no need for an ethics inquiry. The letter, Brachman said, “provides relevant time frames that identify that there are no conflicts in circumstances related to the governors work prior to the 2010 election or since.”

The timeline in the letter shows that Kasich resigned from the board before he took office. He divested himself of all stock he held in the first quarter of 2011. And he reported the stock sale and the subsequent deferred compensation in financial disclosure statements to the state.

The Ethics Commission previously has ruled that a state employee may take deferred compensation earned prior to their taking a state job. That case involved an Ohio Lottery employee in the Strickland administration.

As for the tax credits, they were granted to two subsidiaries, but the governor had no role in awarding them, the governor’s chief legal counsel reported. Nor did he have a stake in either company or stand to benefit once they were awarded.

Jerid Kurtz, a spokesman for the Democratic Party, said the Democrats still think more inquiry is needed. He said he would make a distinction, too, between a case involving a lottery employee and one involving the chief executive of the state.