5% of Ohio voters switched parties in March 2016 primary
COLUMBUS, Ohio -- About 5 percent of voters who cast ballots in Ohio's Democratic and Republican primaries were previously affiliated with the other party, according to data released Wednesday from the Ohio secretary of state.

Of the nearly 1.2 million voters who cast ballots in March's Democratic Primary Election, 34,867 were previously affiliated with the Republican Party. Of the more than 1.9 million voters who cast ballots for Republicans, 115,762 were previously affiliated with the Democratic Party. That's more than double the number who switched parties in the 2012 primary election.

Reports of large numbers of Mahoning County Democrats defecting to vote for or against Republican Donald Trump appear to be true -- nearly 27 percent of Republican ballots cast there were from previously affiliated Democrats, compared to 1 percent the opposite way.

But it's possible many of those crossover voters had changed parties in a prior primary election, making it difficult to say definitively how many "true" Republicans or Democrats voted in another party's primary this year.

Confused? Primary elections are how Ohioans "register" -- or affiliate -- with a political party. Whatever party ballot you choose on Election Day is the party you are then affiliated with from that point on.

The only way to change your party affiliation is to vote in another primary election and choose a different party's ballot. Or choose an issues-only ballot to be considered unaffiliated.

Previous coverage: Can I change my party affiliation in the Ohio primary?

All in all, 1.8 million Ohioans decided to join or switch parties.

Secretary of State Jon Husted said that shows the "intensity" of Ohioans' engagement with this election season.

"Voter turnout is driven by the enthusiasm and interest that groups and candidates can generate for their cause," Husted said in a statement.

Here's how each party fared.

Democrat

651,928 of unaffiliated voters voted Democrat, about 54 percent of all Democratic ballots

58,139 newly registered voters chose Democratic ballots

1,440,700 total affiliated Democrats after the primary

Republican

849,415 of unaffiliated voters voted Republican, about 44 percent of all republican ballots

60,716 newly registered voters chose Republican ballots

2,260,799 total affiliated Republicans after the primary

Cuyahoga County

About 5.7 percent of 2016 Cuyahoga County primary voters switched parties for the March primary, according to state data.

Republicans:

16,710 previously affiliated Democrats voted Republican, or 11.8 percent of all Republican voters

In 2012, 8.6 percent of ballots cast were by previously affiliated Democrats

Democrats:

2,765 previously affiliated Republicans voted Democrat, or 1.38 percent of all Democratic voters

In 2012, 1.3 percent of ballots cast were by previously affiliated Democrats

Good news for Republicans?

The Ohio Republican Party as a sign enthusiasm is on their side going into the fall, calling the additions to their rolls "a political windfall."

"We have a million new Republicans to do our data work on and figure out who would and wouldn't have been in our get-out-the-vote universe," Chairman Matt Borges said in a statement.

But Democratic Party Chairman David Pepper said the surge in turnout shows how much Ohioans don't want Trump to be their next president.

"People were so passionate to stop Trump they changed parties," Pepper said, noting that Gov. John Kasich's presidential campaign encouraged Democrats to vote against Trump. "The same people who voted in that primary will probably vote against him in November."

Follow @JMBorchardt

Follow me on Facebook.