Mary Taylor has become one of Gov. John Kasich's biggest critics. So why does she still work for him?
WILLOUGHBY, Ohio -- As she's continued her run for governor, Lt. Gov Mary Taylor's campaign strategy has drifted from gently criticizing to outright opposing Gov. John Kasich.

So that raises the question -- why does she continue to work for him?

Following a campaign event in Lake County on Friday, Taylor said in an interview that she's stayed a member of the Kasich administration because she's "not a quitter." She specifically cited her work overseeing the Common Sense Initiative, an ongoing state effort to work with businesses and state agencies to reduce regulations.

"I haven't quit anything, and that includes the lieutenant governor office, even though there are things that I disagree with the administration on," Taylor said.

But if there are areas where Taylor agrees with Kasich, who technically has endorsed her candidacy for governor, she doesn't emphasize them in her stump speeches. At the Lake County event, where Taylor addressed about 15 people at a microbrewery in Willoughby, Taylor said she is running to challenge the political status quo. She said she would end the state education department's use of the federal Common Core standards, which Kasich supports, and that she would end the expansion of Medicaid eligibility, which is a signature achievement of Kasich's tenure as governor.

In response to a question about gun control, Taylor said is an ardent supporter of the Second Amendment. Kasich, meanwhile, recently unveiled a raft of proposed gun reforms.

"I'm using the bully pulpit of my office to speak up in support of our Second Amendment rights," said Taylor, who when later asked by an attendee to identify areas where she agrees with Kasich, said she supports his efforts to cut income taxes and his creation of JobsOhio, the economic development nonprofit.

Lt. governor's job open-ended

In Ohio, the duties of the lieutenant governor are largely ceremonial. Besides taking over should the governor die or otherwise be incapacitated, the lieutenant governor traditionally has been assigned by the governor to oversee a state department.

Taylor directed the state insurance department until last year, when she gave up that job so she could raise campaign money from insurers without creating a conflict of interest. That reduced her $150,000 salary to about $78,000.

As lieutenant governor, she oversees a staff of about 10 people, and while she's in touch with her staff remotely, she comes in the office roughly every two weeks, said David Hopcraft, spokesman for the lieutenant governor's office.

One of her major responsibilities is to oversee the Common Sense Initiative. Taylor sets the program's general strategy, and helps cast a tie-breaking vote in case CSI staff and a state subsidiary disagree on a particular regulation, which Hopcraft estimated happens around twice a month. She also meets with a small-business council as part of the program once a quarter.

Taylor also oversees the Ohio Business Gateway, an ongoing project to make a centralized website for businesses to conduct their necessary state business, such as applying for licenses or paying taxes.

From 'really proud to support' Kasich to 'Huh'

Taylor generally also has served as a prominent spokeswoman for Kasich administration policies, which has included speaking at community events and making media appearances. In the lead up to the 2016 Republican National Convention -- including at the convention itself , where Taylor said she was "really proud" to do so -- Taylor supported Kasich's presidential candidacy, even as it became clear that Donald Trump was the party's presumptive nominee. But Taylor had a major break with Kasich politically after the November 2016 election and in January 2017, she switched her allegiances and helped oust Kasich's hand-picked state party chair.

When Taylor announced her candidacy for governor last year, she called Kasich a "good man" whom she respected, but said she did not agree with all of his positions. But as the race has continued, she has ramped up her criticism of Kasich. In January, she told Republicans in Clermont County she hadn't spoken with Kasich for more than a year, which Kasich denied. She's begun distributing political literature emphasizing that she, but not Kasich, attended the 2016 Republican National Convention. (One version of the literature falsely said her opponent, Attorney General Mike DeWine also didn't attend.)

Taylor and her running-mate, Nathan Estruth, have taken to pointing out that Dave Luketic, a political operative who ran a pro-Kasich Super PAC during the 2016 election, now is running DeWine's campaign. And after Kasich gave his State of the State speech earlier this month, Taylor tweeted a one-word reaction that was seen by many as a major show of disrespect.

Tom Zawistowski, a prominent figure in Ohio's Tea Party movement, said he and other conservative Kasich critics whose support Taylor has courted have tried to pressure her to resign to create a clean separation between her and the administration. A Republican familiar with Taylor's campaign said her team at one point gamed out whether to resign, but ultimately decided it wasn't strategically wise.

"I can tell you flat out that not only I, but other leaders in the state have asked her to [resign] point blank," said Zawistowski, who last week denied that his request for $1 million from the Taylor campaign to help fund candidates for the state Republican Party's central committee in exchange for an endorsement was an "extortion" attempt.

Taylor told a reporter that only one person, whom she did not identify, has asked her to consider resigning. She said she doesn't think it poses an issue for her in differentiating herself from Kasich in the eyes of voters.

"Certainly early on, I got that question a lot more than I do now," Taylor said. "I think my public statements and my positions on issues have made it pretty clear where I stand in that I am a conservative."

This story has been corrected to reflect the Taylor campaign in event in Lake County was in Willoughby, not Eastlake. It also has been corrected to reflect that Kasich has cut income taxes, not sales taxes in Ohio.