Residents show an independent streak in Independence as Issue 4 battle over road project brews: Michael K. McIntyre's Tipoff
INDEPENDENCE, Ohio -- Officials here had an issue on their hands that was so pressing, so crucial for the health of the city that they employed their SwiftReach automated phone call system repeatedly to contact residents.

The message: Vote no Aug. 2 on Issue 4, a ballot measure that seeks to stop construction on the realignment of Selig Road at Brecksville Road that Mayor Gregory Kurtz says is crucial to expanding the Independence Technical Center and bringing in the Cleveland Clinic, and 1,000 jobs, as a tenant.

Opponents of the street project now have something else to complain about: The phone calls.

"It's an abuse. That's for emergency situations only. That's why you sign up for it," said insurance broker Anthony Zarlenga, one of the residents behind the charter amendment issue that would halt the road project.

Kurtz says the system is for vital information and has been used to advise residents to change smoke detector batteries or to inform them of holiday garbage pickup schedules. And he made no apologies for using every tool at his disposal, including campaign fliers and a YouTube video, to fight Issue 4.

"This project is crucial to the business community and our reputation with the business community," he said, painting opponents as political detractors bent on assailing him in an election year.

"We have an opportunity to bring in 1,000 jobs," he said. "You cannot have a reputation in the business community where you renege and backtrack or else you won't get any more business."

Zarlenga says residents feel like the mayor and the majority of council "rammed this down our throats." He and two others sued the city after the council failed to put the issue on the ballot last May. After hours of depositions, that suit is pending in Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court.

With some services such as senior snow plowing and residential tree removal possibly on the chopping block, Zarlenga blamed budget woes on the cost of the road work. He said the realignment project isn't key to attracting the Clinic jobs.

And bolstering the mayor's claim that it's election year politics, he noted that if the issue fails and roadwork is completed, "We'll find out what happens in the November election. A lot of people aren't happy with this mayor."

Early departure: Former Cleveland Hopkins Airport boss John Mok, who signed on with the Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport in 2009, is out of that job, too. The departure was characterized as a surprise shake-up in Cincinnati and Kentucky media reports.

No reason was given for his quick departure, which took effect just days after it was announced.

Mok worked for four years as Cleveland's airport chief – running Cleveland Hopkins International Airport and Burke Lakefront Airport, but was replaced in June 2006 after Mayor Frank Jackson took office, conducted a national search (Mok applied) and hired Ricky Smith. He worked for a private firm until the Cincinnati job came through.

Mok has been replaced in Cincinnati by Candace McGraw, a deputy director at Hopkins whom Mok hired as his number two in Cincinnati. McGraw also had served as legal counsel to Cleveland City Council and the Ohio Lottery Commission.

Lanci fulfills promise: Ken Lanci got a lot of flak for outflanking his political rivals in last year's race for Cuyahoga County executive and paying for exclusive rights to campaign at the Family Unity event at Luke Easter Park.

City Councilman Zack Reed said he had no problem with selling the rights: "The only thing free here is the grass. It costs money to put this on."

As the opposition howled, Lanci made a promise that he'd continue to support the event whether or not he won the county job.

He lost big time in his independent bid, to Democrat Ed FitzGerald.

But he kept his political promise, anyway.

"He stepped up again with a big contribution," said Reed, who wonders where all the "whiners" who complained last year are now that it's not election season.

"Where's the Republican Party? Where's the Democratic Party? Ed FitzGerald was whining the loudest last year. They can be in front of all these people for less than $200 with a booth, and none of them gave one thin dime."

The 8th Annual Family Unity in the Park event July 30 will feature fireworks and a concert with the Ohio Players along with George Clinton and Parliament Funkadelic.

Pinup guy: Elyria Building Inspector Ed Doehne will do anything to support his wife, Tara, in her battle against breast cancer. Even if it means ripping off his shirt and climbing to the top of the Terminal Tower in 14-degree weather in March. Seriously.

Doehne was chosen as one of the 12 "models" in the "60 Mile Men" calendar to benefit the Susan G. Komen Foundation battling breast cancer. Doehne did the 3-Day 60-mile walk with Tara last year in Cleveland and Philadelphia and they're gearing up for another one next week in Cleveland.

Tara was diagnosed two years ago with stage 3 cancer and has been undergoing treatment since then. "We classify it now as lying in wait," said Ed.

He said the idea of being beefcake is a bit foreign to him, given that he'd gained a lot of weight after Tara's diagnosis before discovering the release of working out for two hours every morning in the gym. He's down 50 pounds and showing off lots of muscle.

The real strength, though, is in the continuing battle against breast cancer. To check out their story or buy the calendar ($20), log on to tarasjourney.org.

She's history: The Lakewood Historical Society is soon to be part of Mazie Adams' history. She's decided to step down from her post as executive director due to family considerations. She has three kids and her husband opened a restaurant recently, taxing the schedule.

Adams held the post for 14 years and brought a dose of professionalism to the society with her undergraduate degree in history from Kenyon College and her master's in museum education from George Washington University.

She said she's proud of restoration projects and the Oldest Stone House museum at Lakewood Park, but most proud of an ongoing award-winning history project with third graders in the class of teacher Nadine Bluemel at Emerson school. Each class does a new project, complete with videos and oral histories of a section of Lakewood.

Leaving, she said, was not an easy decision.

"You don't often get to do for a job the thing you love doing the most," she said.

Dog days: Cleveland will give new meaning to the term "dog days of summer" over the next couple of weekends. Today, the Happy Dog presents its second annual hot dog-eating contest beginning at 2 p.m.

The dogs are smaller than the restaurant's famous quarter-pounders and contestants must eat as many as they can, bunless, in 10 minutes. Winner gets $100 and proceeds go to the Bridge Avenue School.

On Sunday, July 31, Steve's Hot Dog Lunch will provide the wieners – and the spice – for the first-ever hot dog-eating contest at the Reddstone. This one includes chili sauce, some made with "ghost" chillies, the hottest in the world. Proceeds will go to a different kind of dogs as they'll benefit Friends of the Cleveland Kennel.