McCaskill answers questions at Truman State University
Sen. Claire McCaskill on Monday visited Kirksville and Truman State University. Included in her appearance was a Q&A with audience members. What follows are some of the responses from that exchange. The questions have been edited for clarity. In some cases, McCaskill’s comments have been edited for brevity or clarity.

Q: Would you support a ban on abortion at 20 weeks?

A: I believe decisions, not all of them around abortion, but most of them belong with the mother, with her minister and her doctor. There are medical conditions that are not determinative until after that point in time. I would like it if rather than talking about prosecuting women and doctors, I would like it if we would talk about preventing abortions. Because we all want to prevent abortions. All of us.

We are now at the lowest level of abortions in this country since Roe vs. Wade was decided. We’re at the lowest level of teenage pregnancy since Roe vs. Wade was decided. The reason is simple. In the ACA (Affordable Care Act), we decided it was really important to make birth control free. The way you prevent abortions is with birth control. Then there is not an unwanted pregnancy.

So what I don’t get is why there has been such an effort defund one of the most accessible and available locations for birth control in this country (Planned Parenthood). Not abortions. For birth control. If birth control is not available, if you’ve got to ask your boss permission to get it, of if you can’t get it at someplace like Planned Parenthood, then there’s going to be more abortions. Let’s all get together in the middle and agree that we are going to take a stand and make sure that birth control is accessible and affordable for everyone woman in this country who wants it – including the “morning after” pill.

Q: What did you think of Sen. Cory Booker’s “Spartacus” moment? (The question was in reference to Booker’s actions to make public documents on Judge Brett Kavanaugh that the Senate Judiciary Committee had marked confidential)

A: Are we frustrated over what happened over Merrick Garland? You bet. That was history. That had never happened before. My colleagues on the other side of the aisle like to talk about “the Constitution as written” and the “literal language.” Originalists. Textualists. Absolutely not other interpretation.

Well, nowhere in the Constitution does it say that you don’t get to appoint a Supreme Court justice in the last year of your presidential term. It says the president “shall” appoint when there is a vacancy, and the Senate “shall advise and consent.” Well, they decided to ignore that part of the Constitution and do something that has never happened before.

Then this whole thing with hiding all of these documents, which is weird. They’re not classified and they’re not privileged, because if they were privileged they wouldn’t have been given to us in the first place. So they are in some no-man’s land category they decided to call “committee confidential.” That was frustrating, especially since they laid 140,000 of those documents down the night before the hearing.

Having said all that, I thought the hearings were not good. If you were doing a drive-by watching those hearings, you thought we were all nuts. Nobody has manners. The whole place is crazy. It didn’t help us reassure the American people that we were the greatest deliberative body in the world. It did the opposite. Did the people have a right to protest? Of course they did. But did that mean that it reassured America that we have our act together? No, it did not. I didn’t think it was good for our team. I didn’t think it was good for their team. I didn’t think it was good for Judge Kavanaugh. I didn’t think any of it was great.

Q: How do you address false information without seeming defensive?

A: The ads that are paid for from behind the curtain, the dark money, they lie a lot more than the other kids of ads. Because you don’t know who’s doing it. You don’t know who to be mad at. The candidates can say they had nothing to do with it, it’s a third-party ad, they didn’t put that on or say those lies. It is so wrong.

It’s hard, because if you take the time to say over and over, on every platform, it’s a lie, it’s a lie, it’s a lie, are you bringing too much attention to it? The majority of Missourians think it’s mudslinging. The majority of Missourians, and this is one of the good sides of being around for a while, a lot of people in this state have already voted for me several times. They know I’m not corrupt. I’m not sure that the ads have been effective. More dark money has been spent against me than any senator in the country. If they were effective I assure you I wouldn’t be tied. I would be way under right now.

Dark money, I believe, is the emerging issue in our democracy. We’ve got to amend the Constitution to do something about unlimited dark money, corporate money, swamping the election so that we have no idea who is paying or what’s going on. The people who got unlimited anonymous money from corporations into elections is a group called Citizens United. My opponent is endorsed by Citizens United. He is all down for the dark money. I am endorsed by End Citizens United. It’s an important distinction between the two of us.

And by the way, the dark money ads for me, I’ve said this over and over, I don’t care if the ads are for me or against me, if you can’t figure out who paid for them, don’t pay any attention to them. We’ve got to clean it up.

Q: Do you support Medicare for all?

A: I’m sure there are a lot of supporters for Medicare for all. Let me explain why I am not for it.

We have built up an ad hoc system of health care delivery in this country that has silos of profit. And by the way, those exist in the Medicare program, too. The Medicare program depends on paying for services through private payers. In fact, the incentives are the more you treat, the more money you make. That is why our health care costs are so high.

We have to figure out a way to incentivize (in other ways). For example, if we could incentivize for more end-of-life counseling with people, so they can make decisions about if they want end-of-life hydration, nutrition. Families all over this country are faced with really difficult decisions because they don’t know what their loved one wants. We tried to reimburse doctors for that, the time it takes to explain, so that individuals, their own liberty, their own freedom, can decide how they want to handle their end of life. And that’s what (Republicans) called “death panels.” And so, that didn’t happen.

If we just went to a Medicare-for-all system now, it would swallow the prosperity of this country whole. It would be incredibly expensive, because in the private pay for services, we know how expensive it is in Medicare and we are having to float Medicare. What you pay into Medicare is not paying for it. We have to augment that money every year. I do think people between the ages of 55 and 65 should be given the option to buy in to Medicare in a way that is actuarially sound. If we can get at the underlying cost of health care, then I think we can look at a more comprehensive system.

Q: Do you support sanctuary cities and what are your thoughts on illegal immigration?

A: I voted to defund sanctuary cities. I do think that we we need to cooperate in law enforcement and make sure that people who have committed crimes and who have broken the law are held. But let’s walk down this path. The reason the separation of children from parents at the border happened was some kind of flawed belief that if they started doing that, people would quit coming to this country. They clearly did not understand the kind of conditions these families are living in, the kinds of risks they’re willing to take for their children.

The issue here is, should people who present at our border, not trying to evade, but saying, “We want asylum,” should we have in place a way to quickly allow them an opportunity to have their asylum claim heard? Yes, we should. We can agree on that. We should surge more judges, have more judges and more courtrooms, so these cases can be heard. Should the people who come with their children be separated from their children? Absolutely not. But should they show up for court? Yes, they should.

So the issue is not child separation, but how do you secure someone’s appearance at court? The problem is we have not put the resources into this system. I’m a real prosecutor. Unlike my opponent, I’ve actually looked a jury in the eye. I’ve actually prosecuted criminals. Hundreds of them. Jury trials. I understand what it takes to get somebody to come to court. If they have a lawyer, their chances of coming to court go way up. We had a pilot program that was working. They have abandoned that program. You can do ankle-monitor bracelets for families to make sure they appear at court. We did it all the time in the criminal justice system. That would be much less expensive than building new family encampments. We can do court proceedings remotely. That’s what I call “the middle” and that’s where we need to hang out.

I was endorsed last week by the same group of border patrol agents that were all in for President Trump…because I’m the ranking member on Homeland Security and they’ve seen me work. They know I want to get them the resources they need. They know I’ve gone to the border and been on night patrol with them. I’ve seen the fact they don’t have the technology they need to protect themselves. They don’t have the lateral access roads.

We don’t have enough port agents. That’s where the drugs are coming across. Fentanyl is not coming across the Rio Grande River, I can assure you. It’s way too expensive to take the risk of coming across the river. Fentanyl is coming in through the ports, but they haven’t even asked for more people in the ports. They haven’t even requested more agents at the ports. I am busy, and they get this, I am busy saying we need more agents at the ports. So, I’m very proud that the border patrol agents have endorsed me instead of Josh Hawley.

By the way, do we need a wall from sea to shining sea? No. Nobody thinks we do, including the border patrol agents. But we need some more barriers to make it safer for them, and we need to make our legal immigration system work better. I have worked with my Republican colleagues. I voted for comprehensive immigration reform, which is not amnesty. If you pay a fine and you pay penalties and you have to plead guilty to violating the law, that’s not amnesty. That’s called reasonable, necessary punishment, but it also makes common sense.

We’re not going to deport 12 million people. If we’re not going to do that, let’s figure out a way together to make sense of this. We came within a few votes of getting it done. If the president hadn’t threatened to veto, it would have happened. We had 59 (votes) on a Wednesday night, the president issued an order that he was going to veto the bill, two Republicans skittered away and we ended up with 57. We only need three more votes. It isn’t perfect. There are things about it that many of you wouldn’t like, but it’s sure a darn bit better than what we have.

Q: If you had to vote right now on whether to confirm Judge Brett Kavanaugh to the U.S. Supreme Court, how would you vote?

A: Well, since I don’t have to, I don’t have to answer that question. You’re not going to get me to answer that question today, and the reason – I have already told you how worried I am about dark money – he wrote a very troubling opinion, the Bluman opinion, on foreign entry into our elections and the use of resources. He said some things in these documents that are committee confidential about dark money and about campaign finance limits.

I found those documents as I was going through all of those committee confidential documents. So, I know there might be more on the topics I really care about. Staff can’t read them. They won’t let my staff read them. I have to read them. Now, I have read tens of thousands of them so far and a lot of them don’t say much, but every once in a while I’ve come across something I think is important to my decision. I want to get through all of those documents. Be patient. Respect the process. It won’t be long.

I will announce my decision and I will explain it, and either you’ll feel like knocking doors for me or you won’t. But if anybody thinks there is a political decision I can make here that’s a winner, I wish they’d explain what it is. No matter what, I make a whole bunch of people mad. Welcome to Missouri.

Q: What are your thoughts on gun control issues?

A: There are things I think are reasonable, and by the way most gun owners support universal background checks. The only entity against us doing anything on gun safety appears to be the NRA. Most NRA members want us to do universal background checks. I can show you in terrorist magazines online where they instruct people how they can use gun shows in America to get their weapons, because of gun show loopholes, person-to-person sales at gun shows, by people who are not licensed firearms dealers.

I think universal background checks, improving our instant check system, doing more mental health screening, these are all things most Missourians support. If you’re not afraid of the NRA, you’re willing to say it out loud.

Can we find some common sense gun safety? I’m not saying it’s going to solve every problem. We’re not going to stop every shooting. But to do nothing? I don’t want to be the poster child for the world on school slaughter. It’s not the brand I want our country to have.

Q: Can you talk about why your experience should matter?

A: Can you imagine if you are being wheeled into an operating room and the nurse leans down and says, “I’ve got really good news. This doctor has never done this before.” But somehow in government, the best thing to be is somebody who has never done it before.

I’ll tell you, my time in the courtroom, cross-examining criminals, makes me a better questioner in hearings. My time as a state auditor, finding all of the money that was buried in budgets, being wasted, fraud, that makes me better at doing the work at the Pentagon that I’ve done. My time in state and local government makes me realize how the heavy hand of the federal government can get in the way, particularly on issues like education. We need local and state to have control, not the federal government. All of that experience, I think, has made me a stronger senator, one that can get to the bottom of stuff, one who is not going to get snowed by a lobbyist or somebody who has been on staff forever, and I’m hoping Missourians agree.

But I will tell you it is going to be a negative for me that I’m experienced. Go figure. If I only would have known, I could have skipped all this and gone right to the TV show and I could be president.

Q: Can you speak about the Russian efforts to hack your Senate office computers and the ongoing issue of Russian interference?

A: I will compliment Secretary (Kirstjen) Nielsen and the Department of Homeland Security and (Christopher C.) Krebs, who is running this now. They are doing a good job of reaching out to state and local officials that really run our elections in this country. We are really advantaged in America that we don’t have one central election system. Our election systems are run by all the different counties in Missouri. It’s very hard to hack in to 114 different systems.

The thing I’m most worried about with Russian hacking, they have done cyber warfare on our country. They are trying to break the backbone of democracies all over the world. Typically, when we have someone declare war on us, we punch them. What have we done? We haven’t punched them. And we can.

Google “McCaskill and Rogers Armed Services hearing.” You’ll see an exchange I have with Admiral (Michael S.) Rogers, who was running cyber security for the country. Do we know how to go after them? He said yes, we do. Why aren’t we doing it? And he said, “I have not been directed to.” As long as we’re not punishing them with the same kind of cyber warfare, they’re going to think we can keep doing it. I think that’s a missed opportunity for us. I think we’re stronger and better than that.

Q: Can you address the high price insulin in this country?

I’m pretty sure the pharmaceutical companies are paying for a lot of ads against me. I’ve done a number of bipartisan investigations with my colleague Susan Collins (R-Maine), where we outed hedge funds that found generic drugs that went for $1 apiece and upped the price 7,000 percent. I’m now investigating the opioid manufacturers. It’s the first aggressive, comprehensive investigation into the marketing and sales of opioids in this country. We found a company that was selling fentanyl, buried in the documents, an informal sales staff meeting where they talked about their sales slogan – “start them high and hope they don’t die.” They had a phony unit inside the pharmaceutical company, posing as doctors’ offices.

We got a hold of a tape of a conversation between somebody who worked for the pharmaceutical company calling to the pharmacy, pretending they were the doctor’s office, trying to get somebody approved for fentanyl. The young lady they got approved, in her chart it said she should never have opioids. It was delivered and she was dead within 24 hours. That CEO, after that investigation, was criminally charged and I could not be more proud.

We investigated the 20 top prescribed drugs in the Medicare D program and we discovered that for five years running, all 20 drugs had increased an average of 10-times the rate of inflation every year. Unbridled greed is what’s going on. And what is our country doing? We’re allowing them to make all of their money off America, because every other country is negotiating lower prices based on volume. But the pharmaceutical industry has such a vice grip on Washington, they actually got it written into law that it is illegal for us to negotiate for lower prices based on volume. I can’t wait to change that law. I’ve tried. We’ve got the bill to do it.