Abortions would rule out state aid
Activists: Planned Parenthood 'kills'

For some of the attendees at a legislative hearing yesterday, Planned Parenthood is a vital resource that provides health care and cancer screenings for low-income women. Others called Planned Parenthood a disreputable group that "kills babies" and covers up the sexual exploitation of young women.

More than 75 people turned out for a hearing on a bill that would forbid the state from entering into a contract with Planned Parenthood or any other organization that provides abortions.

The heated rhetoric from anti-abortion activists was fueled by anger over recently revealed tapes showing Planned Parenthood employees across the country allegedly advising pimps - actually actors from an anti-abortion group - on how to get medical treatment for underage prostitutes.

But critics of the bill said it would make it harder for women to get birth control, gynecological exams, treatment for sexually transmitted infections and other basic medical care. They added that public money is already barred from funding elective abortions, and organizations like Planned Parenthood segregate their money.

"No health care provider does more to reduce the number of unintended and unwanted pregnancies in New Hampshire than Planned Parenthood of Northern New England and the many family planning centers across the state," said Rep. Candace Bouchard, a Concord Democrat who chairs the New Hampshire House Reproductive Rights Caucus.

The bill, sponsored by Rep. Robert Willette, a Milford Republican, names Planned Parenthood specifically but would prevent the state Department of Health and Human Services from contracting with any abortion provider. The ban would apply to state and federal funds. It includes an exception for abortions that are necessary to save the life of a woman or "avert substantial and irreversible impairment of a major bodily function." It does not include an exception for a victim of rape or incest, exceptions that are included in the current law barring the use of public money for abortions.

"I know for a fact the people of New Hampshire don't want their tax dollars to pay for abortions," Willette said.

Kary Jencks, director of public affairs for Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, said the money at stake is a mix of federal and state money allocated for family planning programs in the state budget. In 2010, that was $2.35 million, of which $877,000 came from the state's general fund. (Planned Parenthood gets $689,000 in federal money, plus $104,000 in state money.) Lawmakers suggested that the bill could also affect Medicaid reimbursement money given to hospitals, such as Elliot Hospital and Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, which provide abortions. They questioned whether public employees' insurance plans would be affected - for example, by not allowing public employees to get medical care anywhere that provides abortions.

Opponents of the bill said it is overly broad and would destroy the ability for low-income women to get affordable health care. While Planned Parenthood treats anyone, it allows poorer people to pay on a sliding scale. Jencks said Planned Parenthood's family planning services save $4 in Medicaid-related costs for every $1 spent.

Former state senator Jacalyn Cilley, a Barrington Democrat, said Planned Parenthood prevents teen pregnancies by providing birth control information. It also provides yearly checkups and screenings for cervical or breast cancer. If the bill passes, "women will not only suffer, some of them will die," Cilley said.

Several women testified to ways Planned Parenthood helped them. Krysten Evans of Pelham, a 35-year-old married mother of two, said in written testimony that she first went to Planned Parenthood at age 15 for counseling on birth control options. She used its centers in high school and college and returned several years ago when she did not have a primary care physician and needed medical attention. (next page »)