Charles J. Cooper

Partner | ccooper@cooperkirk.com

1523 New Hampshire Ave., N.W.

Washington, DC 20036

Phone: (202) 220-9660 | Fax: (202) 220-9601

Charles J. Cooper is a founding member and chairman of Cooper & Kirk, PLLC. Named by The National Law Journal as one of the 10 best civil litigators in Washington, he has over 35 years of legal experience in government and private practice, with several appearances before the United States Supreme Court and scores of other successful cases on both the trial and appellate levels.

Shortly after serving as law clerk to Judge Paul Roney of the Fifth (now Eleventh) Circuit Court of Appeals, and to Justice (later Chief Justice) William H. Rehnquist, Mr. Cooper joined the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice in 1981. In 1985 President Reagan appointed Mr. Cooper to the position of Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel. Mr. Cooper reentered private practice in 1988, as a partner in the Washington, D.C. office of McGuire Woods. From 1990 until the founding of Cooper & Kirk in 1996, he was a partner at Shaw, Pittman, Potts & Trowbridge where he headed the firm’s Constitutional and Government Litigation Group.

Mr. Cooper’s practice is national in scope and is concentrated in the areas of constitutional, commercial, and civil rights litigation. He is currently representing private clients in a variety of commercial cases, including antitrust, intellectual property, and contract disputes. Mr. Cooper also represents a number of state and local government bodies, as well as private clients, in a wide range of constitutional and federal statutory cases.

In 1998 Mr. Cooper was appointed by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist to serve as a member of the Standing Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure of the Judicial Conference of the United States. Mr. Cooper is a member of the American Law Institute and the American Academy of Appellate Lawyers, and he has spoken and published extensively on a wide variety of constitutional and legal policy topics.

Practice Focus

Administrative Litigation

Antitrust

Appellate

Class Actions

Commercial Litigation

Constitutional Litigation

Election Law

Employment Litigation

Government Contracts Litigation

Health Care Litigation

Intellectual Property

Qui Tam

State Representation

Telecommunications

Trial Practice

Education

J.D., University of Alabama School of Law in 1977 (first in class; editor-in-chief, Alabama Law Review)

B.S., University of Alabama School of Business Administration in 1974 (with honors)

Clerkship

1978-1979: Justice William H. Rehnquist, United States Supreme Court

1977-1978: Judge Paul Roney, United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit

Bar Admissions

District of Columbia

Alabama