Council On State Taxation
Illinois Expands Gambling, Doubles Gas Tax for Capital Funding Illinois lawmakers voted to double the state's tax on gasoline sales to fund capital projects and approved an expansion of gambling as part of a package that legalizes sports betting and authorizes a casino in Chicago.

Transfer Pricing Dragons • Rhythmless BEAT • Park Avenue Tax Bill In this week's roundup of Bloomberg Tax Insights we take deep dives into the OECD's digital tax proposal and questions posed by the BEAT. And we talk dragons in a two-part series on the challenges transfer pricing faces in the digital economy using the Internet of Things as a case study.

Illinois to Become 11th State to Legalize Recreational Marijuana Illinois lawmakers voted to legalize recreational marijuana, becoming the 11th state to decriminalize the drug and bolstering Governor J.B. Pritzker’s efforts to shore up the finances of the cash-strapped state.

Nebraska Lawmakers Override Veto of Mass-Transit Funding Bill A regional transportation authority in the Omaha, Neb., area will have authority to impose up to $17 million in additional property taxes for mass-transit projects under a bill passed May 31 over the veto of Gov. Pete Ricketts (R).

Alabama Governor Signs Law on Licensing, Regulation of Real Estate Appraisers The Alabama Governor May 29 signed a law on the Alabama Real Estate Appraisers Board and the licensing and regulation of real estate appraisers for property tax purposes. The law includes measures: 1) adding the definition of "evaluation" as a valuation of real property for a lending institution which is permitted by rules of any federal financial institution regulatory agency for transactions that don't require an appraisal; 2) providing that evaluations performed by licensed appraisers for financial institutions wouldn't be governed by Ala. Code Section 34-27A; and 3) providing for the employment of investigators by the board who are licensees of the board. The law took effect May 29. [H.B. 304, enacted 05/29/19]

Alabama Governor Signs Law on Business Delivery License Fee The Alabama Governor May 28 signed a law on business delivery licenses, for sales and use and excise tax purposes. The law includes measures: 1) clarifying that the delivery license fee is per business, not per vehicle; 2) providing for the calculation of the fee for businesses within a certain range of annual gross receipts; and 3) noting that the purchase of a delivery license or exemption from the purchase of the license doesn't establish nexus between taxpayers and a municipality. The law took effect May 28. [H.B. 329, enacted 05/28/19]

Alabama Governor Signs Law Extending Private Hospital Assessment, Medicaid Funding Program The Alabama Governor May 28 signed a law concerning private hospital assessments and the Medicaid funding program for excise tax purposes. The law includes measures: 1) extending the Medicaid assessment of private hospitals from 2019 to the end of fiscal year 2022; 2) increasing the 5.75 percent assessment on private net patient revenue to 6.00 percent of net patient revenue in fiscal year 2017; and 3) clarifying that such revenue shall be reviewed and updated annually, subject to limitations on the use of funds in the hospital assessment account. The law takes effect Oct. 1. [H.B. 176, enacted 05/28/19]

Alabama Governor Signs Law on Financial Institution Excise Tax The Alabama Governor May 28 signed a law on the financial institution excise tax that also addresses various corporate income tax topics. The law includes measures: 1) repealing a provision that limits dividend deductions to Alabama corporations; 2) requiring banks to make quarterly estimated tax payments; 3) clarifying that as a financial institution, the common parent corporation will be exempt from all corporate income taxes; 4) clarifying that any election to file an Alabama consolidated excise tax return shall be binding on both the Department of Revenue (DOR) and the Alabama qualified corporate group for a period of not less than 10 taxable years; and 5) specifying the excise tax due should be remitted with checks payable to the DOR. The law takes effect Jan. 1, 2020 and will become operative for tax years beginning after Dec. 31, except as provided in Ala. Code Section 40-16-11. [H.B. 419, enacted 05/28/19]

Alabama Governor Signs Law Extending Privilege Assessments, Monthly Surcharge on Nursing Facilities The Alabama Governor May 28 signed a law concerning the privilege assessment, the supplemental privilege assessment, and the monthly surcharge on nursing facilities for excise tax purposes. The law includes a measure extending the current assessments and monthly surcharge to Aug. 31, 2022. The law took effect May 28. [H.B. 177, enacted 05/28/19]