Sen. Corker Interviewed on MSNBC

BRZEZINSKI:

Joining from us Capitol Hill, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Republican Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee.

Great to have you on the show this morning.

Joe, take it away.

SCARBOROUGH:

Senator Corker, very little to talk to you about. We could talk about Tennessee football but, instead, I'll just ask you. A lot to try to digest over the past 24 hours. Yet another crazy day in the first month of the Trump administration.

Obviously, General Flynn's resignation, "The New York Times" reports of a lot of contacts between Russia and the Trump campaign and even the head of special ops saying that this sort of turmoil is very disturbing to him.

What are your questions this morning?

What are some of the questions you think Congress needs to get to the bottom of?

CORKER:

Joe, as you mentioned, it's hard to know where to start. The base issue is getting to the bottom of what the Russian interference was and what the relationship was with associates of the Trump effort.

And so that is the big elephant in the room that has got to be dealt with in the most appropriate way. The American people need to understand, we need to understand and it needs to be dealt with quickly and we need to get it behind us.

So how we go about dealing with that is very important.

There's the issue of, is the White House going to have the ability to stabilize itself?

I mean, this affects us, not just with international issues that are brewing all around the world and all kinds of problems but the domestic agenda here. I mean, there is the American people are counting on us to do big things this year.

And does it distract from that?

There are the issues. I know you all have been talking earlier about leaks and no doubt that is a subissue that needs to be dealt with and we need to make sure that information that bureaus are taking in is being handled in the appropriate manner.

But the big issue right now is dealing with this Russia issue, making sure that it doesn't destabilize our ability to move ahead as a country and deal with important issues.

GEIST:

Chairman Corker, it's Willie Geist. Good to see you this morning.

(CROSSTALK)

GEIST:

We have been wondering sometime on this show, at least a year and a half or so, why Donald Trump seems to reflexively defer to Vladimir Putin. He can't seem to say things that are clear to many of us about Vladimir Putin.

Do you share concern about his posture, generally, toward Vladimir Putin?

CORKER:

I do. I think, you know, of all the foreign policy issues -- and if you look at where they were in the campaign, where they were in transition, they have begun to evolve to a better place, from my standpoint, on most issues.

I mean, you look at their evolution on China, their evolution on Israel, their evolution on some of the issues in the Middle East. The one area where the evolution is not taking place is with Russia.

Russia is not our friend. Russia has done nefarious things to our country, against our interests, against democracy, against the West for the last three or four years in big ways, when they saw weakness and fairness.

And we have got to push back against that. And I think people like Tillerson and Mattis and others know that. But this relationship that seems to exist and seems to be preeminent and seems to be driving so much of the conversation within the White House, to me, has still not righted itself.

I think there are people who know better. And hopefully it will change. But, no, it's a problem and, look, people are concerned that he is going to, you know, strip away sanctions that are in place. I think that is almost impossible now with everything that has happened. But that is the one area that is hard to understand.

GEIST:

And, why, Senator, do you suspect Donald Trump has not evolved in this one area, at least?

Because, as you said, he has come around to a position you probably find better on China and Israel and places like that.

What is it about Russia?

CORKER:

I have no idea and I think -- that's why I think it's important for us to not have suspicions.

I mean, what you're basically asking is, is there something else there that we don't know?

And I think that's why, from the standpoint of putting forth great international policies, we need to understand what's happening and get it behind us. And from their standpoint, certainly not take any bold steps relative to Russia on the front end. That does not need to occur.

BARNICLE:

Senator, given your concern about our relationship with Russia and this burgeoning story that we are all witnessing and your concern about getting to the bottom of it quickly, as you just said, would you be at all curious about knowing whether or not Mr. Flynn kept the president-elect of the United States in the loop about his conversations with the Russian ambassador prior to the inauguration?

CORKER:

I think we -- I think it would be very good. I understand there may be, based on reading publications, I understand there may be an FBI investigation underway and I know that hampers people's ability to come before Congress.

But I would hope that General Flynn, who, by the way, I think, was setting up the interagency process in an appropriate way.

And I was actually heartened by that. But I think now that he is gone and now that this issue has occurred, I think him coming before us and testifying, if that can be done, would be a very appropriate thing for us to have happen.

So I don't know that I want to get into the intrigue of the daily blows. But I want to understand -- I want to understand what has happened here. And if I were them, by the way, if I were the people leading the Trump effort at the White House, I would want to make sure, with all of this suspicion, that everybody fully understood what has taken place.

Otherwise, maybe there's a problem that obviously goes much deeper than what we now suspect.

BRZEZINSKI:

You know, we really -- we plan to and will get to what you are doing in terms of creating policy because I have heard from a lot of Republicans fairly and I would say the same applies to Democrats, like Elizabeth Warren and others, who are working all day in Washington, like Senator Bob Corker, to try and make this country even better every day.

And Corker is working on the End Modern Slavery Initiative Act, which we would like you to talk about. But I'm sorry. There are -- we apologize -- there are these pressing questions that are swirling around the White House.

We even had, Bob, the president tweeting at us this morning for asking questions. And you said not to have suspicion. We don't have suspicion. We just have eyes, we just have eyes. And what we see seems to lead to a very troubling conclusion.

And the president tweeting at us, accusing us of misinformation, when you have White House spokespeople going out, some of them spreading misinformation, where does that leave us with our conclusions about Russia?

What are we supposed to do?

CORKER:

So, again, I -- you know, we got an investigation -- I guess we will call it that -- that is taking place through the Intelligence Committee. I know the Judiciary Committee is doing the same.

Look, I think over the course of the next couple of months we're going to know a lot more about what has occurred.

But look, if I were at the White House right now, I mean, I would want to be having a meeting right now, let's get ourselves organized. I mean, it's not just -- it's not just what's being leaked out through intelligence agencies -- and, again, I am not trying to distract the big issue is what's happened with Russia.

But it's also what's happening internally at the White House, where there's so much backbiting. So I would want to get organized there and make -- hey, let's get -- let's come together here.

And secondly, though, look, let's get everything out. Let's get everything out as quickly as possible on this Russia issue because, otherwise, it is going to distract from the first six, seven months of this presidency, where the American people are counting on huge things occurring.

So, look, it's a little out of control today. It's hard to know where to start with issues around the world and here domestically. But that is where I would start and getting things bannered down, organized, buttoned up, everybody moving in the same direction.

It's a huge problem for them but it's a big problem for our country.

How does the president lead on tax reforms?

How does he lead on health care replacement?

How does he lead on other issues when this is -- this big distraction is here before us?

GEIST:

So, Chairman, let me ask about a piece of policy then, Mika mentioned, the End Modern Slavery Initiative Act. One of the facts here that jumped off the page to all of us was that, today, more than 27 million people are enslaved around the world. And that's more than anytime in the history of the world.

CORKER:

Yes. Yes, so it's illegal in every country in the world, including ours. But, today, 27 million people, as we speak on this program, are enslaved. And we've initiated an effort, passed an authorization bill, have some appropriations to work with other nations to end it, just like we did with HIV around the world and PEPFAR.

And so it's a big day for us today to begin making awareness -- making even greater awareness to people around the world. But we have an initiative that we think that we can build on. Prime Minister May, as you know, is very interested in this. We have other countries.

It's a public-private partnership, not unlike we've -- what we did with the global HIV issue. And we need to end it. I mean, 24 percent of that is sexual servitude; 75 percent of it is just hard labor, where people working in brick kilns, rug manufacturing, little boys in fishing in Ghana.

I mean, this is a plague, a scourge on mankind that needs to end. And the United States needs to be in leadership, making it end.

BRZEZINSKI:

Senator Bob Corker, thank you so much for being on the show this morning.

CORKER:

Thank you.

SEN. BOB CORKER (R), TENNESSEE

MIKA BRZEZINSKI, MSNBC HOST

JOE SCARBOROUGH, MSNBC HOST

WILLIE GEIST, MSNBC HOST

MIKE BARNICLE, MSNBC CONTRIBUTOR