The News with Sen. Cruz - March 26, 2013
Greetings,

This week marked the third anniversary of Obamacare and the Democrat-led Senate passed a budget, for the first time in four years, that would add $5.2 trillion in deficits, increase spending by $654 billion, and add $1.5 trillion in taxes over the next ten years that would further devastate jobs and the economy. I offered a series of amendments to the budget to repeal Obamacare, revoke funding for Egypt, and pressure the UN to eliminate forced abortions in China. Finally, there is very important news pertaining to your Second Amendment Rights I'd like to share with you. If you have a moment, please read this update below and pass on to your friends on Facebook and Twitter.

All the best,



Ted Cruz

OBAMACARE

Sen. Cruz published an op-ed in the Dallas Morning News today outlining the disastrous effects of Obamacare on its third anniversary.

Since Obamacare, or the Affordable Care Act, was signed into law, it’s proven to be neither affordable nor caring. Insurance premiums are skyrocketing. Seniors are losing health care choices. Millions of Americans are being pushed into a struggling and ineffective Medicaid system. Americans are grappling with scores of new taxes. Employers are slashing jobs and hours to avoid complying with Obamacare requirements. Three years later, it’s clearer than ever that Americans were sold a bill of goods. President Obama told Americans that if Obamacare was made law, they would be able to keep their health plans, taxes wouldn’t go up, premiums would go down, and more jobs would be created. But, the truth is it’s hurting working families, young people, poor minorities, and seniors the most. Read Sen. Cruz's full op-ed and share it with your friends.

BUDGET VOTES

Sen. Cruz filed a number of amendments to the Democrats’ fiscal year 2014 budget, including an amendment to repeal Obamacare that garnered support from every Senate Republican.



View Sen. Cruz presenting his amendment to repeal Obamacare.

Ultimately, three of Sen. Cruz’s amendments received votes in the full Senate. The first amendment, to repeal Obamacare, fell on party lines. The second amendment, a measure to transfer foreign aid for Egypt towards the development of U.S. missile defense received 25 votes in support and 74 votes against. The third amendment, to block United Nations funding until member nations stop forcing citizens or residents to undergo involuntary abortions, failed 38-61.

Sen. Cruz also offered amendments to prohibit drone killings of U.S. citizens on U.S. soil, eliminate corporate welfare, provide scholarships for school choice, and end federal regulation of food and beverage size and quantity.

DEFENDING THE SECOND AMENDMENT

Sens. Cruz, Mike Lee (R-UT), and Rand Paul (R-KY) sent a letter today to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-NV) pledging to use any procedural means necessary to ensure Congress does not pass any legislation that would prohibit Americans’ Second Amendment rights. As the Senate prepares to consider guns legislation, Sen. Cruz is committed to ensuring that Americans' right to keep and bear arms is defended and upheld. Congress should not create new legislation restricting the rights of law-abiding Americans. The Democrats' proposed legislation would require universal background checks for private sales between law-abiding citizens, which according to DOJ would be effective only if accompanied by a national gun registry. This raises serious constitutional issues, and would divert resources from prosecuting felons and fugitives who try to illegally purchase guns.

FREEDOM MINUTE

Sen. Cruz just launched a regular, one-minute radio segment called the "Freedom Minute." In his first message, he highlighted the three year anniversary of Obamacare and why it must be repealed. Listen here and share it with your friends.