James B. Jacobs - Overview
Seminar on Asset Forfeiture and Money Laundering Criminals and criminal organizations are motivated by money. From drug trafficking, arms smuggling, fraud and corporate crime, human trafficking, corruption and terrorism, billions of dollars in criminal proceeds are processed through the US financial systems. The success of these criminal networks depend on the ability to launder money. Over the past three decades, the money laundering and asset forfeiture laws have become a critical weapon in the Government's anti-crime arsenal. The Government employs these laws to disrupt and dismantle criminal enterprises and terrorist organizations, deprive criminals of the proceeds of their illegal activity, deter crime and recover property to compensate victims. These strategies have changed the face of law enforcement, generating specialized investigative and prosecutorial units and an important body of statutory and case law. It has also presented tremendous challenges for counsel seeking to defend against these actions. We will examine both civil and criminal asset forfeiture law and policy, highlighting statutory and constitutional issues (e.g. due process, double jeopardy, disproportionate punishment). We will assess the criticisms and reform proposals of libertarians and others who, in recent years, have sharply criticized federal, state and local law enforcement agencies’ use of civil forfeiture, especially laws that permit law enforcement agencies to keep forfeited property. The complex anti-money laundering regime has been established over the past 30 years by a number of federal statutes, including the Bank Secrecy Act, the Money Laundering Control Act, Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, Annuzio-Wylie Anti-Money Laundering Act, Money Laundering Suppression Act, Money Laundering and Financial Crimes Strategy Act, the Patriot Act, the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act. Our seminar will examine the important interpretative and constitutional issues that the Supreme Court and lower federal courts have dealt with as well as evaluations of the successes and failures of anti-money laundering initiatives. Professor Jacobs will co-teach this seminar with Sharon Cohen Levin who, for twenty years, headed the Money Laundering and Asset Forfeiture Unit in the U.S. Attorney’s Office in the Southern District of New York. Ms. Levin is now a partner in Wilmer Hale