Gov. Rick Scott's budget looks to boost education spending, cut taxes for families, business
TALLAHASSEE | Gov. Rick Scott on Tuesday proposed an $83.5 billion budget for the fiscal year that starts July 1.

The budget is an initial step as lawmakers prepare to draw up a spending plan during the upcoming legislative session. Scott’s proposal includes making $618 million in tax cuts, providing $85 million in business incentives and expanding Bright Futures scholarships to cover summer classes.

The budget proposal could spark what could become a contentious debate with state legislators, who are less certain of the state’s revenue health.

Gov. Rick Scott announced his annual budget recommendations during a morning session at the Associated Press pre-legislative meeting.

The Florida Legislature will consider Scott’s budget request during the session that starts in March.

Scott’s optimistic outlook isn’t being shared by Republican legislative leaders.

LIVE VIDEO: The Florida Channel video stream of legislative planning session

"Florida businesses have added more than 1.2 million jobs over the last six years and our economy is booming because of our continued focus on cutting taxes, reducing burdensome regulations and fostering an environment where job creators can grow and succeed in Florida," Scott said. "Our ‘Fighting for Florida’s Future’ budget continues our hard work and cuts taxes by $618 million while making strategic investments in areas that are important to families. Because our economy continues to grow, we are able to make these investments while also paying down debt and setting aside $5 billion in reserves."

Scott’s budget proposes to cut taxes by decreasing the tax on business rents, providing a one-year sales tax exemption on college textbooks, cutting the business tax, exempting school book fairs from the sales tax and implementing a 10-day back-to-school sales tax holiday, nine-day disaster preparedness sales tax holiday, three-day veteran’s sales tax holiday and one-day camping and fishing sales tax holiday.

His budget also includes $8.1 million in additional annual fee cuts for Florida’s seniors, teachers, veterans and businesses, all while maintaining the quality of services provided.

Scott also recommends $85 million for economic incentives for the sole purpose of bringing more jobs to Florida and supporting small businesses, an issue that should run into opposition in both the House and Senate.

The governor also proposed nearly $21 million in state and local funding for Florida’s K-12 public schools which is $7,421 per student. He also recommends $6.6 billion for higher education which includes increased funding for the Bright Futures Scholarship program. There are also no tuition increases included in the budget.

In other areas, the budget includes:$360 million for water quality projects which includes record funding once again for Florida’s springs.$65 million and $60 million ffor the new Indian River Lagoon and Caloosahatchee Clean-Up Initiative and $225 million for Everglades restoration.$14.6 million to give Florida’s nearly 4,800 sworn state law enforcement officers with a five percent pay raise;$5.8 million to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement (FDLE) to hire 46 new employees dedicated to counterterrorism; and· More than $45 million to increase the pay of Florida’s correctional and correctional probation officers.

Information from Associated Press was used for this report