Redistricting process in Florida more complicated than just moving boundaries
TALLAHASSEE - Even as some lawmakers begin to start work on the once-a-decade chore of redrawing the state's political boundaries, the politically contentious redistricting process is surrounded by more questions than usual.

This year's process is supposed to be the first to follow state constitutional Amendments 5 and 6, measures aimed at ending political gerrymandering that supporters said has produced a Legislature out of touch with Florida's political leanings. The initiatives were approved with 63 percent of the vote.

But Amendment 6 - which governs the drawing of congressional districts - has already been challenged in court by U.S. Reps. Corrine Brown, a Democrat from a Jacksonville-area district, and Mario Diaz-Balart, a Republican from a Miami district.

Meanwhile, Gov. Rock Scott has withdrawn the state's application for federal approval of the amendments - required by the Voting Rights Act because of Florida's history of racial discrimination - in a move that drew another lawsuit from supporters of the amendments.

The questions have prompted the Florida House, which is looking to join Brown and Diaz-Balart's lawsuit, to largely shut down the process. The chamber has created a redistricting website, but House Speaker Dean Cannon, R-Winter Park, has only named the committee's chairman. In a memo sent to lawmakers when he appointed other committees, Cannon said the delay was prompted in part by a need to continue "analyzing the recently enacted constitutional amendments."

Meanwhile, the Senate has begrudgingly moved ahead. Senate President Mike Haridopolos, a Merritt Island Republican who joined Cannon in a vocal campaign against the amendments, said the chamber essentially has no choice but to assume the amendments will stand.

"We have to conclude that," he said. "The voters spoke; we want to respect the voters."

But Haridopolos said he anticipates a new level of upheaval surrounding Florida's redistricting process, given the new standards, which are meant to prevent lawmakers from crafting lines based on wholly political considerations.

"I think it's going to be the full employment act for lawyers, because not just one, not just two, but three or four sides are going to be suing in this thing. ... I will support the Constitution, but as we've already seen, there are multiple lawsuits already filed on both sides," he said.

Haridopolos also said some estimates of the cost of defending the new maps, which generally costs from $2 million to $3 million a year, surpass $10 million.

"You think reapportionment is chaotic - this is going to add a whole new element to it," he said.

Supporters of the amendments contend that lawmakers are trying to make the amendments sound more complicated than they actually are, and that at least some of the standards are in use in several states across the nation. Ellen Freiden, who chaired the campaign to pass the amendments, said there was no reason for lawmakers to ignore the standards now, even with the lawsuit and Scott's maneuver.

"They are law," she said. "They are in the Florida Constitution."

But Freiden's group and other supporters have their own complaint, largely based on Scott's decision to withdraw the state's attempt to get the amendments cleared by the Justice Department. Without clearance, any move to implement either of the amendments could be challenged in court under the Voting Rights Act, making it dicey for lawmakers to follow the standards before getting the final sign-off from Washington.

Scott's administration has argued that he withdrew the amendments as part of an effort to review new regulations, and there is no rush on getting them approved.

"Census data has not been transmitted to the state yet and the Legislature will not undertake redistricting for months, so this withdrawal in no way impedes the process of redrawing Florida's legislative and congressional districts," spokesman Brian Hughes said in an e-mail after the withdrawal was revealed.

But Dan Gelber, a former state senator who now serves as counsel for FairDistricts Now, said the move was a delaying tactic.

"It's a very perverse manipulation of the Voting Rights Act," Gelber said, noting the healthy margin the amendments received in the November elections. "It's really not fair to prevent it from being implemented for no good reason."

brandon.larrabee@ jacksonville.com, (678) 977-3709