Michelle and Barack Obama pictured with Hollywood stars and American icons - and a man inside a balloon - in latest batch of candid photos from White House photographer
President Barack Obama has had a busy few months amid financial and international crises.



Despite the serious disputes place in the halls of Washington buildings and on the stages of the many Republican presidential nomination debates, Mr Obama squeezed in some opportunities for lighter moments.



While promoting the American Jobs Act, which the President created to improve employment opportunities and help the dismal economy, he travelled throughout the country to spread the word.



Finding the fun: President Obama laughs with late-night host Jay Leno before taping an episode of The Tonight Show on October 25 while on a fundraising trip in Los Angeles

Back in a minute: Mr Obama talks with a Tonight Show producer Michele Tasoff during a commercial break as host Jay Leno gets filled in as well

Deny all he will, Mr Obama was able to host several high-rolling fundraisers during his travels, including one in Los Angeles at the home of Hollywood actress Melanie Griffith and her husband Antonio Banderas.



While in L.A., Mr Obama appeared as a guest on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno.



The two have met a number of times and Mr Leno hosted the White House Correspondants Dinner in 2010, where many thought that the President was actually funnier than the comedian.

Trading punch lines: Comedian Will Ferrell (center) and his wife Viveca Paulin meet with the President in the Oval Office after Farrell won the nation's highest award for humor

In the air: Magician John Cassidy performs a balloon trick for First Lady Michelle Obama after putting on a show for children at the White House

Jump shot: The President shoots hoops with press secretary Jay Carnet and his trip director Marvin Nicholson while killing time between events in Colorado

Mr Obama also met with funny man Will Ferrell when he was awarded the Mark Twain Prize of American Honour, the country's highest award.



Mr Ferrell is familiar with the world of politics as he made a name for himself by impersonating Mr Obama's predecessor, President George W. Bush, and even created a play based around Mr Bush called Mission Accomplished.

First Lady Michelle Obama got in on some of the fun as well, hosting a number of children's events at the White House. One of those activities placed her next to Guinness Book of World Records holder John Cassidy who holds the title for sculpting the most balloon animals- a whooping 747- in one hour.



Historic figures: First Lady Michelle Obama meets with former First Daughter Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg during an event at the White House, and President Obama pauses for a quiet moment in front of the new Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial in Washington D.C. which was unveiled in August



Concerned: Dr. Jill Biden, wife of the Vice President, met with actress Jennifer Aniston and other advocates during a tour of a health facility dedicated to breast cancer screenings in Virginia

Close counsellors: President Obama meets with members of his national security team in the Situation Room after the plot to kill the Saudi Arabian ambassador was disrupted Meeting of minds: At a meeting about Libya at the Unite Nations, President Obama leans back to speak with his U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice, while he sits next to French President Nicolas Sarkozy with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in the foreground

The past few months have not just been a barrel of laughs, however, and major international incidents have dictated much of Mr Obama's schedule.



With the revolution in Libya and the death of Colonel Maummar Gaddafi, the ripple effects of the Arab Spring continued to be felt as the calendar turned to fall.



The death of Gaddafi at the hands of Libyan rebels was a victory for President Obama after he had been an advocate of partial American intervention since the beginning of the revolution.

Holding on tight: A supporter grips the President's hand while he visited Detroit, Michigan on Labor Day

High flyers: On the left, the First Couple goods around with the children of an Air Force Sergeant (not pictured) and the President meets with the three winners of the Google Science Fair as they show off their Lego trophies in the Oval Office (right)

Cracking the code: Mr Obama shows a model of Samuel Morse's telegraph to a group of students visiting the White House

Grandma's seal of approval: Jean Meyer, the grandmother of Medal of Honor winner Dakota Meyer, cozies up with the President as he and the First Lady walk along the Colonnade

Just your average Joe: Mr Obama shares a beer with Medal of Honor winner Dakota Meyer

The coming months will be busy ones for Mr Obama as he attempts to revive his lagging approval rating. All the while, much attention is paid to the Republican presidential candidates who continue to wrangle with one another in an attempt to come out as Mr Obama's competitor for the 2012 presidential campaign.

Personal umbrella holders: President Obama and President Lee Myung-bak of Korea shake hands with well wishers when the dignitary visited the White House

Fan favorite: Mr Obama hugs supporters on a trip to Detroit, Michigan (left) and shakes some hands at the airport on a separate trip to the state



Paper or plastic: Mr Obama goes grocery shopping in North Carolina while promoting his American Jobs Act

Kiss the baby: The President proved popular with fans of all ages after a speech in Cincinnati