Gbagbo at bay: Defiant Ivory Coast dictator arrested and handed to elected leader







Laurent Gbagbo, the man who refused to step down from power in the Ivory Coast prompting a conflict which has killed hundreds, has been arrested.



He was seized yesterday by soldiers loyal to his successor, Alassane Ouattara, although initial reports said he had been captured by French forces.



Gbagbo’s dramatic arrest came after days of heavy fighting during which French and UN helicopters fired rockets at his presidential residence.



Captured: Ivory Coast's Laurent Gbagbo and his wife Simone sit in a room at Hotel Golf in Abidjan, after they were arrested



First lady: Simone Gbagbo in the custody of republican forces loyal to election winner Alassane Ouattara in the hotel Downcast: Relatives of Laurent Gbagbo at the Hotel Golf following the arrest of the fallen strongman and his wife Forces backing internationally recognised winner Ouattara had begun a rapid offensive to oust Gbagbo late last month.

Issard Soumahro, a pro-Ouattara fighter, said the ground offensive to seize Gbagbo came after the French launched airstrikes.

‘We attacked and forced in a part of the bunker,’ he said. RELATED ARTICLES Previous

1

2

Next Colonel Gaddafi 'agrees deal to end the bloodshed in Libya'... As Japan honours its 25,000 dead exactly a month after...

'I am still hurting': Ousted Egyptian leader Mubarak defends... Share this article Share ‘He was there with his wife and his son. He wasn’t hurt, but he was tired and his cheek was swollen from where a soldier had slapped him.’

Gbagbo was interrogated and brought to the Golf Hotel, where Ouattara has been trying to run his presidency since the November 28 vote.

Questioning the future: More of Gbagbo's extended family holed up in a hotel room Troops loyal to Ivory Coast leader Alassane Ouattara captured former dictator Gbagbo and his wife and brought them to their base, Ouattara's spokeswoman said Officials were waiting for him to sign a document that formally hands power to Ouattara. TV footage showed Gbagbo in a white sleeveless undershirt, and then donning a colorful print shirt.

‘The nightmare is over for the people of Ivory Coast,’ Ivory Coast’s UN ambassador said. Youssoufou Bamba, appointed UN ambassador by Ouattara, said Gbagbo will face justice.

He predicted that the fighting that has wracked the former French colony will stop. In western Ivory Coast, rebels fired into the air in jubilation.

A soldier loyal to internationally recognised Ivory Coast President Alassane Ouattara holds a modified rocket propelled grenade launcher

Detained: Ivory Coast strongman Laurent Gbagbo (left) has been captured after internationally recognised president Alassane Ouattara (right) announced a blockade around his rival's residence



‘It’s a victory ... considering all the evil that Laurent Gbagbo inflicted on Ivory Coast,’ Ouattara’s ambassador to France, Ali Coulibaly, said. He emphasised that the man in power for a decade would be ‘treated with humanity’.



Some critics accused Gbagbo of clinging to power to avoid prosecution by the International Criminal Court.



Ivory Coast was divided into a rebel-controlled north and a loyalist south by a 2002-2003 civil war. It was reunited in a 2007 peace deal.



The election was meant to reunify the nation but instead unleashed months of violence. U.S.



Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said dictators should take notice that ‘they may not disregard the voice of their own people’.

However, Richard Downie, an Africa expert at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies, said it would be very difficult for Ivory Coast to mount a domestic court to try Gbagbo, adding it would 'probably be a lightning rod for more unrest.'

U.N. and French helicopters have bombarded Gbagbo's presidential palace

Soldiers allied with Alassane Ouattara rest along the roadside at a republican forces operating base in the Youpougon neighborhood of Abidjan

'(Ouattara) didn't want to come to power this way, through the barrel of a gun,' Mr Downie said. 'He was elected fairly and freely. But this is the situation he was dealt. It's going to be incredibly difficult for him to bring the country together.'

In western Ivory Coast, rebels fired into the air in jubilation in Duekoue, causing a panic among refugees who fled in all directions or dropped to the ground in terror. In villages going east from Duekoue people danced in the streets, waving tree branches. In one village, young men paraded with the orange, white and green Ivorian flag.

'It's a victory ... considering all the evil that Laurent Gbagbo inflicted on Ivory Coast,' Ouattara's ambassador to France, Ali Coulibaly, told France-Info radio. He emphasized that the man in power for a decade would be 'treated with humanity.'

'We must not in any way make a royal gift to Laurent Gbagbo in making him a martyr,' Coulibaly said. 'He must be alive and he must answer for the crimes against humanity that he committed.'

Some critics had accused Gbagbo of clinging to power in part to avoid prosecution by the International Criminal Court. ICC prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo has begun preliminary examination of possible war crimes and crimes against humanity in Ivory Coast, including accusations levelled against forces seeking to install Ouattara.

U.N. ambassador Youssoufou Bamba on Saturday rejected allegations that Ouattara's forces raped and killed civilians suspected of supporting Gbagbo but said the new Ivorian government would support an investigation of any allegations raised.



France's Licorne ("Unicorn") forces go for a military operation, in southern Ivory Coast

A soldier loyal to internationally recognised Ivory Coast President Alassane Ouattara holds a rocket propelled grenade launcher as a woman gets in a taxi on a road in Angre

Ivory Coast was divided into a rebel-controlled north and a loyalist south by a 2002-2003 civil war. The country was officially reunited in a 2007 peace deal. The long-delayed presidential election was intended to help reunify the nation but instead unleashed months of violence.

Gbagbo, who won 46 percent of the vote, held power for a decade and already had overstayed his mandate by five years when the November election took place. When the country's election commission and international observers declared he lost the election after it was finally held, he refused to step down.

The former history professor defied near-universal pressure to cede power to Ouattara. The two set up parallel administrations that vied for control of the West African economic powerhouse.

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said that dictators should take notice that 'they may not disregard the voice of their own people in free and fair elections.' She added that 'there will be consequences for those who cling to power.'

Ouattara drew his support from the U.N. and world powers. Gbagbo maintained his hold over the country's military and security forces who terrorized his opponents.

He wrapped himself in the country's flag as he took the oath of office at his shotgun inauguration.

'No one has the right to call on foreign armies to invade his country,' Gbagbo, still taking a nationalistic stance, declared in a televised address on New Year's Eve. 'Our greatest duty to our country is to defend it from foreign attack.'

Ivory Coast gained independence from France in 1960, and some 20,000 French citizens still lived there when the civil war broke out.

French troops were then tasked by the U.N. with monitoring a cease-fire and protecting foreign nationals in Ivory Coast, which was once an economic star and is still one of the only countries in the region with four-lane highways, skyscrapers, escalators and wine bars.

Gbagbo had described efforts to oust him from power as tantamount to a foreign coup d'etat. On Monday, the French government sought to distance itself from Gbagbo's arrest. Commander Frederic Daguillon, the French forces spokesman in Abidjan, said French forces were not involved in Gbagbo's arrest.

Other West African nations had considered military intervention to remove Gbagbo, but those efforts never materialized and sanctions imposed on Gbagbo and his inner circle by the U.S. and European Union failed to dislodge him. Human rights groups accused his security forces of abducting and killing hundreds of political opponents as the deadlock dragged on.

While the United Nations passed resolutions allowing its peacekeepers to intervene to protect civilians, anti-Gbagbo neighbourhoods in Abidjan continued to be pummelled with mortars. So many people were killed that the local morgue began stacking corpses on the floor because they had run out of space in the refrigerated vaults.

Ouattara attempted to assert his authority from the Golf Hotel, protected by U.N. peacekeepers, while the would-be president tried to financially strangle Gbagbo by imposing an embargo on cocoa exports. In a desperate move, Gbagbo seized control of foreign banks in Abidjan - prompting their flight and a liquidity crunch.

After months of political deadlock, forces backing Ouattara began a dramatic offensive in late March, taking the administrative capital and reaching the largest city and commercial capital, Abidjan, in just days.



They met resistance in Abidjan, where Gbagbo and his family sought refuge in an underground bunker at the presidential residence.