Revealed: Buzz Aldrin took Holy Communion on the MOON (but NASA kept it secret)



Former astronaut Edwin 'Buzz' Aldrin may have been the second man to walk on the moon, but he was the first - and only - person to celebrate Holy Communion on it.

Inside the lunar module just hours before following Neil Armstrong onto the heavenly body in 1969, Aldrin celebrated the Christian sacrament with wafers and a bottle of wine - a fact the U.S. government reportedly refused to make public at the time.

The Apollo 11 astronaut's plan to broadcast the religious act back to Earth was blocked by NASA after an atheist filed a lawsuit complaining about a previous holy broadcast on the Apollo 8.



Buzz Aldrin, the second man to land on the moon, celebrated communion on the heavenly orb

Religious: Buzz Aldrin, pictured left in 1969, and right at age 83, was the first and only person to celebrated Holy Communion on the moon



Holy Communion is a Christian act of worship in which parishioners recreate the last meal Jesus had with his disciples, known as the Last Supper.



Before stepping out of the module, Aldrin pulled out a small plastic container of wine and some bread which he had brought from Webster Presbyterian church near Houston, where he was an elder.

Aldrin had received permission from the Presbyterian church's general assembly to administer it to himself.



Armstrong, reportedly a deist, chose not to participate.

'I poured the wine into the chalice our church had given me. In the one-sixth gravity of the moon the wine curled slowly and gracefully up the side of the cup,' Aldrin described in a 1970 copy of Guideposts magazine, cited in the Guardian.

'It was interesting to think that the very first liquid ever poured on the moon, and the first food eaten there, were communion elements.'

Before that, Aldrin had radioed Houston Space Center Mission Control inviting listeners to 'give thanks' with him and also read a section of the gospel of John he had written on a card:



'I am the vine, you are the branches. Whoever remains in me, and I in him, will bear much fruit; for you can do nothing without me.'

That card was auctioned in Texas in 2007, according to USA Today.

This handwritten card containing a Bible verse that Buzz Aldrin planned to broadcast back to Earth during a lunar Holy Communion service was auctioned in Texas in 2007





The surreal story of Aldrian's secret communion service only emerged after the mission.

While the devout Presbyterian wanted to share the ceremony with the world over the radio, NASA stymied the plan after atheist Madalyn Murray O'Hair tried to sue for a previous religious broadcast.

According to Time , O'Hair wanted a ban on NASA astronauts practicing religion on earth, in space or 'around and about the moon' while on duty after the Apollo 8 crew had read out the Genesis creation account in orbit.

O'Hair's case against Nasa eventually fizzled out.