Governor's big power grab could have unforeseen effects
Perhaps he's the man who would be king, rather than merely governor.

Watch carefully the shifts of power working their way through the Legislature during this session with the backing of their beneficiary, Gov. Jeb Bush.

First, there's the all-but-done abolition of the Board of Regents, which currently oversees the state's 10 universities.

Instead of one board trying to mesh the needs of individual universities with the common goal of what's good for the system as a whole, each of the 10 universities will be run by nine-member boards appointed by the governor.

That's 90 patronage appointments for Bush to hand out to supporters and campaign contributors. That's 90 board members to do the governor's bidding.

Then there's the push by Bush to weaken the job protection now given to thousands of state employees.

Their status would change to "at-will" employees, which means they could be fired at will.

Bush would argue that the change would allow the state to more easily get rid of employees who are not carrying their weight. Perhaps. It also would give the governor the power to replace employees with political friends in need of work.

But a choke hold on the state's universities and employees isn't enough.

Bush's supporters in the Legislature want the governor to have control over the judiciary as well.

Currently, judicial nominating commissions pick nominees for openings in Florida's trial and appellate courts.

Those commissions consist of nine members -- three appointed by the governor, three appointed by The Florida Bar and three appointed by those six commission members.

But Bush hasn't been happy with some of the nominees these commissions have sent him from which he has to choose.

To ease his unhappiness, a bill working its way through the House would give the governor the authority to appoint all nine members of each commission. In other words, the governor, through his handpicked friends on the nominating commissions, would have the power to select judges to his political liking. So much for an independent judiciary.

These shifts in power would be fundamental changes in a system set up to lessen the influence of politics in our universities, state employment and judicial system.

Kings like to dictate. These changes would give the governor that power.

But one wonders if the Republican legislators dead set on giving their Republican governor more authority have thought of one thing:

A Democrat could be sitting in that office in 2003.

As Howard Troxler, a columnist for the St. Petersburg Times, pointed out in a recent column, such a Democrat could stack the judicial nominating commissions with cronies who would pick a "bunch of prayer-banning, soft-on-crime, pointy-headed judges" and put "bookworm liberals who hate football" on the boards of the state's universities.

Oops.