Hillary and Bill Clinton 'kiss my *ss' for foundation dough, says Donald Trump
Bill and Hillary Clinton have personally tried to shake Donald Trump's money tree for large donations to their family foundation, according to the real estate billionaire.

He told Daily Mail Online on Thursday during a New Hampshire campaign swing that he has given a six-figure total to the controversial philanthropy over the years, in response to the former first couple pestering him for contributions.

Trump said that unlike foreign governments and companies at the center of a Clinton scandal, he never received any special government favors for his money and was never promised anything.

'No,' he said. 'No. But they do kiss my *ss.'

Asked to clarify that Bill and Hillary Clinton have each personally asked him for money to benefit their foundation, he replied, 'Both of them. Yes. Absolutely.'

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

YOU'RE WELCOME: Donald Trump says he's given in the six-figure range to the Clinton Foundation because Bill and Hillary 'kiss my *ss' for the money – but has never been promised favors in return

THANKS, DONALD: The Clintons' namesake foundation faces trouble stemming from hundreds of millions of dollars it accepted from foreign governments and companies that had business pending before Hillary when she was secretary of state

According to a rapidly evolving list of contributors on the Bill, Hillary and Chelsea Clinton Foundation's website, Trump has donated between $101,000 and $250,000 in past years. His daughter Ivanka has contributed between $5,001 and $10,000.

The business mogul told Daily Mail Online that the contributions weren't likely earmarked for a specific foundation program.

'It was for general support, I think,' he said. 'But what do I know? I give to so many charities. I don't know.'

Trump said he has given 'millions of dollars to charities and causes over the years. Foundations are foundations.'

But he expressed frustration at the Clinton Foundation's recent reputation for allegedly misspending funds on lavish travel for donors and prospective contributors – most recently with a 9-day tour of Africa conducted by Bill Clinton and his daughter Chelsea.

'I wish they would spend the money more wisely,' he said, 'and certainly I wish they would not spend it on themselves.'

'It's supposed to be for good causes, not for luxury airplane flights.'

Trump flies on his own luxe jet, a custom-outfitted Boeing 757 with leather seats, a bed and golf-plated fixtures.

'I like Boeing. You like Boeing,' he said during last weekend's South Carolina Freedom Summit. 'I happen to own a Boeing.'

Trump underscored that his largesse hasn't impacted the level of criticism he has focused on Hillary Clinton, the former secretary of state who is the Democratic Party's front-runner in the 2016 presidential race.

'Nobody has been tougher on her than I have,' said Trump.

'I haven't given her money. I've given her foundation money to be used properly.'

Trump did make modest political contributions to Mrs. Clinton's campaigns, however, according to Federal Election Commission records.

He gave a total of $4,100 to her 2006 U.S. Senate re-election campaign fund, including $200 less than a week before Election Day. Those contributions were split between the general election and a primary campaign that Clinton won in a landslide.

The following year, as Hillary fought a tense primary battle with Barack Obama, Trump gave $600 to her presidential campaign.

Separately, his son Donald Trump Jr. has donated more heavily than Trump Sr. to Mrs. Clinton's political campaigns.

Both have also given massive amounts of money to Republicans.

The elder Trump donated thousands to Rudolph Giuliani's mayoral campaigns and presidential exploratory efforts, to Texas Sen. John Cornyn, Sen. John McCain and former Rep. Allen West. He also gave $2,000 to support a congressionsl bid by upstart conservative Rep. Barbara Comstock in Virginia.

ALL OVER THE MAP: Trump's political donations to US senators go to the far-left (Harry Reid), the center (John McCain) and the far-right (John Cornyn)

Nationally, he has put more than $200,000 into the coffers of Republican political committees that operate on a coast-to-coast scale, including the National Republican Senatorial Committee, the Republican Congressional Campaign Committee and the Republican Party itself.

And he donated $250,000 to the Republican Governors Association last year, according to a Trump campaign aide, after the organization's then-chairman Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey visited him.

Trump's past contributions to Democrats have benefited the congressional campaigns of New York Rep. Charles Rangel and Nevada Sen. Harry Reid, Vice President Joe Biden's 2000 presidential bid, and the New York State Democratic Party.

'I'm a conservative Republican,' he said, 'but I can deal with anybody. I'm a businessman and I've dealt with every politician, and New York is almost exclusively Democratic.'

'I get along with everybody. That's what the country needs. The country's in total gridlock. I don't think it handicaps me politically. It shows I can work with everyone.'

Trump told Daily Mail Online that he will announce 'in June' whether or not he will turn his presidential campaign flirtation into a genuine run for the White House.

'Many people,' he said, 'are going to be very, very happy – the people who want to see good things happen to the country.'