Emma Stone suffers epic photo fail with Hillary Clinton
Having a photograph alongside a top level politician is an opportunity that doesn't arise too often.

And Emma Stone was left visibly cringing after she suffered an unexpected fail while posing with former presidential candidate Hillary Clinton on Wednesday night.

The actress, 28, was left red-faced when she accidentally appeared nude when both ladies were guests on Stephen Colbert's Late Show.

Scroll down for video

'I look like I'm nude!' Emma Stone was left visibly cringing after she suffered an unexpected fail while posing with former presidential candidate Hillary Clinton on Wednesday night

Promoting her upcoming movie Battle Of The Sexes about the life of Billie Jean King, the duo posed for a pic holding up T-shirts depicting the tennis ace.

Unfortunately for the Oscar-winner, her strapless dress was completely obscured from view, making it appear she was posing next to the former First Lady stark naked.

'Can I also point something out beyond this very cool photo?' Emma informed the host when shown the offending snap.

'I get a chance to meet Hilary Clinton - which is just unfathomable and incredible - and I look like I'm nude.

Hilarious: Promoting her upcoming movie Battle Of The Sexes about the life of Billie Jean King, the duo posed for a pic holding up T-shirts depicting the tennis ace

Whoops: Unfortunately for the Oscar-winner, her strapless dress was completely obscured from view, making it appear she was posing next to the former First Lady stark naked

'Yes, it does look like you are topless,' Colbert confirmed.

'Like...really? you have one shot...,' she laughed shaking her head.

Emma also opened up about her life-long struggle with anxiety by bringing a drawing she made at age nine while in therapy.

'This is me, I guess. It's really great artistry with my shoes and then this is anxiety here,'she explained of the sketch labeled 'I'm bigger than my anxiety!'

Naked ambition: : 'I get a chance to meet Hilary Clinton - which is just unfathomable and incredible - and I look like I'm nude

'It's a little green monster that looks a little bit, as someone backstage said, a uterus with some ovaries.'

The La La Land star then revealed she began getting 'immobilizing' panic attacks beginning as far back as age seven.

Emma played the real-life tennis champ Billie Jean King competing against Bobby Riggs (Steve Carell) in the feminist comedy Battle of the Sexes, which hits US theaters Friday and UK theaters November 24.

To better prepare, Emma memorized Billie's choreography and packed on 15lbs of muscle during twice-a-day workouts with fitness trainer-to-the-stars, Jason Walsh, for three months.