9 Times The Trump Team Falsely Accused The Cruz Campaign of Cheating
Real estate mogul Donald Trump and his surrogates have a tendency to throw a tantrum and whine, complain and cry foul every time Trump loses. Thus, Trump and his team accuse Texas Sen. Ted Cruz of cheating pretty much every time he has won:

States where Team Trump has accused Ted Cruz of fraud:



• Iowa

• Texas

• Colorado

• Oklahoma

• Louisiana

• Kansas

• Maine

• Utah

• Wisconsin — Frank Luntz (@FrankLuntz) April 6, 2016

Here are all the times Trump and his team have claimed Cruz has cheated after a loss.

1. Trump accused Cruz of cheating Dr. Ben Carson out of votes in Iowa.

Ted Cruz didn't win Iowa, he stole it. That is why all of the polls were so wrong and why he got far more votes than anticipated. Bad! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 3, 2016

During primetime of the Iowa Caucus, Cruz put out a release that @RealBenCarson was quitting the race, and to caucus (or vote) for Cruz. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 3, 2016

Many people voted for Cruz over Carson because of this Cruz fraud. Also, Cruz sent out a VOTER VIOLATION certificate to thousands of voters. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 3, 2016

The Voter Violation certificate gave poor marks to the unsuspecting voter(grade of F) and told them to clear it up by voting for Cruz. Fraud — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 3, 2016

The Daily Wire editor-in-chief Ben Shapiro has explained that all these charges are bogus, as the Cruz team was simply repeating a story from CNN that was never corrected on-air, and there was nothing illegal about the voter violation form.

2. Trump accused Cruz of coordinating with an anti-Trump Super PAC to put an ad attacking his wife. An anti-Trump Super PAC called "Make America Awesome" put out an ad in Utah showing Trump's wife, Melania, posing nude for a GQ photoshoot. This didn't sit well with Trump, so he blamed Cruz for the ad.

"Everybody knows he sent it out," Trump told CNN anchor Anderson Cooper at a town hall event. As evidence, Trump claimed, "He knew the people in the super PAC. He knew -- I would be willing to bet he wrote the phrase [in the ad]."

Trump is essentially saying that Cruz coordinated with the Super PAC – which is illegal – and there is zero evidence to substantiate his claim.

3. Trump threatened a lawsuit for receiving fewer delegates in Louisiana than Cruz.

Just to show you how unfair Republican primary politics can be, I won the State of Louisiana and get less delegates than Cruz-Lawsuit coming — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 27, 2016

Trump is indirectly accusing Cruz of cheating here, but Cruz didn't cheat – he just knows the rules better than Trump. These rules that Trump has been complaining about have actually benefited him. This is why Trump has yet to file this lawsuit.

4. Trump accused Cruz of coordinating with a Super PAC...again. After his YUGE loss in Wisconsin, Trump released a statement reminiscent of a two year-old and made a baseless allegation against Cruz.

"Not only was he propelled by the anti-Trump Super PAC’s spending countless millions of dollars on false advertising against Mr. Trump, but he was coordinating `with his own Super PAC’s (which is illegal) who totally control him," the statement read.

The Trump camp's supposed evidence of this is that Cruz appeared at campaign events that were put on by the Keep the Promise Super PAC. But this is not a violation of federal law, as the The Washington Post explains:

A close reading of FEC regulations reveals that campaigns can do more than just publicly signal their needs to independent groups, a practice that flourished in the 2014 midterms. Operatives on both sides can talk to one another directly, as long as they do not discuss candidate strategy. According to an FEC rule, an independent group also can confer with a campaign until this fall about “issue ads” featuring a candidate. Some election-law lawyers think that a super PAC could share its entire paid media plan, as long as the candidate’s team does not respond.

Once again, there is no evidence that the Cruz campaign cheated to win Wisconsin.

5-9. Trump ally Roger Stone has accused Cruz of voter fraud in five states. Stone, a longtime Republican operative with a reputation as "The Dirty Trickster," leveled the allegation against Cruz on Breitbart News Saturday with Matthew Boyle:

“Having worked very hard to collect evidence of voter fraud and irregularities in Oklahoma, Kansas, Utah, Hawaii and Texas, frankly, they ought to put the handcuffs on him,” said Stone, referring to Ted Cruz, “because the Trump people can go to credentials and challenge the seating of hundreds, literally hundreds of Ted Cruz’s delegates who were fraudulently elected.” Asked to elaborate, Stone said, “Go to StopTheSteal.org. For over a month we have had an 800 number up, a toll free number. We have collected and documented with sworn affidavits thousands of claims of voter irregularities in the states where Ted Cruz has won. And we’re prepared to present them to the credentials committee.” “If they want to fight, let’s fight,” Stone continued. “Ted Cruz’s delegates in Texas were fraudulently elected. There are thousands of examples of voter fraud. That means people voted for Donald Trump, but their vote was counted for Ted Cruz. Thou shalt not steal, Ted,” said Stone. “You’re a big bible man, Ted, read that one carefully. Thou shalt not steal. That’s why I call him tricky Ted,” concluded Stone.

This is being treated as five accusations since Stone is accusing Cruz of voter fraud in five states. Stone's "evidence" consists solely of the StopTheSteal.org, which claims that votes Trump were changed to votes for Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL) – without any substantial proof – and provides a number to call in for voter fraud and a donate button. If there truly was fraud, then Stone would have filed a lawsuit, and yet that hasn't happened.

Stone may not be technically a part of the Trump campaign, but he essentially spreads the Trump's talking points and perpetuates himself as "Trump's inside man."

As Shapiro wrote in his latest column, the Trump strategy is simply to whine and whine some more after they lose.