Wayne Slater: Ted Cruz wows Iowa pastors, Republican voters in first visit to Hawkeye State
DES MOINES, Iowa — First impressions are important, but they don’t win you the presidential nomination. Ask Rick Perry.

Ted Cruz is the latest Texas political immigrant to cross the border into Iowa, home of the first-in-the-nation caucuses that mark the official start of the race for the White House every four years.

It was Cruz’s first trip to Iowa since being elected to the Senate. He opened the day Friday exactly the way any smart Republican presidential hopeful would: seeking the blessing of several hundred conservative pastors at a closed-door conference about engaging the church in politics.

“Belief is not sitting there politely and doing a golf clap,” Cruz extolled the clergy, pacing the stage Oprah-style. “Belief means doing something.”

White, evangelical, born-again Christians made up nearly 60 percent of Iowa caucusgoers last year, according to exit polls. Several of them got their first look at Cruz on Friday and liked what they saw.

“I’m behind this guy,” said Cecil Stinemetz of Grace West Church in West Des Moines.

“In Texas, he was willing to stand up, go to the Supreme Court and argue things that the rest of the country were getting rid of — for instance, the Ten Commandments” monument on the Capitol grounds, Stinemetz said. “He didn’t care. He went and he fought and he won.”

The fact that Cruz did not actually argue the Ten Commandments case at the Supreme Court, but was part of the team, seems to have been unclear in the presentation. Attorney General Greg Abbott argued the case before the high court.

As for the last exotic Texan to dip his toe in the political waters of Iowa — Gov. Rick Perry — Stinemetz was decidedly cooler. Perry’s star-crossed presidential bid in 2012 was a disaster, capped by a boot-in-mouth “oops” moment in a televised debate that hastened his campaign’s collapse.

“If I had Cruz here and Perry here, Cruz would be my man, hands down,” he said. “He doesn’t have a chance if Cruz is in it.”

Pastor Jamie Johnson of Christ Church in Story City, who is a member of the Iowa state central committee, helped steer Rick Santorum to Republican victory in the 2012 Iowa caucuses. But after Friday, he’s a Cruz man.

“We know how to do it. And if Senator Cruz decides to run, I want to do everything I can to help him,” Johnson said.

At Iowa Republican headquarters, where Cruz was the featured speaker at a noon party fundraiser, the Texas senator drew a crowd — both inside and out. Dozens of chanting, sign-waving protesters blocked the front door, demanding to confront Cruz on the issue of immigration.

“Ted, Ted, come on out! See what Iowa’s all about!” they chanted.

One sign — “Cruz? More Confused than Rick Perry” — offered a broader critique of the Lone Star State and its politicians.

A young GOP party aide, asked how often this happens, shook his head. “Not very often at all,” he said.

Inside, Cruz couldn’t have asked for a better endorsement as he greeted about 70 Iowa Republicans who paid $100 each to have lunch and get their picture taken with him. As he spoke, extolling the free market and the Constitution and denouncing the Obama administration, the rowdy chorus of protesters could be heard outside.

Reporters covering the event wanted to know whether Cruz intends to run for president in 2016. Cruz demurred.

“I’ve been in office all of seven months,” he said. “Prior to that, the last elective office I held was student council. It’s been quite a whirlwind.”

But this was Iowa, after all, the gateway of presidential campaigns. Cruz has already traveled to South Carolina, and he’s scheduled next month to be in New Hampshire — all early nominating states.

“For me as a citizen and a voter, who I will support in 2016 is whoever is standing up and leading,” Cruz said. “Whoever is effectively defending free-market principles, defending the Constitution. Whoever is effectively making the argument to the American people that there is another road we can go down to return to the prosperity and opportunity this country was built on.”

He could have been talking about himself.

Follow Wayne Slater on Twitter at @wayneslater.