Historic tobacco case revisited: biggest litigation win ever or a complete scam?
TEXARKANA — Twenty years ago, then-Texas Attorney General Dan Morales filed a historic federal lawsuit accusing the tobacco industry of racketeering and fraud.

Morales said the case would make Big Tobacco change how it did business, force the cigarette companies to make less dangerous products and stop the industry from marketing to teenagers.

The lawsuit, he contended, would require the tobacco companies to fork over billions of dollars, which would be used to reimburse the state for smoking-related Medicaid costs and to fund anti-smoking programs.

Two decades later, legal experts remain divided over whether to label the Texas litigation a success.

The Texas state treasury pocketed billions of dollars from the litigation, though only pennies on the dollars won in the case went to smoking cessation efforts. Republican political leaders opposed the litigation from the start, then directed the bulk of the cash proceeds into the general budget.

Teen smoking plummeted, but cigarettes are just as addictive and dangerous and the tobacco companies are more profitable than ever.

The trial lawyers representing Texas got filthy rich.

And Dan Morales? He married a former exotic dancer, lost his bid for governor and eventually went to federal prison.

“The litigation had an enormous positive impact, but, at the same time, it was an enormous loss or failure,” says Matt Myers, president of the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids.

“The litigation exposed the tobacco industry’s lies, dramatically reduced teen smoking and resulted in limits in cigarette advertising,” Myers says. “But it is far short of meeting the objectives. We didn’t change the industry’s conduct at all. The product is no safer.”

In the Texas legal battle, the tobacco companies actually struck first by preemptively filing a lawsuit to prevent Morales from suing cigarette makers. The courts quickly rejected the lawsuit as having no merit.

Instead, the tobacco companies teamed with tort reform advocates to successfully lobby the Texas Legislature to pass a law prohibiting Texans from being able to sue the “makers of natural products” that have potential health risks. The law identifies those natural products as milk, eggs, sugar, bread, butter and… cigarettes, which actually have hundreds of chemical additives.

Sixth to file suit

On March 29, 1996, Texas was the sixth state to sue Big Tobacco seeking reimbursement for health care costs related to smoking. Mississippi filed first in 1994, followed by Minnesota, Florida, West Virginia and Louisiana.

The lawsuits were considered extreme long shots for success. The tobacco companies had been sued more than 400 times and had never lost nor settled a single case. In addition, the legal theories at the heart of the state cases were novel and untested.

Plaintiffs’ lawyers, however, unearthed thousands of incriminating internal industry documents that showed the tobacco companies added hundreds of ingredients to cigarettes, targeted teenagers through cartoon marketing efforts and took significant steps to cover up the dangers of smoking.

“We discovered a confidential tobacco industry internal legal memo that stated, ‘The goal in litigation is not to spend all of our money, but to force the plaintiffs to spend all of their money,’” says Houston trial lawyer Harry Potter, who was a Texas special assistant attorney general who supervised the Texas tobacco case.

By 1998, more than 40 states had filed suit. Each state lawsuit sought hundreds of millions or even billions of dollars in damages. No case was bigger than Texas’, which legal analysts predicted would bankrupt the tobacco companies if the state were to prevail.

The litigation took a dramatic turn in April 1997, when lawyers for the tobacco companies asked to meet with former Mississippi Attorney General Mike Moore and Myers from Tobacco-Free Kids to discuss the possibility of a global settlement that would cover all the states that sued Big Tobacco.

The meeting took place at the Marriott Hotel in Crystal City, just outside of Washington D.C. Those who attended included the CEOs of the five cigarette makers and elite Wall Street lawyers.

“The CEOs of Phillip Morris and RJR told us that to show they were serious, they agreed right then to give up the Marlboro Man and Joe Camel, their two most successful marketing efforts,” Moore says. “We were stunned. That’s when settlement talks really heated up.”

Mississippi, which was set to go to trial in July 1997, settled for $3.4 billion. Florida settled during jury selection two months later for $11.3 billion.

Texas’ turn

The Texas lawsuit was the next tobacco case set for trial.

“Texas suddenly became so very important because it had an actual trial date and that scared the tobacco companies silly,” says Joe Rice, a partner at a South Carolina law firm that represented 31 states, including Texas, involved in the tobacco litigation.

Rice said the Texas lawyers brilliantly sued the cigarette makers in the federal courts of the Eastern District of Texas, which employed a “rocket docket” that streamlined pretrial proceedings so that the parties could have a trial date set within 16 or 18 months.

“The Texas lawsuit wasn’t first but it was so important because it is such a large state with potentially huge damages,” says Richard Daynard, a professor at Northeastern University School of Law and president of the Public Health Advocacy Institute in Boston.

Daynard points out that Texas was the first state to file in federal court, which meant its lawyers had nationwide subpoena power to call witnesses. Texas accused the industry of racketeering and operating a criminal organization, which, if proven, would have tripled monetary damages and lawyer fees.

“The Texas case had the potential to bring the tobacco companies to their knees,” Daynard says. “No doubt, the case had a major impact, but it clearly fell far short of Morales’ goals. Cigarettes are definitely no safer today.”

Measuring success

If money is the primary grading point — in most litigation, it is the only grade — the Texas case was an extraordinary success.

In January 1998, the Texas lawsuit settled on the eve of trial for a record $15.3 billion — the largest settlement of a single case in U.S. history.

“Just about every lawyer who knew anything about the case thought it was a long shot for the state and that the state’s case faced significant hurdles,” says Houston lawyer Richard Mithoff. “But even more importantly, the tobacco companies were looking for peace and it was absolutely the right time for the state to push for a settlement.”

Mithoff represented Harris County in demanding that the cigarette makers also make payments to counties in the state for their smoking-related health care costs. Mithoff’s efforts led Big Tobacco to pay an additional $2.3 billion in July 1998, increasing the overall settlement to $17.6 billion.

So far, the cigarette makers have paid Texas $10.2 billion and make annual payments of about $490 million to the state, according to court records. Under the settlement agreement, the payments will continue in perpetuity, surpassing $15 billion in 2023.

To pay for the settlement and lawyers’ fees, tobacco companies increased the price of cigarettes by $1.40 per pack, which impacted cash-strapped teenagers. As a result, teen smoking plummeted. Surveys showed that nearly 36 percent of teens smoked in 1996, but only 12 percent of them do today.

Myers and others point out that Texas budgeted only $10.2 million of the $490 million payment — or two percent — to be used for anti-smoking efforts in 2016. Meanwhile, the Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids says the tobacco companies will spend an estimated $630 million on marketing their products in Texas.

The public health group says that the annual health care costs for treating sick smokers in Texas will be $8.8 billion in 2016.

State records show that $110 million of the settlement funds goes annually into a special endowment to fund health care for children and cancer research. The endowment currently has a balance of more than $2 billion.

Trial lawyers’ share

Potter, who was one of the lead settlement negotiators, says the deal nearly imploded at the end over the issue of fees to be paid to the private lawyers representing the state.

“We reached the amount the state would actually receive pretty easily,” he says, “but hammering out the details became like the movie ‘Groundhog Day’ over and over and over.”

Finally, the tobacco companies agreed to set up a special fund to pay the outside lawyers separate from monies going to the states. An arbitration panel determined the amount to be paid.

The private lawyers representing Texas — John Eddie Williams, Walter Umphrey, Harold Nix, Wayne Reaud and John O’Quinn — had a contract that said they would pay all the state’s costs in the litigation and would be paid 15 percent of any money they won for the state. If the state lost, the lawyers would receive nothing.

Initially, the Big Five, as they were known in legal circles, asked the arbitration panel for $25 billion — an amount even the arbitrator they appointed said was outrageous. Instead, the panel awarded $3.3 billion to be paid by the cigarette makers over 25 years.

So far, Big Tobacco has paid the Texas lawyers nearly $2 billion. The cigarette companies continue to send Umphrey and the group about $120 million annually, which will end when the $3.3 billion award is met.

Tort reform groups blasted the lawyers’ fees as excessive and claimed the plaintiff’s lawyers did almost no work to deserve such large sums of money — a claim that even the lawyers for the tobacco companies and leaders in the public health community say is untrue.

“Did the lawyers deserve that much — does anyone deserve that much?” asks Moore. “It’s a lot of money, but it is also a free market system and the tobacco companies agreed to pay it, which meant cigarette prices went up a little more and that means fewer teenagers can afford to smoke.”

Indeed, the Big Five from Texas bought new yachts and private jets, but they also donated tens-of-millions to their colleges, law schools and to fund health care programs.

“The bottom line is that the tobacco litigation achieved some tremendous successes and the lawyers should be pleased with that,” says Myers of the Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids. “But measured against the potential successes and the potential good that could have been achieved, Texas and many other states fell far short of their objectives.”

For a longer version of this article, please visit TexasLawbook.net.