Dallas murders jumped 17 percent in 2015, to 136, but rate among lowest in history
A high school student caught in crossfire while sitting outside her apartment. A Subway cashier shot during a robbery. A teenager kidnapped on her way to church and later stabbed.

These were among the 136 victims slain in Dallas in 2015 as murders here jumped 17 percent from 2014’s historic low of 116.

Despite the spike, though, city officials touted the murder rate — 10.7 slayings per 100,000 residents — as the city’s fourth-lowest since Dallas police started counting in 1930.

“The murder rate history books are being rewritten,” Police Chief David Brown said. But, he added, “One is too many. We are not celebrating anything. We’re just acknowledging the hard work and commitment of Dallas police officers.”

The rise came as other big cities such as Los Angeles, New York, Houston and San Antonio also saw upticks in slayings. The 2015 rate was expected to rise about 15 percent among the country’s 30 largest cities, jumping to about 10 murders per 100,000 residents, according to the Brennan Center of Justice at the New York University School of Law.

Dallas had a higher murder rate than most other cities with more than 1 million residents, according to preliminary figures from police and published reports. Cities that had lower rates than Dallas were: Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Phoenix, San Antonio, New York, San Diego and San Jose, Calif. Chicago, Philadelphia and Houston all had higher rates.

Still, compared with the city’s own history, 2015 was far less bloody. Murders in Dallas have fallen dramatically since the crack-cocaine epidemic in the 1980s and 1990s. The city hit its peak in 1991, with 500 murders. Then, the rate was 49 slayings per 100,000 residents.

The rate has declined dramatically since then. The number of killings hasn’t reached 200 since 2007.

“Even though we had this uptick, the numbers are still less than most of the last 10, 15 years,” said Alex Piquero, a criminology professor at the University of Texas at Dallas. “You can’t put the word ‘positive’ on any of this, but it’s a good trend for the city of Dallas.”

The first homicide victim of 2016 died late Wednesday after a shooting in a Buckner Terrace apartment. Randall Jones, 46, was shot about 11 p.m. in the 3800 block of Cedar Lake Drive, police said. The suspect remains at large.

Impact of police

Murder rates fluctuate year to year, and experts say many factors are at play. Those include mass incarceration, the economy, poverty, education and housing. Improvements to emergency medicine may also help save the lives of some gunshot victims.

Because murder is often spontaneous, it’s hard for law enforcement to prevent, Piquero said.

“It’s very difficult for police to really affect homicides. If people think economic disadvantage contributes, or underperforming schools … police can’t do much about those risk factors.”

For Brown, though, the only factor that definitely has an impact is the police. He said he added detectives to the investigative units that handle violent crime, including assaults, robberies and homicide, to catch assailants before they wreak more havoc. He also pointed to proactive patrols, investigative task forces, surveillance cameras in crime hot spots and license plate readers.

“What the cops do matters,” Brown said. “Good, bad or indifferent, they do matter. When cops are on their game, cities are safer. When we’re not, obviously, things are not as safe. I give all the credit to the men and women in blue.”

Assistant Chief Randy Blankenbaker, who oversees criminal investigations, added that the murders probably fell in recent years after the department cracked down on drug dealers and improved its response to domestic violence.

Ron Pinkston, president of the Dallas Police Association, said the department remains understaffed and desperately needs the 200 or so officers it has lost through attrition since 2010. To attract cops, he said, the city should raise salaries to be in line with most metro area departments. It’s an issue that Brown has said he supports.

“The only way to stop the increase in violent crime and the murder rate is to hire the best police officers” and more of them, Pinkston said. “The only way for the city to do that is to increase the pay.”

Never-ending battle

Murders occurred in all parts of the city, but the police divisions that saw the most killings were Northeast, Southeast and South Central, according to department figures.

Arguments were the most common motive for slayings, sparking 42 deaths. Another 22 died over drugs, 11 due to family violence and 15 due to robbery. Three victims were killed by someone who sexually assaulted them or at least tried to, police said.

The most common weapon used was a handgun, claiming 88 victims. About 14 were killed in stabbings, six were beaten or kicked to death and 11 were killed by shotguns or rifles.

More than half the victims and suspects were black. And 81 percent of the victims were men.

The youngest victim of the year was Justice Hull, a 2-month-old baby. A 14-year-old girl was convicted of intentionally drowning her at a house in Red Bird. The teen received a 40-year sentence.

Brown said the majority of murders are “criminal on criminal,” and the victims usually know their attackers. However, several victims were killed seemingly at random by strangers.

Kierra Robinson, 19, was caught in crossfire meant for a man as she sat outside her east Oak Cliff apartment.

David Stevens, 53, an engineer and marathoner, was hacked to death as he ran on White Rock Creek Trail by a mentally ill former Texas A&M football player, police said.

Zoe Hastings, 18, who was about to leave on a church mission trip, was stalked by a man as she returned a movie at a White Rock-area drugstore, police said. The suspect abducted her and stabbed her to death near her minivan.

And while police constantly work to stop the killings, the loved ones of victims say they also fight a never-ending battle.

Every morning, every night and all throughout the day, Chris Garcia said, his thoughts turn to his daughter. Alexus Garcia, 20, was found strangled in a burning car in June. Police arrested a man she had met online.

Chris Garcia moved to Odessa in October because he couldn’t bear to be in the Dallas-Fort Worth area anymore. Still, he and his 9-year-old son return every two weeks to visit Alexus’ grave. His son has trouble understanding that he can buy stuffed animals, but won’t ever be able to give them to his sister.

“It’s a daily struggle,” Garcia said Wednesday. “You want to do whatever you can that you think will help, but it doesn’t. It may have been six months, but it’s as hard today as it was Day One.”

On Twitter:

@NaomiMartin