Under Trump order, immigration agents raid 'target-rich' communities in Texas, elsewhere
Immigration activists said the crackdown went beyond the six states DHS identified, and said they had also documented ICE raids of unusual intensity during the past two days in Florida, Kansas, Texas and Northern Virginia.

Susannah Volpe, a managing attorney at Ayuda, an immigrant legal services group in Washington, said she had noticed what seemed to be roundups of people, like those without criminal records, that the government had not previously paid much attention to.

"These are agents going into apartment buildings or agents going to work sites," said Volpe, who had a client arrested, along with five others, at a construction site in Washington last week. "This is new."

That unauthorized immigrants with no criminal records were arrested and could potentially be deported sent a shock through immigrant communities nationwide amid concerns that the U.S. government could start going after law-abiding people.

"This is clearly the first wave of attacks under the Trump administration, and we know this isn't going to be the only one," Cristina Jimenez, executive director of United We Dream, an immigrant youth organization, said Friday during a conference call with immigration advocates.



ICE agents in the Los Angeles area Thursday swept a number of individuals into custody over the course of an hour, seizing them from their homes and on their way to work in daytime operations, activists said.

David Marin, ICE's field director in the Los Angeles area, said in a conference call with reporters Friday that 75 percent of the approximately 160 people detained in the operation this week had felony convictions; the rest had misdemeanors or were in the U.S. illegally. Officials said Friday night that 37 of those detained in Los Angeles have been deported to Mexico.

"Dangerous criminals who should be deported are being released into our communities," Marin said.

School principals in Los Angeles have been sent a checklist of things to do in case immigration agents turn up. The Mexican government even warned "the entire Mexican community" in the United States "to take precautions and to keep in touch with their nearest consulate," after the deportation of a woman who had previously been allowed to remain in the United States.

A video that circulated on social media Friday appeared to show ICE agents detaining people in an Austin shopping center parking lot. Immigration advocates also reported roadway checkpoints, where ICE appeared to be targeting immigrants for random ID checks, in North Carolina and in Austin. ICE officials denied that authorities used checkpoints during the operations.