Former Texas hospital chain owner found guilty of Medicare fraud
TYLER — A federal jury took less than two hours on Thursday to find a Dallas businessman who plunged his rural hospital chain into ruin guilty of health-care fraud and conspiracy.

Dr. Tariq Mahmood, 63, was convicted on 15 fraud counts, including aggravated identity theft. Mahmood directed his hospital billing coders to illegally alter underlying diagnoses in more than $1.1 million in claims to the federal Medicare insurance program.

The convictions could carry 20 years or more in prison, but formal sentencing will not take place until sometime next year, authorities said. Prosecutors did not request that Mahmood be jailed, saying there had been no problems with his conduct since he posted bond following his indictment in April 2013.

Mahmood, who is expected to appeal, has agreed to forfeit $312,886, the actual amount he was illegally reimbursed from false claims.

He remained silent and expressionless after the verdict, as he did throughout most of the trial’s three days of testimony.

Former employees of Mahmood’s hospitals who followed the trial through news accounts, word of mouth and court record updates were relieved that jurors grasped the evidence.

“I want to say thank you to the jurors,” said Sharon Nelson, a nurse practitioner at Shelby Regional Medical Center. She said she watched her hospital suffer financially under Mahmood until it closed, leaving the community with no emergency medical care.

“I don’t think our community will ever recover from all the damage he’s done,” she said.

A 2013 investigation by The Dallas Morning News found that serious regulatory gaps allowed Mahmood and his hospital chain to operate with virtual impunity from regulators for years. The News also reported that warnings of fraud in 2008 by a former hospital administrator went unaddressed by government agencies.

Four of his six rural Texas hospitals have closed. Two are struggling under new ownership.

In January, prosecutors brought fraud charges against Mahmood’s top administrator, Joe White. In that separate case, set to go to trial in August, prosecutors allege White falsified documents to obtain part of nearly $18 million in federal stimulus funds distributed to Mahmood’s hospitals to computerize electronic health records. The bulk of that money, The News found, was never used for that purpose and remains unaccounted for.

The trial was the government’s first legal proceeding stemming from several government criminal and civil investigations.

The fraud case against Mahmood primarily focused on billing at three hospitals: Renaissance Hospital Terrell, Cozby Germany Hospital in Grand Saline and Central Texas Hospital in Cameron.

The prosecution called to the stand more than a dozen witnesses, including Medicare claims experts and several former insiders at Mahmood hospitals who portrayed the owner as routinely fixated on boosting his facilities’ Medicare reimbursements.

Prosecutors kept their closing arguments rooted in the contents of several billing claims, matching them up, one by one, with the coders’ original code assessments then showing the overpayments.

The conspiracy involved Mahmood routinely ducking into his billing coders’ offices in recent years, directing them to assign more serious diagnostic conditions to Medicare claims than were reflected in patients’ medical charts, commanding higher reimbursements.

“The defendant found some people who would participate,” said Nathaniel Kummerfeld, a prosecutor with the eastern Texas division of the U.S. district court. “He wasn't the treating physician for any of these patients.”

Two employees testified that they refused to change the codes, considering it a breach of professional ethics or guidelines. They said it was the first time in their combined 40 years experience at hospitals that an owner or top executive had ever meddled in coding practices.

Mahmood found ways to maneuver around their refusals, according to testimony. One coder was fired three weeks after she told Mahmood she wouldn’t manipulate the codes.

Two employees at Mahmood’s Central Texas Hospital and his Lake Whitney Medical Center did agree to change billing codes. Workers would fax their original codes to Mahmood’s personal fax machine then he would direct them to change them, according to testimony.

Mahmood’s attorney, Michael Khouri, didn’t specifically address the coders’ accusations. But he repeatedly emphasized during questioning that it’s not unusual for hospitals to try to “maximize profits’’ through the reimbursement process.

In his closing argument Thursday, Khouri said Mahmood did not wield a “Charles Manson-like’’ power over employees who altered the codes.

Mahmood was merely a boss making “suggestions” to his billing coders, Khouri told jurors. The staffers were the ones who made the final decision to change underlying diagnosis codes in claims for government reimbursements, he said.

Khouri said even if Mahmood suggested or instructed employees to change codes, it was because the hospital owner simply disagreed about how much his hospitals should be reimbursed for patient care.

“It’s not a crime to disagree with the government,” Khouri said. He capped his remarks by saying, “They done wrong to Dr. Mahmood. The poor man comes to East Texas to help ... and look what he gets.”

On Twitter:

@milesmoffeit @DMNInvestigates