Democrats fault state for inability to detail impact of voter ID law on minorities
AUSTIN — State officials have acknowledged to the U.S. Department of Justice that more than 600,000 registered voters may lack a state-issued photo identification necessary to cast a vote under the state’s new voter ID law.

Democrats immediately criticized the state’s response, saying it is inadequate because it fails to provide a breakdown of those voters by race and doesn’t sufficiently scrutinize the possibility that the law could keep minorities from the polls.

The law will require voters to present a government-issued photo ID at the polls starting next year. After the state reported that an estimated 605,500 registered voters may lack a state-issued license or ID, the department wanted to know the race and county of residence of the voters, and whether they have a Spanish surname, to determine whether the law will unduly burden minority voters.

Under the Voting Rights Act, Department of Justice officials must authorize changes to elections laws before they take effect, a response to the history of Texas and other Southern states discriminating against minority voters.

Because the state voter registration process doesn’t document race, the secretary of state’s office said the only racial breakdown it could give was by Hispanic surnames in Texas. Democrats contend the state could have used available data or hired a commercial vendor to estimate how many minorities might be harmed.

“The fact that the secretary of state’s office won’t provide the data requested by the DOJ shows that they’re either grossly incompetent or that they have something to hide,” said Texas Democratic Party spokeswoman Kirsten Gray. “It also shows an utter disregard for the importance of the Voting Rights Act in protecting every Texan’s right to cast a ballot that counts.”

Proponents, including Gov. Rick Perry, who made the measure a priority in the last legislative session say the law is needed to crack down on voter fraud. Democrats have said the law will hurt minorities, who tend to be poorer and lack the resources to obtain state ID, and is designed to bolster Republican margins at the polls.

The secretary of state’s office said it’s not certain that all 605,500 registered voters identified in the report lack state ID. That many didn’t match Department of Public Safety records by first name, last name and date of birth. But discrepancies in the data, such as if someone has married and registered to vote under a different name, mean some could have state ID, officials argue.

As of Sept. 16, 174,866 registered voters with a Hispanic surname did not meet the DPS criteria and may not have been issued a state license or ID. In Dallas County, 64,764 registered voters did not meet the criteria, and 7,961 had a Hispanic surname.

The controversial law remains in limbo until the Justice Department determines whether the requirement will violate federal law. The department also wants details about how Texas plans to educate voters and train election officials on how to comply with the photo ID requirements.

Under the law, Texans can produce a state driver’s license, a personal ID issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety, a U.S. passport, a military identification card or a concealed handgun permit.