Obama: No U.S. troops to Mexico border for now

WASHINGTON – Mexico’s drug war and the risks of cross-border violence deserve top-level attention, President Barack Obama said in an interview today, but it isn’t time to send U.S. troops.

“We’ve got a very big border with Mexico,” the president said. “I’m not interested in militarizing the border.”

Last month, Texas Gov. Rick Perry visited El Paso – whose neighbor, Ciudad Juarez, has taken the brunt of drug violence that has claimed more than 7,000 lives in Mexico in 14 months – and called on Washington to send a thousand troops or border agents.

“We’re going to examine whether and if National Guard deployments would make sense and under what circumstances they would make sense,” Obama told The Dallas Morning News this afternoon in an hourlong talk with 14 regional newspapers in the Roosevelt Room, near the Oval Office. “I don’t have a particular tipping point in mind. I think it’s unacceptable if you’ve got drug gangs crossing our borders and killing U.S. citizens.”

Mexican President Felipe Calderón declared a war on drug cartels nearly two years ago, setting off waves of violence as rival gangs fight for turf and survival. Former President George W. Bush hammered out a deal with Calderón called the Mérida Initiative, to provide equipment and training to help Mexico take on the traffickers and weed out corruption.

Obama supports the plan and vows a close partnership with Calderón. He said he’ll offer his own “comprehensive policy … in the next few months” to address U.S. drug demand, northbound smuggling, and the southbound flow of cash and guns that have given the cartels “extraordinary power,” as he put it.

Obama noted recent high-level contacts between U.S. and Mexican officials as a sign of the partnership.

Last Friday, for instance, Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, met with counterparts in Mexico and offered more intelligence and surveillance, and training based on lessons learned against insurgents in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Earlier Wednesday, Obama named a new national drug czar, Seattle Police Chief Gil Kerlikowske. Bush gave the post Cabinet rank, and Obama removed that designation, and bristled at the suggestion that means he isn’t as serious about fighting drugs.

“The implication was somehow that I think we should weaken our drug laws. That’s never been my position,” Obama said in the interview, vowing better funding for addiction treatment.

“We do have to treat this as a public health problem, and we do have to have significant law enforcement," he said. “If we can reduce demand, obviously that allows us to focus more effectively where interdiction is needed.”

Obama also rejected the push by some Southern Republicans to end Justice Department oversight of election procedures – a debate that could affect Texas.

“You don’t just leave it up to the states to self-correct,” he said, defending the reasoning behind the Voting Rights Act, a Lyndon Johnson-era civil rights reform.

The U.S. Supreme Court is expected to rule later this year on the validity of a key section that requires states with a history of Jim Crow practices, such as literacy tests and poll taxes – including Texas and its counties and cities – to “pre-clear” redistricting plans and even minor adjustment to polling sites.

“You really have to look at the data and examine whether it still has some applicability,” the president said, and as long as “racial bloc voting” persists, “that’s not such a huge hurdle to jump through. It’s legitimate to err on the side of caution before you started eliminating that requirement.”

He added that Congress should revisit the issue and study voting trends each time the Voting Rights Act comes up for renewal; as a senator, he voted to renew the law.