Area census workers out for the count of minorities, immigrants
IRVING – A conga line shimmies to a Bhangra beat as revelers throw magenta- and marigold-colored powder in an Indian celebration of spring known as Holi.

Photos by XIAOMEI CHEN/DMN Tenneh Carter (left) from Liberia and Ti Ti Beene from Jamaica participated in a gathering about the census and immigration at Dallas Catholic Charities on Saturday. Some people fear providing information to the government. and Ti Ti Beene from Jamaica participated in a gathering about the census and immigration at Dallas Catholic Charities on Saturday. Some people fear providing information to the government.

Among the guests here are U.S. Census Bureau workers, eager to spread the word about the government's own mission of renewal. The biggest ever decennial head count of the nation begins in full force this week with the mailing of 10-question census forms to more than 130 million addresses.

Texas' population is now more than 50 percent minority. Nearly a fifth of the Dallas-Fort Worth area's population is foreign-born. Worries are high that immigrant, minority and young populations won't be accurately counted, so the census is using more resources to make sure it reaches hard-to-count populations.

"There is a fear of government in people," said Kay Jain, a census specialist working in immigrant communities. "I tell them that there are no questions on the form about residency, immigration status or Social Security numbers."

In 2000, an undercount cost Dallas County $156 million in federal funds, and Texas more than $1 billion, according to a PriceWaterHouseCoopers study commissioned by an independent board monitoring the Census Bureau.

An undercount could mean less funding renewed for government programs ranging from schools to roads to foster care to hospitals. Each year, the federal government allocates more than $400 billion to states and communities based in part on census data.

It might also mean that Texas doesn't gain four congressional seats that redistricting after the census is expected to bring.

Suspicions

In January, a Pew Research Center survey of U.S. adults found that 11 percent of respondents believed that census data will be shared by the government to "locate illegal immigrants for arrest."

To allay those fears, Jain, a naturalized citizen born in India, reassures immigrants in temples, mosques, churches and community festivals that the census is safe.

To put folks at ease, she sometimes speaks Hindi, passes out forms in Gujarati, Nepali and Urdu. She'll dress in a sari at Indian events and a salwar kameez tunic-and-pant ensemble at mosques filled with Pakistanis and other immigrants.

If there's fear in this Indian community, it didn't show at this Holi festival.

"Fear?" said Swati Pandit, at the Hindu temple gathering. "We have people working at the Pentagon now."

At the immigration services offices of Dallas Catholic Charities on a crowded Saturday morning, director Vanna Slaughter planted herself in the middle of a crowd of Mexicans, Jamaicans, Liberians and Cubans. " Es completamente confidencial y importantísimo," Slaughter said to those in the Dallas office. ("It's completely confidential and really important.")

"Catholic Charities supports the census, and it is important you do, too," Slaughter said, switching to English.

Penalties for census workers disclosing confidential information to other agencies or individuals are high: A violator faces a federal prison sentence of up to five years and a fine up to $250,000.

Boycott urged

Not everyone is on board with the census push.

Last year, a group of evangelical preachers, members of the National Coalition of Latino Clergy & Christian Leaders, urged Latino immigrants to boycott the count. They sought to hold back participation until Congress passed immigration reform. The effort never gained steam in Texas.

This month, immigrant-rights groups asked Homeland Security officials to halt enforcement activities during the census count. They said immigrants wouldn't cooperate if they feared detection of someone in their home who is in the U.S. illegally – especially during the intensified crackdown of the last few years.

Last October, Louisiana Republican Sen. David Vitter tried to get a citizenship question on the form. That effort was blocked by Democrats, who argued it would discourage immigrants from responding. Vitter wanted only citizens counted and not the total population as required by the U.S. Constitution.

A citizenship question is asked in a much smaller sampling of the U.S. population known as the American Community Survey of the Census Bureau. It doesn't ask if a person is in the U.S. illegally or legally though.

'It's important'

At Catholic Charities, San Juanita Ramírez, a 26-year-old from Mexico, clutched a red canvas bag with the census logo and her immigration documents. She planned to fill out the forms and skip any questions that worry her, she said.

"It's important to cooperate so that funds come here," Ramírez said.

Radio and television advertising blares from broadcast outlets in multiple languages, ranging from local radio stations geared to Indian and Pakistani listeners to those targeting Latino youth.

A Mexican soap opera on the Telemundo network even featured a census worker named Perla in a show titled Más Sabe el Diablo ( The Devil Knows Best).

Yelina Ravelo, a 28-year-old originally from Cuba, knew about the census before Slaughter started her talk.

"It's on so much on the television," she said.

And, she said, she likes the idea of a census that helps spread federal money to cities – something she never saw in Cuba.

Census officials said Dallas and Harris counties have the largest number of hard-to-count residents in Texas. They are often found in groups that speak little or no English, or are new immigrants or among ethnic populations. Sometimes these areas have highly mobile college students, overcrowded housing or have had low response rates to the census in the past.

Participation down

There is also worry because participation rates are sinking among censuses worldwide.

In the 2000 census, Texas participation was 64 percent—lower than the 67 percent nationwide for mail-back participation. Dallas County came in at 65 percent, Collin County at 74 percent, and Denton and Tarrant counties at 69 percent. The city of Dallas had a 62 percent rate, and Plano had a 76 percent rate. Carrollton had a rate of 75 percent and Irving a rate of 62 percent.

"The less people who are counted the less power and money you have," said Gabriel Sanchez, regional director for the Census Bureau, who's been to Islamic festivals, rural colonias on the border and Chinese New Year events in Grand Prairie for the census cause.

"We simply say that this is about power and money. If you care about that, get counted."