Arlington Super Bowl's economic impact estimated at $611.7 million
Next year's Super Bowl in Arlington is projected to have a record economic impact of $611.7 million, according to a report commissioned by local organizers.

The document, obtained from the Texas comptroller's office, estimates spending related to the 2011 Super Bowl in the two months leading up to the game.

The study was created by California-based Marketing Information Masters, which has done similar work on previous Super Bowls, nearly two dozen college bowl games and this month's NBA All-Star game at Cowboys Stadium. Spending attributed to that basketball game was estimated at $152 million.

"These numbers are premature at this point," host committee spokesman Tony Fay said. "In a few weeks, we will have more accurate numbers from the comptroller's office, and at that point, we will be able to talk in more detail about them. We're very excited, though, about what we think they will show."

Trust fund creation

The research was commissioned in May to provide the state with estimates to help with the creation of a Major Events Trust Fund. That will use some sales tax generated by spending from Super Bowl fans to help pay for the event.

Some money would go to the host committee to pay for expenses required in the Super Bowl bid, such as volunteer training. Another portion would reimburse local governments for some of their costs, such as public safety.

For purposes of the trust fund, the comptroller will focus only on the estimated spending of $374.7 million by out-of-state visitors. That would generate $36.2 million in additional taxes, which is the estimated maximum size of the trust pool. That figure included direct spending, as well as multipliers.

Scholarly skepticism

Many university economists who study sports business are skeptical of the huge numbers. Calculations by academics often show an impact that's in the range of tens of millions of dollars or even lower when government costs and lost non-Super Bowl business is figured in.

The previous record impact was estimated at a little more than $500 million for the 2008 game in Arizona. The last two Super Bowls had lower estimated impacts in part because of the recession. This North Texas report is expected to be the only one commissioned to estimate the Super Bowl's economic effect here.

When the Super Bowl was held in Houston in 2004, the comptroller's office estimated the economic impact of the game and events at $330 million. That's about in line with many past host committee studies.

The calculations are based on economic modeling and data ranging from interviews with past Super Bowl attendees to numbers of hotel room nights secured by the North Texas host committee.

Philip Porter, an economics professor at the University of South Florida in Tampa, said he was stunned by the more than $600 million estimate. He said extensive research of sale tax collections in Super Bowl host cities and regions has never shown that kind of boost.

"I'm blown away by this," he said. "The numbers get bigger and bigger and more absurd. They don't at all reflect anything that ever occurs."

Porter said little of the additional spending during a Super Bowl stays in the area. Most of it "leaks" out to corporate shareholders and executives elsewhere, he said.

This new report, made public this week, also breaks down where spending is expected to occur and shows Dallas as the biggest winner. The study estimates that more than $5 million in city tax would be generated here. That's more than the estimates for 12 other local cities combined, including Arlington and Fort Worth.