Clinton campaign says Texas is one big reason the race isn't over

Hillary Rodham Clinton sharpened the contrast she's drawing with Barack Obama as she campaigned Wednesday in South Texas, while Mr. Obama's campaign manager said she was too far behind for it to matter.

The tough talk came a day after Mr. Obama swept primaries in Virginia, Maryland and Washington, D.C., and foreshadows a March 4 contest in Texas that could revitalize Mrs. Clinton's sagging campaign or clear Mr. Obama's path to the Democratic nomination.

With her presidential aspirations on the line, Mrs. Clinton let her punches fly as Mr. Obama looked toward the closing bell.

"There is a very important choice and a big difference between the candidates in this race," Mrs. Clinton told a crowd of 2,000 in McAllen. "I am in the solutions business. My opponent is in the promises business."

She added: "We need answers, not questions, about what we're going to do."

Mr. Obama's aides portrayed Mrs. Clinton's campaign as falling way behind and said he had a commanding lead in pledged delegates.

"Even the most creative math doesn't get her back to even in terms of pledged delegates," Obama campaign manager David Plouffe said. "We believed all along the pledged delegate leader would be the nominee of the party."

Pledged delegates are awarded based on primary and caucus results. "Superdelegates" – elected officials and party leaders – also have a vote in the nomination at the national convention in Denver in August.

The Associated Press estimated that as of Wednesday, Mr. Obama had 55 more total delegates than Mrs. Clinton.

The Clinton campaign countered that the race was far from over, partly because of her strength in Texas.

"From our perspective, we expect change to begin March 4," said Clinton strategist Mark Penn. "We're looking at favorable groups within these states. We've gone through the ups and downs of this race. We fully expect March 4 we will be back in a strong position."

Mrs. Clinton dismissed suggestions that her campaign was losing its joy after a staff shake-up, lagging fundraising and eight straight losses to Mr. Obama, who has started cutting into her edge among women and working-class voters.

"That's not what's going on. We have a tremendous amount of energy and focus," she said.

In Robstown, west of Corpus Christi, Mrs. Clinton outlined policy proposals and accomplishments on children's and veterans' health care to about 3,000 gathered in a livestock pavilion.

When asked what the real difference was between her and Mr. Obama, she replied, "Well, about 35 years of experience."

She stressed her plans for universal health care, a 90-day moratorium on foreclosures on people's homes, pre-kindergarten programs and affordable college tuition.

Mr. Obama outlined his economic agenda Wednesday and also has made education proposals similar to Mrs. Clinton's. But she emphasized that hers came earlier and are more comprehensive.

Meanwhile, Houston-area Clinton supporters slammed Mr. Obama's claim of universal health care coverage in a pointed conference call with reporters Wednesday morning.

"The last time I checked, universal health means covering all people. Senator Obama's plan leaves 15 million people uninsured," said Dr. Vivek Kavadi, a Sugar Land oncologist.

Mrs. Clinton would require all Americans to get insurance and said she might be willing to have workers' wages garnished if they refuse. Mr. Obama would require only that children get health insurance.

The Obama campaign struck back at Mrs. Clinton's record.

"If Senator Clinton weren't so busy attacking Senator Obama, maybe she'd notice that today he laid out a comprehensive economic agenda," said Josh Earnest, a spokesman for Mr. Obama. "The truth is, Senator Obama doesn't need lectures on the economy from someone who voted for a bankruptcy bill that makes it harder for families to climb out of debt, and has said she'd go after workers' wages if they don't purchase health insurance."

With Mr. Obama drawing momentum from his latest wins and expected victories in Wisconsin and Hawaii on Tuesday, Mrs. Clinton was showing that she intended to mass her resources in Texas and Ohio, which vote March 4 and offer almost 400 delegates.

"I'd like to congratulate Senator Obama on his recent victories and just tell him to meet me in Texas," Mrs. Clinton said. "This is a long journey to the nomination. Some weeks one of us is up and the other is down. And then we reverse it. ... It's a long and winding road."

After Texas, she plans to campaign in Ohio. But she said she would return to Texas next week and plans to stage a rally in the Rio Grande Valley that the campaign hopes will attract up to 50,000 people.

Meantime, Mr. Obama campaigned in Wisconsin as his forces mobilized in Texas and Ohio.

On Tuesday night, an estimated 1,000-plus people attended a volunteer meeting at Gilley's, south of downtown Dallas. More events are planned in the area Saturday and Sunday. Other than his appearance at next Thursday's debate in Austin, Mr. Obama hasn't announced any Texas visits.

Mr. Plouffe said he hoped the stretch of time until the Texas and Ohio contests would allow Mr. Obama to make inroads there.

"They need to win Texas and Ohio by 20 points," Mr. Plouffe said of the Clinton campaign. "We believe we can amass a large number of delegates in Texas."

He added that said the campaign was also aggressively courting unpledged superdelegates.

The Clinton campaign said that after March 4, the candidates would be within 25 total delegates of each other.

Staff writers Robert Garrett and Karen Brooks contributed to this report.

CLINTON, OBAMA HEALTH CARE PLANS

Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama have offered plans to expand health coverage to the 47 million uninsured Americans, financed in part by rolling back President Bush's tax cuts for those making more than $250,000 a year.

Mandates: Mrs. Clinton's plan would require every American to have coverage, and Mr. Obama would require insurance for children only. Mr. Obama says that if premiums don't fall sufficiently with new reforms, insurance may still be too expensive for some with modest incomes, and those people shouldn't be penalized.

Truly universal? Mrs. Clinton has said that 15 million people would be left uncovered in Mr. Obama's plan. Some experts say the plans don't offer enough detail to support the validity of such a hard number.

How to enforce: Mrs. Clinton hasn't always specified how she would enforce her mandate, but in a TV interview this month, she said she might be willing to have workers' wages garnished if they refuse to buy health insurance. Mr. Obama has said he might fine adults if they don't buy insurance for their children.