Doggett picks fight with Perry over schools money
AUSTIN – Gov. Rick Perry has not been shy about mixing it up with the federal government.

Indeed, he is writing a book on how fed up he is with it.

So the bitter dispute between Perry and U.S. Rep. Lloyd Doggett over $830 million in federal emergency school aid would seem to fit neatly into the governor's Texas vs. Washington political narrative.

But Perry, a Republican facing re-election in November, wasn't necessarily spoiling for another fight. Until Doggett picked one.

Doggett, an Austin Democrat, has been fuming for more than a year over Texas' use of the $3.2 billion in federal stimulus money intended to help public schools in 2009.

He said that money was intended to supplement state education dollars, not replace them.

Since Texas' rainy day fund was flush with billions in cash, Doggett argued the state didn't need the federal dollars to plug its budget hole.

Legislators disagreed, anticipating much rainier days probably ahead.

Lots of states did the same thing with their stimulus money, but Doggett didn't want it to happen again in Texas. He tried – and failed – last year to pass a measure that constrained how Texas could spend its education stimulus money.

This summer, Doggett finally scored a victory on this point. His amendment to a $10 billion education jobs measure was aimed at forcing the state to maintain education spending levels even as it grapples next year with an $18 billion – or more – budget shortfall.

The U.S. Department of Education last week denied Texas' application for the $830 million, which is intended to prevent teacher layoffs. The governor failed to provide the assurance called for in the Doggett amendment – that Texas would maintain a certain level of education spending for the next three years.

The state regularly makes these kinds of maintenance agreements to qualify for all kinds of federal money. Under normal circumstances, it is a commitment made by the Legislature when the budget is approved.

This was not a normal circumstance. Perry argued that he would have to violate the Texas Constitution to meet the requirements of the Doggett amendment. A governor cannot appropriate money nor bind a future legislature to future spending.

Condemning the "anti-Texas language" in Doggett's amendment, Perry said last week: "Surely Congress did not intend to require states to violate their own constitutions and statutes in order for schools to receive this money."

Many in the education community felt Perry's legal arguments were suspect.

Railing against Obama administration education initiatives to score political points had become commonplace for Perry, particularly as he geared up for a primary fight last spring against U.S. Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison that cast her as complicit in a federal power-grab.

In January, Perry said the $4 billion education reform initiative called Race to the Top "smacks of a federal takeover of public schools."

Yet, in the case of the education jobs money, the potential loss of $830 million for Texas schools threatens Texas' future, Perry said in a recent news release.

"It is unfortunate that Washington continues to play partisan games with Texans' tax dollars and the very future of our children," the governor's statement said. "Texas will not surrender to Washington's one-size-fits-all, deficit-spending mindset or let Washington do to the Texas budget what they have done to the federal budget."

Doggett dismisses Perry's arguments as phony.

"Thanks to the governor, [schools] get no money now, and had there been no such amendment, any money they got would have likely been subtracted from state aid," Doggett said in a statement on Thursday. "With our amendment, they at least have a chance of eventually securing this federal support."

Kate Alexander, Austin American-Statesman