Cowlishaw: Thanks to 'Tuck Rule' game, this won't be the last cold-weather Super Bowl
NEW YORK — In four days, the NFL will embrace the cold like never before. It’s not the worst thing in the world. It won’t be the last time it happens, either.

When Super Bowl XLVIII kicks off Sunday night, the temperature is expected to be in the mid-30s with a slight chance of snow. This is not exactly what players, coaches and fans have come to know as “Super Bowl weather” over the last half century.

Super Bowl imagery? You think of Joe Namath sitting poolside in swim trunks promising victory. You don’t think of Peyton Manning sitting on a raised platform above the New Jersey Devils’ home ice on Media Day because the football playing field is too cold.

Four years ago, with a gentle nudge from Commissioner Roger Goodell, NFL owners voted to hold the 48th Super Bowl in the new home of the Giants and Jets. It was an unprecedented move, since previous cold-weather Super Bowls (Minneapolis, Detroit and, yes, Dallas) had been played in domed stadiums.

The risk of holding the league’s showcase game — the biggest day in American sports — here was considerable. New Jersey’s a place “to get out while we’re young,” not to play football in February.

Was it also nothing but a flagrant money grab on the part of the NFL, soaking its wealthiest sponsors and fans along with the not-so-wealthy media for a week in this cost-of-living-run-amuck city and its surroundings?

Most assuredly.

But it was a savvy move in so many ways I can’t do much besides stand back and applaud. And given that the Denver Broncos and Seattle Seahawks are no strangers to playing games in chilly or inclement weather, neither team is likely to trot out foul weather as a fair excuse for defeat.

“It’s just something to focus on and be aware of and not be surprised by something,” Seattle tight end Zach Miller said. “But it’s not going to distract us. It’s not going to be any reason why we don’t win on Sunday.”

Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning has a history of falling short in cold weather, but the reasons for those defeats go way beyond any lack of adaptability on his part. In fact, he has taken to wearing gloves, which he never did when Indianapolis played cold games on the road, and he’s fine with the new feel.

“I committed to wearing them even in Houston a few weeks back, and I think that was a good decision,” Manning said.

For the record, his passer rating with one or two gloves in Denver is 111.9 the last two seasons. Without any gloves, it’s 108.7. I think the bottom line is he finds his targets in all kinds of weather, and if something derails him Sunday night, it will be the best secondary in the NFL, not the chilly breeze blowing down from Hoboken.

Here’s what the NFL has figured out, and why I say this won’t be the last outdoor Super Bowl played without palm trees. Blame it all on Tom Brady and the “tuck rule” game if you don’t like it.

On Jan. 19, 2002, the New England Patriots beat the Oakland Raiders in the snow in Foxboro to move a step closer to their first Super Bowl victory. The Patriots benefited from the “tuck rule” late in the game, but forget that part of it. The rule has been abolished anyway.

The game got great ratings. Something about football in the snow as America was just discovering the wonders of HD television triggered an idea in the league’s Park Avenue offices.

Until that time, the NFL had mostly avoided December Monday night games in cold weather cities. Look what happened in the aftermath.

Monday Night Football traveled to games in New York and Cleveland in December of 2003. By 2005, in addition to a late November date in Green Bay, Monday night games were showcased in Philadelphia, Baltimore and New York in December.

What once was the exception became the rule. Fans are fascinated with cold-weather football … especially when they can watch from the comforts of home.

Besides, how can one argue there is anything wrong with allowing weather to factor into the biggest game of the year when it’s already huge in everything leading up to the Super Bowl?

Do you think crowd noise in Seattle didn’t bother the Saints or 49ers? Before their late rally came up short in Denver, do you think the San Diego Chargers might have fared better if the temperature hadn’t been 41 degrees at kickoff?

Is the Ice Bowl not as rich a piece of history as this league has to offer?

“Forget what the weather factor is in this thing,” Seahawks coach Pete Carroll, who coached the Jets here 20 years ago, said. “Any time you do an event of this magnitude in the New York-New Jersey area, you’re going to get a great performance by the people and by the spirit of the area and the history and the background of New York’s teams and just the fans that have come from here for generations.”

It’s kind of a rambling answer but perhaps if you throw enough of those factors together at once, it’s not a bad way to keep warm.

Get the latest Dallas sports news at SportsDayDFW.com