Daveed Gartenstein-Ross is a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, an adjunct assistant professor in Georgetown University’s security studies program, and a lecturer at the Catholic University of America. His research and professional work are focused on the challenges posed by violent non-state actors, with a concentration on al-Qaeda and other jihadist organizations. Gartenstein-Ross is the author or volume editor of fifteen books and monographs, including Bin Laden’s Legacy (Wiley, 2011), and has published widely in the popular and academic press, including in The New York Times, The Washington Post, Foreign Policy, The Atlantic, Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, Terrorism & Political Violence, and The Yale Journal of International Affairs. He also frequently conducts field research in relevant regions, including North Africa, the Persian Gulf, and South Asia.

Gartenstein-Ross has presented his research at events sponsored by the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting, the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Uppsala University (Sweden), the Combating Terrorism Working Group (Belgium), O.P. Jindal Global University (India), the National Defense College (Abu Dhabi) the Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya (Israel), and the Defense Intelligence Agency, among others. He has been featured in the Distinguished Speaker Series at the University of Southern California’s National Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events (CREATE), and has been a keynote speaker at the Global Futures Forum.

In addition to his academic work, Gartenstein-Ross consults for clients who need to understand violent non-state actors and twenty-first century conflict. His client work has included live hostage negotiations in the Middle East, risk assessments for oil and gas companies, border security work in Europe, and story and series development for major media companies. He also regularly lectures for the U.S. Department of Defense’s Leader Development and Education for Sustained Peace (LDESP) program, and has designed and led training for the U.S. State Department’s Office of Anti-Terrorism Assistance.

Gartenstein-Ross has taught classes or been on faculty at a number of major academic institutions, including the Catholic University of America, the University of Maryland, the University of Southern California, and the Takshashila Institution (India). He holds a Ph.D. in world politics from the Catholic University of America and a J.D. from the New York University School of Law. He is a senior fellow at George Washington University’s Homeland Security Policy Institute and a visiting research fellow at the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism—The Hague. Gartenstein-Ross can conduct research in five languages.

Gartenstein-Ross’s e-mail address is daveed@defenddemocracy.org, and you can follow him on Twitter.