Dave Aronberg For Attorney General
Referring to State Senator Dave Aronberg, the Orlando Sentinel stated, "If you're looking for new leaders, try starting here." The Fort Myers News-Press said that Senator Aronberg "is considered to be the strongest consumer advocate in state government." The Naples Daily News called him "the real deal," and Governor Charlie Crist has praised him as "a rock star."



In his seven years in the State Senate, Dave Aronberg has passed major consumer protection legislation that safeguards our privacy against identity theft and financial schemes. As part of a Medicaid task force, Dave successfully fought for reforms to combat fraud and abuse that will save taxpayers millions of dollars.



As a rare Democratic committee chair in a Republican-led Senate, Senator Aronberg led the Senate's efforts to secure federal funding for Everglades restoration. In addition, he oversees a consumer protection project in his Senate office that has returned more than four million dollars to Floridians who have called with consumer complaints.



In 2008, Senator Aronberg was named Chair of the Military Affairs and Domestic Security committee, where he works with members of local, state and federal law enforcement to protect Florida's ports and to ensure proper treatment of our State's veterans and those serving on active duty.



Dave Aronberg was born and raised in South Florida and attended public schools before going off to Harvard for college, then Harvard Law School, where he graduated with honors in 1996. As an attorney, he worked closely with Insurance Commissioner (now U.S. Senator) Bill Nelson to investigate European insurance companies that refused to honor World War II-era policies sold to victims of the Holocaust. In 1999, Dave became a Florida Assistant Attorney General for economic crimes. Among other cases, he headed the State's lawsuit against "Miss Cleo," the "Jamaican Shango Shaman psychic" who had become an international celebrity among late-night television viewers.



In 2000, Dave was selected to be one of 15 White House Fellows from across the country. In this non-partisan position, Dave served in two Presidential Administrations as Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury Department for international money laundering.



Elected to the Florida Senate in November 2002, Senator Aronberg represents a challenging, diverse district that stretches from eastern Palm Beach County through Glades, Hendry and Charlotte Counties all the way to Lee County on Florida's gulf coast. Even though Democrats comprise only 38% of his district, Dave was re-elected in 2008 with 59% of the vote.