Colorado Senate’s budget debate includes circumcisions, ATMs at strip clubs
The Colorado Senate gave initial approval Wednesday night to a $19 billion state budget after a debate that touched on funding infant circumcisions for the poor and whether state welfare ATM cards can be used at strip clubs.

The debate was largely conflict-free, compared with prior years. The House passed the bill last week, 64-1.

The bipartisan, bicameral goodwill comes as a result of an improved revenue picture, which allowed lawmakers to avoid a fight on whether to again suspend a $98.5 million property-tax break for seniors. With the higher revenues, everyone agreed there was money to fund the tax break this year.

The budget keeps per-pupil funding for K-12 education at the current level and keeps funding for higher education almost equal with the current fiscal year, which ends in June.

“There’s a lot of good in this budget,” said Sen. Pat Steadman, D-Denver, a member of the Joint Budget Committee, which crafted the budget.

“It may not be totally perfect,” agreed Sen. Kent Lambert, R-Colorado Springs, “but it’s pretty close.”

One of the most impassioned debates Wednesday was over infant circumcisions for Medicaid-eligible families. The state eliminated the funding last year, and Sen. Joyce Foster, D-Denver, wanted to restore the program at a cost of $194,986.

Emotional at times, Foster said low-income families that have to pay up to $400 for the procedure usually skip it.

“Because they’re poor, they have no choice,” she said.

Lambert said circumcision is an optional procedure that not everyone agrees is medically advisable.

“This is also one of those areas where private charities and private donations are possible,” he said.

The amendment failed.

Senate Minority Leader Bill Cadman, R-Colorado Springs, offered an amendment that would bar the use of state cash- assistance cards at ATMs in casinos, strip clubs or liquor stores. The amendment, like similar bills that have failed previously, came in response to TV news reports of cash withdrawals at such places.

“It’s supposed to be a safety net, not a party net,” Cadman said of cash assistance.

Sen. Betty Boyd, D-Lakewood, however, said such withdrawals represent a tiny fraction of the usage of the cash-assistance cards. Further, she and others said liquor stores might be the only place that people in “bank desert” neighborhoods can find an ATM to withdraw money for food.

And, she said, there’s no guarantee that people who do use the state ATM cards at grocery stores aren’t “doing bad things” with the money.

The amendment failed.

The Senate still has to approve the entire budget on a recorded vote. After that, the House is likely to ask for a conference committee to work out disagreements before it goes to Gov. John Hickenlooper, a Democrat.

Tim Hoover: 303-954-1626 or thoover@denverpost.com