Gorsuch looks like shoo-in for court
WASHINGTON — Denver native Neil Gorsuch seemed headed toward easy confirmation to the Denver-based 10th Circuit Court of Appeals after gliding through a 20-minute U.S. Senate committee hearing on his qualifications Wednesday.

Only one senator on the 18-member Judiciary Committee attended the hearing, a signal the nomination is not controversial.

“I have nothing but good things to say about Mr. Gorsuch,” said Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., the sole senator at the hearing. Graham worked with the Columbia-, Harvard- and Oxford-educated Gorsuch at the Department of Justice.

Gorsuch’s nomination now moves to a vote of the full committee, which Graham said he hoped would happen before the August recess. If approved, it goes to a vote of the full Senate.

“Barring something coming out of the blue, it sounds like it will go through very smoothly,” said Carl Tobias, law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia.

If approved, Gorsuch, 38, would take the position vacated by Judge David Ebel, who is taking senior status. The appellate court sits between trial courts and the U.S. Supreme Court.

Colorado’s U.S. Sens. Wayne Allard, a Republican, and Ken Salazar, a Democrat, introduced Gorsuch, both giving glowing reviews.

During the brief questioning, Graham asked Gorsuch to describe his judicial philosophy.

“I resist pigeonholes. They aren’t terribly helpful,” Gorsuch said. “People do unexpected things. Pigeonholes ignore gray areas in the law.”

Gorsuch said his approach to deciding cases was to pay attention to arguments made by the lawyers presenting the case, to try to reach unanimity with his colleagues on the bench, and to respect court precedent.

During the hearing, Gorsuch’s wife, Marie Louise, sat in the front row with their daughters, Emma, 6, and Belinda, 4, who wore matching pink dresses.

The 10th Circuit serves Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Wyoming and Utah.

Gorsuch’s mother is the late Anne Gorsuch Burford, a Coloradan who was chief of the Environmental Protection Agency under President Reagan.