Once at risk, CDC office in Fort Collins now fighting Zika virus
WASHINGTON — One of the laboratories involved in the global fight against the Zika virus is the Fort Collins office of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which six years ago nearly had its funding slashed by the Obama administration.

The Colorado facility is the headquarters of the CDC’s Division of Vector-Borne Diseases — which focuses on illnesses carried by critters such as fleas and ticks. Since at least 2007 it has led U.S. efforts to combat the Zika virus that is spread by mosquitoes and can lead to birth defects in babies.

But that nearly wasn’t the case.

As part of its 2011 budget request, the Obama administration in 2010 proposed a crippling cut to the Division of Vector-Borne Diseases that would have reduced its budget by $26.7 million.

The idea was to use some of that money to bolster a broader infectious-disease program, but the plan ran into a wall of opposition from scientists and Colorado lawmakers.

Researchers were concerned that cuts to the Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, which now has branches in Atlanta and San Juan, Puerto Rico, would mean the CDC would have a diminished ability to scan the horizon for future threats.

“If you’re not doing surveillance … you’re going to miss these things until you have a major outbreak,” said Laura Kramer, a virologist at the New York Department of Health in Albany, to the publication Science at the time.

Members of Colorado’s congressional delegation shared that anxiety and were concerned about job losses at the Fort Collins office. According to one estimate, a $26.7 million cut would have lead to a loss of nearly 100 jobs — mostly at the Colorado laboratory.

In response, three Colorado Democrats, U.S. Sens. Michael Bennet and Mark Udall and U.S. Rep. Betsy Markey, lobbied their colleagues and the White House to restore the funding.

“I remember the basic point (the) scientists were making was that this was an incredibly short-sighted budget decision,” Bennet said. “Instead of having a proactive approach to the work … we are going to be in completely reactionary mode.”

“Not only is that bad from a disease-control perspective, but it’s not great from a budget perspective,” he added. “That made a lot of sense to me, and we were able to argue with the appropriations committee to get them to restore the proposed cuts that the president’s budget made.”

The campaign ultimately was successful, and the final version of the 2011 budget restored most of the $26.7 million in cuts, his office said.

Since then the division’s 300 workers have been busy — notably with the Zika virus.

Dr. Lyle Petersen, director of the Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, said his team of scientists — from veterinarians and zoologists to physicians and molecular biologists — has gone into overdrive to combat the latest outbreak.

“This is our highest priority right now,” he said.

Petersen added the Division of Vector-Borne Diseases has paid special attention to the Zika virus since 2007, when it popped up on the small island of Yap, east of the Philippines.

“Our division mobilized and went out there and examined that outbreak,” he said.

Nine years later, the division is at the forefront of efforts to deal with the current spread of the Zika virus, and team members have been dispatched to the CDC’s emergency operations center in Atlanta.

The illness is especially worrisome to pregnant women, as scientists suspect a link between the virus and microcephaly, a birth defect in which babies are born with heads smaller than average.

“We’ve been working very extensively on this ever since this birth defect issue came about,” Petersen said.

But even as the Division of Vector-Borne Diseases works to combat the Zika virus, Petersen warned the future could be busier.

“What’s happening with all these mosquito-borne viruses is they are all increasing dramatically. And we have had to deal with more and more and more incoming infections that cause these giant outbreaks,” he said.

Mark K. Matthews: 202-662-8907, mmatthews @denverpost.com or @mkmatthews