No credible evidence on whether death penalty deters, experts say
Go ahead and stake out your opinion on whether a state's death-penalty law will deter future murderers.

But don't pretend that opinion is based on any remotely credible evidence, according to a consensus of criminologists, economists and other academics who have reviewed deterrence studies from both sides and officially declared them useless.

The National Academy of Sciences picked apart decades of deterrence research last year and recommended "that these studies not be used to inform deliberations" on capital punishment. In a blunt report, the academy's National Research Council noted it had made a similar survey 30 years before and was "disappointed" to learn each study since was equally futile.

Such pessimism, and accompanying admonitions to move on to other death-penalty topics, has not stopped statisticians from attempting proofs and rejections of deterrence.

The Death Penalty Information Center points to higher murder rates in states that have the death penalty as proof the sentencing threat does not deter crime. The gap grew in the 1990s, these opponents of executions say, to the point where death- penalty states currently have 35 percent more murders per capita than those who have abolished it.

If deterrence worked, how could Texas, which executes a dozen inmates a year, have a higher murder rate than Colorado, which has executed one murderer in more than four decades?

Advertisement

"There's no credible evidence of deterrence," concludes John Blume, a law professor with the Cornell Death Penalty Project.

Death-penalty proponents have all sorts of problems with that comparison. Maybe those states instituted the death penalty because they know they have more murders and want to stop them. How high would the murder rate have gone in those states if they didn't have executions?

"I can assure you, anyone in Texas who might kill somebody knows there is a death penalty in Texas," said John McAdams, a Marquette University political science professor who has reviewed deterrence studies.

"If the death penalty has a deterrent effect, and we fail to execute murderers, then we are allowing the murders of innocent victims," McAdams said. "If we do conduct the death penalty and it doesn't have a deterrent effect, all we are doing is killing murderers."

Deterrence will come up often after Gov. John Hickenlooper's call for a statewide debate on the death penalty, as he gave a temporary reprieve to death- row inmate Nathan Dunlap on May 22.

The father of one of Dunlap's victims brought up deterrence in his criticism of Hickenlooper's decision. The move will invite "all would-be murderers to come to Colorado," said Bob Crowell, whose daughter, Sylvia, was among four people Dunlap killed in an Aurora Chuck E. Cheese's restaurant in 1993.

University of Colorado at Boulder professor Michael Radelet surveyed 90 leading crime researchers around the nation in 2008, seeking their professional critique of deterrence evidence. Reflecting a previous 1990s study almost exactly, 88 percent of his respondents said they do not believe the death penalty is a deterrent to murder.

Those who say deterrence is impossible to sort out cite these main challenges:

• There's no way to tell if a murderer was aware of a state's death-penalty status when the crime was deliberated, or what impact the knowledge had.

• Studies have not tried to discern if the threat of life without parole makes an equal impression on potential murderers.

• Violent crime rates have fallen nationwide due to an aging population, tougher incarceration of criminals and other factors. Pinning the death penalty's share of that decline is fruitless.

• Many states have death-penalty laws but rarely if ever get to an execution, muddying the potential impact on criminal minds. Colorado has executed one prisoner since 1967 — in 1997.

A flurry of pro-deterrence study results landed in the past decade, largely from economists and statisticians who said they could filter crime rates for dozens of factors and still get conclusive answers.

A 2002 study said each execution prevented five to six murders, and pardons from death row led to more murders.

Soon after, Emory University researchers, including Paul Rubin, said that national sorting of crime rates showed each execution prevented 18 deaths.

A colleague of Rubin's did a later analysis saying the effect did not hold true in states like Colorado that go decades between executions. Infrequent executions can actually increase the murder rate in those states through a "brutalization effect," said Emory law school researcher Joanna Shepherd.

"However, if a state executes many people, then criminals become convinced the state is serious about the punishment, and the criminals start to reduce their criminal activity," Shepherd wrote.

"We don't look at the mind of the criminal," Rubin said. After allowing for differences between counties and states on race, poverty, age and other factors, the impact was real and measurable, he said.

The Emory study and others have looked at thousands of counties individually and calculated how soon after an execution the crime rate might have changed.

The main criticism of such studies is that executions are so rare, and skewed by just a few states like Texas conducting most of the executions, that the numbers are spread too thin to mean anything.

The New York Times pointed out that in 2003, with 16,000 homicides nationally, only 153 resulted in death sentences, and only 65 people were actually executed.

Two Pepperdine University professors made a quantitative analysis in 2007 that argued an even greater role for deterrence, saying each execution from 1979 to 2004 stopped 74 murders the next year.

Statistical nonsense, countered the National Academy of Sciences panel.

The only reliable study, the researchers said, would look at murders in one state that did have a death penalty, then look at the same state in the same time period with only life in prison as the top penalty — a geographic and chronologic impossibility. And they'd still have to dive inside the decision-making of the murderers and near-murderers who changed their minds — even less likely.

The high bar for reliable answers has put off even those once convinced deterrence was real.

Emory's Rubin said scholars raise so many doubts about statistical models in deterrence that it "may not be a fruitful area for more research."

Opponents of the death penalty believe they found a trump card against the idea of deterrence in a survey of 500 U.S. police chiefs. The Death Penalty Information Center asked chiefs to comment on a statement that the death penalty does not provide deterrence because criminals do not consider the consequences of their violence.

Fifty-seven percent of the police chiefs agreed.

Wyoming attorney Traci Lacock said she has seen the deterrence question both as an academic, working with Boulder's Radelet, and as a public defender. For her, deterrence issues became much simpler over time.

Her clients accused of violent crimes were coping with grinding poverty, mental-health issues and other challenges, Lacock said.

"Are you really going to be asking the question, 'Does my state have the death penalty or not?' when you are doing something horrific to another person," Lacock said. "Just basic common sense says no."

Michael Booth: 303-954-1686, mbooth@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mboothdp