Buck softens stance on abortion and "personhood"
As a Republican primary candidate, Ken Buck took absolutist positions on abortion and "personhood" — declaring that if elected to the U.S. Senate he would sponsor a constitutional amendment to ban abortion and backing a proposed state law that would outlaw some common forms of birth control.

Now, faced with televised attacks from incumbent Sen. Michael Bennet over those strident views, Buck is painstakingly trying to modify positions that may not match the beliefs of the unaffiliated moderates who will ultimately decide the contest.

Before the Republican caucuses, Buck answered a Christian family group's questionnaire and said he supported Amendment 62, the "Personhood Amendment," on the Colorado ballot.

Buck said Saturday through his campaign spokesman that he will now vote against the measure. In an earlier interview, he said he did not understand until recently that passage of the amendment would likely outlaw some common contraceptive methods, like the IUD or birth control pills that can reduce the chances of implantation for a fertilized egg.

"This isn't how I looked at the personhood amendment," Buck said. "I'm not in favor of banning common forms of birth control."

Coloradans overwhelmingly rejected — by almost 3 to 1 — a similar measure in 2008, which would have guaranteed constitutional protections to "any human being from the moment of conception."

Advertisement

No longer would Buck introduce a constitutional amendment to ban abortion — though he says he would still support one — and he now says he would be willing to vote to confirm even pro-choice judicial nominees.

Earlier this year, Buck answered another survey saying he would never confirm "pro-abortion" candidates for any government job, including judgeships. But last week, he drew a distinction between pro-choice and pro-abortion candidates, saying he would have no "litmus test" preventing pro-choice candidates from Senate confirmation.

"When I look at that word, pro-abortion, to me that doesn't mean pro-choice, that means someone who is an activist, someone trying to find ways to promote abortions," he said.

Cleta Jasper, a board member from the Pikes Peak Citizens for Life — which sent Buck the survey during the primary election season — defines "pro-abortion" as anyone who is pro-choice.

Is she disappointed Buck wouldn't use abortion as a litmus test now?

"Not enough to kick him in the shins," she said.

Buck's early staked-out positions — on abortion, privatizing Social Security, shuttering the federal Department of Education — during his long primary fight have blossomed into the most divisive issues in this election season.

Bennet calls the Weld County district attorney an extremist, and describes Buck's changing positions as disingenuous as he reaches out to moderate voters during the general election season.

"Either he's changed his mind on all these issues . . . or he doesn't believe the issues he believes in, that he ran on in the Republican primary, are acceptable to the vast majority of Coloradans," Bennet said. "I don't believe they are."

Though Buck believes social issues are important, he thinks voters would rather talk about jobs and the economy.

"I think people are focused on the economic issues right now," he said. "They're not focused on a pro-life candidate or a pro-choice candidate as much as they are, 'What are they going to do for me in these other areas.' "

But Bennet, who has always stated he is pro-choice and against the personhood measure, says these matters face senators in Washington, D.C., whether they like it or not.

He noted the health care reform debate hung up for weeks on how to keep federal insurance subsidies from supporting abortion.

Far from amending the U.S. Constitution to ban abortion outright, Bennet supports protecting the Constitution and the U.S. Supreme Court's interpretation of it in the Roe vs. Wade decision legalizing abortion across the nation.

"I always find it amazing that people who claim they are following the Constitution want to change it," Bennet said. "Especially on an issue as important to women and individual choices as this."

Bennet also supports federal funding for embryonic stem-cell research — controversial because it uses and destroys fertilized embryos. He said conservative Republicans often tell him on the campaign trail they also support such research because of its medical importance.

Buck has been consistent in his opposition to federal funding for embryonic stem-cell research. He has also maintained from the start of his candidacy that he believes abortion should be outlawed even in cases of rape or incest and allowed only in the rare cases where the life of the mother is in jeopardy. However, he now says abortion matters would not rank high on his list of priorities if elected to the Senate.

Independent political analyst Eric Sondermann said what Buck touted in the primary — particularly on prickly social issues, like personhood — could hurt him in the general election.

"We're seeing the difficulty of Buck being forced by the primary environment to not just be pro-life, but to be pro-life squared," Sondermann said. "When faced with what that means in the cold light of day, it's a tough position to maintain."

Staff writer Michael Booth contributed to this story. Allison Sherry: 303-954-1377 or asherry@denverpost.com