Compared with peers, Ohio is looking good
Ohio really picked a great time to pass a budget based on imaginary slot-machine revenue.

Amid the antics in other states, few people might even notice that we've decided to finance our vital services by inviting residents to try lining up three cherries.

The state of California has been reduced to issuing IOUs.

The governor of Alaska is quitting her job in a few days for reasons she can't coherently express.

South Carolina continues to be led by a man who walked off the job for five days to consort with his "soul mate" in Argentina.

Ohio really picked a great time to pass a budget based on imaginary slot-machine revenue.

Amid the antics in other states, few people might even notice that we've decided to finance our vital services by inviting residents to try lining up three cherries.

Thank goodness for the lunacy in other state capitols. It makes ours seem almost rational.

For a while there, New York couldn't agree on which party was in charge of its Senate. Illinois will spend years living down the Rod Blagojevich farce. If Texas were to secede from the Union (itsgovernor raised the possibility, remember?), I wouldn't be surprised.

Ohio? We're technically solvent, between scandals and showing no intent to declare independence from the United States. In this era, that makes us a model of sober-minded governance.

We didn't even make the top 10 when ABC News ranked the most-broke states in the Union. Given that the Ohio rainy-day fund had 89 cents in it at the time, that's either a testimony to the shoddy work of ABC News or a measure of just how bad the economies are in the states that made the cut. Let's go with the latter.

Now we see the wisdom of our stubborn resistance to slot machines all these years. New Jersey (one of the top 10) already had them and therefore couldn't pretend that their introduction would solve the state's budget woes. But Ohio could paper over its money shortages with slot-machine magic because we have never had slots and so are free to make up numbers as necessary.

This should serve us well for weeks, if not longer.

By the time our gambling delusions crumble into disappointment, as all gambling delusions do, I'm confident that some other state will have gone off the deep end in far more spectacular ways.

The conditions are ripe. In most states, the only thing that goes up faster than the demand for services is the resistance to tax increases. Combine that with the hubris and deviousness of politicians, and we're all but assured of wacky happenings throughout the nation.

Florida, hobbled by foreclosures and reliably batty, could descend into irrationality at any time. Arizona, where the budget crisis got so bad that the Republican governor sued the Republican-controlled Legislature, could explode in more silliness. New Jersey is always capable of acting like New Jersey.

And don't forget California.

Because of its dysfunctional constitution, that state is often said to be ungovernable. But that implies that some states are governable -- a proposition that I'm beginning to question. Perhaps we just have degrees of ungovernability.

In that case, the best we can say for Ohio might be that it's on the lower end of the scale. But I'd say the trend is definitely upward.

Joe Blundo is a Dispatch columnist.

jblundo@dispatch.com