Strickland touting auto bailout successes
Ted Strickland said he thinks Chrysler's repayment of government-backed loans will help President Barack Obama in Ohio in 2012 when he seeks re-election.

Ted Strickland said he thinks Chrysler's repayment of government-backed loans will help President Barack Obama in Ohio in 2012 when he seeks re-election.

Strickland, the former Democratic governor of Ohio, said Obama will fare well here despite the president's 49 percent approval rating in last week's Quinnipiac Poll.

"People are beginning to understand where we are today is because of decisions made by President Obama in the most trying of times," Strickland said during a conference call hosted by the Democratic National Committee to highlight Chrysler's payback of about $7.5 billion in U.S. and Canadian government loans.

Chrysler took $10.5 billion from the U.S. government to survive two years ago, and earlier had repaid some of the money. Yesterday, it retired a $5.9 billion balance on the U.S. loans and $1.7 billion to the governments of Canada and Ontario.

To pay off the governments, Chrysler raised $3.2 billion through a bond sale and took out $3 billion in lower-interest bank loans. It also will use a $1.3 billion investment from Italian automaker Fiat SpA, which kicked in the money yesterday. That raises Fiat's stake in Chrysler to 46 percent, making it the largest shareholder.

Strickland said Ohio added 6,000 automotive jobs from March 2010 through March 2011 and has enjoyed a declining unemployment rate for 14 consecutive months - in part because of a recovering auto industry.

Strickland also said the man who defeated him last fall, Republican Gov. John Kasich, "expressed negative attitudes toward the bailout."

Many Republicans voiced opposition to the loans, including current U.S. Sen. Rob Portman, whose spokesman said yesterday that Portman still thinks "the auto bailout was not a good deal for Ohio."

Kasich, in previous statements to media outlets circulated yesterday by national Democratic operatives, chided the government for taking a role in private auto companies. But he was more forceful in his repudiation of the 2009 federal stimulus package.

"Here's what I think about Chrysler," Kasich said when asked yesterday. "I'm glad that Bob Kidder is the chairman. I'm glad that he has ties to Ohio, and I want him to make more investment in our state, period."

Joining Strickland on the conference call were former Democratic Gov. Jennifer Granholm of Michigan and Bob King, president of the United Auto Workers. Both former governors said Republican presidential contenders, most notably former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, opposed the bailouts for both General Motors and Chrysler.

Information from the Associated Press was included in this story.

jvardon@dispatch.com