GOP legislators prepare bill to add hurdles to abortion in Ohio
A new, sweeping Republican bill aimed at reducing abortions in Ohio would require women to wait longer before having the procedure and force doctors to pass on debatable information that a fetus might feel pain and that the procedure increases the risk of breast cancer. So far, 35 House Republicans have signed on in support of the bill, which also subjects doctors who violate the new regulations to penalties of up to 10 years in prison and a $1 million fine.

A new, sweeping Republican bill aimed at reducing abortions in Ohio would require women to wait longer before having the procedure and force doctors to pass on debatable information that a fetus might feel pain and that the procedure increases the risk of breast cancer.

So far, 35 House Republicans have signed on in support of the bill, which also subjects doctors who violate the new regulations to penalties of up to 10 years in prison and a $1 million fine.

The bill drew criticism from Democrats and abortion-rights supporters such as Planned Parenthood of Greater Ohio, which sent an email headlined, "Ohio legislators continue to violate women."

Rep. Ron Hood, R-Ashville, said he drafted the bill based on talks with the National Pro-Life Alliance in an effort to reduce abortions by making women more aware of what they are agreeing to do.

"The purpose of this bill is to make sure a woman understands this isn't a decision to kill a lump of cells. It's a decision to kill a baby," Hood said, discussing requirements that a woman have an ultrasound before any abortion is performed and that the doctor relay certain information from those pictures.

While abortion remains legal in the United States, it has been made increasingly more difficult to get in recent years as opponents have won passage of numerous state restrictions.

"The purpose of these laws has always been to stack these restrictions one on top of the other ... so it is impossible for some women to get an abortion," said Jennifer Dalven, director of the American Civil Liberties Reproductive Freedom Project.

Abortion-rights opponents in Ohio are following a similar pile-on-the-restrictions playbook, said Kellie Copeland, executive director of NARAL Pro-Choice Ohio.

"In the budget, you have this bureaucratic bullying that will pressure some clinics into closing, and this bill looks to shame women and put up barriers if they want an abortion," she said.

Copeland said the Ohio proposal is riddled with problems, including the expansion of the time period, from 24 hours to 48 hours, before a woman can have an abortion. She said that will make it difficult for women who must drive long distances to one of Ohio's 12 abortion clinics, located in Columbus, Cleveland and other urban centers.

Current Ohio law says that Ohio doctors must give the woman the opportunity to view the ultrasound image, if one was made. Under the bill, the doctor must describe to the woman all "relevant features" of the ultrasound, including an audible heartbeat.

"The extent of the information in this bill seems designed to either shame a woman or to coerce her to make a different decision," said Celeste Ribbins, spokeswoman for Planned Parenthood of Greater Ohio.

Mike Gonidakis, president of Ohio Right to Life, sees it as a way to better inform women. "I don't know anyone who opposes a woman having all the information prior to making a medical decision, especially one that relates to life and death."

Under the bill, a doctor must describe the fetus's ability to feel pain, and tell the woman that an abortion increases her risk of breast cancer.

The American Cancer Society says: "scientific research studies have not found a cause-and-effect relationship between abortion and breast cancer." Studies about when a fetus can feel pain also vary - some researchers say it doesn't happen until around 28 weeks.

"I don't think these issues need to be stated as fact," Hood said. "I think they need to be stated that there is evidence out there that the possibility does exist."

The bill has caught the attention of the Ohio State Medical Association, which "recognizes the huge impact this bill could potentially have on physicians," said spokesman Reginald Fields, adding that the group still is analyzing the proposal.

The bill also requires that a doctor disclose how much he or the facility makes in a year from abortions and the potential loss of money if the woman decides against having one.

"We know it's a cash cow and it preys upon women in a very weak hour for them," Hood said. "The financial gain from these abortions is an issue that should be brought to the forefront."

jsiegel@dispatch.com

@phrontpage

ccandisky@dispatch.com

@ccandisky