Medicaid expansion covers nearly 500,000 Ohioans for mental health, drug treatment
Nearly 500,000 low-income Ohio adults, most of them uninsured, received mental health and addiction services under the state's hard-fought Medicaid expansion. About 100,000 of the new beneficiaries have severe mental illnesses, including psychosis, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. And many of the rest are battling drug addiction.

Nearly 500,000 low-income Ohio adults, most of them uninsured, received mental health and addiction services under the state's hard-fought Medicaid expansion.

About 100,000 of the new beneficiaries have severe mental illnesses, including psychosis, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.

And many of the rest are battling drug addiction.

The Medicaid expansion - pushed through by Gov. John Kasich despite strenuous opposition from the Republican legislature - has brought 954,887 onto the rolls (not all at the same time) since the program began Jan. 1, 2014; just over 50 percent were treated for mental health and drug addiction problems, and more than 1 in 10 were diagnosed with severe mental illness.

"At a basic level of justice, there is something really wrong if this group of people doesn't have regular access to some sort of rational form of coverage," said Greg Moody, director of Kasich's Office of Health Transformation.

Although not all care providers are entirely satisfied with the new wave of services, most see it as a positive step.

"It has helped 100,000 people who had severe and persistent mental illness. That's really a big number," said Cheri Walter, CEO of the Ohio Association of County Behavioral Health Authorities. "We want to make sure no one falls through the cracks."

State officials said nearly all of the 481,903 newly enrolled Medicaid clients with behavioral health or addiction issues had been uninsured before gaining coverage through the tax-funded health care program for the poor and disabled. Some received limited services through community-based programs but many were not getting treated.

Through Medicaid, they were able to get inpatient or outpatient treatment and medication.

Ohio's heroin crisis spurred a "huge outpouring" of people in the addiction area, Moody said. The governor and administration felt it was not just an option, but an "imperative to act" to get help for people struggling with untreated mental health and addiction issues.

Terry Russell, executive director of National Alliance on Mental Illness Ohio, said Medicaid expansion gave many people access to care for the first time in their lives.

"So many people were not getting their mental health needs met, and equally important, they were not getting physical health care. And the addicted had no place to go. There wasn't a treatment system," Russell said. "It's amazing how many more people are being seen."

Medicaid expansion, part of an ongoing redesign of the state's behavioral health system, has been the biggest change since moving away from institutionalization in the 1980s when the state began shuttering mental hospitals and transferring patients back to local communities to be served, Moody said. But money set aside for community programs dried up, partially in line with budget cuts during the four years of the Strickland administration.

"The system was on its knees," Moody said of 2011 when Kasich took office.

Expanded eligibility extended benefits to those ages 18 to 64 without dependent children who earned up to 138 percent of poverty, or $16,243 a year. Currently, expansion enrollment is 678,850 as individuals are continually coming on and off the program.

Moody said Medicaid expansion is part of multi-prong redesign of Ohio's behavioral-health system designed to sustain services. Beneficiaries needing treatment for mental health or addiction services represent 27 percent of Medicaid enrollment but account for 47 percent of spending.

Health care costs of those newly eligible through expansion are paid 100 percent by the federal government through 2016, and 95 percent in 2017, scaling down to 90 percent by 2020. The balance will be paid by states.

To better control costs, the Kasich administration also is updating billing codes used by health care providers and then moving those receiving behavioral health services into private-sector managed care plans starting in 2018. The hope is that better care coordination will improve treatment and control costs.

Both initiatives have created some angst.

Russell said the administration has been very open and inclusive about its plans, "but anytime there is a massive change we have to make sure no one falls through the cracks."

Hubert Wirtz, executive director of the Ohio Council of Behavioral Health & Family Service Providers, representing 150 community providers affected by new billing requirements and increased demand for services, said "the most positive impact is people being able to obtain treatment. That's a big, big win," especially for single adults seeking drug treatment.

The demand was so large some providers had to add treatment staff - which is a good thing, Wirtz added.

At the request of Republican legislators, Ohio also recently asked federal regulators to approve a plan requiring Medicaid beneficiaries to contribute to health savings accounts, but the request is not expected to be approved.

ccandisky@dispatch.com

@ccandisky

ajohnson@dispatch.com

@ohioaj