Ohio purge of voter rolls gets Supreme Court scrutiny this week
WASHINGTON — To the state of Ohio, it is nothing more than a housekeeping device to keep the voting rolls up to date. To opponents, it is a system that deprives legal voters the right to cast a ballot in a federal election.

With oral arguments scheduled Wednesday, the U.S. Supreme Court will have to decide whether Ohio has been too zealous in trying to keep its voter rolls up-to-date and make certain those rolls do not include people who have left the state or died.

And while the dispute between Ohio and the American Civil Liberties Union probably does not rise to the level of a landmark case, if the justices strike down Ohio’s system — the decision is expected this spring — then more than a dozen other states will have to revise their election laws.

At stake is one small part of Ohio’s law: If a person skips voting in a federal election over a two-year period, that sets in motion a legal process that could eventually lead them to being removed from the voter rolls.

“This is a way that demonstrably kicks people off the voter rolls when the only thing they are guilty of is not having voted in a recent election,” said Richard Saphire, a professor emeritus of law at the University of Dayton who helped write the ACLU’s legal papers.

“And that’s not a reason to disqualify people from voting in the future.”

Michael A. Carvin, an attorney in the Washington, D.C., office of the Cleveland law firm Jones, Day who has filed legal papers defending Ohio’s system, said that “you can’t knock somebody off the voter rolls solely for failure to vote. Obviously, that’s not remotely what Ohio does.”

Not voting in any election in two years triggers a notice from the registered voter's county board of elections to check if they still live there. If they don't reply, they get a variety of mailings over the ensuing four years, such as request for absentee ballots, a change of address card, notice on polling sites.

If the voter responds to any of those notices — or votes even once during that four years — they remain registered. If elections officials don't hear from a voter in the six-year period — no votes, no response to mailings — their name is purged from the list of eligible voters. The voter can register again to regain eligibility.

The procedure has been the same for years, under both GOP and Democratic secretaries of state.

Ohio Secretary of State Jon Husted plans to attend the hearing.

That the high court is considering the case is something of a surprise to legal analysts. A three-judge panel of the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in 2016 ruled the Ohio system violated federal laws approved by Congress in 1993 and 2002.

Because there was no disagreement among different federal appellate courts, there seemed little reason the justices would take the case.

But after Republican Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine and Husted appealed to the high court, the justices decided last May to hear the case. Because it takes four justices to agree to take a case, the move suggests those four might be sympathetic to Ohio's case.

There is an element of politics as well. DeWine and Husted have formed a ticket for governor and lieutenant governor in this year’s Republican primary.

In papers filed with the court, DeWine’s office said the “failure to respond to a notice, not a failure to vote, is the sole proximate cause” for a voter being removed from the registration rolls.

But the Ohio ACLU argues Ohio’s system turns individual voting decisions on their head. People have the right, Saphire said, not to vote, particularly if they do not like the candidates offered by the major parties.

“Something like 50 percent of people don’t vote in off-year elections,” Saphire said. “What the state can do is use my non-voting as an assumption that I no longer live in the state.”

“It turns out that system is purging lots and lots of people who are fully qualified to vote, (and) who have registered to vote,” Saphire said.

In the 2016 elections, the ACLU determined that roughly 7,500 people in Ohio showed up to vote only to discover that they had been purged. And while those 7,500 voters would not have been enough to tip the presidential election from President Donald Trump to Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, scores of Ohio elections have been decided by a handful of votes.

Ezra Rosenberg, co-director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law in Washington, said Ohio’s system has a disproportionate impact among minority voters “because studies show minority populations are more likely to have a history of not voting.”

Just last week, Husted said that 29 elections were decided by a single vote or tied during last November's elections, including 25 local candidate races and four local issue campaigns.

“When we say ‘one vote matters,’ it’s not just a saying — it has proven true 141 times in Ohio over the last five years,” Husted said in a statement. “Last November’s election was another reminder why eligible voters need to be active participants in the democratic process.”

jtorry@dispatch.com

@jacktorry1