Democrats tussle over ECOT campaign money, but GOP got far more
As Ohio's big bet on a big online charter school fizzles, candidates are pointing fingers over the $2.1 million in campaign money the school's operator has doled out during the past two decades.

On Tuesday, one of the Democratic campaigns for governor sniped at another over relatively small contributions from people associated with the Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow. Meanwhile, statewide Republican candidates who took vastly larger contributions were largely mum when asked whether they would return them now that the school has imploded amid scandal and massive debt.

Unable to repay nearly all of the $80 million the state says ECOT over-billed it, the school was forced to shut down last Thursday, leaving its 12,000 students scrambling to find a new educational home.

That led Richard Cordray, a Democratic candidate for governor and former director of the U.S. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, to wax Biblical on Twitter Monday.

"On the ECOT scandal: 'Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven,'" he wrote, quoting from Jesus' Sermon on the Mount. "'Then next in Matthew: 'For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.'"

On the ECOT scandal: “Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven.” Then next in Matthew: “For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.”

— Rich Cordray (@RichCordray) January 22, 2018

He went on to say there was reason to know of problems with ECOT from the very beginning in 2001.

"Details in Dispatch story on ECOT are startling," Cordray tweeted. "It was a fraud from the start: in its first year it reported 2,270 students, but records show only SEVEN logged on to any school computer systems. Not 70, not 700. Just 7. They got a slap on the wrist and kept right on going."

Details in Dispatch story on ECOT are startling. It was a fraud from the start: in its first year it reported 2,270 students, but records show only SEVEN logged on to any school computer systems. Not 70, not 700. Just 7. They got a slap on the wrist and kept right on going.

— Rich Cordray (@RichCordray) January 22, 2018

But Stephanie Dodd, a Democratic member of the Ohio Board of Education and lieutenant governor candidate on a ticket with Ohio Sen. Joe Schiavoni, had a Bible lesson of her own.

"Spare us the sermon, Rich. You took Bill Lager's money in 2006 and money from #ECOT's COO in 2008," she tweeted, then cited Jesus' words in the very next chapter: “'For in the way you judge, you will be judged; and by your standard of measure, it will be measured to you,' Matthew 7:2."

Spare us the sermon, Rich. You took Bill Lager's money in 2006 and money from #ECOT's COO in 2008.

“For in the way you judge, you will be judged; and by your standard of measure, it will be measured to you.” Matthew 7:2 https://t.co/6Ts2YQvHfp

— Stephanie Dodd (@StephanieDodd) January 23, 2018

The contributions Cordray took were relatively small — $500 in 2006, when he was running for Ohio treasurer and $100 when he was running for state attorney general. His campaign said Cordray's record proves he's against organizations such as ECOT.

“Rich has spent his entire career fighting for people who were ripped off by special interests, which is why President (Barack) Obama entrusted him to take on fraudsters like ECOT as the first director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau," campaign spokesman Mike Gwin said in an email. "Democrats across the state want this primary campaign to be about a candidate's vision and a comparison of accomplishments, not petty attacks - that's how we win in November."

As Democrats take shots at each other, officials on Republican gubernatorial tickets aren't saying much about far-bigger ECOT-linked contributions.

Attorney General Mike DeWine has received more than $12,000 and his running mate, Secretary of State Jon Husted, got $28,500. Husted was speaker of the Ohio House when key charter school legislation passed.

A campaign spokesman declined to say whether any of the contributions linked to ECOT would be surrendered.

“The DeWine Husted campaign supports school choice," said spokesman Ryan Stubenrauch, campaign press secretary. "Every school in Ohio has to prepare kids for the real-world economy while meeting Ohio standards and regulations. We are concerned about the 12,000 students who attend ECOT and hope that all of its students are able to find alternative schools to fit their needs, especially the seniors who are close to graduation.”

Another GOP candidate for governor, Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor, received $22,500 and her campaign also did not respond to questions.

A spokesman for term-limited GOP Gov. John Kasich, who received $30,000 in ECOT-related contributions, said Kasich would give up nothing.

"No contributions will be returned," Chris Schrimpf said in an email. "The only thing that donors ever get from the governor is good government."

Ohio Auditor Dave Yost is seeking the GOP nomination for attorney general. In 2015 he supported legislation to make Ohio's ballooning charter-school sector more accountable and he's called for a crackdown on ECOT since.

Before that, however, Yost received almost $24,000 from ECOT-related sources, spoke at the school's graduation and gave them an auditor's award. But his political director, Amy Natoce, said ECOT founder Bill Lager got only grief in return for his contributions to Yost.

“Anyone that donates to Dave Yost invests in good government, and that is exactly what Yost has delivered by holding ECOT accountable," Natoce said in an email. "Lager’s donations — which account for less than one half of one percent of all contributions Yost has received — are now costing him millions thanks to Yost’s vigilance. Dave Yost always puts Ohioans first and is focused on recouping the money ECOT owes the state, and making sure ECOT’s students find a new school where they can succeed.”

Ohio Rep. Keith Faber, a GOP candidate for auditor, said he is still evaluating whether to return the $34,000 he's received from ECOT-related sources.

"We haven't reached any conclusions yet," he said, adding that the contributions were from years ago.

"It's important to remember that (ECOT founder) Bill Lager hasn't been happy with me for a long time. When I was president of the Senate we passed the charter school accountability measures that ended with ECOT being shut down."

Ohio Sen. Frank LaRose, R-Hudson, is running for secretary of state. In 2012 he received a $5,000 contribution from Lager, according to records at the secretary of state's office. In a text message Tuesday, LaRose said he was traveling and would have to check his records.

Top Recipients of ECOT Contributions

Infogram

mschladen@dispatch.com

@martyschladen