ECOT superintendent who predicted 'death spiral' to resign
The superintendent of online charter school giant ECOT announced Friday that he will resign next month, after he warned that the school could face a "death spiral" if the state forces it to pay back more than $60 million.

Rick Teeters, 54, is leaving the embattled Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow to spend more time with his family, a spokesman said. The move comes less than two months after the Ohio Board of Education ordered ECOT to repay millions of dollars for students it couldn't prove attended classes, a move Teeters has said would result in closing the school.

Teeters owns property in Florida, has been in the field for three decades and wasn't forced out, ECOT spokesman and lobbyist Neil Clark said. "It clearly is about his own family."

Asked whether Teeters' departure was a surprise to the organization, Clark said, "I think that they were always aware that he was going to be retiring soon."

Teeters didn't return a telephone call to his office seeking comment. Brittny Pierson, ECOT deputy superintendent and chief of staff, will replace Teeters, who has been superintendent for almost four years.

Last fall, Teeters testified in court that the repayment the state was demanding, even if it were repaid over time, would put ECOT in a "death spiral." And that was just for one school year, 2015-16. Another Department of Education audit, for 2016-17, could result in another huge clawback unless the online school can show that each student participated for the required 920 hours per year to get full state funding.

Education Department spokeswoman Brittany Halpin said Friday that no clawback figure for 2016-17 has been given to ECOT.

ECOT is a taxpayer-funded, public school, but it contracts out services to private firms owned by ECOT's founder, William Lager, one of the largest contributors to the Ohio Republican Party.

Teeters testified in court last fall that, when he came to ECOT in October 2013, he questioned the lack of student-participation logs and was told by Scott Kern, the head of Altair Learning Management, Lager's company, that they weren't necessary because a funding agreement with the state didn't require them.

A series of court rulings has refuted that.

Teeters also testified that he persuaded state Auditor Dave Yost's office to not request log-in durations during a special examination of the school in 2014, instead providing certifications from teachers on the number of hours that students were participating. For years, the state accepted ECOT's word that students were attending classes and provided state funding under an agreement the courts ruled was no longer enforceable.

Kathy Ferguson, ECOT general counsel, wasn't able to provide Teeters' salary on Friday.

bbush@dispatch.com

@ReporterBush