DeWine defends ECOT strategy; Democrats criticize moves
Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine says that critics slamming his office for not moving faster against ECOT while millions of tax dollars flowed out the door to its founder "don't know what they're talking about."

A strident DeWine, the Republican candidate for governor, defended himself and his office's actions Friday amid sniping by Democrats that he long ignored the scandal surrounding the Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow.

“I will use every tool I have in the law to go after this money, to go after Lager personally and other individuals who have been involved in this. I am doing it now. I will continue to do it," DeWine said.

DeWine's office said Thursday that it found legal precedent to assert claims to recover hundreds of millions of dollars from Lager, after a March ruling from a Hamilton County trial-court judge in a case involving a closed Cincinnati charter school.

The judge, in the first ruling of its kind, said that the attorney general's office had standing to pursue claims of unlawful interest in a public contract and engaging in a pattern of corrupt practices, which DeWine's office signaled Tuesday it would pursue against Lager, who operated two companies to which ECOT channeled about $200 million for management and software services.

Ohio Democratic Chairman David Pepper and other Democrats were dismissive of DeWine's statement that his office could not act until it obtained a trial-court ruling, now under appeal, that they said was of dubious value as legal precedent. DeWine is facing Democrat Richard Cordray for the governor's office.

"The biggest scandal in the history of Ohio and @MikeDeWine, who has cracked down on everything from online dating scams to NBA tickets, now claims that he was utterly powerless to do anything til this week," Pepper wrote in a tweet.

DeWine fired back, “The people who are being critical, the politicians who are being critical of this, don’t know what they are talking about in regard to the law. We have been very aggressive on this and we have moved when we legally could move.

“The one thing you learn early on in law school is you have to do it right. You can’t make stuff up. You follow the law, you use the tools you have in the law and that is what we are doing and we are doing it very aggressively," he said.

ECOT, the state's largest online, for-profit charter school, closed in January amid money woes and the loss of its sponsor. The Ohio Department of Education, in a case on appeal to the Ohio Supreme Court, ruled that ECOT artificially inflated its attendance to improperly pocket $80 million in state aid.

DeWine is asking a judge for permission to seek the recovery of funds from Lager. Auditor David Yost, suspecting fraud, has asked Franklin County Prosecutor Ron O'Brien and the U.S. attorney's office to determine whether crimes occurred.

The case that DeWine cites as setting the stage for his pending move against Lager involves the Value Learning & Teaching Academy, which operated in Cincinnati from 2005 until the charter school lost its sponsor in 2014 and closed. Though not accompanied by a finding for recovery from a state audit, Auditor Dave Yost asked DeWine's office to pursue claims against the school's leaders.

It was established that the school had nearly $1.9 million in janitorial contracts with a company owned by the superintendent's husband. She had access to the company's bank accounts and cash, which the judge found constituted an unlawful interest in a public contract.

Hamilton County Common Pleas Court Judge Steven Martin also ruled that the superintendent and her husband, because of breaching their fiduciary duty to the school, should forfeit $1.2 million in combined compensation.

Martin found that the couple had violated Ohio's Corrupt Practices Act and awarded accompanying triple damages to the state totaling $6.1 million from the superintendent and $5.4 million from her husband.

rludlow@dispatch.com

@RandyLudlow