Directional and informational signs
Alert: The following services will be unavailable on Saturday, January 5, 2013 from 12 a.m. (midnight) to 6 a.m. CST due to system maintenance.

Directional and informational signs

Specific informational signs | Tourist oriented directional signs

The SIS logo program is designed to direct motorists to services located up to five miles from Interstate highways, freeways, and conventional highways designated by the legislature as of May 8, 1990 as Specific Information Sign (SIS) highways. The program is designed to be self funded without any state or federal support.

SIS may only include the following categories of motorist services AND meet the following standards for the respective category.

Gasoline

Must have vehicle services including fuel, oil and water. Provide restroom facilities and drinking water. Be in continuous operation for at least 16 hours a day, seven days per week for freeways and expressways. Be in continuous operation for at least 12 hours a day, seven days per week for other highways, provided automotive fuel is available under the emergency fuel allocation program and provide a public telephone.

Must have vehicle services including fuel, oil and water. Provide restroom facilities and drinking water. Be in continuous operation for at least 16 hours a day, seven days per week for freeways and expressways. Be in continuous operation for at least 12 hours a day, seven days per week for other highways, provided automotive fuel is available under the emergency fuel allocation program and provide a public telephone. Food

Must have licensing or approval where required. Regular operation at least five days a week, opening for service no later than 10 a.m. and remaining open until at least 7 p.m. Also 50 percent of the gross receipts are from meal, food, food product and beverage sales and a public telephone.

Must have licensing or approval where required. Regular operation at least five days a week, opening for service no later than 10 a.m. and remaining open until at least 7 p.m. Also 50 percent of the gross receipts are from meal, food, food product and beverage sales and a public telephone. Lodging

Must have licensing or approval where required. Adequate sleeping accommodations and public telephone.

Must have licensing or approval where required. Adequate sleeping accommodations and public telephone. Camping

Must have licensing or approval where required. Adequate parking accommodations, and modern sanitary facilities and drinking water.

Must have licensing or approval where required. Adequate parking accommodations, and modern sanitary facilities and drinking water. Attractions

Must have the primary purpose of providing amusement, historical, cultural or leisure activities to the public. Be of regional significance and provide adequate parking to accommodate normal traffic volumes for the facility. Not be identified on any supplemental signing or guidance sign on the same route as the specific information sign and comply with the laws concerning the provisions of public accommodations without regard to race, color, age, sex, or national origin, and laws concerning the licensing and approval of service facilities. The SIS Program Advisory Council reviews applications under the "Attractions" category.

Must have the primary purpose of providing amusement, historical, cultural or leisure activities to the public. Be of regional significance and provide adequate parking to accommodate normal traffic volumes for the facility. Not be identified on any supplemental signing or guidance sign on the same route as the specific information sign and comply with the laws concerning the provisions of public accommodations without regard to race, color, age, sex, or national origin, and laws concerning the licensing and approval of service facilities. The SIS Program Advisory Council reviews applications under the "Attractions" category. Send completed application form (note - This file is in Adobe Acrobat version 7) to:

Interstate logos - Wisconsin

4918 Triangle St.

McFarland, WI 53558

(844) 496-9163

to: Interstate logos - Wisconsin 4918 Triangle St. McFarland, WI 53558 (844) 496-9163 Map of SIS highways in Wisconsin

To qualify for display of gas, food, lodging, camping or attraction, on a SIS, OR to find out more info.:

Call (844) 496-9163

Visit www.wisconsin.interstatelogos.com

TODS provide motorists with directional information for qualifying tourist-related businesses, services or activities.

Qualifying businesses

Tourist-related businesses, whose major portion of income or visitors is derived from visitors who do not reside in the immediate area where the business is located, qualify for TODS. The business cannot have direct access to a state or U.S. highway, but must be located within five miles of a state or U.S. highway.

Businesses qualify for TODS in five categories:

Gasoline

Must be open at least 12 hours per day, seven days per week and provide restrooms, drinking water and a public telephone.

Must be open at least 12 hours per day, seven days per week and provide restrooms, drinking water and a public telephone. Food

Must be open five days per week from at least 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. and have at least 50 percent of gross receipts from food and non-alcoholic beverages.

Must be open five days per week from at least 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. and have at least 50 percent of gross receipts from food and non-alcoholic beverages. Lodging

Includes hotels, motels, resorts, boarding houses or bed & breakfast establishments. Must have parking accommodations.

Includes hotels, motels, resorts, boarding houses or bed & breakfast establishments. Must have parking accommodations. Camping

Must provide restrooms, drinking water and a public telephone.

Must provide restrooms, drinking water and a public telephone. Tourist attraction

Must be open at least eight hours per day, five days per week for at least three consecutive months and provide restrooms and drinking water. The attraction must also be of significant interest to the traveling public (shops, amusement parks, etc.).

TODS prohibited in some cases

Some urban areas prohibit TODS. Contact your county highway department.

Highways designated as Specific Information Sign (SIS) highways (most freeways and expressways) prohibit TODS.

For more information on SIS, call Interstate logos - Wisconsin (614) 332-4709 .

. Businesses with illegal outdoor advertising signs cannot have a TODS sign.

Costs

The TODS program is self-funded. No state or federal funds support the program. All administration, manufacturing and installation costs are paid by applicants.

The TODS sign life is estimated to be 10 years, but fees are collected for a 5-year duration. Total estimated costs over the 10-year period are around $550 Ė thatís $55 per year or about one dollar per week for each sign.

Estimated costs over 10 years:

Administration fee $100/sign ($20 per year fee)

Sign cost $100/sign (Fees vary based on size)

Installation fee $250/sign

Total estimated cost $550/sign

To obtain a TODS

Contact the county highway department in which the sign will be located to obtain a TODS application. Complete the application and attach a check for $100 payable to the county (this is the administration fee for a 5-year period). If you donít qualify for the program, or there isnít room for a TODS at the desired location, the check will be returned. Businesses that qualify for a TODS will receive a list of qualified TODS sign manufacturers. Contact as many manufacturers as you wish to get the best price. Bring the sign to the county highway department with a check for $250 payable to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation (this is the installation fee). The county highway department will install the sign.

For more info. on TODS, contact:

Jeannie Dammen

Wisconsin Department of Transportation

Bureau of Traffic Operations

(608) 246-5408

jeannie.dammen@dot.wi.gov

Return to top