Denny Roy's work has focused mostly on Asia Pacific security issues, particularly those involving China. Recently Roy has written on Chinese foreign policy, the North Korea nuclear weapons crisis, China-Japan relations, and China-Taiwan relations. His interests include not only traditional military-strategic matters and foreign policy, but also international relations theory and human rights politics.



Before joining the East-West Center in 2007, Roy worked at the Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies in Honolulu for seven years, rising to the rank of Professor after starting as a Research Fellow. In 1998--2000 Roy was a faculty member in the National Security Affairs Department at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California. There he taught courses on China, Asian history, and Southeast Asian politics. He also designed and taught an innovative course titled Human Rights and National Security in Asia.



From 1995 to 1998, Roy was a Research Fellow with the Strategic and Defence Studies Centre at the Australian National University in Canberra, where he studied and wrote on Northeast Asian security issues. He also participated in educational activities with the Australian armed forces and the Australian College of Defence and Security Studies. In January and February 1997 Roy was attached to the Singapore Armed Forces Training Institute as coordinator for Singaporean students enrolled in the SDSC's M.A. program.



From 1990 to 1995, Roy held faculty appointments in the Political Science Departments of the National University of Singapore (Lecturer) and Brigham Young University (Assistant Professor), teaching courses on international relations and Asian politics.



Roy has five years of work and residency experience in Taiwan, Korea and Singapore. He has made presentations at academic conferences in China, Thailand, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, Japan, Australia and the USA. He is conversant in Mandarin Chinese and fulfilled his graduate school foreign language qualification in Korean.

Roy is the author of Return of the Dragon: Rising China and Regional Security (Columbia University Press, 2013), The Pacific War and its Political Legacies (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2009), Taiwan: A Political History (Cornell University Press, 2003), and China's Foreign Relations (Macmillan and Rowman & Littlefield, 1998), co-author of The Politics of Human Rights in Asia (Pluto Press, 2000) and editor of The New Security Agenda in the Asia-Pacific Region (Macmillan, 1997). He has also written many articles for scholarly journals such as International Security, Survival, Asian Survey, Security Dialogue, Contemporary Southeast Asia, Armed Forces & Society, and Issues & Studies.



Publications



Books

The North Korea Crisis and Regional Responses, (co-editor with Utpal Vyas and Ching-Chang Chen), (Honolulu: East-West Center, 2015).

Return of the Dragon: Rising China and Regional Security (Columbia University Press, 2013).

The Pacific War and its Political Legacies (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2009).



Taiwan: A Political History (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2003). Published in Chinese as Taiwan Zhengzhi Shi (Taipei, Taiwan: Commercial Press, 2004).



The Politics of Human Rights in Asia (co-author with Kenneth Christie), (London: Pluto Press, 2000).



China's Foreign Relations (London: Macmillan Press, 1998).



The New Security Agenda in the Asia-Pacific Region (editor), (London: Macmillan Press, 1997).



A Time to Kill: Reflections on War (co-editor with Grant Skabelund and Ray Hillam), (Salt Lake City, UT: Signature Books, 1990 and 1992).





Selected Journal Articles



"Parsing Pyongyang's Strategy," Survival, February-March 2010.



"China's Democratised Foreign Policy," Survival, April-May 2009.



"Taiwan Perilously Ponders its Strategic Missile Force," China Brief, Jamestown Foundation, Oct. 4, 2006.



"The Sources and Limits of Sino-Japanese Tensions," Survival, Summer 2005.