CH4 summary: Howarth Lab
Some commonly asked questions:

Aren’t carbon dioxide emissions less for natural gas than for coal? Yes, substantially so. But methane emissions are far greater from natural gas, particularly from shale gas. When methane is included, total greenhouse gas emissions are greater from natural gas than from coal, particularly when analyzed on a 20-year period following emission.

I've heard that methane is 21-times more powerful as a greenhouse gas than is carbon dioxide. Is that true? No, that is based on a 20-year old report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 1995. In 2013, the IPCC stated that methane is more than 100-times more powerful for the first decade after emission, 86-times over a 20-year period, and 34-times over 100 years. The shorter time periods are the most appropriate to use, given the urgency of slowing global warming over the coming 10 to 20 years.

Why are emissions so great from shale gas, and are shale gas emissions high in Europe as well as the US? The shale gas revolution in the US began only in the past decade, mostly since 2009. As a result, scientific study of emissions is new and as such estimates are somewhat uncertain. But increasingly, many studies show methane emissions that are far greater than from conventional natural gas. One reason is release during drilling in older gas & oil fields and coal mines that often overlay the deeper shale gas reserves. To date, there has been virtually no shale gas development in Europe or anywhere outside North America.

Don't some studies show low methane emissions? The past 5 years have seen an explosion of new studies on methane emissions, with a wide range of results. Studies with some of the lowest emissions estimates are probably flawed, though, because of misuse of measurement equipment. Longer term, larger scale observations from monitoring networks and satellites provide the most robust estimates, and indicate high emissions.

Can regulation reduce methane emissions to an acceptable level? Methane emissions come from many sources, from the well site to delivery through pipelines to final customers. Many of these remain poorly characterized. Reducing emissions is expensive, and enforcement of regulations is difficult. Society is better off moving away from natural gas, and particularly shale gas.

If natural gas is not a bridge fuel, should we burn coal instead? No. It is past time to move away from all fossil fuels, and embrace the renewable energy technologies of the 21st Century.

Aren’t cows more important as a source of methane than the natural gas industry? Both animal agriculture and the oil & gas industry are big emitters, but the most recent research indicates fossil fuel sources are larger, and that recent increases in global methane are driven by fossil fuels, particularly natural gas.

Visit our website for more information.