Sen. Cruz's schedule for El Paso visit Thursday, Friday
CLOSE U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz was in El Paso on Friday to talk with business leaders Rudy Gutierrez/El Paso Times

Buy Photo U.S. Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, shown at his last visit to El Paso in June, plans a series of events in the city Thursday and Friday. (Photo: RUDY GUTIERREZ / EL PASO TIMES)Buy Photo

Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, will visit El Paso businesses, meet with Border Patrol agents and talk about military issues during his visit to El Paso Thursday and Friday, his office announced.

El Paso is the latest stop on Cruz's "Ted Works for Texas" tour of the state and marks his third visit to the city this year.

In a news release, Cruz's office said he plans to discuss job creation, economic growth, tax reform, regulatory reform, the efforts to repeal and replace Obamacare, NAFTA renegotiations and improving trade relations, agriculture, border security, and infrastructure during his meetings with El Pasoans.

More: Sen. Ted Cruz to visit El Paso this week, meet with Border Patrol

The National Border Patrol Council sent out this flyer promoting a meeting between its members and U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas. (Photo: Courtesy)

The senator will begin his El Paso visit at 9:30 a.m. Thursday with an executive round table discussion, tour and employee town hall at Plastic Molding Technology, and East Side manufacturing company.

He'll have an 11:30 a.m. round table lunch discussion with the Texas Pecan Growers, followed by a 1:30 p.m. meeting with officials from the El Paso Border Patrol Sector.

At 6 p.m. he'll have a town hall meeting with the National Border Patrol Council Local 129, which also will include national union president Brandon Judd.

A group of El Pasoans said on Facebook they plan to protest Cruz during his town hall meeting with the Border Patrol union.

More: Beto O'Rourke raises $2.1 million, more than incumbent Ted Cruz

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-351-1677. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

O'Rourke will challenge Cruz for Senate in 2018

On Friday, Cruz will tour El Paso's Lucchese Boots plant at 10:30 a.m., then conclude his visit at a 12:30 p.m. meeting with the Greater El Paso Chamber of Commerce's military affairs committee.

Cruz was elected to the Senate in 2012, and is up for re-election next year.

Rep. Beto O'Rourke, D-El Paso, is challenging Cruz.

Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, is shown during a June visit to El Paso. He will visit the city Thursday and Friday. (Photo: RUDY GUTIERREZ/EL PASO TIMES FILE)

Read or Share this story: http://www.elpasotimes.com/story/news/politics/2017/08/23/sen-cruzs-schedule-el-paso-visit-thursday-friday/595215001/