EMILY’s List Blasts Kelly Ayotte for Opposing Equal Pay for Women
WASHINGTON, D.C. – Today EMILY’s List, the nation’s largest resource for women in politics, denounced Senator Kelly Ayotte for refusing to end gender discrimination in pay. April 12, 2016 is Equal Pay Day, the date that symbolizes how far into the year women must work to earn what men have earned in the previous year for the same work. This year August 23 is African American women’s Equal Pay Day, September 14 is Native American women’s Equal Pay Day, and November 1 is Latinas’ Equal Pay Day.

“Time and again Kelly Ayotte has blocked opportunities to end gender discrimination in pay and New Hampshire women need better. This is a problem that hardworking New Hampshire women and families can't afford to ignore," said EMILY’s List Communications Director Marcy Stech. “Kelly Ayotte has joined with Donald Trump, Ted Cruz, and the rest of the Republican Party to unite around an agenda that is deeply out of touch.”

“She just doesn’t understand the challenges faced by New Hampshire women and families. It’s time to elect someone who does.”

Ayotte Voted Against the Paycheck Fairness Act. In June 2012, Ayotte voted against a procedural vote to move forward with S. 3220, Paycheck Fairness Act, a bill that would amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (also known as the Equal Pay Act), “to revise remedies for, enforcement of, and exceptions to prohibitions against sex discrimination in the payment of wages.” The Paycheck Fairness Act would require a clarification in reasons for differences in wages paid to men and women doing the same work. The motion was rejected 52-47. [S. 3220, Vote #115, 6/05/12]

Again…Voted Against the Paycheck Fairness Act. In April 2014, Ayotte voted against a motion to address the Paycheck Fairness Act. According to Congressional Quarterly the vote was a “Motion to invoke cloture (thus limiting debate) on the Reid, D-Nev., motion to proceed to the bill that would require employers to demonstrate that wage gaps between men and women with similar qualifications and in similar jobs have a business justification. It would prohibit employers from retaliating against employees who share salary information and authorize the Labor secretary to seek additional compensatory or punitive damages in a sex discrimination action. The bill also would require the Labor Department to provide training and collect wage information.” The motion was rejected by a vote of 53-44. [S 2199, Vote #103, 4/09/14]

And Again…Voted Against the Paycheck Fairness Act. In September 2014, Ayotte voted against a bill to strengthen federal equal pay laws for women. [S. 2199, Vote #262, 9/15/14]

And Again. In March 2015, Ayotte voted against Senator Mikulski’s proposal to “establish a deficit-neutral reserve fund relating to amending the Equal Pay Act of 1963 to allow for punitive damages, limit the any factor ‘other than sex’ exception, and prohibit retaliation against employees who share salary information.” The amendment failed 45-54. [S. Con. Res. 11, Vote #82, 3/24/15]

Ayotte Did Not Rule Out Supporting Trump, Said She Would Support Republican Nominee. “But when asked whether she would support Trump if he wins the Republican nomination, Ayotte didn't rule it out. ‘Well, at this point, we’re going to let the people of New Hampshire sort this out,’ she said. ‘I’ll support the Republican nominee.’” [NHPR, 12/09/15]

Trump Opposed Equal Pay for Equal Work. In October 2015 Trump said that women should get equal pay if they “do as good a job” as men. [Fusion, 10/12/15]

EMILY’s List, the nation’s largest resource for women in politics, has raised over $400 million to support pro-choice Democratic women candidates – making it one of the most successful political organizations ever. We recruit and train candidates, support strong campaigns, research women's issues, and turn out women voters. We've trained over 9,000 women to run and helped elect over 100 women to the House, 19 to the Senate, 11 governors, and over 700 to state and local office. Since its founding in 1985, almost one-third of the candidates EMILY’s List has helped elect to Congress have been women of color - including every single Latina, African American, and Asian American Democratic congresswoman currently serving.