House Votes to Defund Obamacare – Eric Cantor for Congress
Congressman Cantor scheduled a vote for the House to pass a continuing resolution that would defund Obamacare. It passed this morning and will now go to the Senate.

In his remarks on the floor, Congressman Cantor said, “This resolution will also protect the working middle class from the devastating effects of ObamaCare. Each week, we hear stories about how both major employers and small businesses are cutting back benefits and cutting back hours. The President’s health care law is turning our full time economy into a part time economy. Even the heads of major unions who were once so supportive of ObamaCare want to see this law drastically changed to avoid further “nightmare scenarios.”

“Let’s defund this law now and protect the American people from the economic calamity that we know ObamaCare will create.”

Last night he spoke about the vote and the upcoming battle in the Senate on Fox New’s “On the Record with Greta Van Susteren.” In case you didn’t see it, below is an article about it from Politico.

Team Cantor



Eric Cantor on defunding: I support Ted Cruz

By Lucy McCalmont

September 20, 2013

House Majority Leader Eric Cantor said Thursday that House Republicans have given their Senate GOP colleagues “what they want” by voting on a continuing resolution that would defund Obamacare.

“Sen. [Ted] Cruz, Sen. [Mike] Lee, Sen. [Marco] Rubio have said that they’re going to do everything and anything that they can to stop Obamacare. I support them in their efforts to do so. And we’ve actually given them what they want because this bill is coming over to them,” the Virginian Republican said on Fox News’s “On the Record with Greta Van Susteren.”

Cantor’s comments follow Speaker John Boehner’s announcement that the House will vote on a continuing resolution that will include a provision to defund Obamacare, a strategy that has erupted in disagreement within the Republican Party.

When asked about the likely possibility of the bill returning from the Senate without the Obamacare provision, Cantor said he doesn’t think people “should be betting against them.”

“Let’s not assume anything here because the senators and the Republicans have decided that they’re going to do anything they can…I don’t think we should be betting against them,” Cantor said.

While many have said this could be a risky move, Cantor emphasized the vulnerability that Democrats seeking reelection in 2014 will be facing too over the vote.

“And remember, this puts the Democrats like Kay Hagan in North Carolina and Mark Pryor in Arkansas and Mark Begich in Alaska and Sen. [Mary] Landrieu in Louisiana in a tough position. Obamacare has huge impacts in those states. These are Democratic senators that are up for reelection. Let’s see how they respond because they also have to be held to account for Obamacare,” he said.