Gravel plan seen by some as a road to ruin
COTULLA— Peggy Schulze Van Cleeve remembers when her father donated land for FM 469 in La Salle County in 1952.

Now, more than 60 years since ranchers and farmers started driving on that paved asphalt road, the state wants to tear it up and make the entire 15 miles gravel — a plan that has left many like Van Cleeve in a state of disbelief.

In the middle of the biggest economic boom South Texas ever has seen, the Texas Department of Transportation says it must convert about 66 miles of roads to gravel, saying it does not have the funds to pave over the damage caused by the recent heavy oil field traffic.

Another 17.3 paved miles in Reeves and Culberson counties in West Texas — another area in the middle of an intense oil drilling boom — also would become gravel.

“Everyone thinks it's crazy,” said Van Cleeve, a feeling echoed by others who remember the long effort to get paved roads into the Texas countryside.

At a regional public meeting in Cotulla to discuss the plans, elected officials and more than 200 residents told Texas Department of Transportation officials that graveling roads would take the region backward.

Business

“It is not acceptable in this day and time to turn roads to gravel,” said Atascosa County Judge Diana Bautista, who called the idea an embarrassment to the state. She suggested taking roads in urban counties to gravel instead, garnering a big round of applause.

But the problem is one of money, and of a road system built for rural use now overwhelmed by heavy trucks.

County tax receipts are up, but don't cover the hundreds of millions needed to fix ruined roads. And state severance taxes, paid on oil and gas production, usually don't fund the state's highway system.

TxDOT asked the Legislature for $1.6 billion for energy-sector road work, but got $225 million. Of that, about $157 million is going into the Eagle Ford region.

“If resources were different, different decisions would be made,” said John Barton, chief engineer for TxDOT.

Several roads in Dimmit, La Salle, Live Oak and Zavala counties would become gravel under the plan. One road, FM 1916 in Dimmit County, saw 40 cars or trucks per day in 2012 but now has 730 cars or trucks per day.

Many in South Texas have been calling the name of a native son, former Gov. Dolph Briscoe — the largest individual landowner in Texas when he was alive — who advocated paving country roads in the 1940s and 1950s.

Under the state's plan, one of the roads that would be converted to gravel is FM 2688 in Dimmit County, which is known locally as the Briscoe Highway and leads to the Briscoe Ranch.

Bill O'Neal, the state historian, said the paved FM system changed rural life in Texas.

It got products to market. It brought about the end of the one-room schoolhouse because buses could more easily pick up children from farms and ranches. It meant that farmers and ranchers didn't get trapped on their property during heavy rains. It allowed people to live farther from town.

“It has real implications. There has got to be a way to keep those roads. Go backward? No way. I saw those old roads — I saw what an improvement it was,” O'Neal said.

The graveling already has started in some counties, but TxDOT Executive Director Phil Wilson said the intent is to repave the roads in the future when funding is available.

For now, the agency says the solution is what it's calling “high-end unpaved roads,” and officials said they would be rougher than a paved road, but would not have loose aggregate. They should be safer because traffic would have to travel more slowly, between 30 to 45 mph.

But residents had a host of concerns Tuesday night, asked through a written Q&A process, about safety, dust, flooding and school bus routes. County judges said that local officials should have been consulted. Many were skeptical and thought gravel roads would fall apart even faster than the existing roads.

“This process has to change,” Zavala County Judge Joe Luna said. “You must allow local officials to have more input.”

TxDOT acknowledged a communication problem and has launched a moratorium through the end of October so local officials can try to find alternatives — even though no more state funding is available.

Thirty years ago, Texas Monthly called the FM roads “a symbol of the culture” of Texas.

“The FM road conquered at last the vastness and deep isolation of rural Texas,” Paul Burka wrote. The campaign was called, “Get the farmer out of the mud.”

“Now they want to put us back in the mud,” Van Cleeve said.

jhiller@express-news.net