Bexar County GOP formally denounces Speaker Straus

































Photo: Eric Gay, STF / Associated Press Image 1 of / 9 Caption Close Image 1 of 9 Texas Speaker of the House Joe Straus, R-San Antonio, presides over the opening of the 85th Texas Legislative session in the house chambers at the Texas State Capitol, Tuesday, Jan. 10, 2017, in Austin, Texas. (AP Photo/Eric Gay) less Texas Speaker of the House Joe Straus, R-San Antonio, presides over the opening of the 85th Texas Legislative session in the house chambers at the Texas State Capitol, Tuesday, Jan. 10, 2017, in Austin, Texas. ... more Photo: Eric Gay, STF / Associated Press Image 2 of 9 Joe Straus acccepts congratulations after being voted the Speaker as the 85th Texas Legislative session opens in Austin on January, 10, 2017. Joe Straus acccepts congratulations after being voted the Speaker as the 85th Texas Legislative session opens in Austin on January, 10, 2017. Photo: Tom Reel, Staff / San Antonio Express-News Image 3 of 9 Joe Straus accepts congratulations from Governor elect Greg Abbott and Lt. Governor elect Dan Patrick after being sworn in as Speaker of the House during the opening of the 2015 Legislature at the State Capitol on January 13, 2015. less Joe Straus accepts congratulations from Governor elect Greg Abbott and Lt. Governor elect Dan Patrick after being sworn in as Speaker of the House during the opening of the 2015 Legislature at the State Capitol ... more Photo: Tom Reel, Staff / San Antonio Express-News Image 4 of 9 Speaker Joe Straus shares some laughs on the rail with Representative Drew Springer, R-Gainesville (left), and Representative Dennis Bonnen, R-Angleton during the Texas House of Representatives meeting on April 19, 2017. less Speaker Joe Straus shares some laughs on the rail with Representative Drew Springer, R-Gainesville (left), and Representative Dennis Bonnen, R-Angleton during the Texas House of Representatives meeting on April ... more Photo: Tom Reel, Staff / San Antonio Express-News Image 5 of 9 Texas Speaker of the House Joe Straus, R-San Antonio, presides over the opening of the 85th Texas Legislative session in the house chambers at the Texas State Capitol, Tuesday, Jan. 10, 2017, in Austin, Texas. (AP Photo/Eric Gay) less Texas Speaker of the House Joe Straus, R-San Antonio, presides over the opening of the 85th Texas Legislative session in the house chambers at the Texas State Capitol, Tuesday, Jan. 10, 2017, in Austin, Texas. ... more Photo: Eric Gay, STF / Associated Press Image 6 of 9 House Speaker Joe Straus hears a point of order made which caused a postponement of property tax legislation on the floor of the House at the Texas Capitol on May 18, 2017. House Speaker Joe Straus hears a point of order made which caused a postponement of property tax legislation on the floor of the House at the Texas Capitol on May 18, 2017. Photo: Tom Reel, Staff / San Antonio Express-News Image 7 of 9 House Speaker Joe Straus enters the ball room to address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter less House Speaker Joe Straus enters the ball room to address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott ... more Photo: Ron Cortes, Freelance / For The San Antonio Express-News Image 8 of 9 House Speaker Joe Straus talks to the media after addressing about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter less House Speaker Joe Straus talks to the media after addressing about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio ... more Photo: Ron Cortes, Freelance / For The San Antonio Express-News Image 9 of 9 House Speaker Joe Straus address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter House Speaker Joe Straus address about 375 school board members and superintendents at a Texas Association of School Boards conference on Wednesday, June 14, at the San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter Photo: Ron Cortes, Freelance / For The San Antonio Express-News Bexar County GOP formally denounces Speaker Straus 1 / 9 Back to Gallery

A deeply divided Bexar County Republican Party passed an anti-Joe Straus resolution Monday night calling for “a change in leadership in the Texas House speakership.”

In a way, it was a stunning move, considering that Straus is San Antonio’s most powerful and prominent GOP elected official, and someone whose family helped build the Bexar County Republican Party at a time when Democrats controlled the state.

At the same time, it wasn’t altogether unexpected.

A soft-spoken pragmatist who emphasizes efficient government, economic development and low taxes over social-conservative crusades, Straus took over leadership of the House in January 2009, just weeks before the tea party movement emerged on the national scene and began to demand uncompromising conservative fervor from Republican politicians.

Straus was out of step with that movement and it didn’t help that he had been elected speaker with the crucial backing of 64 House Democrats, who saw him as a Republican with whom they could work.

Most recently, Straus has clashed with Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick over Patrick’s insistence on pushing a bathroom bill that would require transgender individuals to use public restrooms that conform to their birth gender, rather than their gender identity.

The issue will be addressed this month by the Legislature in a special session called by Gov. Greg Abbott.

Straus is extremely popular in his district and has brushed aside all speaker challenges with little trouble, but he perpetually faces noisy detractors.

Last year, he faced a primary challenge from local tea-party Republican Jeff Judson, who accused the speaker of blocking “God-honoring, conservative legislation,” and whose campaign issued an email with the following subject line (in reference to the fact that the Texas House did not ban sanctuary cities in 2015): “Is Straus to blame for murder? Judson says yes!”

Monday’s resolution, passed during a County Executive Committee meeting, cited Straus’ alleged “non-support” of the Texas Republican Party platform. The resolution is a purely symbolic move and some local Republicans privately suggested it will bring much more embarrassment to the party than it could ever bring to Straus.

Bexar County Republican Party Chairman Robert Stovall opposed the anti-Straus resolution and chalked it up to a small but vocal group asserting itself.

“Most of them don’t live in his district,” Stovall said. “I don’t think it represents the perspective of the party.”

The County Executive Committee consists of 244 precinct chairs but only 61 are required to make quorum. By the end of Monday’s meeting, there were only 64 precinct chairs who remained in attendance, and after one Straus critic, Mike O’Donnell, introduced the resolution, it passed by a margin of 36-28.

In a statement provided to the San Antonio Express-News, Straus spokesman Jason Embry said the speaker “understands that voicing concerns about harmful bathroom bills is unpopular with some, but he was elected to act in the best interest of District 121 and the state of Texas.”

Embry added that while “it may be difficult to find anyone who agrees with 100 percent of the party platform,” Straus has worked hard to enact the plank stipulating that school districts with an adequate tax base should be free to manage their own finances and those with insufficient tax bases should be bolstered by general state revenues.

“Speaker Straus looks forward to taking action in the upcoming special session on school finance and other issues important to the state of Texas,” Embry said.

Straus’ mother, Jocelyn, was a pioneering force in the Bexar County Republican Party. She served as co-chairwoman for John Tower’s successful U.S. Senate campaigns in the 1970s and as Texas co-chair for George H.W. Bush’s presidential campaign. Lamar Smith was elected to the U.S. House in 1986 with Joe Straus as his campaign manager.

Straus has worked against anti-LGBT legislation, going back to his first year in the Texas House, when he opposed a 2005 bill banning gays, lesbians and bisexuals from serving as foster parents.

Patty Gibbons, a North Side precinct chair who opposed Stovall for the party leadership in 2013, said the anti-Straus resolution was something she and other conservatives in the organization had been seeking for more than three years.

“For this to have erupted Monday night,” Gibbons said, “it was a signal.”

Gibbons said part of the impetus for the resolution was the fact that the conservative City Council District 9 recently went to a Democrat, John Courage, and that the GOP lost the Sheriff’s Office and several judicial races last November. She said grass-roots conservatives believe they need to make their voices heard.

On Tuesday, the Bexar County Commissioners Court commended Straus’ commitment to “real tax relief” in a resolution that called on state lawmakers to reform the state’s public-education funding system.

Lost in the Straus hoopla was the fact that Stovall announced Monday that he’ll be seeking another term as county chair. He referenced the District 9 council race by saying the Bexar County GOP will begin taking a more active role in municipal races.

ggarcia@express-news.net

Twitter: @gilgamesh470