Child molester gets 35 years in prison

| By Saturday, Nov. 19By Staff

Charles Lordell Jefferson Jr.

Circuit Court Judge Jeffrey W. Parker sentenced a convicted child molester to 35 years in prison after an emotionally charged hearing Wednesday afternoon.



Charles Lordell Jefferson Jr., 29, a former Fauquier resident, faced at least 15 years to life plus 50 years in prison after pleading guilty to a slew of charges back in August. The charges included six counts of producing child pornography; one count of producing child pornography as second or subsequent offense; one count of sodomy; and one count of unlawful wounding.



Parker ordered Jefferson to spend two years in prison on the unlawful wounding charge; and six years (running concurrently with each other but consecutive to other charges) on each of the production of child pornography charges.



On top of that, Parker sentenced Jefferson to 15 years in prison on the production of child pornography as a second/subsequent offense.



He also ordered Jefferson to serve 52 years on the forcible sodomy charge with 40 years suspended.



The charges stemmed from what prosecutors dubbed “a secret six-year relationship with the minor daughter of his adult girlfriend.”



According to Commonwealth’s Attorney Jim Fisher, the activities began with sexual suggestions and fondling and progressed to sex acts that Jefferson filmed and photographed.



During his sentencing hearing, Jefferson admitted to persuading the victim to have oral sex with him and filming the activity on one occasion this spring, but denied the other allegations.



He also admitted to trying to destroy the photos taken with his cell phone, and to assaulting the victim’s mother after she discovered and confronted him about the photographic evidence she discovered April 2.



“Words cannot express how sorry I am,” Jefferson said minutes before Parker ruled. “I raised [the victim] as my own child, and I should have treated her as such.”



As his friends and family watched from the crowded gallery, Jefferson apologized for disgracing them and begged for their forgiveness. He also apologized to his own daughter, saying he is sorry that he will not be able to “guide and raise” her.



“Only time will tell how much damage I have done,” Jefferson said. “I take full responsibility for my actions.”



Jefferson’s father, Charles Lordell Jefferson Sr., testified that his son had a normal childhood. As a youngster, Charles Lordell Jefferson Jr. played sports, was active in Boy Scouts and Cub Scouts, and did well in school, his father said.



“We lived a very good life and tried to instill morals on him,” the elder Jefferson said.



Charles Lordell Jefferson Sr. said his son is a devoted father.



“[This situation] has been very hard on the family,” Jefferson Sr. added. “We feel sorry [for the victim], but he’s my son. It’s a hard pill to swallow.”



The older man pledged to support his son while he’s in prison and when he gets out.



“I believe he can be rehabilitated,” said Jefferson Sr. “We all fall down. We all make mistakes. He understands his mistakes.”



Given the gravity of the offenses, Parker said it’s imperative for the court to send a strong message to the community that these types of crimes will not be tolerated.



Upon his release from prison, Jefferson Jr. will be placed on supervised probation for the rest of his life.



He’ll have to register as a sex offender, and will not be able to have any unsupervised contact with girls under 18.

Get Headlines Every Tuesday and Thursday By Email

More News

Commenting is not available in this channel entry.