1882 30-Jan Franklin Delano Roosevelt born in Hyde Park, NY

1896 FDR enters Groton

1900 Matriculates in Harvard College

8-Dec His father, James Roosevelt, dies at age 72

1903 24-Jun Receives A.B. from Harvard College

1904 Enters Columbia University Law School

1905 17-Mar Marries Anna Eleanor Roosevelt

Honeymoon trip to Europe

1907 Admitted to the New York Bar Association and becomes clerk in the law firm of Carter, Ledyard, and Milburn

1909 Member, Hudson-Fulton Celebration Commission

1910 Elected to the New York State Senate from the 26th District (Dutchess, Columbia, and Putnam Counties)

1911 28-Nov Degree of Master Mason conferred by Holland Lodge No.8, New York City

1912 Visits Panama Canal

Reelected to the New York State Senate

1913 17-Mar Sworn in as Assistant Secretary of the Navy in the Woodrow Wilson Administration

1913 Member, Plattsburg, New York, Centennial.

1914 Defeated in Democratic primary, for the U.S. Senate by James W. Gerard.

1915 Member, National Commission, Panama-Pacific Exposition

1917 Elected Overseer of Harvard University

21-Jan - 7-Feb Undertakes inspection tour of Haiti and Santo Domingo

Promotes deployment of 230-mile long minefield be­tween Orkney Islands and Norway designed to bottle up German U-boat fleet in the North Sea

1918 Jul - Sept Tours American naval bases in the European Theatre

1919 Jan-Feb Travels to Europe to supervise dismantling of naval establishment

1920 6-Jul Nominated for Vice-President at Democratic National Convention in San Francisco on ticket with James N. Cox

6-Aug Resigns as Assistant Secretary of the Navy

2-Nov Defeated in election for Vice-President

1921 Jan Returns to active work in the law firm of Emmet, Marvin & Roosevelt, and at the same time becomes the vice-president in charge of the New York office of the Fidelity and Deposit Company of Maryland, the third largest surety bonding company in the country

Aug Stricken with poliomyelitis at Campobello, New Brunswick, Canada. Transferred to Columbia-Pres­byterian Hospital in New York City, for the start of a long recuperation process, largely unsuccessful. He never again walked unaided.

1922 Joins United European Investors

Becomes president of the American Construction Council.

1923 Made member of the Board of Trustees of Vassar College

Elected to Board of Directors of the Holland Society in New York

Named national chairman of fund-raising for the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York City

Named a delegate to the New York State Democratic State Convention

1924 Jul Nominates Governor Alfred E. Smith for president at the Democratic National Convention in New York City Calls him "The Happy Warrior."

Forms new law practice, 0' Connor and Roosevelt

Oct First visits Warm Springs, Georgia, whose warm waters were reputed to have curative powers.

1925 Writes columns for the Macon (Ga.) Telegraph and the Atlanta Constitution

1926 Publishes his first book. Whither Bound

1927 Forms the Georgia Warm Springs Foundation, a therapy center for the treatment of victims of infantile para­lysis.

1928 27-Jun Nominates Governor Alfred E. Smith for presi­dent for the second time at Democratic National Con­vention in Houston

2-Oct New York State Democrats nominate FDR for governor

6-Nov Elected governor of New York over Republican challenger Albert Ottinger.

1929 12-Mar In special message on water power develop­ment, FDR advocates state construction and ownership of dams and power plants, and warns private utilities that state might construct its own transmission lines if they do not transmit state-generated electricity at reasonable rates.

3-Apr In his first half-hour radio address, FDR attacks Republican Party for not living up to its platform; address is a forerunner of his "fireside chats."

10-Apr Signs legislation to aid farmers by reducing contributions of rural counties to state highway con-construction costs, and having the state assume a greater share of rural education costs.

19-Jun Chief marshal at Harvard Tercentenary; elect­ed honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa; given honorary Doctor of Laws degree.

29-Jul Visits Clinton Prison at Dannemora following riot there (July 22), and orders investigation of con­ditions of prisons.

1930 6-Jan Recommends to the legislature further im­provements in prison administration, including the creation of a full time parole board.

4-Nov Reelected governor of New York, defeating Republican opponent Charles H. Tuttle.

1931 7-Jan Recommends examination and revision of the Old Age Pension Law to create a system based on contributions by the employee.

14-Jan Louis M. Howe and James A. Farley form "Friends of Roosevelt" and open New York City office to promote FDR's candidacy for president.

25-Mar Recommends that the legislature create a commission to investigate unemployment compensation systems and submit a plan "for accomplishing some kind of scientific unemployment insurance."

28-Aug In address to special session of the legislature, recommends creation of a Temporary Emergency Relief Administration and a work relief program.

26-Oct Urges voters to support Hew itt amendment which would provide funds to reforest submarginal farmland s.

1932 6-Jan In annual message to the legislature, calls for elimination of unsound banking practices and revision of laws relating to sale of securities to the public.

Mar Forms the "brains trust," a group of Columbia University professors, to advise him on national economic and social issues for the forthcoming presi­dential campaign.

7-Apr Delivers "forgotten man" speech, keynote of his preconvention campaign, in an address to the Gov­ernors' Conference.

1-Jul Democratic Party nominates him for president on the fourth ballot at its convention in Chicago. John Nance Garner is vice-president.

2-Jul Flies from Albany to Chicago to accept nomination; pledges "a new deal for the American people.”

6-Aug Summons Mayor James J. Walker of New York City to a public hearing concerning his fitness to remain in office. Walker resigns September 1 after State Supreme Court upholds the Governor 's right to remove him from office.

8-Nov Elected president, defeating Herbert Hoover.

1933 15-Feb Unhurt in assassination attempt by Guiseppe Zangara in Miami, Florida.

4-Mar FDR inaugurated; addresses the nation on his plans to fight the depression stating that "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself." Also pledges the United States to the Good Neighbor policy.

5-Mar Calls a special session of Congress and proclaims a. bank holiday to beg in March 6. Congress sits for "hundred days" from March 9 to June 16 and enacts into law the principal New Deal measures.

12-Mar Delivers first radio "fireside chat" in which he discusses the banking crisis.

20-Mar Signs the Economy Act, reducing the salaries of federal employees.

22-Mar Signs Beer-Wine Revenue Act which amends the Volstead Act to legalize the manufacture and sale of beer and wine, and levies a $5.00 per barrel tax.

5-Apr Issues executive order establishing the Civilian Conservation Corps.

10-Apr Recommends to Congress the creation of a Tennessee Valley Authority.

19-Apr Issues executive order embargoing gold shipments, effectively taking the United States off the gold standard.

12-May Signs the Agricultural "Adjustment Act.”

13-Jun Signs Home Owners Refinancing Act which creates Home Owners Loan Corporation to refinance home mortgage debts for non-farm owners.

16-Jun Signs Banking Act which creates Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for guaranteeing individual bank deposits.

16-Jun Signs the National Industrial Recovery Act, which establishes the National Recovery Adminis­tration and the Public Works Administration.

3-Jul Rejects currency stabilization plan proposed by World Economic Conference. Action seen as a blow to international cooperation and a move toward isola­tion.

5-Aug Sets up the National Labor Board, as authorized by NIRA, to protect the right of labor to engage in collective bargaining.

9-Nov Issues executive order establishing the Civil Works Administration, an emergency relief pro­gram to employ four million jobless on federal, state and local make-work projects.

16-Nov Recognizes the Soviet Union.

1934 31-Jan Issues a proclamation setting the price of gold at $35.00 an ounce. Signs the Farm Mortgage Refinancing Act.

12-Apr Senate votes an inquiry into manufacture and traffic in arms. The hearings of Senator Nye's com­mittee which follow strengthen isolationism and sup­port for the neutrality laws.

13-Apr Enacts Johnson Debt Default Act which prohi­bits loans to governments in default on obligations to the United States government. Bill does not persuade debtor countries to pay.

28-Apr Signs the Homeowners Loan Act.

6-Jun Signs the Securities Exchange Act which creates the Securities and Exchange Commission.

12-Jun Signs the Trade Agreements Act which authorizes him to cut tariffs by up to 50% for those nations that accorded the U.S. the most favored nation treatment.

28-Jun Signs the Federal Farm Bankruptcy Act.

28-Jun Signs National Housing Act which establishes Federal Housing Administration.

1935 4-Jan Asks Congress to enact legislation to assist the needy and unemployed.

8-Apr Signs Emergency Relief Appropriation Act which provides for large-scale national works program for jobless employables. Major agencies of the program are the Public Works Administration and the Works Progress Administration, renamed Work Projects Administration in 1939.

1-May Sets up Resettlement Administration to improve conditions of impoverished farm families.

11-May Creates Rural Electrification Administration to bring electricity to isolated rural areas not serviced by private utilities.

22-May Vetoes veterans' bonus bill.

27-May Supreme Court rules NRA unconstitutional in Schechter Corp. vs. United States.

26-Jun Sets up National Youth Administration to provide jobs for youths aged 16 to 25.

5-Jul Signs the Wagner Act, which set up the National Labor Relations Board.

14-Aug Signs the Social Security Act.

26-Aug Signs Public Utilities Act which requires all public utilities to register with SEC and limits them to the simplest form of incorporation.

31-Aug Signs the Neutrality Act which imposes a mandatory arms embargo against all belligerents.

5-Oct Proclaims U.S. neutrality following Italy's invasion of Ethiopia.

1936 2-Mar Signs Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act which replaces AAA, invalidated by the Supreme Court on January 6.

23-Jun Roosevelt is nominated for a second term at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia. Running mate is again John N. Garner.

Aug Delivers speech at Chautauqua, New York in which he says, "I hate war."

3-Nov Roosevelt is reelected, defeating Alfred M. Land on of Kansas.

Dec Attends and addresses the Inter-American Conference for the Maintenance of Peace in Buenos Aires.

1937 20-Jan Roosevelt inaugurated for second term, addresses the nation on the needs of the one-third of the people who are "...ill-ho used, ill-clad, ill-nourished."

5-Feb Responding to invalidation by the Supreme Court of major New Deal social and economic legisla­tion, FDR requests Congress for legislation empow­ering him to appoint six additional justices to the Supreme Court, and make other changes in the federal court system.

1-May Signs Neutrality Act of 1937 which permitted sale of certain commodities to belligerent countries on a "cash and carry" basis.

1-Jun Asks Congress for legislation to close tax loop-holes used "by a minority of very rich indi­viduals."

7-Jul Fighting breaks out between Japanese and Chinese troops at the Marco Polo Bridge near Peking.

20-Jul FDR in conference with Congressional leaders agrees to shelve the judicial reorganization plan, thus ending his attempt to "pack" the Supreme Court.

22-Jul Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act sets up the Farm Security Administration and provides for low in­terest loans for tenants to purchase farms.

26-Aug Signs modified Judicial Procedure Reform Act.

2-Sep Signs the National Housing (Wagner-Steagall) Act which creates the U.S. Housing Authority .

5-Sep Warns American citizens in China that they stay at their own risk.

14-Sep Forbids, by executive order, Government owned ships to transport arms and munitions to China and Japan.

5-Oct Delivers speech in Chicago calling for a "quarantine" of aggressor nations.

12-Oct Calls special session of Congress for November 15, urging legislation on maximum hours, minimum wages and other matters. Congress adjourns December 21 without adopting any of his recommendations.

13-Dec Responding to the sinking of the United States gunboat, Panay, by Japanese planes the previous day,, Roosevelt sends a memo to the Secretary of State ordering him to tell the Japanese ambassador of his shock and concern over "indiscriminate bombing of American and other non-Chinese vessels on the Yangtse..."

1938 6-Jan States his opposition to the Ludlow amend­ment which calls for a popular referendum on a decla­ration of war unless the United States was invaded.

28-Jan Asks for a billion dollar appropriation to beg in construction of a two-ocean navy.

29-Jan Initiates the work of the National Founda­tion for Infantile Paralysis to foster research and treatment of polio.

16-Feb Signs the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938.

14-Apr Asks Congress for additional emergency recovery aid to combat the business recession that began in August 1937.

30-Apr Appoints Myron Taylor to Intergovernmental Committee on Political Refugees.

14-Jun Congress passes Minimum Wages and Hours Bill.

16-Jun Congress establishes the Temporary National Economic Committee to determine the effects of mono­poly on the economy and to improve antitrust policy.

21-Jun Signs the Emergency Relief Appropriation Act aimed at dealing with the recession.

24-Jun Delivers fireside chat on party primaries; calls for the election of liberal candidates who recognize that "new conditions...cal1 for new remedies."

25-Jun Signs the Fair Labor Standards Act. which stipulates minimum wages and maximum hours for busi­nesses engaged in interstate commerce.

30-Jun Lays cornerstone at New York World's Fair site.

1-Jul Establishes the Federal Works Agency which consolidates five agencies: Public Buildings Administration, Public Roads Administration, Public Works Administration, Works Progress Administration, and U.S. Housing Authority.

7-Jul Begins transcontinental speaking tour; returns to Washington August 12.

14-Jul Proposes world disarmament conference in 1939.

Aug Following through on his speech of June 24, FDR campaigns against "reactionary” legislators seeking reelection. These include Senators George of Georgia and Tydings of Maryland, and Representative 0 'Connor of New York. The "purge" fails, w i th loss of prestige for FDR.

26-27 Sep Urges peaceful solution to the Czechoslovak crisis.

7-Oct Announces that counter-espionage measures in the U.S. will be intensified.

14-Nov Summons principal military and civilian advisors to a White House conference on rearmament. His objectives include production of 10,000 combat aircraft by 1940.

15-Nov On receiving the news of Nazi atrocities of “Kristallnacht," FDR denounces German treatment of the Jews; orders U.S. ambassador to return home for” consultations."

27-Dec Announces plan to provide pilot training to college students to qualify them as civilian reserve pilots.

1939 4-Jan Urges program of intensified national defense in State of the Union address.

27-Jan Discloses that French purchase of modern military planes has been authorized.

3-Apr Administrative Reorganization Act seeks to increase government efficiency by regrouping or simplifying many federal agencies to reduce or eliminate overlapping and waste.

4-Apr Signs the emergency appropriation bill for national defense.

14-Apr Pledges full support for any American nation which is attacked by hemispheric outsiders.

15-Apr Sends message to Hitler and Mussolini seeking formal assurance that they will not invade 31 independent nations.

30-Apr Becomes first president to appear on televi­sion, addressing the opening ceremonies of the New York World’s Fair.

Jun Entertains the King and Queen of Great Britain

5-Jul Transfers the Joint Army -Navy Board, the Joint Army-Navy Munitions Board and several other military procurement agencies from the service departments into the newly-established Executive Office of the Presi­dent. Makes Chiefs of Staff directly responsible to him.

14-Jul Formally requests Congress for revision of U.S. Neutrality Law.

19-Jul Invites Intergovernmental Committee on Refugees to confer on methods of speeding up immigra­tion from Germany.

24-Aug Sends peace appeals to King Victor Emmanuel, President Moscicki of Poland and Hitler.

25-Aug President Moscicki replies indicating he was ready to negotiate directly with Germany; President Roosevelt sends second appeal for peace to Hitler.

1-Sep Germany attacks Poland.

3-Sep In fireside chat on the war in Europe, FDR says the nation would remain neutral but that he can not ask that “every American remain neutral in thought as well.”

8-Sep Proclaims state of limited national emergency.

21-Sep Calls special session of Congress to repeal arms embargo.

11-Oct Receives letter dated August 2, 1939 from Albert Einstein which discusses the possibility of an atomic bomb. Creates President's Advisory Committee on Uranium the following day to explore the potentialities of atomic energy.

4-Nov Congress passes Neutrality Act of 1939 which repeals the arms embargo and places arms sales on a cash and carry basis.

19-Nov Speaks at the laying of the cornerstone of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library at Hyde Park, NY.

1940 9-Feb Sends Under Secretary of State, Sumner Welles, to Europe to gather information on the war aims of the belligerents and the possibilities for peace. Welles reports on March 28.

10-13 May Germany invades Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg and France.

16-May FDR issues call for annual production of 50,000 planes.

29-May Appeals to Mussolini to use his influence for peace.

10-Jun Denounces Italy for its attack on France: "the hand that held the dagger has struck it into the back of its neighbor."

13-Jun Promises redoubled efforts to aid France and the Allies.

20-Jun Appoints Republicans Henry L. Stimson Secretary of War and Frank Knox Secretary of the Navy.

22-Jun France signs armistice with Germany at Compiegne.

22-Jun FDR overrides advice of Joint Board of the Army and Navy and decides to extend full military assistance to Great Britain.

28-Jun Alien Registration Act (Smith Act) makes it unlawful for any person to advocate the overthrow of any government in the United States by force, and to organize or become a member of any group dedicated to teaching such doctrine.

17-Jul Accepts Democratic Party's "draft" for the presidency and agrees to run for an unprecedented third term. Demands Henry Wallace as vice-president.

20-Jul Approves bill authorizing two-ocean navy.

18-Aug Meets with Canadian Prime Minister Mackenzie King to plan joint defense measures. Joint Defense Board established.

2-Sep Approves "destroyers for bases" deal with Great Britain.

16-Sep Signs Burke-Wadsworth Act-first peace­time draft in U.S. history.

27-Sep Japan signs a three-power pact with Germany and Italy, pledging mutual assistance in the event of war with a nation not then a belligerent.

30-Oct Delivers campaign speech in Boston in which he states that no American boys are going to be sent into any foreign wars.

5-Nov Elected to a third term, defeating Wendell Willkie.

17-Dec At press conference FOR proposes "lend-leasing" arms to Great Britain.

20-Dec Sets up the Office of Production Manage­ment with William S. Knudsen as director to coordi­nate defense production and speed up "aid short of war" to Britain and other anti-Axis nations.

29-Dec In fireside chat, he pledges that the United States will become the "arsenal of democracy."

1941 6-Jan In state of the union message recommends lend lease aid to Great Britain and enunciates the four freedoms: freedom of speech and expression, freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom from fear.

27-Jan - 29-Mar As authorized by FOR, the U.S. military holds secret talks in Washington with their British counterparts to discuss strategy for war. They decide that if they become involved in a war with Germany and Japan, the concentration of force should be on Germany first.

11-Mar Lend lease bill signed.

6-May FDR extends lend-lease aid to China.

27-May Declares "unlimited national emergency" in Pan American Day Address.

14-Jun Orders freezing of all German and Italian assets in the United States.

15-Jun Creates Fair Employment Practices Committee to prevent discrimination in defense work.

22-Jun Germany invades U.S.S.R.

24-Jun Releases Russian credits and promises U.S. aid.

28-Jun Establishes the Office of Scientific Research and Development to coordinate the U.S. scientific effort, including radar, proximity fuse, sonar and the atomic bomb. Development of the bomb was transfer­red later to the Army under the Manhattan District project.

1-Jul Directs Admiral Stark to order American forces to Iceland to prevent occupation and use by Germany as a base against Western Hemisphere. U.S. forces land there July 7.

9-Jul FDR requests the Secretaries of War and Navy to explore at once overall prod action requirements needed to defeat potential enemies. In response the Army-Navy Joint Board produces the Victory Production Program in September 1941.

24-Jul Japanese military occupies French Indochina.

26-Jul Nationalizes the armed forces of the Philippines and places them under General Douglas MacArthur, who is named commander-in-chief of U.S. forces in the Far East.

26-Jul United States embargoes gas, oil, and metal shipments to Japan and freezes Japanese assets in the U.S.

9-12 Aug Roosevelt and Churchill meet at Atlantic Conference aboard USS Augusta at Argentia Bay in Newfoundland.

14-Aug United States and Great Britain jointly issue the Atlantic Charter.

7-Sep His mother, Sara Delano Roosevelt, dies at age 86.

11-Sep Responding to the German submarine attack on the USS Greer , declares that U.S. will protect vessels of any nationality "engaged in commerce in our defensive waters."

9-Oct Requests arming of U.S. merchant ships.

17-Nov Signs bill amending Neutrality Act to allow American merchant ships to be armed.

17-Nov Ambassador Joseph Grew warns Washing ton of the possibility of a sudden attack by Japan.

20-Nov Japanese-American discussions begin in Washington between Hull and Ambassador Nomura and special envoy Kurusu.

25-Nov Japanese carrier force bound for Pearl Harbor leaves the Kurile Islands.

26-Nov Hull proposes to the Japanese (with FDR's approval) that Japan withdraw its troops from China and Indochina and conclude a multilateral non-aggression pact.

1-Dec Japan publicly rejects Cordell Hull's peace proposals.

6-Dec FDR appeals directly to Emperor Hirohito to use his influence to preserve peace and to" with-draw Japanese troops from Indochina.

7-Dec Japan attacks Pearl Harbor.

8-Dec Asks Congress to declare war on Japan.

11-Dec Germany and Italy declare war on the United States.

22-Dec Churchill arrives for the first Washington conference. He and FDR decide on "Germany first" war strategy.

27-Dec Rationing begins with auto tires

1942 1-Jan United Nations declaration signed by 26 nations.

2-Jan United States forces abandon Manila to the Japanese and retire to Bataan and Corregidor Island in Manila Bay where they surrender on May 6.

6-Jan Calls for production in 1942 of 60,000 planes, 45,000 tanks, 20,000 anti-aircraft guns, 6,000, 000 deadweight tons of merchant ships.

12-Jan A twelve-man National War Labor Board is established to settle disputes by mediation and arbitration.

16-Jan Establishes the War Production Board with Donald Nelson as head.

30-Jan Signs Emergency Price Control Act, which establishes the Office of Price Administration.

20-Feb Signs Executive Order 3066 which orders the evacuation of Japanese-Americans from the Pacific coast to relocation camps inland.

18-Apr Establishes by executive order a nine-man War Manpower Commission for more effective use of manpower resources with Paul V. McMutt as chairman.

18-Apr Carrier-launched U.S. 3-25 bombers led by Major General James H. Doolittle raid Tokyo.

27-Apr Outlines drastic 7 point program to combat inflation, including control of incomes, wages, prices and distribution.

29-May-1-Jun Meets with Russian foreign minister, V.M. Molotov, and assures him of efforts for a second front in 1942, over the protests of General Marshall.

3-6-Jun Japan handed its first major defeat at the battle of Midway, which checks the Japanese advance across the central Pacific.

19-25-Jun Meets with Churchill at second Washing ton Conference and discusses the timing of the projected cross-channel invasion and Anglo-American cooperation in the development of the atomic bomb. Both men agree that American forces should become engaged in the European or African theater in 1942.

16-Jul In his instructions to Harry Hopkins, Gen­eral Marshall and Admiral King for their conference in London, he gives highest importance to American ground forces engaging the Germans in 1942, while opposing an all-out effort in the Pacific against Japan.

23-24-Jul FDR decides to execute TORCH, the invasion of north Africa.

7-Aug United States launches first major offen­sive against the Japanese at Guadalcanal.

14-Aug Names General Dwight D. Eisenhower command­er for the North African invasion.

Sep Sends Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt to Great Britain to visit American troops stationed there.

2-Oct Establishes Office of Economic Stabilization with James F. Byrnes as head.

4-Nov British forces defeat Germans at El Alamein.

8-Nov U.S. and British forces under the command of General Eisenhower land in North Africa.

19-Nov Russian offensive against the Germans on the Stalingrad front commences.

4-Dec Work Projects Administration given "honorable discharge" by Roosevelt.

1943 14-24-Jan Becomes first president to leave the United States in wartime. Meets Church ill at the Casablanca Conference in North Africa and enunciates "unconditional surrender" formula, agrees to invasion of Sicily and strategic bombing in Europe.

9-Feb United States Marines complete conquest of Guadalcanal.

8-Apr Issues "hold-the-line" executive order freezing prices, salaries and wages.

20-Apr Confers with President Avila Camacho in Monterrey, Mexico on wartime and postwar cooper­ation.

12-25-May Third Washing ton Conference plans global strategy and the opening of the second front in Europe.

27-May Issues executive order creating the Office of War Mobilization.

27-May Orders that all contracts with war industries forbid racial discrimination.

10-Jul - 17-Aug Invasion and conquest of Sicily by Anglo-American forces.

14-24-Aug First Quebec Conference reaches agree­ment on stepping up military operations in the Far East .

Aug Dispatches Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt on a 25,000 mile trip to installations in the South Pacific war zone.

3-Sep British Eighth Army launches invasion of Italy.

8-Sep Italian government of Marshall Badoglio surrenders unconditionally to the Allies.

9-Sep U.S. Fifth Army lands at Salerno.

10-Nov Allied Control Commission for Italy established.

24-Nov Tarawa in the Gilbert Islands is taken.

22-26 Nov First phase of Cairo Conference.

28-Nov - 2-Dec Roosevelt, Church ill and Stalin meet at Teheran and agree that the invasion of Normandy is main objective in 1944.

2-7-Dec Roosevelt, Churchill and Chiang Kai-shek meet at Cairo

24-Dec Roosevelt in Christmas radio message announces the appointment of General Eisenhower as supreme commander of Overlord-the invasion of France.

1944 22-Jan Creates War Refugee Board.

29-Jan Russians announce the Moscow-Leningrad area cleared of German troops.

31-Jan-23-Feb United States forces take Kwajalein and Eniwetok in the Marshall Islands.

1-Mar - 22-Apr United States troops invade the Admiralty Islands and take Hollandia in Dutch New Guinea.

27-Mar Commander Howard G. Bruenn, consultant in cardiology, begins treatment of FDR.

4-Jun U.S. Fifth Army liberates Rome.

6-Jun Allied forces invade France. FDR goes on radio to announce cross-Channel invasion is under way; leads nation in prayer for speedy victory.

15-Jun U.S. ground forces invade Saipan in the Mariana Islands.

22-Jun Signs Servicemen's Readjustment Act, known as G.I. Bill of Rights, which offers veterans grants for education and other assistance.

1-22-Jul Bretton Woods conference on international economic problems.

19-21-Jul Roosevelt nominated for a fourth term. Drops Wallace and accepts Harry Truman as vice-president.

26-29-Jul Confers in Hawaii with General MacArthur and Admiral Nimitz on strategy in the Pacific.

9-Aug United States forces take Guam, completing the conquest of the Marianas.

21-Aug Dumbarton Oaks Conference convenes in Washington, D.C. to discuss structure of the future United Nations.

25-Aug - 11-Sep France, Belgium and Luxem­bourg liberated by General Eisenhower’s Allied Forces.

12-Sep U.S. forces enter Germany.

11-16-Sep Meets with Churchill at Second Quebec Conference to formulate plans for postwar Germany.

23-Sep Denounces Republican attacks on his dog Fala in campaign speech at Teamsters' Union dinner.

Oct On the 21st and 27th, respectively, FDR cam­paigns in an open car in cold rain in New York City and Philadelphia to dispel rumors he is in poor health.

20-Oct General MacArthur leads United States forces in the invasion of Leyte in the Philippines.

7-Nov Roosevelt reelected to a fourth term, de­feating Thomas E. Dewey.

16-26 Dec German counteroffensive-"Battle of-the Bulge"-is checked, but Americans suffer 77,000 casualties .

1945 12-23-Jan Russians reach Oder River.

20-Jan Roosevelt inaugurated for fourth time.

30-Jan - 2-Feb Malta Conference.

4-11-Feb Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin meet at Yalta and discuss postwar settlements. Stalin agrees to enter the war in the Far East once the conflict in Europe is over.

19-Feb United States Marines land on Iwo Jima in the Bonin Islands and secure it March 16.

23-Feb Manila is liberated.

1-Mar Addresses Congress on the results of the Yalta Conference.

7-Mar United States troops seize the bridge at Remagen and cross the Rhine River.

13-Mar Meets with delegates to the organization conference for the United Nations scheduled to meet in San Francisco.

29-Mar Travels to Warm Springs for rest and recu­peration.

1-Apr U.S. Tenth Army invades Okinawa, main island of the Ryukyus, 360 miles southwest of Japan.

11-Apr U.S. Ninth Army reaches the Elbe River.

12-Apr Roosevelt dies at Warm Spring, Georgia.