American Federation for Children
AFC Condemns Teachers Union Bullying Tactics The American Federation for Children—the nation’s voice for school choice—condemned the actions of the Louisiana Association of Educators, after counsel for the teachers union threatened schools participating in Louisiana’s statewide voucher program by urging them to drop out of the program or face a lawsuit from the union. Click here to help us fight back!

WATCH: Keynote Addresses from the 2012 National Policy Summit Click to watch the keynote addresses from New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal, and Newark Mayor Cory Booker at the 2012 AFC National Policy Summit held in Jersey City, New Jersey. Click here to watch!

WATCH: Breakthrough Victories for Children In 2011, seven new private school choice programs were enacted and in total, more than 210,000 students were benefiting from school choice. And through the first few months of 2012, that amazing momentum has continued. Find out exactly how in "Breakthrough Victories for Children." Click here to watch!

Education Trumps Immigration Among Top-Tier Issus For Latino Voters Education ranks behind only the economy and jobs as the most important consideration among likely Latino voters in five battleground states, according to a survey released by AFC and the Hispanic Council for Reform and Educational Options (HCREO). Click here to learn more!

A Tribute to John T. Walton WATCH: A video tribute to John T. Walton recognizing his amazing personal and financial contributions to the cause of providing educational options for children, espeically those from low-income families. Click here to watch!

Dr. Tony Bennett Honored with John T. Walton Award Dr. Tony Bennett—the Indiana Superintendent of Public Instruction—received the John T. Walton Champions for School Choice Award at the third annual National Policy Summit hosted by the American Federation for Children and the Alliance for School Choice. Click to find out more!

Parents Know Best Special interests are attacking parents claiming that parents make poor decisions when it comes to their children's education. The American Federation for Children - the nation's voice for school choice - is launching a campaign to defend parents because we believe that parents know best! Click here to learn more!

Electing School Choice Champions Parents and children across the nation desperately want educational options and are looking to their elected officials to enact bold reforms that will empower parents and transform the lives of children. The 2011 Election Report highlights the education champions. veteran legislators, and rising stares who are taking significant action to advance school choice. Click here to read the 2011 Election Report

The Promise of Special Needs The Promise of Special Needs Scholarships chronicles the stories of eight students with special needs who attend the school of their parents' choice thanks to the 10 special needs programs across eight states. Read the latest data and trends of private school programs tailored to students with special needs. Click here to download a copy of The Promise of Special Needs Scholarships

Turning the Tide Read the latest from the American Federation for Children in our monthly newsletter Turning the Tide featuring March's Champions for School Choice, an update on legislative action in Louisiana, news for the 2012 Summit, and more! Read Turning the Tide here

Get the Alliance's 2011-12 School Choice Yearbook Today! More than 210,000 children are participating in publicly funded private school choice programs across the nation, according to the Alliance for school Choice's School Choice Yearbook 2011-12—the annual award-winning publication offering the most comprehensive data on the nation’s 27 private school choice programs. Click here to download the Yearbook!