Florida Teacher Certification Examinations (FTCE)
About the FTCE

The purpose of the Florida Teacher Certification examinations (FTCE) is to ensure that all teacher candidates demonstrate the necessary content and pedagogical knowledge necessary to effectively instruct students in Florida. The purpose of the Florida Educational Leadership Examination (FELE) is to ensure that all school administrator candidates demonstrate the knowledge and skills necessary to effectively lead in Florida’s schools. The Department of Education recognizes that children are our most important resource, and we would not be doing our due diligence if we did not do everything in our power to ensure that their teachers and school leaders meet rigorous professional standards at an appropriate level for a Beginning Effective Teacher Candidate (BETC) or a Beginning Effective School Administrator Candidate (BESAC). The FTCE and FELE are administered in accordance with State Board of Education Rule 6A-4.0021, F.A.C., and Rule 6A.400821, F.A.C.

Requirements for Teacher Certification

For information on what is required to be certified to teach in Florida, go to the Florida Department of Education's Bureau of Educator Certification website. You may also call the Florida Department of Education, Bureau of Educator Certification, at 1-800-445-6739.

Test Information Guides

Test Information Guides are available for free online. For a full list of electronic test information guides that are available now, go to the FTCE/FELE contractor's website.

Effective January 2019, the written-performance sections of select Test Information Guides (General Knowledge Test, English 6–12, Middle Grades English 5–9, and the Florida Educational Leadership Examination) have been updated to include an additional writing sample item with a sample passing response and a sample not-passing response. Each sample response includes rationale that cross-reference the scoring criteria and may also include annotations that reference performance characteristics used in evaluating written responses. Additionally, effective March 2019, select Test Information Guides (Professional Education Test and General Knowledge Test—English Language Skills and Mathematics subtests) have been updated to include additional sample multiple-choice questions.

Effective March 2019, select Test Information Guides (Professional Education Test and General Knowledge Test—English Language Skills and Mathematics subtests) have been updated to include additional sample multiple-choice questions.

Competencies and Skills

2019 EXAMS: Revised competencies and skills for Hearing Impaired K–12, Guidance and Counseling PK–12, Music K–12, Speech-Language Impaired K–12, School Psychologist PK–12, and Visually Impaired K–12 were approved by the State Board of Education in 2019. The revised competencies for Hearing Impaired K–12, Guidance and Counseling PK–12, School Psychologist PK–12, and Visually Impaired K–12 will be implemented on examinations beginning in Fall of 2020; revised competencies for Music K–12 and Speech-Language Impaired K–12 will be implemented on examinations after 2020. The revised competencies and skills are included in the Competencies and Skills Required for Teacher Certification in Florida, Twenty-Fifth Edition (PDF)

Test Development Opportunities!

The Department of Education has issued the following communications regarding Florida Teacher Certification Examinations Test Development.

For information about participating in test development activities, go to the Department's FTCE / FELE testing contractor's website.

We Want to Hear From You!

Testing services, including Test Administrations, for the FTCE are provided by Evaluation Systems group of Pearson.

Please take a few minutes to fill out our online survey regarding services you have received. The information you provide will be analyzed by Program Managers at the Florida Department of Education and used for improving the FTCE testing system.

FTCE Questions?

To register or to obtain specific information, visit www.fl.nesinc.com or call FTCE/FELE Customer Service toll-free at 866-613-3281 8 a.m.–6 p.m., Mon.– Fri., excluding holidays. (The Automated Information System is available by phone 24 hours daily.)