Governor Rick Scott: More Than 36,000 Jobs Created So Far This Year
Florida’s annual private-sector job growth rate has exceeded the nation’s for four years

TAMPA, Fla. — Governor Rick Scott announced today that Florida businesses have created 36,900 private-sector jobs since January 2016. With Florida’s unemployment rate of 4.9 percent in March, the state’s rate is down from 10.7 percent in December 2010. Florida’s annual private-sector job growth rate of 3.2 percent has consistently exceeded the nation’s for four consecutive years. Over the year in March, Florida businesses created 225,300 new private-sector jobs. Since 2010, Florida businesses have created 1,061,700 new jobs.

Governor Rick Scott said, “I am proud to announce today that Florida businesses have created more than 36,000 new jobs so far this year. Florida continues to be a leader in job creation, and our annual private-sector job growth rate has exceeded the nation’s for four straight years. We have also cut more than $1 billion in taxes over the last two years, and our success is sending a message across the country that Florida is the best state for families to find new opportunities and for businesses to grow. We will continue to work each day to meet our goal of making Florida first for jobs.”

Governor Scott made the announcement at Beneficial Blends, LLC, a manufacturer, co-packer and distributor of Kelapo coconut oil products headquartered in Tampa. Governor Scott announced today that Beneficial Blends will be expanding to a second facility in Tampa and creating 70 new jobs for local families. The new jobs will include positions in sales, marketing, accounting and quality control positions, along with production and warehouse facility roles.

Florida Department of Economic Opportunity Executive Director Cissy Proctor said, “We’re working every day to attract fast growing businesses to Florida and help our local businesses get the resources they need to be successful in our state. Florida’s continued economic success is a testament to Governor Scott’s pro-growth policies that enable the private sector to thrive.”

Other positive economic indicators include:

Private-sector industries gaining the most jobs over the year in March were professional and business services with 47,200 new jobs; education and health services with 41,600 new jobs; and trade, transportation, and utilities with 39,900 new jobs.

Florida job postings showed 264,826 openings in March 2016.

During March 2016, Florida’s 24 local workforce development boards reported 39,029 Floridians, including 2,049 veterans, were placed in jobs.

To view the March 2016 employment data visit www.floridajobs.org/labor-market-information/labor-market-information-press-releases/monthly-press-releases.

###