Sexual Abuse or Violence Prevention
Preventing sexual violence is critical. After homicide, sexual violence is the most costly violent crime in the U.S., costing $151,423 per incident in 2008 (DeLisi, et al., The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology Vol. 21, No. 4, August 2010, 501–513). Sexual Violence Prevention Program Quick Facts (.pdf - 75kb) The Sexual Violence Prevention Program (SVPP) administers the following federal funds: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control for Rape Prevention and Education: SVPP contracts with rape crisis centers, universities, mental health organizations, county health departments and other community based organizations for primary prevention educational trainings to the general public; 24/7 operation of hotlines; training programs for professionals; efforts to increase awareness regarding the prevention of sexual violence in underserved communities, social norms marketing campaigns to end sexual violence; as well as special projects and services for victims of sexual assault through contracted providers. operate hotlines, provide education, and change social norms. Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grant for Sexual Assault Victim Services: SVPP contracts with certified rape crisis centers to provide core sexual assault services, including advocacy and accompaniment, crisis intervention and counseling, support groups, and therapy. U.S. Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women for the Sexual Assault Services Formula Grant Program (SASP): SVPP contracts with the Florida Council Against Sexual Violence (FCASV) to administer SASP to enhance the provision of sexual battery recovery services at certified rape crisis centers. U.S. Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women for the Services-Training-Officers-Prosecutors (STOP) program: FCASV receives STOP funds to provide training and technical assistance to first responders at certified rape crisis centers, law enforcement agencies and allied professionals to improve the provision of the sexual battery recovery services for sexual assault victims. The SVPP administers the following state funds:

Rape Crisis Program Trust Fund (RCPTF): SVPP contracts with FCASV to administer the Rape Crisis Program Trust Fund to enhance the provision of sexual battery recovery services at certified rape crisis centers. General Revenue: SVPP contracts with the FCASV to administer general revenue funds to enhance the provision of sexual battery recovery services at certified rape crisis centers. SVPP contracts with the Palm Beach County Victim Services and Rape Crisis Center to provide a centralized, coordinated crisis response, to improve medical and mental health treatment of rape victims and to enhance the evidence collection process, and recurring general revenue funds to improve the provision of sexual battery recovery services for sexual violence victims.

Sexual Abuse or Violence Prevention

Preventing sexual violence is critical. After homicide, sexual violence is the most costly violent crime in the U.S., costing $151,423 per incident in 2008 (DeLisi, et al., The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology Vol. 21, No. 4, August 2010, 501–513). Primary Prevention Education

Victim Services

Hotline Services

Domestic Violence

Sexual Assault Services Program (SASP)

Rape Crisis Program Trust Fund (RCPTF)

Services-Training-Officers-Prosecutors (STOP)

The SVPP administers the following state funds:

Primary Prevention Education Primary prevention education focuses on preventing sexual violence. Throughout the state, SVPP funds sites to provide presentations to create change that will prevent sexual violence. Education is based on addressing the underlying attitudes, knowledge, and behavior that result in rape and sexual violence. Topics include bullying and sexual violence, consent and coercion, dating violence, drug facilitated rape, gender roles, healthy relationships, masculinity and sexual violence, media advocacy, oppression, primary prevention of sexual violence, role of bystanders, sexual harassment, and the law as it relates to sexual assault. Back to Top

Victim Services The SVPP funds rape crisis centers in Florida to provide the following services 24/7 to primary victims of sexual violence: crisis intervention, information and referral, advocacy and accompaniment, counseling, therapy, and support groups. If you or someone you know is a victim of sexual assault, call the Florida Council Against Sexual Violence’s (FCASV) toll-free hotline at 1-888-956-7273 or visit FCASV’s website at www.FCASV.org. Back to Top

Hotline Services The SVPP funds rape crisis centers in Florida to provide 24/7 hotline services to victims of sexual violence. Hotline services are monitored to ensure victims receive quality information. Back to Top

Domestic Violence SVPP offers technical assistance to Departments of Health in local counties on safety planning, internal operating policy, training, and assistance in building ongoing collaborative partnerships with domestic violence centers. Medical studies link long-term effects of domestic violence and abuse with a myriad of major health problems including smoking, diabetes, obesity, eating disorders and substance abuse. If you or someone you know is experiencing abuse, call the Florida Coalition Against Domestic Violence’s (FCADV) toll-free hotline at 1-800-500-1119 or visit FCADV’s website at www.FCADV.org. Back to Top

Sexual Assault Services Program (SASP) The Department of Justice (DOJ), Office of Violence Against Women provides Sexual Assault Services Program (SASP) grant funding to the Department. The Department passes these funds to FCASV, who subcontracts the funds to eight certified rape crisis programs. SASP provides funding for intervention, advocacy, accompaniment (e.g., accompanying victims to court, medical facilities, police departments, etc.), support services, and related assistance to: Adult, youth, and child victims of sexual assault

Family and household members of such victims

Those collaterally affected by the victimization (e.g., friends, coworkers, classmates), except for the perpetrator of such victimization

Support outreach and awareness activities to underserved populations Back to Top

Services-Training-Officers-Prosecutors (STOP) The Violence Against Women and Department of Justice Reauthorization ACT (VAWA), has improved the systemic response to sexual violence victims by funding intervention services. FCASV receives STOP funds to provide training and technical assistance to first responders at certified rape crisis centers, law enforcement agencies and allied professionals to improve the provision of the sexual battery recovery services for sexual assault victims. Back to Top