Too many tests? Some parents, teachers say yes
CLOSE FLORIDA TODAY visits Suntree elementary to talk about tests. Video by Tim Shortt. Posted Sept.11,2014.

Buy Photo Fifth-grade students in the technology lab at Suntree Elementary in Melbourne. (Photo: TIM SHORTT/ FLORIDA TODAY)Buy Photo

It's not just state standardized tests that English teacher Vanessa Skipper administers each year at Cocoa High School.

Her eighth graders also take the FAIR exam three times a year, which measures reading comprehension. Plus a district standardized test — also given three times a year — which helps prepare students for the state test.

Her eighth graders take a test on technology use, measuring skills such as saving a document and closing a program. Plus, a test to see if they can operate the program used for the state test.

The list doesn't count the math or science exams her coworkers give each year, Skipper said. Or the end-of-course tests, which are given in subjects such as algebra, biology and U.S. history.

In total, state tests are given during 80 of the school year's 180 days, if you count the "testing window" in which schools administer exams.

"It's too much," Skipper said. "It's overwhelming for teachers it's overwhelming for students. And every year, it feels like it gets worse."

Controversy is mounting over the so-called "testing culture" in Florida schools, where high-stakes decisions such as student promotion, graduation and teacher pay are tied to student test results. To prepare for such important tests, the district administers additional standardized tests to help ensure students are ready for the state exams.

And that's led parents and teachers to call on Brevard School board members to make changes. Parent Tina Descovich recently recently started an "Opt Out Brevard" Facebook group, and saw membership rapidly grow to more than 500.

"It's gotten so out of control," said Descovich, who has students in first and eighth grade. "I see (the group) as a place for us to share ideas and have a united front. To go to the school board and have them visit issues. They need to hear from voters. We have a much stronger voice if we're united."

To some extent, local school boards hands are tied when it comes to much of state-mandated testing. The Lee County School Board learned that earlier this month when it voted to "opt out" of the Florida Standards Assessments, which are replacing the FCAT this year.

The board quickly reversed its decision when it found out about the possible consequences of the move: From losing state funding to preventing students from earning a high school diploma.

New state tests are based on the Florida Standards, which have been rebranded, with minor changes, from the Common Core State Standards. The political opposition to Common Core has brought increased attention to state tests, some of which have been administered for more than a decade.

Local school board members say parents need to turn to state representatives and senators. It's the state lawmakers who have the authority to change state laws that govern testing and consequences tied to the exams.

"I believe we are testing our students too much," School Board member Barbara Murray said, but she added: "You have to understand, most of that testing is being driven by regulation, not by what we at the local level feel is appropriate for children."

CLOSE Footage of the moment that The Lee County School Board in Fort Myers, Florida, became the first in nation to opt out of Common Core testing Wednesday. Video by Kinfay Moroti/news-press.com Posted Aug. 28, 2014

Tests have their merits

Teachers routinely give chapter tests and other exams in class. And every day, activities are used to check-in on student learning.

From asking for a quick "thumbs up" if students understand to more intricate group activities — such as answering questions on post-it notes and placing them on the wall — a quality education requires measuring student progress.

Standardized tests have their place in the mix. They can identify concepts students are struggling with and teachers can adjust their lesson plans accordingly.

And that's why Brevard administers certain district standardized tests, to help both students and teachers prepare for the end-of-the-year state exams.

"We do all these tests all year," said Pamela Bradford, a fourth grade teacher at Suntree Elementary. "They're ready for what they're going to see (on the state exams)."

State exams measure whether students learned what they should have during the school year, and help determine whether students are promoted from third grade or graduate high school. End-of-course exams in subjects like algebra make up 30 percent of a student's grade.

Plus, they're used in a range of other decisions, from school grades to teacher evaluations and pay.

But after fielding complaints about the amount of testing in schools, Brevard made some adjustments. They eliminated two district-required elementary exams, dropping the number from four to two, and made certain exams optional for teachers.

"They do get good information from those assessments," Brevard Superintendent Brian Binggeli said. "But you want to strike the right balance."

The challenge is scheduling

State tests are given during 80 of the school year's 180 days, though not every student takes a test on each of those 80 days.

Individual tests can take one or two days, and last 70 or 80 minutes sessions each day. Students may take three or four state exams, a number that doesn't count district or other exams, such as the college-entrance ACT.

A challenge schools face is scheduling. State lawmakers are requiring more computer-based testing, and there aren't enough computer labs to go around.

At some schools, classes that use computer rooms are temporarily relocated to a library or cafeteria on testing days, to the frustration of some teachers or students.

Other classes must battle with student absences; half a class might be testing one day and the second half the next, making it difficult for teachers to create consistency in their lessons.

"We know there's a potential to impact instruction," said Karen Schafer, Brevard's director of accountability and testing. She added that teachers are encouraged to modify lessons so learning continues.

This year, students will be taking even more tests, given the new state requirement that every class should have an end-of-course exam.

They'll be given in courses that are not tested right now — from kindergarten art classes to high school orchestra — and used in teacher evaluations. And that has some concerned.

"They are sucking the fun out of exploring these activities," said Sheri Snow, an art teacher at Sunrise Elementary. "They should be about trying the violin and playing strings ... trying art and painting. It should be about discovering their interests."

Sleepless nights

Many point to the anxiety these high-stakes tests fosters in kids.

In years past, certain students grew so nervous, they become physically sick,parents and teachers say. Sometimes, there are tears before the "big test." Sometimes, sleepless nights.

And sometimes, extreme reactions. One parent said her son broke out in hives. One teacher said she saw a high school student pick a fight — just to get out of testing.

The cause? The consequences of a poor performance.

"The high stakes tests are so unfair to children," Brevard School Board Chair Karen Henderson said. "We put them in such a bad spot."

Fourth grader Kadie Zulon said she worried about passing the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test last year in third grade, the first year the students take the test.

But when the big day finally came, her teacher had a special surprise: A note of encouragement from her mom and brothers. And that lifted her spirits. "They said: Do your best," Kadie said.

Schools try to ease the tension of testing. Suntree Elementary Principal Mecheall Giombetti said that students need an absence of threat — they need a safe environment — in order to learn and perform well.

Teachers at Suntree liken the exam to a championship baseball game, or perhaps a special music performance. It's a chance to show what you've learned and practiced all year.

But they also know much isriding on state tests — and every year, there are students who slip through.

"There is not one test on any one day that can tell us what a student is all about," said Debbie Sandstrom, a teacher at Astronaut High. "Nor should any one test be the only measure of a student."

There are third graders who teachers go to bat for each year, presenting a portfolio of work to demonstrate that they are ready to move on to fourth grade, despite what their state exam says.

And in high school, there are honor students who do poorly on the reading exam and are told to forfeit an elective and enroll in a remedial reading course.

But unlike third grade promotion, there is no portfolio option for remedial reading.

"Using testing as a sledgehammer to force all students into the mold is not the answer," parent Karen Clark said.

Contact Ryan at (321) 242-3664 or mryan@floridatoday.com. Follow her on Facebook at facebook.com/floridatodayeducation or on Twitter @Mackenzie_Ryan

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1s17G5V