Trevor J. Will
Trevor Will is a partner and litigation attorney with Foley & Lardner LLP with a broad general litigation background, and concentrates in the areas of product liability, toxic torts, and utility facility permitting. Mr. Will is experienced in handling mass litigation, as he is responsible for defending a number of companies in asbestos litigation in Wisconsin, Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota. He has tried a number of such cases to defense jury verdicts, and has argued asbestos issues in the supreme courts of Wisconsin and Minnesota and in the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. Perhaps as importantly, he also implemented and administers a cost-effective system for investigating and resolving such cases short of trial. Mr. Will is former chair of the Product Liability Practice and a member of the Automotive, Energy, and Insurance & Reinsurance Industry Teams and the Business Litigation & Dispute Resolution and Insurance & Reinsurance Litigation Practices.

Not all of Mr. Will's time is taken by asbestos cases. He successfully argued the case that established in Wisconsin the principle that where a commercial product fails and does not cause personal injury, the purchaser has no claim in negligence or strict liability, but may sue only for breach of warranty, Sunnyslope Grading, Inc. vs. Miller, Bradford & Risberg, Inc., 148 Wis. 2d 910, 437 N.W.2d 213 (1989). Also, he has been an adjunct professor at Marquette Law School, where he taught a class in complex litigation.

Recognition

Named to The BTI Consulting Group’s coveted BTI Client Service All-Stars lists for 2014 and as an MVP for 2015; This elite group of standout attorneys — identified solely through unprompted client feedback — are recognized as delivering the absolute best client service

Named the "Milwaukee Energy Law Lawyer of the Year" (2014) and “Milwaukee Mass Tort Litigation/Class Action – Defendants Lawyer of the Year” (2015) by The Best Lawyers in America©

Selected by his peers for inclusion in The Best Lawyers in America© since 2007 in the areas of energy law, mass tort litigation and product liability litigation

Peer Review Rated as AV® Preeminent™, the highest performance rating in Martindale-Hubbell's peer review rating system

Selected for inclusion in the list of Wisconsin Super Lawyers® (2011 and 2012)

Admissions and Professional Memberships

Mr. Will is a member of the State Bar of Wisconsin and the American Bar Association.

Education

A summa cum laude graduate of Augustana College in 1975, he received his J.D. degree, cum laude, from Harvard Law School in 1978. He is a member of Phi Beta Kappa.