Foundry United Methodist Church
See a full timeline of Foundry history for the past 200 years here.

Read a variety of articles about our history here.

EARLY ROOTS LEAD TO GROWTH AND OUTREACH

Originally located at 14th and G, Foundry dedicated its first building in September 1815. Henry Foxall, a Methodist layman and influential businessman, donated the land and building after his Georgetown iron foundry survived the British attack on Washington in the War of 1812. For almost two centuries, the church has been home to presidents, members of Congress, and others in public service. President Abraham Lincoln became a Life Director of the Methodist Missionary Society, and President Rutherford Hayes attended Foundry nearly every Sunday during his term. President Franklin Roosevelt and Prime Minister Winston Churchill attended a special service at Foundry on December 25, 1941. President William Clinton and his family attended regularly. Foundry has long been active in mission, with work that mirrors the humanitarian concerns of the times. In 1995, Foundry affirmed publicly that it was a reconciling congregation, now one of nearly 200 United Methodist Churches in the Reconciling Congregation Movement.

A CARING COMMUNITY

Foundry United Methodist Church has been a spiritual leader in the nation’s capital for more than 200 years. In a city often characterized by transience and change, Foundry has remained a steadfast beacon — long recognized for its commitment to mission service, social justice, and reconciliation. Foundry’s ministers are viewed as models of influential and dedicated parish leadership. Distinguished by their scholarship, oratory, caring counsel, and deep commitment to Christian principles, they have extended the church’s reputation as a voice of conscience, reason, and hope for residents of and visitors to our city. Located at 16th and P Streets NW in Washington’s Dupont Circle neighborhood — one mile north of the White House — Foundry is easily accessible by public transport

Get Directions!

Foundry's Archive and History Committee helps preserve Foundry's history and is available if you have any research questions.