Governor-elect Scott Walker: Wisconsin is closed to high-speed rail
Last week the current administration put the temporary brakes on building the high speed rail. Walker says if that didn't happen he would have pursued legal options to stop it before he is inaugurated Governor in January.

Governor-elect Scott Walker's motto has been Wisconsin is open for business. Monday he restated that to Milwaukee business leaders. After that Walker told the media, Wisconsin is still closed to high-speed rail once he's Governor on January 3rd. Walker says, "We had assumed all along we had been looking at several legal options to try to stop the train between now and January third."

Walker has said he wants the 810 million dollars the federal government is giving Wisconsin for high-speed rail to be used for roads instead. If that can't be done, Walker stands behind his position the train should be stopped. Walker said, "I'd rather have that go back to the federal government. What you're going to see, particularly with the change in the house majority, you're going to see them try to capture as much of that money as they can to deal with the federal deficit."

Governor Doyle issued a statement Monday saying for high-speed rail to be successful the US Department of Transportation and Scott Walker have to agree. Doyle says, "It is my understanding that in the coming days the US Department of Transportation will reach out to Governor-elect Walker about the project. If the Governor-elect decides that Wisconsin should not build new rail infrastructure, the US DOT has made it very clear this money will go to another state."

Wisconsin Department of Transportation Secretary Frank Busalacchi issued the order stopping work, but hopes Wisconsin will keep its funding and its high-speed train.

The Doyle administration has already committed 14 million dollars to this project, which will have to be paid by the state taxpayer.

Governor-elect Scott Walker says he doesn't want the state to be saddled with maintenance costs for high-speed rail, which could be more than 7.5 million dollars a year.