What's next for Iraq and the IRS investigation?
Watch the latest video at FoxNews.com

This is a rush transcript from "Sunday Morning Futures," June 22, 2014. This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated.

MARIA BARTIROMO, HOST: Does Iraq's president have to go? Good morning, everybody. I'm Maria Bartiromo. Welcome to "Sunday Morning Futures."

Growing calls for Nouri al-Maliki to step down so that a new inclusive government might be formed before Iraq completely breaks apart. A member of the House Select Committee on Intelligence is here with us on what America should and should not do to avoid another quagmire.

Lawmakers accuse the IRS commissioner of lying about missing e-mails. The chair of the House Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee joins us live on how to recover those hard drives that the taxman claims may be gone for good.

Plus, new GDP numbers due out this week to give a report card on the economy. One industry that's been thriving all along? Technology. The cofounder of PayPal will talk jobs, the markets, immigration and a lot more as we look ahead on "Sunday Morning Futures."

Good morning. With more and more of Iraq falling under the sway of Sunni militants, what can the U.S. do to stop the country from completely sliding into chaos?

Congressman Peter King is a member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and the former chairman of the House Committee on Homeland Security.

Congressman, good to have you on the program. Thanks so much for joining us.

REP. PETER KING, R- N.Y.: Thank you, Maria. Thank you very much.

BARTIROMO: So I guess the question is, at this point, does Maliki have to go?

KING: Yes, I do believe Maliki has to go, but I don't know if we have time to wait for Maliki to go, because by then it may be too late. It is absolutely essential that we stop ISIS from gaining this foothold in Iraq and also Syria.

So I believe it is important that we do make airstrikes, that special operations are on the ground. I would hope they're out trying to be able to call in attacks and give us the intelligence as to where to attack.

Maliki is a bad guy, there's no doubt about it. But for us to stand back and wait for Maliki to go before we take any action, it could be too late. I think we should do both, taking military action in the form of airstrikes and using whatever leverage and diplomatic pressure we have to push Maliki out.

BARTIROMO: I guess one of the real issues here is how did we get here and why is Maliki a bad guy? I want to talk with you about that. Plenty more to say from Congressman Peter King.

But first, let's get to Eric.

How did the crisis in Iraq get to this point?

Many say it has everything to do with the government and policies of Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki. Let's get to Fox News senior correspondent Eric Shawn, joining us with more on that.

Good morning, Eric.

ERIC SHAWN, FOX NEWS SENIOR CORRESPONENT: Good morning, Maria.

And good morning, everyone. He was once Iraq's hope, but now the U.S. wants him out. Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, who lived in Iran for years and some fear could become or has already become an Iranian puppet, well, his critics say he has brought this catastrophe upon his nation himself.

The 62-year-old al-Maliki, a prominent Shiite, took office back in 2006, promising to end the violence and terrorism that plagued his country in the wake of the U.S. invasion. But his tenure was marked by a harsh crackdown on rival Sunnis, purging them from the military, raiding Sunni camps, suppressing opponents all while wanting U.S. forces to leave.

Al-Maliki began his political career as a prominent Shiite activist in the Islamic Al-Dawa (ph) Party, opposing Saddam Hussein . He fled to Syria and lived in Iran, living in exile for more than two decades before returning to Iraq.

He did support the U.S. surge that largely worked and did leave the offensive against fellow Shiite radical cleric Moqtada al-Sadr back in 2008. But the successes were short-lived. Instead of bringing the Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds together, critics say al-Maliki's policies have done just the opposite. And his refusal to permit even some U.S. forces to remain has, now many charge, led to his military's stunning collapse.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

NOURI AL-MALIKI, IRAQI PRIME MINISTER (through translator): The status of forces agreement expires on December 31st, 2011. The last American soldier will leave Iraq. Secondly, this agreement is sealed. And, at the time, we designated it as sealed, and it is not subject to extension.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

SHAWN: For now, al-Maliki refuses to go anywhere, as the Islamist advances have ironically put Washington, Tehran and Moscow all on the same page against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria militants. But you know, it could still take at least another 45 days before Iraq's political parties decide on their prime minister's fate as each day his country edges closer to becoming completely apart -- Maria.

All right, Eric, thanks very much. We are back now with Congressman Peter King of the House Intelligence Committee.

Congressman, what would you like to see done? Last week, it seemed that the president was shying away from airstrikes.

KING: First of all, I wish the president would stop saying what he would not do. One of the reasons we're in the position we are right now is because the president did not get the forces -- the status of forces agreement with Iraq by pulling all of our troops out, we lost much of the leverage we had. We allowed Maliki to fall into this way of Iran.

Also by not saying significant action in Syria, we've allowed ISIS to build up the space. The border's now porous between Syria and Iraq ,and they're going back and forth. This isn't just Iraq. It's Iraq and Syria and it represents a threat to the United States.

I would remind people that ISIS three years ago attempted to attack Ft. Knox in Kentucky. That was before they were anywhere near the power that they have today. So I think the president -- we should find ways to use air power that works.

And I think if these special forces are on the ground, I would hope that the main purpose is for them to get intelligence as to where we can attack. That's not going to be enough to win, but that could be enough to blunt the ISIS offensive and give the Iraqi army the chance to regroup. And also, at the same time, be bringing in a new unity government which would work with the Shiites, the Sunnis and the Kurds.

BARTIROMO: Congressman, what are the implications of all of this accelerated fighting to the U.S.?

KING: This is a direct threat to the United States. This would set up an Islamist caliphate in the Middle East. It would be a privileged sanctuary from which they could launch attacks against the United States.

It also would be a direct threat to Jordan, a direct threat to Israel, a direct threat to all of our vital interests in the Middle East. This is an offshoot of Al Qaeda, which is the worst of the worst. The Islamists say that Iraq and Syria is deadly; it is so bad that Al Qaeda has actually pushed them aside.

So this is like -- they are like the spear point for the Al Qaeda movement and this is a direct threat to the United States and also as far as oil supply, as far as boosting up Iran, as they basically make Al Qaeda and Iran the two powers in the Middle East. And neither one of them is in any way helpful to the United States. They're both extremely dangerous to us.

BARTIROMO: Well, it does feel like we're making one bad policy decision after the next in regards to foreign policy.

KING: Well, and it's -- again, I think, I hate to sound partisan. This is a lack of leadership. When the president drew the red line in Syria and then allowed the Russians to come in and we basically took no action at all. I know people like for instance Rand Paul say that the problem is because of the U.S. in Iraq and Syria.