Keystone XL Oil Pipeline Important to North American Energy Security
What is energy security and why does energy security matter?

When we talk about a secure and prosperous future energy security is front and centre. The International Energy Agency defines energy security as, “the uninterrupted availability of energy sources at an affordable price.” And energy security matters because the disruption of supply anywhere can have economic impacts here at home – and around the world.

In many places, energy is often used to control and oppress others, instead of being used as the force for good that we recognize here in North America. Instead of enriching people’s lives with abundant and affordable energy sources, international oil cartels and nations like Venezuela and Russia use their energy riches and the threat of scarcity as a mechanism to bully and assert control over others.

We can all see this happening today. In Russia, the government has threatened to cut supplies of natural gas off to Ukraine and the rest of Europe. Venezuela has repeatedly threatened to cut off supplies of crude oil to the United States. And while domestic oil production continues to climb, the United States – the largest oil consumer in the world at 15 million barrels each and every day – is still beholden to other countries for its oil.

Both the U.S. Energy Information Administration and the International Energy Agency predict America will continue to import between five and eight million barrels per day at least until 2040. America must rely on getting much of its oil from Russia, Nigeria, the Middle East, Venezuela – hardly bastions of democracy or countries and regions that embrace freedom and free speech.

President Obama’s former National Security Advisor, Retired General James Jones testified before a congressional hearing in March stating,

“The international bullies who wish to use energy scarcity as a weapon against us all are watching intently. If we want to make Mr. Putin’s day and strengthen his hand, we should reject the Keystone. If we want to gain an important measure of national energy security, jobs, tax revenue and prosperity to advance our work on the spectrum of energy solutions that don’t rely on carbon, it should be approved.”

Another Choice

A majority of Americans want to see Keystone XL built. An even larger majority believe that getting the oil they need from a stable, friendly neighbour makes sense – oil and refined products to start their cars every morning, heat their homes and travel on airplanes to visit loved ones. Canada is that stable, sensible choice – and our countries have enjoyed one of the world’s closest and most respected trading relationships.

Oil from Canada has been safely transported to the U.S. for decades. American and Canadian companies have worked together to both develop the resource and then send it to American refineries. This free trade has created and supported thousands and thousands of jobs, spurred economic growth and produced that most important commodity – energy security.

Retired Major General Gary Wattnem highlighted this in an editorial in the Iowa Gazette,

“The risks associated with our oil acquisitions from the Middle East do not exist with Canada. Canada and the United States long have been reliable allies, great trading partners, and both stand to receive a very favorable economic boost from this pipeline.”

North American Investment

Keystone XL will help ensure that security of supply continues for decades to come. This pipeline has the capacity to transport 830,000 barrels per day of crude oil produced in Canada and the continental United States to refineries on the Gulf Coast. Keystone will push out much of the higher-priced oil those refineries currently import from overseas – easing the worry over the impact global instability has on American’s way of life back home.

But Keystone and energy infrastructure in general will do much, much more.

The International Energy Agency identified that North America will require over $6 trillion in energy infrastructure investment between now and 2035. Approximately $2.5 trillion of that amount is in oil infrastructure. In order to fully realize the jobs and economic benefits of new oil production from Alberta’s oil sands and North American tight oil plays such as the Bakken and Eagle Ford, new infrastrucuture must be built.

In the U.S. alone, oil infrastructure investment is expected to contribute:

$94 billion to the U.S. GDP each year from 2014 to 2025. That is equal to the annual economic contribution of the telecommunication industry in the United States

It will also support almost 900,000 jobs with a labour income of $59 billion (between 2014 and 2025)

Building Keystone XL would support approximately 42,000 jobs, generate $2 billion in earnings throughout the U.S. and add $3.4 billion to the U.S. GDP

Security of Supply



Keystone XL will be the most modern, technologically advanced pipeline ever built and will help drive this infrastructure renaissance. And the need for pipelines such as KXL is growing stronger – one just needs to look at how crude oil production is expected to ramp up in the coming years.

In Canada, production is forecast to reach 5.2 million barrels per day by 2030 – more than double the 1.8 million barrels per day currently being produced.

In the U.S., forecasts show tight oil production from the Bakken, Eagle Ford and other formations will reach 2.2 million barrels per day by the end of this decade, which is a 500 per cent increase over 2008 levels. Pretty staggering growth in production on both sides of the border made possible by amazing technological advancements that have freed oil from what previously seemed like worthless rock.

All this newfound oil needs now to be safely transported to market. Building more pipelines seems like the logical answer. But well-organized, very well-funded groups of professional activists want to prevent any new infrastructure from being developed. These professional energy security opponents are preventing American men and women from working, forcing U.S. refineries to get oil from Venezuela, Russian and the Middle East, jeopardizing our energy security in the process.

Separating the Real from the Rhetoric

If one were to believe all the rhetoric one might think Keystone itself would be the ultimate cause of a global Armageddon and life as we know it would cease to exist. Nothing could be further from the truth.

Fossil fuels will be the primary source of transportation fuels for decades, even as companies like TransCanada invest more in renewable and new energy sources. The oil that we all need to create products we all rely on will get to refineries one way or another. If the U.S. has to continue importing millions of barrels from overseas and hostile regimes, it will be no further ahead in its quest to achieve real energy security.

If Keystone XL is not built, opponents of energy security might dance in the streets and yell ‘we have won!” And as more and more oil is transported by rail, by barge, by tanker and by truck – a modern, multi-billion dollar state-of-the-art pipeline – is left to sit on the sidelines.

This ongoing and seemingly never-ending debate has never been a choice between oil and alternative energy, as many of our opponents argue. It is about the responsible development of all resources, resources we need to meet America’s growing needs.

We must strike a balance between the social and economic forces that are colouring the infrastructure debate today. If not, the opportunity is simply ours to lose.