Rosie O'Donnell Calls Donald Trump 'Pimp' on Her Blog; Trump Fires Back That O'Donnell Is 'Big, Fat Pig'
The holiday cease-fire between Rosie O'Donnell and Donald Trump ended with new bombs dropped by both, with Trump calling O'Donnell a "big, fat pig" and "bully" who was "cracking up" after O'Donnell posted writings on her blog implying Trump was a "pimp."

O'Donnell, who'd been quiet since her nasty spat began with Trump last week, called him "the comb over" on her blog Wednesday — and suggested he was acting like a "pimp" for Miss USA, Tara Conner.

• Click here to read Rosie's blog. Warning: Contains rough language.

In response, Trump had some choice words for O'Donnell in an interview Thursday with FOX News.

"Well, it's too bad," Trump said. "I think she's got something wrong with her. I think she's cracking up ... Rosie is basically a very untalented person who's a bully. Her intelligence is less than average in my opinion."

• Click here to watch video of Trump on FOX News..

Trump said O'Donnell was "a huge liability" for "The View," the ABC show she co-hosts. He told FOX News that the only thing she had going for her was a "nice girlfriend," referring to Kelli O'Donnell.

Trump referred to Rosie O'Donnell as a "big, fat pig" when imagining how her partner had announced to her family that she was involved with the comedian.

"Can you imagine the parents of Kelli ... when she said, 'Mom, Dad, I just fell in love with a big, fat pig named Rosie'?" he said. "Can you imagine the expression on their face?"

"The View" is in repeats this week and O'Donnell was not immediately available to comment.

But in her blog, posted Wednesday on Rosie.com in the poetic, no-punctuation style she uses, O'Donnell wrote:

"a young girl in nyc / meets a pimp / he cons her into a life of illusion / she works for him / no fun — no f—-g — no life / she is owned / when she sneaks out on her own / to party the night away / he freaks/he roughs her up a bit / shames her in front of the others / teaches her to behave/for his own benefit ...

"so what happens / when u say the emperor / has no clothes / the comb over goes ballistic / via phone to Mr. King / i imagine it is interesting / as celeb feuds tend 2b / so here r my thoughts ... beauty pageants where women were paraded around / judged valuable or not / by old white men. / it is always old white men."

The timing of the posting was curious, coming days after Trump's last blast at O'Donnell last Thursday night on "Larry King Live."

• Video: Trump on 'O'Reilly'

"She calls me a pimp just because I helped someone who was in trouble," Trump said Thursday on FOX.

The celebrity feud — one of the most bitter in recent memory — was in danger of going away until now.

"Rosie got mentally beaten up by me," Trump told The Post yesterday, "because she's a mental midget, a low-life.

"I think she's got a death wish."

The spat began last week on "The View" when O'Donnell accused Trump of being a "snake-oil salesman" for the way he handled the hard-partying Miss USA affair.

After Trump responded with blasts of his own, calling her a "fat slob" and an "animal" on several TV shows, Rosie chose not to respond.

Instead, she simply made a face on "The View" the following day.

Barbara Walters, creator and co-owner of "The View," has pointedly not taken sides in the battle, saying both Trump and O'Donnell are friends.

The Post's Cindy Adams has even reported that Walters tried to patch up the fuss with some e-mails.

Evidently, her peace efforts did not work.

• She Said, He Said: Name-Calling the Rosie and Donald Way

FOX News' Catherine Donaldson-Evans and The New York Post's Michael Starr contributed to this report.