Where is outrage over leaks about president?; Gorka: Fake news now dishonest news
This is a rush transcript from "Hannity," May 16, 2017. This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated.

SEAN HANNITY, HOST: Welcome to "Hannity." And this is a Fox News Alert. Jay Sekulow, Dave Bossie, Rod Wheeler, Joe Concha, Ric Grenell and Dr. Sebastian Gorka all here tonight react to breaking news. We're following for huge breaking news stories. James Comey is starting to enact his own revenge on President Trump for firing him. We'll have more later tonight.

But first, it's time for tonight's very important "Opening Monologue."

All right, we start tonight with the Trump-hating Washington Post. Now, last night, they released a story saying that President Trump gave the Russian foreign minister and ambassador classified information while they were visiting the White House last week.

Now, this story has been denied by Trump administration officials who were actually in the room. National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster said it was bogus. He said, quote, "I was in the room. It didn't happen." And Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, he denied the report.

But that does not stop the destroy Trump media from running wild with all of this. Watch this biased, abusively biased, so-called news. It's really fake news coverage. Watch this.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIPS)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE,CNN: The White House reeling from another Russia crisis, an unforced error at the hands of President Trump.

JOE JOHNS, CNN SENIOR WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT: The damage to U.S. intelligence interests is being viewed as incalculable this morning.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE, "GMA"/ABC: After this story broke here last night, we heard yelling behind closed doors here in this West Wing, Robin. This is a White House in chaos right now.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE, "GMA"/ABC: If true, this could be the most significant and dangerous mistake of the Trump presidency.

(END VIDEO CLIPS)

HANNITY: Oh, hyperventilating breathlessness! We're going to have more on the destroy Trump media's biased coverage later in our new segment. It's called the "Fake News Round-up." You don't want to miss it.

But let's talk about the Washington Post for a minute. This is the same newspaper who has on their home page the slogan, "Democracy dies in darkness." And just last week, remember? The Post reported that deputy attorney general Rod Rosenstein -- he was threatening to quit because of Comey's firing. Oh, guess what? Rosenstein -- and they cited anonymous sources -- well, he spoke in an on-camera interview and he said, I'm not quitting. I never threatened to quit.

But that wasn't the only story The Washington Post got wrong last week. After Comey was fired, The Post reported this headline. Quote, "Comey sought more resources for Russian probe just days before he was fired by President Trump, officials say." Well, guess what? Wrong again because the acting FBI Director Andrew McCabe, when testifying before Congress last week said he was unaware of such request and that also -- he also went on to say we have plenty of money for this. We have adequate funding.

So let's put the latest Washington Post fake news story into context. You got two stories they published last week, dead wrong! Anonymous sources, they're losing a ton of credibility, and that fits into a much broader narrative that we have been dealing with almost exclusively here in the media on this show.

The media's now so corrupt that their anger toward the president is now stopping them from doing their jobs! It's why I have spoken about changing the White House and how they handle the press. I've said they need to restructure daily briefings.

Now, the destroy Trump media -- well, they turned them into nothing more than a dog and pony show. I explained this last night. The White House press team -- they should develop a list of the top 15, 20 issues of the day. Let members of the mainstream media submit questions about them beforehand and afterwards, and they can have all their questions answered in detail, and then ask questions from there.

Also tonight, another massive breaking news story, explosive developments in the mysterious murder of former DNC staffer Seth Rich that could completely shatter the narrative that, in fact, WikiLeaks was working with the Russians, or there was collusion between the Trump campaign and the Russians.

Now, if true, this could become one of the biggest scandals in American history and could mean that Rich could have been murdered under very suspicious circumstances. Now, according to former homicide Detective Rod Wheeler, who's been hired by the Rich family to investigate the killing, newly discovered evidence shows that the 27-year-old former DNC employee was, in fact, communicating with WikiLeaks before he was gunned down in Washington, D.C. That was back in July of 2016, July 10th, while he was walking home. Seth Rich shot in the back, left for dead.

Police have been saying and characterizing this as an attempted robbery gone wrong. Here's a problem, and that's an odd explanation because, well, the assailant didn't take anything from Rich. They didn't take his phone, his wallet, his watch, his necklace. They were still on his person at the scene of the crime.

And now while there are several key questions about why Rich was killed, well, here's what we do know -- 12 days, exactly 12 days after Rich died and was killed, WikiLeaks published the leaked emails from the DNC. And after Rich's death, Wikileaks offered a $20,000 reward for information leading to the conviction of the person or the people responsible for the murder.

And then back in August, during an interview on Dutch TV, Assange implied that, in fact, Seth Rich was his source. Take a look at this!

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP, AUG. 9, 2016)

JULIAN ASSANGE, WIKILEAKS FOUNDER: (INAUDIBLE) whistleblower (INAUDIBLE) going to significant efforts to get us material and often very significant risks. It was a 27-year-old who worked for the DNC who was shot in the back, murdered just a few weeks ago for unknown reasons as he was walking down the street in Washington. So...

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: That was -- that was just a robbery, I believe, wasn't it?

ASSANGE: No. There's no finding. So...

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: What are you suggesting? What are you suggesting?

ASSANGE: I'm suggesting that our sources take risks, and they become concerned to see things occurring like that.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: But was he one of your sources, then? I mean...

ASSANGE: We don't comment on who our sources are.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Then why make a suggestion about a young guy being shot in the streets of Washington?

ASSANGE: Because we have to understand how high the stakes are in the United States.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: That's pretty profound. Now, this new information is also consistent with what Julian Assange told me back in January when I asked him specifically, did Russia give him any of these emails? Now, keep it in context here. In all the years of WikiLeaks, 11 years, they've never been proven wrong. Watch this.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP, JAN. 3)

HANNITY: Did Russia give you this information or anybody associated with Russia?

ASSANGE: Our source is not a state party. So the answer for our interactions is no.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: Now, during that same interview, I also asked Julian Assange about a report saying that a disgruntled Democrat and not the Russians gave John Podesta's emails to WikiLeaks. Take a look at this.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: There was one report in The Daily Mail that suggested somebody that you are friendly with actually was handed the documents at American University in a wooded area by a disgruntled Democrat who felt betrayed because the revelations showed that Bernie Sanders had been betrayed, and he didn't like the corruption of the Clinton Foundation. Can you confirm or deny that? Is that story true?

ASSANGE: Well, that statement came from Craig Murray. He...

HANNITY: Friend of yours?

ASSANGE: He's a friend of mine. He's been here several times. But WikiLeaks is a source protection organization. We are famous for never having exposed one of our sources over 10 years. That's why sources trust us and they come to us. So I can't comment on other people's statements about our sources, except to say what we have said, which is that our sources are not a state party.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: And the mystery deepens. Now, let me connect the dots from here. Now, from my perspective, this could be a very huge bombshell story. If this is true and Seth Rich gave WikiLeaks the DNC emails which ultimately led to the firing -- remember Debbie Wasserman Schultz on the eve of the DNC convention? This blows the whole Russia collusion narrative completely out of the water.

Now, maybe Seth Rich was upset that the DNC was conspiring to hurt Bernie Sanders and help Hillary Clinton win the nomination. Now, we learned from those released e-mails, remember this, that that was the case!

And then finally, tonight, five powerful forces. I want you to understand exactly what's happening here because the intensity, the fervor to get this president has been more fierce than ever.

You have five forces aligning against President Trump. You've got the destroy Trump propaganda media, the destroy Trump Democrats, the Washington deep state establishment, meaning some in the intelligence community, you got weak establishment Republicans, never-Trumpers. They now seem to be working together in an unprecedented attack against a sitting president.

Now, let start with the destroy Trump propaganda media. Now, they have been working around the clock since November. Oh, that's right, they were colluding with Hillary before the election, but since then to smear, slander, besmirch, character assassination against the president, any means necessary. And they have been against President Trump from the beginning. Remember, it was a funeral for most of these people on television on the night of November 8th?

On top of that, you may remember this.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIPS)

SETH MEYERS, WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENTS' DINNER, APRIL 30, 2011: Donald Trump has been saying that he will run for president as a Republican, which is surprising because I just assumed he was running as a joke.

(LAUGHTER)

REP. KEITH ELLISON, D-MINN., "THIS WEEK"/ABC, JULY 26, 2015: We better be ready for the fact that he might be leading the Republican ticket.

(LAUGHTER)

GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, CO-HOST: I know you don't believe that, but I want to go on (INAUDIBLE)

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Sorry to laugh.

BILL MAHER, "REAL TIME"/HBO, JUNE 19, 2015: Which Republican candidate has the best chance of winning the general election?

ANN COULTER, CONSERVATIVE COMMENTATOR: Of the declared ones right now? Donald Trump.

(LAUGHTER)

(END VIDEO CLIPS)

HANNITY: Well, they were laughing then. I don't know if they're laughing now. Now they're in intense take Trump down mode.

But then you got the tinfoil hat conspiracy theories about President Trump colluding with the Russians despite up to this point, no evidence, that these liberal crackpots -- they've been pushing forever. Where's the evidence?

Now, the media's become completely unhinged. They're suffering from Trump derangement syndrome. And as we have been continually pointing out right here on this show, the truth does not matter to people that call themselves journalists! They are agenda-driven. They're radical left-wing ideologues who are more than happy to push and advance Democratic talking points and political conspiracies.

Now, what do we know to be true is what, in this case, WikiLeaks did expose. Remember? The countless members of the destroy Trump media -- they were caught colluding with the Clinton campaign. Their main objective? They wanted to get Hillary elected, which explains why they have been perfectly willing to say anything, do anything, regardless of how insane, conspiratorial it may sound, all in an attempt to damage the president.

Now, number two, you got this alliance. You got sore loser Democrats. They're still in total and complete denial. They can't believe that Donald Trump won and Hillary lost, that Donald Trump's the president.

Now, they've also made it very clear that they're going to obstruct every single agenda item of the president at every single turn. For example, look at the firing of James Comey. Democrats -- they hated the guy's guts. They were calling for his head for months, and they even blamed Comey for Hillary Clinton's election loss. Then President Trump, he fires the former FBI director. All of a sudden, Democrats change their tune, feigning moral outrage, which exposed them to be nothing more than a bunch of partisan hypocrites.

Then you've got the third alliance. You got the deep state in Washington targeting the president, selectively, now on a daily basis, as you saw earlier tonight and last night, leaking information. We told you at the top about the bogus fake news story from completely unreliable Washington Post that they were wrong all those times last week.

Last night, it was claiming that President Trump allegedly leaked information to the Russians. They didn't care when Hillary did it.

Now, to me, it's clear what the motive is here. Some people inside Washington, D.C., the deep state -- they are selectively leaking information to try and damage the president. You may remember back in January, the Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer -- remember he issued this warning to the president-elect about the capabilities if he takes on the NSA, the deep state, the intelligence community. This is what he said.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP, MSNBC, JAN. 1)

SEN. CHUCK SCHUMER, D-N.Y., MINORITY LEADER: You take on the intelligence community, they have six ways from Sunday of getting back at you. So even for a practical, supposedly hard-nosed businessman, he's being really dumb to do this.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: Ah, six ways and Sunday, the deep state'll get you one way or the other! That what James Comey was doing tonight, seeking revenge? And by the way, since that warning, we've seen unprecedented leaks, including to The New York Times tonight. We have transcripts of the president's calls with foreign leaders. They'd been given to the press! Where did they come from? Drafts of executive orders shared with the media, information meant to damage the attorney general, Jeff Sessions, that was handed out!

And then after Lieutenant General Michael Flynn was caught up in incidental surveillance, he was then unmasked. And then in violation of the Espionage Act, that classified information was also released to the press, a felony in case you're interested.

Number four, in this alliance, the establishment Republicans, so many of these people so weak, so timid. They're spineless. They're feckless. They have no vision. They never supported the president, their own candidate, during the campaign.

Now, the National Security Adviser, H.R. McMaster -- he came out last night and called the report bogus in spite of all of these people.

Finally, number five, we have never-Trumpers. They were vitalized, so-called Republicans. They didn't like President Trump during the election, and now they seem to want him to fail so they can say to themselves they're right. They're so desperate to become relevant again.

So it's time to call out this alliance, these five groups, for what they are and what is actually happening here.

All right, when we come back on this busy breaking news night, James Comey strikes back against President Trump after he was fired last week. Jay Sekulow, Dave Bossie -- they'll weigh in.

And also tonight...

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Donald Trump just gave somebody up out there. Who will end up dead? And that's not hyperbole, by the way.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: The destroy Trump media is going to town with the Washington Post Story, and tonight, The New York Times story. We're going to explain the hypocrisy. We have a new segment on the program, our "Fake News Round-up" segment. We'll get reaction from Joe Concha, Ric Grenell.

And later tonight, Dr. Sebastian Gorka -- he's here on this busy, busy, nonstop breaking news, well, against the propaganda media night as we continue.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

HANNITY: Welcome back to "Hannity" as we continue with more of the murder of DNC staffer Seth Rich, the complete media hysteria meltdown and the alliance to destroy President Trump.

Joining us now with reaction -- he is the chief counsel for the American Center for Law and Justice, Jay Sekulow, and former deputy campaign manager for Donald Trump, he's also for (ph) the president of Citizens United, Fox News contributor David Bossie. Guys, good to see you both.

All right, Jay, let's start with -- let's start with the Seth Rich issue, Jay, and the timeline here. And you know, Wikileaks, say what you will about Julian Assange, he hasn't been wrong in 11 years. Nobody's proven him wrong. He's been defiant. It's not Russia, not Russia. He defended this guy, as we just played in the last segment, on Dutch TV.. And then you look at the timeline, and then you look at earlier reports.

Is it possible that this whole Russia narrative was -- and the leaks really came from a DNC staffer and that the media's been wrong for almost a year?

JAY SEKULOW, AMERICAN CENTER FOR LAW AND JUSTICE: Well, Sean, the media has not been right yet. So the -- you know, the presumption should be that the media is wrong with where they're laying the blame on the leaks that are going on now.

So I think the fact is that when you look at evidence -- and this is the timeline, as you mentioned, that is troubling, to say the least. And I think it raises a serious issue and a serious concern that our national security is being jeopardized in ways we don't fully understand. But I think the media narratives on this and trying to blame the president for all of this is proving to be false every single moment of every single day.

HANNITY: Dave Bossie, what's your reaction to all of it?

DAVID BOSSIE, FOX NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: Well, look, Sean, you're exactly right. The media is out to get this president. They are playing gotcha politics every single day, day in and day out. The people in the room over this particular -- this last leak -- the people in this room have said that the president did everything by the book, that none of the information was about sources and methods and that they share information all the time.

Look, this is -- this is continuous -- the permanent campaign against President Trump by the Democrats and by the media.

HANNITY: Yes. All right, Jay, let me -- let me give you an example. So for -- you know, we look about (ph) the sabotage of a president, so The Washington Post breaks this big story. Oh, my God, Donald Trump -- wouldn't he as president, first of all, have as commander-in-chief the ability to share whatever he thought was necessary in spite of the fact that, as David is pointing out, OK, everybody in the room says no?

And then you go to their sources, and what do we find once again? The sources are questionable, just like they were last week when they got the - - they got two issues wrong, that Rod Rosenstein threatened to quit. Rod Rosenstein said in an interview with a D.C. station, no, he didn't threaten to quit. You know, according to current and U.S. officials, OK, who were the former officials if they weren't in the room? What information did they have? Or the issue of, Well, Comey quit just before (sic) he asked for money for the investigation into Russia, and that was denied by Andrew McCabe.

SEKULOW: Sure. Well, first of all, the president has the constitutional rights. He's the commander-in-chief. So he can -- assuming arguendo, assuming for the purpose of argument that the president discussed security information of a significant nature with the Russians, guess what? No crime. He has the constitutional authority to do it. The Supreme Court has said so in the Department of the Navy versus Egan (ph) in 1988, An opinion by not a conservative member of the court there, an opinion by Justice Blackmun. That's number one.

Number two, reports have been indicating all day that, in fact, this information came from possibly Israeli sources, who, by the way, do intelligence sharing with guess who? The Russians.

So we're acting as if discussions about issues of, in this case, civilian aviation are somehow what, to be not discussed with Russia or the Israelis? That's absurd.

So again, they write this headline to create a fabricated story and everybody in the room denies its truthfulness, but at the end of the day, even if it was true, which it's not, it would be so what? The president...

HANNITY: OK, now...

SEKULOW: ... has this authority.

HANNITY: ... so last night, Jay -- all right, I agree, but last night, the media goes hysterical! They're breathless. They're reporting -- and you know, earlier tonight, I see the same thing unfolding.

SEKULOW: Hyperventilation.

HANNITY: Hypervent -- then I see the New York Times today, I hope you can let this go, meaning the investigation or to end the Flynn investigation that the president aid to James Comey. And James Comey's bitter! James Comey got fired. James Comey -- maybe he wrote a memo, maybe he didn't.

(CROSSTALK)

HANNITY: ... the president to say the words, I hope you can let this go? Is there anything illegal about that or...

SEKULOW: Not that's not...

(CROSSTALK)

SEKULOW: That's not intervening in the investigation. So (INAUDIBLE) look, James Comey's credibility -- let's -- first of all, let's -- I don't care what memo James Comey wrote. At this point, is there anyone that's watching this or anywhere that can believe anything that James Comey is saying about any of these matters? I mean, really, not a credible witness.

HANNITY: Dave?

BOSSIE: Well, he's exactly right. James Comey lost his credibility long ago, and it had to do with Hillary Clinton. Let's not forget that the Democrats were hyperventilating about James Comey themselves, you know, in July and in October, before the election, and they all wanted him fired then. And then, of course, the president fires him. And the president knows that it is going to make things worse for him by doing the right thing for the American people.

SEKULOW: Right.

BOSSIE: That's important here. Lester Holt lied last week when he said the president said he didn't care. Well, of course, he continued to say, I don't care that it is going to make it worse for me when the American people need this man fired, need new leadership at the bureau. And the president put that first ahead of himself...

HANNITY: You know, it's funny...

BOSSIE: ... and of course, Lester Holt turned that around.

HANNITY: Well said. All right, guys, good to see you both. When we come back, former D.C. homicide detective Rod Wheeler investigating the death of DNC staffer Seth Rich, who was killed last July. According to Wheeler, there is now evidence that confirms Seth, was in fact, speaking with Wikileaks. Wheeler joins us next in an exclusive.

And also tonight...

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: If true, this could be the most significant and dangerous mistake of the Trump presidency.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: Here we go again, destroy Trump media. They cannot get enough of The Washington Post. Now The New York Times story about the president in (INAUDIBLE) sharing information with Russia. And did he say, I hope this investigation ends? Well, anyway, The Post's newsroom reportedly erupted in applause as the story broke. Aren't they supposed to be unbiased journalists?

That's coming up. And we'll explain in our "Fake News Roundup." We got Joe Concha, Ric Grenell, and later, Dr. Sebastian Gorka weigh in on the unprecedented White House leaking and much more.

HANNITY: Welcome back to "Hannity." So more on the story of murdered Democratic National Committee staffer Seth Rich who was gunned down last July in Washington, D.C. D.C. police are officially in charge of this case, but former D.C. homicide detective Rod Wheeler who was hired by a third party to investigate the murder on behalf of the family says Mr. Rich was communicating with WikiLeaks before he was killed.

Now, Seth's family has been pushing back today, releasing a statement that reads in part, "We are a family that is committed to facts, not fake evidence that surfaces every few months to fill the void and distract law enforcement and the general public from finding Seth's murderers." Now the services of the private investigator who spoke to the press was ordered to the Rich family and paid for by a third party and contractually was barred from speaking to the press or anyone outside of law enforcement or the family unless explicitly authorized by the family.

FOX News has retained a copy of the contract signed by the Rich family retaining the services of Rod. He joins us now with the very latest. I don't want to spend a lot of time on the technicality of who hired you. I've known you a long time, Rod. You're a man of honor and integrity. So tell us who hired you.

ROD WHEELER, FORMER D.C. HOMICIDE DETECTIVE: Actually I was hired by the family, Joe and Mary Rich. They signed the contract. The financial benefit, if there were any financial benefit, and by the way there wasn't much, that was actually paid for by a third party that I have had little communication with at all, Sean.

HANNITY: Let's go through this case. The termite is fascinating here. As I played in the last segment, Julian Assange, I asked him repeatedly on radio and television if Russia was involved. Absolutely not. Now, believe him or not, he's a guy that WikiLeaks has an eleven year history of never being proven wrong. And all these leaks, by the way, ended up, a lot of them ended up being published in places like "The New York Times."

So I guess my question is, when you look at the timeline of this, and 12 days after he was killed it shows up on WikiLeaks, what did you discover in terms of the contacts with WikiLeaks?

WHEELER: Right. Well, that's an excellent question. And let me clear that up right now exactly what it was that I found. Now, I have never seemed them email myself directly. I haven't even seen the computer that Seth Rich used. Here's the problem with all of this. I don't even know where the computer is. I checked with the police department. They said they don't know where the computer is. And the FBI, they say they don't have the computer.

Now, where does this information come from in terms of knowing or believing, I should say, that it could have been in communication with WikiLeaks? There was a federal investigator that was involved on the inside of the case, a person that is very credible. And I'll tell you, let me just say this, Sean. I don't like to suggest things without saying the person's name. But I can't say the person's name because that person would be thrown under the bus, and I can't do that.

But this person, we checked him out, we have to check him out, very credible. He said he laid eyes on that computer and he laid eyes on the case file. And he came across very credible. When you look at that with the totality of everything else that I found in this case, it's very consistent for a person with my experience to begin to think, well, perhaps there were some email communications between Seth and WikiLeaks. Every time I talk with the police department, though, Sean, every time I talk with the police department about the WikiLeaks or the emails, it's automatically shut down. That discussion is automatically shut down.

HANNITY: So we don't know for sure if the FBI or the D.C. police have any access to this, these forensics, these emails?

WHEELER: Right, we don't know. We actually have a statement from the FBI saying, telling us to contact the D.C. police. The D.C. police says contact the FBI. Now, which is that? If this was just a murder investigation, first of all, why would the FBI be involved? The only reason the FBI would be involved, just so that the viewers understand, is this has some degree of national exposure, meaning, because maybe it is related to the DNC. And we don't know that. We don't know that for sure. It could have been a botched robbery.

But my point is this, Sean. I've been investigating murders for a while. You have to look at every possibility. You can't just look at one thing and say, well, that has to be it.

HANNITY: Have you ever seen a lot of robberies, which is how they've been looking into this case, where the person has their wallet and there watch after they've been shot and killed in the back?

WHEELER: No, I haven't. That's not to say that that could not happen. But here's the thing, and this is so important. There has been a $125,000 reward out for information pertaining to the death of Seth Rich. Not one person has come forward.

Here's one other thing that's going to be startling, and I'm just going to say this right now. I reached out to the police department way back in March when the family first hired me, right, to get involved. I don't hear anything from the police department for two to three days. Guess what I learned yesterday from the family of Seth Rich -- the police department did not call me back because someone, a high-ranking official at the DNC, check this out, a high-ranking official at the DNC, when I called the police department, they got that information and called the Rich family wanting to know, why was I snooping around?

HANNITY: Wouldn't that explain, how is it possible that the DNC, when the FBI wanted to look at their computers, was able to bring in their own people? Or that the people that ended up getting immunity ended up being able to destroy their laptop computers? Is there any evidence that the might of been disgruntled at the treatment of Bernie Sanders and the unfairness and that the fix was in to put Hillary in that position and maybe had evidence of that?

WHEELER: No, I haven't seen any evidence in that regard. The only thing that I have been able to confirm is that there were some problems that Seth was having on his job at the DNC right before he was killed. And the person, listen to this, the person that called the father after I called the police to get information, that's the person that Seth was having problems with at the DNC. So connect the dots here. It's starting to all come together.

Let me just really quickly say this. I don't know for sure, I don't know as a matter of fact if the emails went out to the WikiLeaks or anybody else, but it sure appears that way.

HANNITY: All right, Rod Wheeler, thanks for being with us. We appreciate it.

When we come back, our fake news roundup segment of the day, "Washington Post" newsroom erupting in applause after breaking the so-called big news story yesterday about President Trump Trump sharing information with Russia. So much for unbiased journalists.

And also tonight --

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: After this story broke here last night, we heard yelling behind closed doors here in this West Wing. Robin, this is a White House in chaos right now.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: Wow, destroy-Trump media foaming at the mouth over what turned out to be the nonstory by the "Washington Post," of course on top of their two false stories last week. We will expose the hypocrisy, get reaction from Joe Concha, Ric Grenell, and also Dr. Sebastian Gorka weighs in on the leaks from the deep state in the White House.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

HANNITY: Welcome back to "Hannity." Time for tonight's fake news media roundup. Last night "The Washington Post" reported President Trump gave away classified information during his meeting with the Russians. Following the release of that story "The Washington Post," their fact- checker Glenn Kessler, actually tweeted this, couldn't believe it, "Applause in "The Washington Post" newsroom as the Russian leaks scoop breaks the "Hollywood Access" record for the most readers per minute." Keep in mind, the same "Washington Post" newsroom that allegedly broke out in applause when President Trump visited in 2009. Meanwhile, smelling blood in the water, the destroy-Trump propaganda media, they were quick to jump on this speculative report. Take a look.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIPS)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE, CNN: The White House reeling from another Russia crisis, an unforced error at the hands of President Trump.

JOHNS: The damage to U.S. intelligence interests is being viewed as incalculable this morning.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE, "GMA"/ABC: After this story broke here last night we heard yelling behind closed doors. Here in this West Wing, Robin, this is a White House in chaos right now.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE, "GMA"/ABC: If true, this could be the most significant and dangerous mistake of the Trump presidency.

SCARBOROUGH: Trump just gave somebody up out there who will end up dead. And that's not hyperbole, by the way. He and other people, whoever that source was inside of ISIS, I guarantee you a lot of people are going to get shot in the head today by ISIS because they are going to indiscriminately start killing people that they suspect leaked this information.

(END VIDEO CLIPS)

HANNITY: Joining us now with reaction from "The Hill" is Joe Concha, he is a media reporter, as well as former U.S. spokesman for the U.N. ambassador Ric Grenell. Let me start with Ric tonight. So "The Washington Post" gets all these things wrong last week. They talk about the deputy attorney general, he was going to step aside. And the he's interviewed and he said no, anonymous source wrong. And then they get other issues. Well, Comey was asking for money. No, the interim FBI director says that didn't happen. That was just last week. Then this media takes this credible source and races with the story last night as if with a breathlessness I've never seen before, and the same people that ignored Hillary Clinton and her leaking of classified information on the server and top-secret, et cetera.

RIC GRENELL, FORMER SPOKESMAN FOR U.S. AMBASSADOR TO U.N.: I think we have two problems here, Sean. One is that the media love leaks. They are encouraging leaks. They're never going to stop talking about these leaks. And they're not going to give us a very good prioritization of who is leaking, why they are leaking. Is this the full information? They're just going to dramatize these leaks.

And the second problem that we have is that reporters in Washington, it's all groupthink. They are repeating and re-tweeting each other. There is very little actual research going on trying to figure out is this true. What reporters are racing to do is just tell each other story and fan the flames. They still haven't accepted the fact that Donald Trump is the president, and I think now they are in the anger phase.

HANNITY: You know, Joe, there is a certain effectiveness to this. I mean, "Saturday Night Live," because of Trump, best ratings ever. Jimmy Kimmel and Fallon were killing Colbert. Colbert has been resurrected from the dead and his lifeline was sent because of Donald Trump. And even leftists with the conspiracy theories are doing better than ever on cable news. Is it just because it's big money to peddle anything true or not true, proven wrong twice last week, not proven wrong last week?

JOE CONCHA, "THE HILL": Subscriptions up at "The New York Times," Subscriptions at "the Washington Post," everybody has benefited from Trump presidency because it's unpredictable. It's always something different every day. It's a crisis ever since Trump announced his candidacy over 700 days ago.

But I want to go back to a point that Ric just made around anonymous sources. And this is why it's not -- I think you just said, Sean, that it's having an effect. Look at the polling before the Comey firing in mid- April and then look at it after a week of nonstop negative coverage. Trump's approval rating doesn't move a bit, virtually unchanged. And I think that's because people see every story is based on anonymous sources, and they sit at home and they wonder, OK, what is the motive of that anonymous source? Do they want to take down the president some way? Do they have some sort of hatred, vitriol and anger there, or maybe they want to advance themselves? Maybe it's a matter of access. Are they at a senior level, these sources, or is it the White House chef?

And finally --

HANNITY: Let me ask you this.

CONCHA: And finally, the credibility of these folks as well, we don't know who they are and what their history is in terms of telling the truth. So I think people see that at home and they say, you know what, I'm fatigued, I'm getting cold. There's a crisis every day, and I don't know where these reports are coming from.

HANNITY: All right, guys, thank you for your patience. We appreciate you being with us.

And up next tonight on this busy news night.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

LT. GEN. H.R. MCMASTER, NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER: What the president discussed with the foreign minister was wholly appropriate to that conversation and is consistent with the routine sharing of information between the president and any leaders with whom he's engaged.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster earlier today saying President Trump's conversation with the Russian foreign minister was completely appropriate, and he was in the room. Will the Democrats, the destroy-Trump media, will they stop with the hysteria now, the breathlessness? We got it. The deputy assistant to the president, Dr. Sebastian Gorka, will join us next with reaction as we continue.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

MCMASTER: What the president discussed with the foreign minister was wholly appropriate to that conversation and is consistent with the routine sharing of information between the president and any leaders with whom he's engaged.

I'm not concerned at all. That conversation was wholly appropriate to the conversation and I think wholly appropriate what the expectations are of our intelligence partners.

I was in the room. The secretary of state was in the room, as you know. The deputy assistant, the deputy adviser for national security Dina Powell, for strategy was in the room. And none of us felt in any way that that conversation was inappropriate.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: That was the national security advisor H.R. McMaster earlier today at the White House in the press briefing saying that what President Trump discussed with the Russian foreign minister last week was completely appropriate. But the destroy-Trump left, they continue to try and take the president down. And these leaks, where are they coming from? They need to stop.

Joining us now with reaction, deputy assistant to the president Dr. Sebastian Gorka. Current and former officials, it comes from the same newspaper, by the way, that said that the deputy attorney general, Rosenstein, threatened to quit, but he did an interview and said no, I never threatened to quit. And then of course, they were suggesting that days before Comey left that James Comey had said he wanted more funding, and McCabe, the interim FBI director, said no, we have enough funds. We're adequately funded. And the list goes on. And now tonight it's "The New York Times," oh, did Donald Trump ask to end the Flynn probe by a bitter, angry Comey who didn't care a whit about the rule of law and equal justice under the law as it relates to Hillary.

DR. SEBASTIAN GORKA, DEPUTY ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT: Sean, I think we have to go to the next stage. It's no longer fake news. It's now dishonest news. It's all about the political agenda. It's politics above national security. We've gone through the numbers. Just since February, let's look at what has been leaked to the press. I'm just going to give you a handful. The A.P. leaked the conversation to Mexico, to the president of Mexico, "Washington Post" leaked the conversation to Australia, "Politico" leaked the one to Paris, and Reuters one of the calls to the Kremlin.

When is it going to stop? When is the conspiracy theory insanity of the resist movement, of the Ben Rhodes, Colin Carl (ph) nexus going to say, look, we're not going to endanger national security anymore. We're going to do actual journalism. This has to stop.

HANNITY: Sebastian, when is the leaking thing going to stop? This has to be coming. You know, they're making it all up. And by the way, "The Washington Post" was so wrong so often, the fact that they were breathlessly reporting everything they said last night after last weeks' disastrous accuracy rating is pretty amazing. And then of course the eruption in the "Washington Post" newsroom.

Here's my question, OK, if there leaking the Australia -- conversations with the Australia Prime Minister and people in the Kremlin and elsewhere around the world, that means that's the deep state intelligence community doing it. It has to be coming from there, doesn't it?

GORKA: Can I just say two things. Number one, the bad news is there are people that unfortunately we've inherited that don't recognize who the president is and that his primary responsibility is to protect America. And they think they know better and they think they're allowed to call their friends up at The Washington Post, the Politico, The Huffington Post. That is illegal. That's felonious activity that could endanger Americans.

HANNITY: Dr. Gorka, nobody has been held responsible for the felony violation of the Espionage Act with Michael Flynn. Nobody's been held accountable for unmasking. Even if it is incidental surveillance, the unmasking and then the leaking of intelligence, raw intelligence. Nobody has been held accountable so far. Nobody has been fired. How many Obama holdovers still exist in these communities.

GORKA: You have to keep doing what you do. Sara Carter has to keep doing what she does, because you've nailed it. Sean, the biggest story, the biggest story of the last eight years, not eight weeks, eight years is not just the unmasking and the leaked to "The Washington Post," but why were those transcripts written? Who wrote the taskers, because those taskers cannot justify on the basis of national security. They were clearly politically motivated. When Sara Carter, when Sean Hannity gets to the bottom of that, we will have a story that makes Watergate look like a fairy tale.

HANNITY: All right, Dr. Gorka, great to see you as always.

When we come back, we need your help, a very important "Question of the Day." We need your input, that's straight ahead.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

HANNITY: Time for our "Question of the Day." So I spoke about this in my opening monologue. Do you think there's an alliance to take down President Trump? We want to hear from you, Facebook.com/SeanHannity, @SeanHannity on Twitter, let us know what you think.

Unfortunately that's all the time we have this evening. So much news to get in in one small hour. Thank you for being here. We will see you back here tomorrow night.



Content and Programming Copyright 2017 Fox News Network, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Copyright 2017 CQ-Roll Call, Inc. All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ-Roll Call. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.