Malia Obama to spend summer as an intern at U.S. Embassy in Spain
In a few weeks, Malia Obama will leave Pennsylvania Avenue for Madrid’s Serrano Street.

President Barack Obama’s eldest daughter is planning to do a summer internship at the U.S. Embassy there, Spanish newspaper ABC is reporting.

Malia Obama will turn 18 years old on July 4.

After graduating from Sidwell Friends School, she reportedly decided to take a sabbatical year before starting at Harvard University in the fall of 2017.

American embassies often take State Department interns during the year, usually recent college graduates. According to ABC, Malia’s decision to intern in the Spanish capital may be related to the Obamas' friendship with the U.S. ambassador in Madrid, James Costos, and his romantic partner of 14 years, interior designer Michael S. Smith.

Costos was one of President Obama’s top donors during his reelection campaign in 2012. Before being appointed ambassador, he was a corporate executive in the retail and entertainment industries. Smith was commissioned to redecorate several rooms of the White House for Obama, according to ABC.

Malia's Spanish would seem to be fairly functional. During Obama's historic March visit to Cuba, she acted as unofficial translator for her dad.

The President and Malia share a laugh as Malia translates Spanish to English for her dad at a restaurant in Old Havana. A photo posted by Pete Souza (@petesouza) on Mar 21, 2016 at 8:28am PDT

Malia’s internship in Madrid could start as soon as Obama’s official visit to Spain (July 9 to 11) is over, the news outlet reported.

According to official information released earlier this month, the president will meet with acting Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy and King Felipe VI.

“The visit to Spain, which is an important ally, is aimed at intensifying cooperation in terms of security and strengthening political and economic relations,” the White House said in a statement.

The White House added that the president's visit to Europe would be taking place within the context of a NATO meeting that will take place in Warsaw between July 7 and 9.

Like us on Facebook

Follow us on Twitter & Instagram