AAN Kicks Off $2 Million Nationwide TV Ad Campaign on AHCA
Advertising in 21 congressional districts and national TV WASHINGTON – American Action Network (@AAN) today announced a new $2 million issue advocacy campaign as part of its ongoing effort to highlight the merits of the American Health Care Act (AHCA). The ad features a California woman named Elizabeth Jacinto sharing her family’s story with the Affordable Care Act’s broken promises and her support for the AHCA. Over the next two weeks, the member-specific ads will air in 21 congressional districts nationwide and on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.” See the full list of districts targeted here. Elizabeth is a mother of four who shared her health care story in one of AAN’s issue advocacy campaigns earlier this year. Despite repeated promises to the contrary, Elizabeth lost both her doctor and health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. Under her new plan, Elizabeth could not keep her trusted doctor who had delivered her first two children. At the time, Elizabeth was not only forced to find a new doctor to give birth to her third baby but a system glitch canceled her family’s plan leaving them uninsured for four months. During this time, Elizabeth’s family couldn’t go to the doctor, her newborn missed immunizations, and her husband had to delay a previously scheduled surgery. With passage of the AHCA, Elizabeth is looking forward to what the new plan means for her family, including more choices, lower costs, and better coverage. “Conservatives in Congress made a promise to the American people that better health care was on the way, and they kept that promise by passing the AHCA,” said Corry Bliss, AAN Executive Director. “Elizabeth’s story represents that of too many families across the country who have suffered under the current system. The AHCA will help provide better coverage, lower costs, and more choices, while protecting those with pre-existing conditions. That’s why AAN will continue its aggressive efforts to promote the AHCA and thank members of Congress who are fighting to ensure these patient-centered reforms become a reality.” The ad is part of AAN’s previously announced commitment to thank members in the U.S. House of Representatives who voted for the American Health Care Act. Since passage of the AHCA, AAN has spent over $5.6 million in advertising across various platforms including TV, radio and digital.



View an example of a member-specific ad here. View an example of the national ad here. SCRIPT

ELIZABETH: As a mom, rising health care costs are a big concern.



My family lost our insurance and doctor because of the Affordable Care Act.



But now, we have hope.



The American Health Care Act will fix our broken health care system.



More competition and choices.



Resulting in lower costs and better coverage.



Families get tax credits to make insurance cheaper,



And people with pre-existing conditions are protected.



Thank [MEMBER OF CONGRESS] for fighting for the better health care we deserve. ###