Bush signs record-high budget bill
TALLAHASSEE - Wielding a relatively light veto pen on a record level of state spending, Gov. Jeb Bush signed a new $64.7 billion state budget into law Thursday that provides major increases for education, transportation and health care programs.

Bush vetoed $180 million in projects from the budget bill (SB 2600), but it was well short of his $349 million veto record that he set last year.

''Overall, this is a really good budget,'' Bush said.

Included in the vetoes was the rejection of $500,000 for the University of Florida McKnight Brain Institute for traumatic brain injury and spinal cord research, according to Tom Fortner, director of communications for the Health Science Center.

He said some of the research involved adult stem cells.

"Our disappointment is on behalf of the patients who we encounter every day with these devastating injuries and who hope desperately for recovery," Fortner said.

On paper, the budget represents a huge increase from the $57.3 billion budget passed by lawmakers last year. But Bush said that figure needs to be adjusted for hurricane-related spending that occurred in the interim.

By his estimate, the current budget is at $62.3 billion and will increase by 3.8 percent in the new fiscal year, which begins July 1. Bush said while the size of the new budget gave him ''cause for a pause,'' it also reflects the fact that the state's economy is booming.

''We have more money to spend this year because business is thriving,'' he said. ''This state has busted loose.''

Bush said the new budget was acceptable since lawmakers put aside nearly $5.5 billion in reserve funds that could be used for emergencies like another major hurricane season. He also said the budget reflects the state's commitment to spend $1.5 billion in new roads, schools and water projects as part of a new growth management initiative.

And the budget contains more than $200 million in tax cuts, including another reduction in the state's tax on major stock and bondholders.

''I'm really proud of the fact that we continue to cut taxes,'' Bush said.

With that kind of money, the budget is replete with record increases for most major state services. Public schools will see an increase of $1.3 billion, which is a 9 percent boost over this year. Universities will have $145 million increase, with students paying an additional 5 percent in tuition. Community colleges will have a $64 million increase along with a 5 percent tuition hike. State workers will receive a 3.6 percent raise on Aug. 1 - their largest pay raise in recent years.

The state Medicaid program, which pays for health care for the poor and disabled, will grow by 11 percent to $15.5 billion.

But following the pattern he has set since he became governor in 1999, Bush showed he wasn't afraid to use his veto power when it comes to pruning state spending. Although his $180 million in vetoes wasn't his most aggressive effort, the Republican governor did cut more than 250 individual items and programs from the annual spending plan.

Bush said that while many of the projects were ''well intended,'' they didn't necessarily represent a state priority. Examples of his vetoes ranged from cutting $600,000 to pay pig farmers who are forced to abandoned their operations because of new restrictions to eliminating $5 million for a Florida Bar-backed program to provide more legal services to Floridians.

Some lawmakers strongly objected to the cuts, saying the governor isn't the only who should decide whether a project is worthy or not.

Rep. Dan Gelber, D-Miami Beach, said many of the projects cut by the governor represent areas where lawmakers think the state should be doing more, including providing social service and health care programs in their communities.

''These funds are going to help real people, usually real children and real seniors,'' Gelber said.

Rep. Anne Gannon, D-Delray Beach, sharply criticized Bush's veto of $30,000 to fund a cervical cancer task force that was created by lawmakers last year but never funded.

''The governor is greatly detached from the health issues that face women and this veto clearly shows his disconnect,'' she said.

But Bush said he was also a little more lenient on his veto criteria for some areas, including communities that were hit hard by last year's hurricanes and rural communities that have a limited ability to raise their own revenue. He also said he gave ''deference'' to projects that were endorsed by House and Senate leaders.

Victor Hull of the Herald-Tribune in Sarasota contributed to this report.

FYI: Area projects cut Here are the local projects vetoed by the Gov. Jeb Bush: $250,000 Lifestyle Enrichment Center in Columbia County.

$150,000 for the Enhancing Education program through Alachua Southwest Social Services.

$500,000 for the University of Florida brain and spinal cord research and development.

$100,000 for Dixie County District Four community center program.

$500,000 for the Putnam County storm shelter retrofit.

$200,000 for the Starke Fire Department garage and storage.

$500,000 for the Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences' Kids Fishing for Success program.