Scott urges universities to hold the line on tuition
Scott is making a personal appeal to all 12 state university presidents, meeting them in person or talking to them by phone to reiterate his commitment not to raise tuition as they meet with their respective boards of trustees to approve next year's budgets.

Gov. Rick Scott is making a personal appeal to all 12 state university presidents, meeting them in person or talking to them by phone to reiterate his commitment not to raise tuition as they meet with their respective boards of trustees to approve next year's budgets.

The meetings follow letters from Scott to each president last month reiterating his commitment to not raising tuition, after vetoing a 3 percent tuition rate increase approved by the Legislature.

"We don't want a 3 percent increase or even a 1 percent increase in tuition on our students," he said, describing tuition increases as a tax hike.

University presidents agreed in December not to seek a tuition increase this year if the Legislature and governor restored more than $300 million in spending cuts from last year. The budget restores that amount and provides an additional $314 million to universities.

But tuition may go up anyway.

A statute requires that tuition automatically increase to meet the rate of inflation if no other tuition increase is requested. Based on inflation, tuition would go up 1.7 percent.

Scott and his general counsel are meeting with legislative lawyers to determine whether the increase will stand. Scott said universities could use their differential power to lower rates by 1.7 percent to negate the automatic inflation adjustment.

The budget before the UF board of trustees this week contains no tuition increase for undergraduates but it does contain a 1 percent fee increase, UF Provost Joe Glover said.

Glover said there is no plan to reduce fees if government lawyers decide the statutory tuition increase will stand. "Fees are dedicated to specific purposes and services that for the most part students have indicated they want," he said.

The governor had meetings scheduled Tuesday with Florida State University President Eric Barron and University of North Florida President John Delaney, a day after he met with Florida Atlantic University President Dennis Crudele and had a phone conversation with University of Florida President Bernie Machen.

The governor spoke with Machen to "get a better understanding of the university's budget plans for next year and how he can be helpful in producing degree programs to create jobs for graduates," said Jackie Schutz, Scott's press secretary.

"The conversation was general and supportive of UF's intentions to move to the Top-10 publics," Machen said via an email to The Sun. He declined to get into specifics about the talk.