Gov. Rick Scott returns to Nanotherapeutics to talk jobs
In October 2013, Gov. Rick Scott turned the first shovel of dirt at a ceremonial groundbreaking for biopharmaceutical company Nanotherapeutics' new headquarters near Progress Park in the city of Alachua.

Two and a half years later, Scott was back on Tuesday to tour the nearly completed, spacious but still unfurnished and unequipped 180,000-square-foot, $138 million manufacturing plant.

During a short news conference, Scott joked with Nanotherapeutics Board Chairman Weaver Gaines about the different local pronunciations of a county (A-lat-chew-uh) and city (A-lat-chew-A) with the same name. He then talked up the job creation that has been a focus of his 5 1/2 years in office.

Scott pointed to the 75 new jobs at Nanotherapeutics since 2013.

“Look at what this company is doing,” he said. “And they will continue to grow.”

In recent years, Nanotherapeutics has received $500 million in contracts and grants to make biodefense, infectious-disease and influenza products, including a Department of Defense contract that could be worth up to $359 million to develop and manufacture drugs to treat bioterrorism and radiological threats.

Born in the University of Florida's Sid Martin Biotechnology Incubator, Nanotherapeutics first moved to the adjacent Progress Park and will now jump another short distance to its nearby new headquarters nearing completion.

Gaines said the company, which set a goal of 150 employees when its expansion started in 2013, now has a staff of about 120.

During his comments, Scott pointed to the permanent sales tax exemption on manufacturing machinery and equipment that he got through the Legislature this session as one tool he feels will help that sector of the economy continue to grow.

At the same time, the Legislature balked at his request for $1 billion in tax cuts and $250 million in incentives to lure businesses to the state or encourage their expansion.

Scott was speaking in the headquarters of a firm that is receiving state and, to a lesser extent, city and county incentives through the Qualified Target Industry program that focuses on high paying jobs.

“I'm going to continue to push for more tax cuts so we can get more jobs,” he said.

Back in 2012, the total tax rebate incentive package for Nanotherapeutics had a total possible value of $1.05 million, with the city of Alachua and Alachua County each kicking in 10 percent and the state paying the rest.

During Tuesday's event, Scott took a few minutes to honor Nanotherapeutics controller Jonah Goolsby, an Army veteran who served in Iraq and received the Purple Heart. Scott, who served in the Navy toward the end of the Vietnam War, recalled how Vietnam was such an unpopular war that you didn't go off base in your uniform.

“Today, we respect our veterans,” Scott said.

Goolsby said he had no idea beforehand that Scott planned to talk about him.

“It was a surprise, but I'm honored,” he said.