Georgia Department of Economic Development
Sage to put North American HQ in Atlanta

The UK-based technology company to create innovation hub, 400 jobs | 06/12/2015

ATLANTA, June 12, 2015—Gov. Nathan Deal today announced that Sage, a global leader in business management software for small- to medium-sized businesses and an FTSE 100 company based in the United Kingdom, will establish its North American headquarters and an innovation hub in Atlanta. This will result in the creation of 400 jobs over the next few years.

“Georgia is a hotbed for innovative global companies to locate their North American headquarters,” said Deal. “Sage’s decision to locate here speaks volumes about our pro-business climate and qualified workforce. At the same time, it demonstrates that our state’s thriving technology scene remains at the forefront of the minds of global business leaders who are looking to remain competitive and grow their business in the U.S.”

Sage is establishing a new Customer Business Center in the Midtown district of Atlanta, which will open this fall. The goal of the new office is to enhance collaboration and foster innovation and primary support for the company’s newest product, Sage Life, produced in partnership with Salesforce. The new jobs will be in the areas of sales and marketing initially, as well as customer service, digital marketing and R&D over the next few years. The University System of Georgia will aid in the recruitment process for the newly created positions. This new Midtown location will join the company’s existing operations in Lawrenceville. Between the two facilities, Sage will have approximately 1,000 employees in the Atlanta metro area.

“We are proud to welcome Sage to the City of Atlanta, where the technology and software development sectors are thriving,” said Mayor Kasim Reed. “Businesses are voting with their feet and choosing the City of Atlanta every day. By building its new headquarters in Midtown, Sage will have access to our strong pool of talented tech workers, the world’s busiest and most efficient passenger airport, and best-in-class transit solutions.”

Sage is the world’s third-largest supplier of enterprise resource planning software and the largest supplier to small businesses, with millions of customers worldwide.

“Sage has called Georgia home for many years, and we are delighted to expand our operations here with the addition of a new facility in Midtown Atlanta,” said Marc Scheipe, Sage North America CFO. “Our new Atlantic Station location puts us in the in the center of the emerging Midtown Atlanta technology corridor and positions our newly established North American headquarters to attract top talent in the years to come.”

Mary Ellen McClanahan, Georgia Department of Economic Development (GDEcD) project manager and director of entrepreneur and small business development, assisted Sage on behalf of Georgia and partnered with Invest Atlanta, Georgia Power and the Metro Atlanta Chamber.

“We are pleased that Sage Group has selected metro Atlanta for their North American headquarters and innovation center,” said Brian P. McGowan, executive vice president and chief operating officer for the Metro Atlanta Chamber. “Sage joins a growing base of international companies in the region that are choosing Atlanta for their R&D and innovation centers. This is a testament to the strength of our innovation ecosystem and the talent coming from our region’s colleges and universities.”

“When global technology companies such as Sage chose our state for their North American headquarters and innovation center, it tells us that we’re doing something right,” said GDEcD Commissioner Chris Carr. “Our top talent and solid technology cluster has attracted dozens of innovation centers to the state. I have no doubt that our pro-business climate will help Sage remain competitive in the global marketplace.”

About the Sage Group

Sage energizes the success of businesses and their communities around the world through the use of smart technology and imagination. Sage works with a thriving community of entrepreneurs, business owners, tradespeople, accountants, partners and developers who drive the global economy. Sage is a FTSE 100 company with 14,000 employees in 24 countries. For more information, visit www.sage.com.

Related