‘It’s not about money; it’s about freedom of speech’: Glenn responds to Duck Dynasty controversy
A&E has placed Duck Dynasty star Phil Robertson on indefinite hiatus because of candid comments he made about homosexuality in an interview with GQ magazine. Robertson offered honest – and crass – insight into his views on homosexuality in an interview that appears in the January issue of GQ.

“I want to start with Duck Dynasty and what happened with Duck Dynasty. It is one of the most incredible stories I have heard,” Glenn said on radio this morning. “Now and I don’t know what the Robertsons are going to do. I don’t know what’s going to happen. I can’t imagine that A&E is going to cancel that thing, but if they do, I want to make it very clear to the Robertsons: If they fire you, TheBlaze would love to be in business with you. And it’s not about money. It’s about freedom of speech. You know, I said this with Paula Deen. I didn’t agree with what Paula Deen said by any stretch of the imagination, but you don’t destroy people like that. We’re not those people.”

In the interview, Robertson crassly explains why he personally does not understand homosexually, but he also clarifies that he does judge anyone because “that’s the Almighty’s job.”

Feeling the pressure of LGBT groups like GLAAD and the Human Rights Campaign, A&E decided to suspend the reality star from the show he stars in with his family. In a statement, A&E said:

“We are extremely disappointed to have read Phil Robertson’s comments in GQ, which are based on his own personal beliefs and are not reflected in the series Duck Dynasty. His personal views in no way reflect those of A+E Networks, who have always been strong supporters and champions of the LGBT community. The network has placed Phil under hiatus from filming indefinitely.”

Robertson released his own statement prior to the news of his hiatus:

“I myself am a product of the ’60s; I centered my life around sex, drugs and rock and roll until I hit rock bottom and accepted Jesus as my Savior. My mission today is to go forth and tell people about why I follow Christ and also what the Bible teaches, and part of that teaching is that women and men are meant to be together. However, I would never treat anyone with disrespect just because they are different from me. We are all created by the Almighty and like Him, I love all of humanity. We would all be better off if we loved God and loved each other.”

Your browser does not support iframes.

While Glenn did not necessarily agree with Robertson’s choice of words, he unfailingly defended his right to speak his mind. Glenn offered the Robertson family a bit of advice that might go against traditional counsel but would certainly force A&E to make a decision:

Now, if I am in the Robertson family, I sit down with my family and say, “Is this the way we’re going to let him be treated? Is this who we are? We’re just going to be quiet because he has an opinion about the scriptures? Well, I got news for ya. I don’t care.”

[…]

So what you do is you call up GQ and say, you know what? The whole family wants to do an interview. Whole family. GQ will… invent the teleporter to be able to be there within five minutes. And they will have the cameras and they will have all the best writers. And you say, “Look, this is going to be a really short interview. We agree with Phil.”… And you say exactly what Phil said.

And then I guess A&E has to make a decision: Gee, are we going to make a stand because all A&E cares about… is the cash. And this is the biggest cash cow they have ever had. So do you think they’re going to cut you loose? Answer: Yep. Yes, they will because they have already caved once, they will now have to cave every time after.

You should be giving interview after interview… You all memorize the exact words that Phil said and that’s the only way you answer every question… No matter what they ask you, you only answer that way. And you force A&E to make a decision. And you will either be out, or you will be the most powerful people the country has ever seen on television. You already have all of the juice you’re ever gonna get. It’s never going to get more powerful than this – unless you take a stand.

And if you take a stand and they fire you, TheBlaze will… be on the phone… We’d like you at TheBlaze. We’re not ashamed. We won’t fold. We have people of diverse opinion here. There are people here that are godly and atheist. There are people here that are liberal and very conservative. There are straight people. There are gay people. There are white people. There are black people. They all have an opinion, and they’re all welcome at TheBlaze.

Duck Dynasty, we would be proud to have you. May I suggest: Make your stand. You will never have a better chance. And quite honestly, you’re our best shot as people. If we don’t get people to wake up to the fact that this is fascism, that we are not allowed to have another opinion. If we don’t get them to make up now, they’re never going to wake up, and you’re our best shot. Diversity of thought.