While world burns, White House parties
[kyteembed s=”1196603″]

Well, as the world burns down with riots and protests, the White House was able to find the time to throw yet another party. There must have been an opening on the President’s schedule. Among the guests was John Legend, who has been complaining about getting a tax “break”. Glenn gave his reaction to the story on radio this morning.

“Singer John Legend is very upset. Why? Because he’s a millionaire who got a tax cut. Quote: People fought to give me, a millionaire, a tax cut this year. I don’t need it. And all the other millionaires don’t need it, either,” Glenn said.

“You give away all the money to a charity of your choice. That’s what I do. I give a lot of money to charity. Better yet, give it as a little gift to the U.S. Government. Nobody’s stopping you from writing a bigger check to the U.S. Government. Go ahead. Look it up. The address is online. And give me a call when you’ve made and written that check to the IRS, you dope.”

“He’s in the news again because of the party at the White House while the world was burning last night, the White House was partying,” Pat explained.

Pat continued, “Last night the party included not just John Legend but Seal, Jamie Foxx, Nick Jonas I guess of the Jonas Brothers, Sheryl Crow was there.”

“By the way, John, you didn’t get a tax cut! You’re going to pay the same taxes this year that you paid last year,” Pat said.

“I asked one of the guys who used to be the head of the IRS. This is like five years ago. I said, has anybody ever sent, intentionally, overpaid their taxes? You know, some millionaire said, hey, I got a million dollars that I want to pay? He said occasionally we’ll get somebody who say they want to apply it directly to the debt but nobody ‑‑ did I say Hollywood, anybody? He said, no, nobody just says, hey, I’m going to pay extra, I just want to pay extra, give it to some of the other ‑‑ give it to the EPA and give it to DHS, give it to those guys. Spread it around a bit. No, no. Nobody does it. You know why? Because they know charities are more effective than the federal government. That’s why. It’s ridiculous. Ridiculous,” Glenn said.