Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Council
The Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Council (Compact Council) was established on December 8, 2008, when the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Compact became State and federal law. Each of the eight Great Lakes State legislatures ratified the Compact and Congress provided its consent for this historic accord.



The Compact details how the States will work together to manage and protect the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin. It also provides a framework for each State to enact programs and laws protecting the Basin.



News

May 28, 2019

The Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Council (Compact Council) will meet on Thursday, June 27, 2019 at the Indiana State Capitol, Senate Committee Room 233, 200 West Washington Street, Indianapolis, Indiana. The meeting began immediately following the adjournment of the Regional Body meeting, at approximately 9:45 a.m. EDT. This meeting will beopen to the public and include an opportunity for public comments. Meeting participation is also open via webinar. An agenda, materials to be discussed and call-in information are available on this website. All materials posted to the website are subject to revision up to and through the meeting.

Remote participation is available to individuals registering at: https://attendee.gotowebinar.com/register/5837379099237402893

Listen only mode is available by calling:

Canada: 647/497-9429

United States: 914/614-3429

Passcode 355-403-356

Draft June 27, 2019 Meeting Agenda

December 6, 2018 Draft Meeting Summary

December 28, 2018

Comment and Response Document

The Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Water Resources Regional Body (Regional Body) and the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Council (Council) held a public comment period from September 10 to October 10, 2018 on Compact Council’s proposal to adopt Rules of Practice and Procedure and to amend its Interim Guidance; and, the Regional Body’s proposal to amend its Interim Procedures guidance.Â In addition, the Council and Regional Body under the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Compact (Compact) and the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Sustainable Water Resources Agreement (Agreement), respectively, jointly proposed to amend their Sequence of Events guidance. These documents are referenced collectively as the Updated Procedures Documents. The Updated Procedures Documents were adopted by the Regional Body and Compact Council on December 6, 2018.

The Regional Body and Council received ~2517 written comments (email/mailed postcards, letters, written comments at hearing) from individuals and groups. Additionally, comments were received at a public hearing on October 3, 2018 in Indianapolis, Indiana. Eight individuals provided oral testimony at the public hearing. A Comment and Response Document has been issued by the Regional Body and Compact Council. Comments received are grouped and summarized under topic headings. Responses are provided to the summarized comments.

October 19, 2018

Comments received during the public comment period are now available for download and review.

Common Email Set 1

Common Email Set 2

Unique Comments received

October 3, 2018 Indianapolis Indiana Hearing--Transcript

October 10, 2018

The Public Comment period has closed on the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Council’s (Council) proposed Rules of Practice and Procedure; Council’s proposed Council Guidance; Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Water Resource Regional Body's (Regional Body) proposed Regional Body Procedures; and, Council’s and Regional Body’s joint proposed Sequence of Events for Consideration of Proposals for Exceptions to the Prohibition on Diversions that are subject to Regional Review (Sequence of Events). Thank you to those who have submitted comments.

September 10, 2018

NOTICE

The Full Notice, including Supplementary Information, can be downloaded here. The documents subject to public comment can be found here.



AGENCY:

The Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Council (Council) and the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Water Resources Regional Body (Regional Body).

The Great Lakes St. Lawrence Governors & Premiers serves as the Secretariat to the Council and Regional Body.

ACTION:

Notice of: Council’s proposed Rules of Practice and Procedure; Council’s proposed Council Guidance; Regional Body’s proposed Regional Body Procedures; and, Council’s and Regional Body’s joint proposed Sequence of Events for Consideration of Proposals for Exceptions to the Prohibition on Diversions that are subject to Regional Review (Sequence of Events).

All information, including the documents to be commented upon, can be found here.

For those seeking information on the Waukesha Diversion Application, information can be found here.