Dems ramp up support for DiNicola in race for Congress
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee produces, airs new DiNicola ad

Democratic congressional candidate Ron DiNicola's bid to unseat Republican U.S. Rep. Mike Kelly got a boost from national Democrats in July when DiNicola earned a spot in the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee's competitive Red to Blue program, which gives candidates fundraising and organizational support.

That support has ramped up in recent weeks with a DCCC-funded TV ad campaign targeting Kelly and touting DiNicola — an indication that the committee considers Kelly to be among several incumbent Republicans nationwide vulnerable in the Nov. 6 midterm elections.

The ad, titled "Dealer," is the centerpiece of a $325,000 advertising buy, according to Democratic sources familiar with the production and airing of the ad. It began airing in the Pittsburgh market on Sept. 25.

The ad echoes a theme that DiNicola, an Erie lawyer, has touched upon in TV ads produced by his campaign — that Kelly, who is seeking a fifth two-year term in the U.S. House of Representatives, is looking out for himself in Washington, not residents of the newly-configured 16th Congressional District.

The DCCC ad claims that Kelly's net worth has increased by millions of dollars since he was first elected to Congress in 2010. A narrator states that "it's no surprise he helped give special tax breaks to car dealers, like himself."

That claim is a reference to what DiNicola has called the "Kelly Kickback," a little-known loophole in the tax reform bill, which Kelly voted for, that gave car dealerships tax breaks.

Kelly owns automobile dealerships in Butler.

Later in the ad, the narrator mentions DiNicola's service in the U.S. Marine Corps, and points out that he helped GE Transportation workers get federal benefits after they were laid off.

"Ron DiNicola. He'll look out for us," the narrator states.

The ad buy was the DCCC's first for DiNicola since he was selected for the Red to Blue program, which helps candidates the committee considers "top tier" with fundraising and organization support for their campaigns. It also provides staffing, training and strategic advice.

A Pennsylvania Supreme Court redistricting plan unveiled in February reworked what had been known as the 3rd Congressional District. The 16th Congressional District now includes Erie, Crawford, Mercer, Lawrence counties and the western portion of Butler County.

Kelly has represented the 3rd District since 2010, when he defeated Democratic incumbent Kathy Dahlkemper. Libertarian Ebert Beeman, a former Erie County Councilman, is also in the race.

The mid-term contest is something of a referendum on the GOP's majority in Congress and on Donald Trump, who was elected president in 2016. Trump won the voting precincts within the new congressional district by more than 20 percentage points. Nationwide, Democrats need to flip 23 seats to retake control of the House.

Though the new district is more favorable for Democrats than before, Republicans still hold an advantage.

The Cook Political Report gives Kelly an 8-point edge in the race and lists the district as "leans Republican," and statistician Nate Silver's fivethirtyeight.com website gives Kelly a 13-point advantage, saying the district still leans solidly Republican.

DCCC spokeswoman Amanda Sherman, asked about the committee's support for DiNicola, said: "From leading the charge to give special tax breaks to his fellow car dealers, to increasing his wealth by $10 million while in Washington, it’s clear that Mike Kelly’s priority is to look out for himself, not the people of Western Pennsylvania.

"It is time for a change, and with a proven track record of winning tough fights and standing up for workers in Pennsylvania, Marine Veteran Ron DiNicola is well positioned to win in November."

Kelly's campaign has, in turn, attacked DiNicola's record as a defense lawyer, claiming that in the past he defended Mexican drug dealers; a "man who illegally aided Iran," gang members and a murder suspect.

Mike Barley, Kelly's campaign manager, said "the notion that Congressman Kelly's individual wealth is at all related to his work in Congress, especially the Tax Cuts & Jobs Act, is desperate, ridiculous, and totally false. It's a flat-out lie."

Barley said that, due in large part to Kelly, Congress "was able to pass the first tax reform law in 31 years that lowered taxes for everyone and helped all businesses grow. The results are undeniable: more take-home pay for middle-income families and workers and a booming economy with more job openings than ever before. With millions of taxpayers now getting to keep more of their hard-earned money, the Tax Cuts & Jobs Act has been a huge win for everyone in western Pennsylvania. When a law is this successful, the only thing its opponents can do is lie about it."

Barley also said the DCCC's support regarding DiNicola is hardly a shock.

"Our campaign is not surprised to see that (Democratic House Minority Leader) Nancy Pelosi and her political team are doing whatever they can to elect Ron DiNicola. She needs his vote to become speaker again and the far left wants his support for their radical agenda."

DiNicola's campaign has not directly addressed Kelly's claims regarding the clients DiNicola has represented, instead focusing on Kelly's support of the Republican tax reform bill and DiNicola's accomplishments.

Tony Coppola, DiNicola's campaign manager, said "our focus is making sure voters know there is a clear choice between Ron, who has a record of service in the Marines and fighting for local workers who were getting shafted by the federal government, and Congressman Kelly, who has a record of enriching himself in Congress."

Kevin Flowers can be reached at 870-1693 or by email. Follow him on Twitter at twitter.com/ETNflowers.