Preserving Our Values From its founding, America has been an idea as much as a political or geographic entity. It has meant, for untold millions around the world, a set of ideals that speak to the highest aspirations of humanity. From its own beginning, the Republican Party has boldly asserted those ideals, as we now do again, to affirm the rights of the people under the rule of law. Top Upholding the Constitutional Right to Keep and Bear Arms We uphold the right of individual Americans to own firearms, a right which antedated the Constitution and was solemnly confirmed by the Second Amendment. We applaud the Supreme Court’s decision in Heller affirming that right, and we assert the individual responsibility to safely use and store firearms. We call on the next president to appoint judges who will similarly respect the Constitution. Gun ownership is responsible citizenship, enabling Americans to defend themselves, their property, and communities. We call for education in constitutional rights in schools, and we support the option of firearms training in federal programs serving senior citizens and women. We urge immediate action to review the automatic denial of gun ownership to returning members of the Armed Forces who have suffered trauma during service to their country. We condemn frivolous lawsuits against firearms manufacturers, which are transparent attempts to deprive citizens of their rights. We oppose federal licensing of law-abiding gun owners and national gun registration as violations of the Second Amendment. We recognize that gun control only affects and penalizes law-abiding citizens, and that such proposals are ineffective at reducing violent crime. Top Ensuring Equal Treatment for All Individual rights – and the responsibilities that go with them – are the foundation of a free society. From the time of Lincoln, equality of individuals has been a cornerstone of the Republican Party. Our commitment to equal opportunity extends from landmark school-choice legislation for the students of Washington D.C. to historic appointments at the highest levels of government. We consider discrimination based on sex, race, age, religion, creed, disability, or national origin to be immoral, and we will strongly enforce anti-discrimination statutes. We ask all to join us in rejecting the forces of hatred and bigotry and in denouncing all who practice or promote racism, anti-Semitism, ethnic prejudice, or religious intolerance. As a matter of principle, Republicans oppose any attempts to create race-based governments within the United States, as well as any domestic governments not bound by the Constitution or the Bill of Rights. Precisely because we oppose discrimination, we reject preferences, quotas, and set-asides, whether in education or in corporate boardrooms. The government should not make contracts on this basis, and neither should corporations. We support efforts to help low-income individuals get a fair shot based on their potential and merit, and we affirm the common-sense approach of the Chief Justice of the United States: that the way to stop discriminating on the basis of race is to stop discriminating. Top Protecting Our National Symbols The symbol of our unity, to which we all pledge allegiance, is the flag. By whatever legislative method is most feasible, Old Glory should be given legal protection against desecration. We condemn decisions by activist judges to deny children the opportunity to say the Pledge of Allegiance in public school. Top Freedom of Speech and of the Press We support freedom of speech and freedom of the press and oppose attempts to violate or weaken those rights, such as reinstatement of the so-called Fairness Doctrine. Top Maintaining The Sanctity and Dignity of Human Life Faithful to the first guarantee of the Declaration of Independence, we assert the inherent dignity and sanctity of all human life and affirm that the unborn child has a fundamental individual right to life which cannot be infringed. We support a human life amendment to the Constitution, and we endorse legislation to make clear that the Fourteenth Amendment’s protections apply to unborn children. We oppose using public revenues to promote or perform abortion and will not fund organizations which advocate it. We support the appointment of judges who respect traditional family values and the sanctity and dignity of innocent human life. We have made progress. The Supreme Court has upheld prohibitions against the barbaric practice of partial-birth abortion. States are now permitted to extend health-care coverage to children before birth. And the Born Alive Infants Protection Act has become law; this law ensures that infants who are born alive during an abortion receive all treatment and care that is provided to all newborn infants and are not neglected and left to die. We must protect girls from exploitation and statutory rape through a parental notification requirement. We all have a moral obligation to assist, not to penalize, women struggling with the challenges of an unplanned pregnancy. At its core, abortion is a fundamental assault on the sanctity of innocent human life. Women deserve better than abortion. Every effort should be made to work with women considering abortion to enable and empower them to choose life. We salute those who provide them alternatives, including pregnancy care centers, and we take pride in the tremendous increase in adoptions that has followed Republican legislative initiatives. Respect for life requires efforts to include persons with disabilities in education, employment, the justice system, and civic participation. In keeping with that commitment, we oppose the non-consensual withholding of care or treatment from people with disabilities, as well as the elderly and infirm, just as we oppose euthanasia and assisted suicide, which endanger especially those on the margins of society. Because government should set a positive standard in hiring and contracting for the services of persons with disabilities, we need to update the statutory authority for the AbilityOne program, the main avenue by which those productive members of our society can offer high quality services at the best possible value. Top Preserving Traditional Marriage Because our children’s future is best preserved within the traditional understanding of marriage, we call for a constitutional amendment that fully protects marriage as a union of a man and a woman, so that judges cannot make other arrangements equivalent to it. In the absence of a national amendment, we support the right of the people of the various states to affirm traditional marriage through state initiatives. Republicans recognize the importance of having in the home a father and a mother who are married. The two-parent family still provides the best environment of stability, discipline, responsibility, and character. Children in homes without fathers are more likely to commit a crime, drop out of school, become violent, become teen parents, use illegal drugs, become mired in poverty, or have emotional or behavioral problems. We support the courageous efforts of single-parent families to provide a stable home for their children. Children are our nation’s most precious resource. We also salute and support the efforts of foster and adoptive families. Republicans have been at the forefront of protecting traditional marriage laws, both in the states and in Congress. A Republican Congress enacted the Defense of Marriage Act, affirming the right of states not to recognize same-sex “marriages” licensed in other states. Unbelievably, the Democratic Party has now pledged to repeal the Defense of Marriage Act, which would subject every state to the redefinition of marriage by a judge without ever allowing the people to vote on the matter. We also urge Congress to use its Article III, Section 2 power to prevent activist federal judges from imposing upon the rest of the nation the judicial activism in Massachusetts and California. We also encourage states to review their marriage and divorce laws in order to strengthen marriage. As the family is our basic unit of society, we oppose initiatives to erode parental rights. Top Safeguarding Religious Liberties Our Constitution guarantees the free exercise of religion and forbids any religious test for public office, and it likewise prohibits the establishment of a state-sponsored creed. The balance between those two ideals has been distorted by judicial rulings which attempt to drive faith out of the public arena. The public display of the Ten Commandments does not violate the U.S. Constitution and accurately reflects the Judeo-Christian heritage of our country. We support the right of students to engage in student-initiated, student-led prayer in public schools, athletic events, and graduation ceremonies, when done in conformity with constitutional standards. We affirm every citizen’s right to apply religious values to public policy and the right of faith-based organizations to participate fully in public programs without renouncing their beliefs, removing religious objects or symbols, or becoming subject to government-imposed hiring practices. Forcing religious groups to abandon their beliefs as applied to their hiring practices is religious discrimination. We support the First Amendment right of freedom of association of the Boy Scouts of America and other service organizations whose values are under assault, and we call upon the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to reverse its policy of blacklisting religious groups which decline to arrange adoptions by same-sex couples. Respectful of our nation’s diversity in faith, we urge reasonable accommodation of religious beliefs in the private workplace. We deplore the increasing incidence of attacks against religious symbols, as well as incidents of anti-Semitism on college campuses. Top Preserving Americans’ Property Rights At the center of a free economy is the right of citizens to be secure in their property. Every person has the right to acquire, own, use, possess, enjoy, and dispose of private property. That right was undermined by the Supreme Court’s Kelo decision, allowing local governments to seize a person’s home or land, not for vital public use, but for transfer to private developers. That 5-to-4 decision highlights what is at stake in the election of the next president, who may make new appointments to the Court. We call on state legislatures to moot the Kelo decision by appropriate legislation, and we pledge on the federal level to pass legislation to protect against unjust federal takings. We will enforce the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment to ensure just compensation whenever private property is needed to achieve a compelling public use. We urge caution in the designation of National Historic Areas, which can set the stage for widespread governmental control of citizens’ lands. Top Supporting Native American Communities The federal government has a special responsibility to the people in Indian country and a unique trust relationship with them, which has been insufficiently honored. The social and economic problems that plague Indian country have grown worse over the last several decades, and we must reverse that trend. Ineffective government programs deprive Indians of the services they need, and long-term failures threaten to undermine tribal sovereignty itself. Republicans believe that economic self-sufficiency is the ultimate answer to the challenges in Indian country and that tribal communities, not Washington bureaucracies, are better situated to craft local solutions. Federal – and state – regulations that thwart job creation must be reconsidered so that tribal governments acting on Native Americans’ behalf are not disadvantaged. The Democratic Party’s repeated undermining of tribal sovereignty to advantage union bosses is especially egregious. Republicans reject a one-size-fits-all approach to federal-state-tribal partnerships and will work to expand local autonomy where tribal governments seek it. Better partnerships will help us to expand opportunity, deliver top-flight education to future generations, modernize and improve the Indian Health Service to make it more responsive to local needs, and build essential infrastructure. Native Americans must be empowered to develop the rich natural resources on their lands without undue federal interference. Crime in Indian country, especially against women, is a special problem demanding immediate attention. Inadequate resources and neglect have made Native Americans less safe and allowed safe havens to develop in Indian country for criminal narcotics enterprises. The government must increase funding for tribal officers and investigators, FBI agents, prosecutors, and tribal jails. The legal system must provide stability and protect property rights. Everyone’s civil rights must be safeguarded, including the right to due process and freedom of the press, with accountability for all government officials. We support efforts to ensure equitable participation in federal programs by Native Americans, including Alaska Natives and Native Hawaiians, and to preserve their culture and languages. We honor the sacrifices of all Native Americans serving in the military today and in years past and will ensure that all veterans receive the care and respect they have earned through their service to America. Top

The 2008 Platform Committee received public input through a website. Ultimately more than 13,000 comments were received and considered. The following is a sampling of those comments: (Newt Gingrich - Washington, DC)

(James - Boston, MA)

(America Forward And - New York, NY)

(Lee - Georgetown, TX)

The Second Amendment should have read..”An armed populace being necessary to the security of a free society, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.” This concept is at the root of the American experience. It defines us. Other countries hate us because they still believe that the average citizen is a moron that must be controlled. If Americans were not thoughtful, slow to anger, and reluctant to commit violence, Washington would be a graveyard. We do not need keepers. (Cliff - Portland, OR)

The 2nd Amendment says that the reason for the right of the people to keep and bear arms is the necessity of a well-regulated militia for the security of a free state. Not for hunting or antique collecting. We will only have a secure free state if the people keep and bear arms and can regulate a militia well. The assumption that the state regulates the militia is not in the Constitution. Article I, Section 8 says that Congress shall “provide for the calling forth of the militia” to repel invasion, suppress insurrection and execute the laws of the United States. (Thomas - Shelby, OH)

We should get out of Afghanistan and Iraq immediately. We should never have went to those places in the first place. Our meddling in affairs in the Middle East (and aiding their enemyIsrael) is the reason were are hated by the Arabs. Now theyhate us even more and they don't forget - for centuries. All this military escapade has done for us is ensure that our great grandchildren will still be worried about terrorism. We shouldcome home and mind our own business. Empire building is immoral, anti-American and foolish foreign policy. (Megan - Acton, MA)

The core American values are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. Freedom is the one that makes the other two values possible. One cannot pursue happiness if one is not free to do so; one cannot lead a fulfilling life if one is not free to do so. Religious freedom is a large piece of this, and religious freedom includes freedom from religion as well as freedom of religion. The government has no right to dictate anyone's religious beliefs, and must therefore remain secular, allowing citizens to choose their own beliefs. (Ronald - Redwood City, CA)

One of the most important principles that the Founders of our country sought to protect was that of religious freedom. They sought to create a separation of Church and State via the First Amendment to our Constitution. I firmly believe that placing that, along with freedom of the press, as the first of the Constitutional amendments was no accident. To fully support American values, one must support, as Thomas Jefferson stated, “a wall of separation” between government and religion. (Ruth - St. Louis, MO)

Keep the pro-life plank located in the 2004 platform in the “Protecting Our Families” section under “Promoting a Culture of Life” without change in the 2008 platform. The Republican Party is the pro-life party. The greatest distinction between the Republican Party and the Democrat Party is the protection of our inalienable right to life. Any change to this section will lessen the integrity of the Republican Party and cost it votes in November. (Bernd - Albuquerque, NM)

I personally think each abortion is a tragic event. However, 75% of them are carried out by those that claim to be Catholic or Protestant. Seems like some folks are not practicing what they preach. Anyhow, this is a divisive issue that has no real solution since the country is pretty much split. I like Ron Paul's idea that Roe vs. Wade should be overturned, and, whether or not an abortion is performed, should be mandated by the states themselves. Let communities at least at the state level decide for themsleves. (Natalia - Trinity, FL)

On the issue of same-sex marriage- it should be illegal in all states. I am a young, bible reading, conservative and this is a very important issue to me and anyone who cares about the fate of this great nation. Our forefathers who founded this nation on biblical principles would abhor and protest same-sex marriage, and so would Jesus Christ (clearly the Bible calls homosexuality a sin). Thus, it is imperative to get our country on the right path, to give morals back to society, so that one day, I (and anyone else) can have and raise children in a good and wholesome society. I am proud of my country and my American soldiers. God bless them and I look forward to voting for McCain in November. NK (Jim - Wichita, KS)

The family is the core unit of any sucessful society. The Father & Mother working together to instill values, educate and nuture children is the ONLY proven method that works consistently. We must not knuckle under to those who would undermine this structure. We cannot permit the foundation of the nation to be eroded for the sake of being broadminded or accepting. The personal choices of citizens in their private lives are just that, but they should not be imbedded in public policey. (Paul - Carrollton, TX)

Adult stem cells have consistently shown promise and results. Fetal stem cells, conversely, have shown little to no positive results and leads to abortion just to harvest these cells which should be inconsistent with our platform. Our platform should reject fetal stem cell research and promote adult stem cell research only. (Cliff - Portland, OR)

The 2nd Amendment says that the reason for the right of the people to keep and bear arms is the necessity of a well-regulated militia for the security of a free state. Not for hunting or antique collecting. We will only have a secure free state if the people keep and bear arms and can regulate a militia well. The assumption that the state regulates the militia is not in the Constitution. Article I, Section 8 says that Congress shall “provide for the calling forth of the militia” to repel invasion, suppress insurrection and execute the laws of the United States. (Gerry - Scottsdale, AZ)

Holding on to the most conservative pro-life stance as a party keeps away from our membership many who hold moderate views on abortion but share our economic, foreign policy and size of government views. It is time that we moved away from the dichotomy of “pro-life” and “pro-choice.” Most Americans share neither position but have a liberal attitude toward first term abortion and a conservative attitude toward late term abortion. We should take this contentious issue off the national agenda and make ourselves more attractive to middle-of-the-road voters who share most of our agenda.