Pence: New CBO Report Confirms Latest Democrat Health Care Bill Increases Premiums on Families
NOVEMBER 30, 2009

The House Republican Conference Press Office at (202) 226-9000 or

"The CBO has confirmed what every American already knows, the Democrats' plan for a government takeover of health care will dramatically raise health care costs on working families. This latest CBO study reveals that the health care bill before the U.S. Senate will raise individual insurance premiums by up to 13 percent. That means every family that refuses the government's one-size-fits-all plan, will be forced to spend an additional $2,100 a year to keep their current health care. "During last year's campaign, the president promised to deliver health care reform that would lower premiums by $2,500. In light of this new CBO report, I urge the president to call on Democrat leaders to start over or explain to the American people why lowering health care costs isn't a promise worth keeping."

Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today after the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO) reported that the Senate Democrat health care bill will increase individual insurance premiums by $2,100 or up to 13 percent in 2016:

Related Documents



ObamaCare's Economic Destruction “It’s about jobs. In its life, [the healthcare bill] will create 4 million jobs—400,000 jobs almost immediately." —... “It’s about jobs. In its life, [the healthcare bill] will create 4 million jobs—400,000 jobs almost immediately." —...



Creating Paperwork, Raising Costs, Destroying Jobs "[W]e have to pass the [Healthcare] bill so you can find out what’s in it." —House Speaker... "[W]e have to pass the [Healthcare] bill so you can find out what’s in it." —House Speaker...



ObamaCare: Scrap this flawed mess for real health fixes Rep. Brian Bilbray (CA) published a piece today on ObamaCare. Read an excerpt here: During the recent election, the... Rep. Brian Bilbray (CA) published a piece today on ObamaCare. Read an excerpt here: During the recent election, the...



Mack Says 112th Should be "Repeal Congress" Rep. Connie Mack (FL) published a special piece in Roll Call today looking forward to the next two years.... Rep. Connie Mack (FL) published a special piece in Roll Call today looking forward to the next two years....



Another Accounting of TARP Background The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) recently released its November 2010 report on the financial costs of the Troubled... Background The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) recently released its November 2010 report on the financial costs of the Troubled...



Stearns: Flaws in Healthcare Law Coming to Light Rep. Cliff Stearns (FL) published a blog post in the Hill today. Please read an excerpt of "Flaws in... Rep. Cliff Stearns (FL) published a blog post in the Hill today. Please read an excerpt of "Flaws in...



Sinking on QE2 “Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.” –Milton Friedman Background The first round of quantitative... “Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.” –Milton Friedman Background The first round of quantitative...



Pence Statement on Federal Reserve Decision Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after...



Generational Theft is Not Okay (VIDEO) Washington's runaway spending amounts to generational theft -- and that's not okay. House Republican Whip Eric Cantor's office created... Washington's runaway spending amounts to generational theft -- and that's not okay. House Republican Whip Eric Cantor's office created...



WSJ: Fannie, Freddie Elicit Grim Forecast In more bad news about Fanne and Freddie, the Wall Street Journal reports: Propping up Fannie Mae and Freddie... In more bad news about Fanne and Freddie, the Wall Street Journal reports: Propping up Fannie Mae and Freddie...



Fannie and Freddie: Doing Less with More Background Last week the Congressional Oversight Panel released a report on the contracting authority exercised by the Treasury Department... Background Last week the Congressional Oversight Panel released a report on the contracting authority exercised by the Treasury Department...



Democrats' New Mission Same as the Old Mission: Selling the Failed Stimulus “It’s awful hard to say it’s [$1.2 trillion stimulus] working…but if the dog hadn’t stopped would it have caught... “It’s awful hard to say it’s [$1.2 trillion stimulus] working…but if the dog hadn’t stopped would it have caught...



Unemployment Rises: Where are the Jobs? (VIDEO) Republicans have been asking "Where are the jobs?" for months now yet in the month of September America lost... Republicans have been asking "Where are the jobs?" for months now yet in the month of September America lost...



Democrats' Final Accomplishments: Spending Preserved at Status Quo, Taxes Set to Increase Continuing (Resolution) Unsustainable Spending: With the adjournment of the House of Representatives, Democrats put aside the priorities of the... Continuing (Resolution) Unsustainable Spending: With the adjournment of the House of Representatives, Democrats put aside the priorities of the...



A Stroll Down Memory Lane “President's Economic Record No Cause for Celebration.” —Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) Press Release, July 2003 “President's Economic Record No Cause for Celebration.” —Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) Press Release, July 2003



Hope for Change “I’m also a mother. I’m a wife. I’m an American veteran, and I’m one of your middle-class Americans. And,... “I’m also a mother. I’m a wife. I’m an American veteran, and I’m one of your middle-class Americans. And,...



Pence Reacts to Latest Unemployment Report “The American people are hurting under the weight of the failed economic policies of this administration. On top of... “The American people are hurting under the weight of the failed economic policies of this administration. On top of...



The Living Dead Bailout “The TARP is not ended by [the Dodd-Frank Act]…[t]here is some money left unobligated and I intend to press... “The TARP is not ended by [the Dodd-Frank Act]…[t]here is some money left unobligated and I intend to press...



Flatlines: Day 1 Under ObamaCare's Patients Bill of Rights: 25 Percent Rate Increase in NYC The New York Post reports that a 62-year-old man in New York City received a 25 percent rate increase... The New York Post reports that a 62-year-old man in New York City received a 25 percent rate increase...



The Choice: More Jobs or More Government “It’s about jobs. In its life, [the healthcare bill] will create 4 million jobs—400,000 jobs almost immediately.” –Speaker Nancy... “It’s about jobs. In its life, [the healthcare bill] will create 4 million jobs—400,000 jobs almost immediately.” –Speaker Nancy...



New Video: Stop the Bailouts! House Republican Conference Vice-Chair Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers (WA) has lead the charge against the Greek bailout for months... House Republican Conference Vice-Chair Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers (WA) has lead the charge against the Greek bailout for months...



Flatlines: Obama's Job Loss Program Gets Worse—50 Million Americans Uninsured in 2009 Yesterday, the Census Bureau indicated that 50.7 million Americans were uninsured in 2009, up from 46.3 million in 2008. ... Yesterday, the Census Bureau indicated that 50.7 million Americans were uninsured in 2009, up from 46.3 million in 2008. ...



Pence: "Raising taxes on job creators won't create jobs" Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, gave the following statement today at a GOP Leadership press conference: “Over... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, gave the following statement today at a GOP Leadership press conference: “Over...



Democrat Division on Tax Cut Plan Increases There has been much division in the Democrat Party for sometime now but with November so close, those disagreements... There has been much division in the Democrat Party for sometime now but with November so close, those disagreements...



The International Scoreboard "The Recovery Act has worked." - House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, (SFGate, June 5, 2010) Background... "The Recovery Act has worked." - House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, (SFGate, June 5, 2010) Background...



Democrats' Small Business "Jobs(?)" Bill Background On June 17, 2010, the House voted to approve H.R. 5297, Small Business Jobs and Credit Act... Background On June 17, 2010, the House voted to approve H.R. 5297, Small Business Jobs and Credit Act...



Pence Discusses the Economy On The Record with Greta Van Susteren Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, discussed the President’s speech on more... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, discussed the President’s speech on more...



Pence Calls for Bipartisan Support of Boehner Economic Plan Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today in... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today in...



"Recovery Summer" "The Recovery Act has worked." --House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, (SFGate, June 5, 2010) CLAIM #1 –... "The Recovery Act has worked." --House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, (SFGate, June 5, 2010) CLAIM #1 –...



"Recovery Summer" "Everybody agrees that the recession is over." --Larry Summers, (ABC's This Week, December 13, 2009) CLAIM... "Everybody agrees that the recession is over." --Larry Summers, (ABC's This Week, December 13, 2009) CLAIM...



Democrats' "Recovery Summer" Math “Jobs must be our Number One focus in 2010.” –President Obama, State of the Union address, January 2010 BackgroundAs... “Jobs must be our Number One focus in 2010.” –President Obama, State of the Union address, January 2010 BackgroundAs...



"Recovery Summer" “Welcome to Recovery” –Treasury Secretary Tim F. Geithner, (Op-Ed, August 3, 2010) CLAIM #1 – A January 2009... “Welcome to Recovery” –Treasury Secretary Tim F. Geithner, (Op-Ed, August 3, 2010) CLAIM #1 – A January 2009...



Are We Looking at the Same Economy? The Economy House Democrats See: "Today we are moving in the right direction," Rep. Chris Van Hollen (D-MD),... The Economy House Democrats See: "Today we are moving in the right direction," Rep. Chris Van Hollen (D-MD),...



Democrats Break Ranks to Oppose Obama & Pelosi's Job-Killing Tax Increases DEMOCRATS' IMPENDING TAX INCREASESUnless Democrats take action, hard working Americans will face the largest tax increase in the nation’s... DEMOCRATS' IMPENDING TAX INCREASESUnless Democrats take action, hard working Americans will face the largest tax increase in the nation’s...



Bilirakis On How ObamaCare Hurts Seniors by Rep. Gus Bilirakis (FL) Throughout the healthcare debate, Democrats claimed that if you like your health care... by Rep. Gus Bilirakis (FL) Throughout the healthcare debate, Democrats claimed that if you like your health care...



Really? 1 in 5 Seniors Could be Forced Out of Their Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Rep. Dave Camp (MI), ranking member of the House Republican Committee on Ways and Means, published this recent analysis... Rep. Dave Camp (MI), ranking member of the House Republican Committee on Ways and Means, published this recent analysis...



House GOP Meetings, Events, & Town Halls Continue (PHOTOS) Rep. Lynn Westmoreland (GA) meets with Georgians from Henry County.Rep. Sue Myrick (NC) hosts a town hall in Gaston County,... Rep. Lynn Westmoreland (GA) meets with Georgians from Henry County.Rep. Sue Myrick (NC) hosts a town hall in Gaston County,...



Pence Joins Call For Geithner, Summers Resignations Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today joining... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today joining...



The Next Generation's Debt Burden "Addressing the challenge of our national debt requires bold leadership and tough choices from members of both parties. Our... "Addressing the challenge of our national debt requires bold leadership and tough choices from members of both parties. Our...



Democrats' "Canal to Nowhere" on Jobs “If America sits on the sidelines while other nations sign trade deals, we will lose the opportunity to create... “If America sits on the sidelines while other nations sign trade deals, we will lose the opportunity to create...



Drudge: Jobless Claims At the Highest Since February Republicans continue to ask the question, "Where are the jobs?" President Obama has promised time and time again that... Republicans continue to ask the question, "Where are the jobs?" President Obama has promised time and time again that...



GRAPH: Democrats' Job Agenda Revealed Unemployment has remained at a historic high under President Obama and a Democrat-led Congress. House Republicans have offered real... Unemployment has remained at a historic high under President Obama and a Democrat-led Congress. House Republicans have offered real...



Budgets, Taxes and Spending: Graphs and Charts We know it's easier to understand things when you can see them laid out. That's why the House Republican... We know it's easier to understand things when you can see them laid out. That's why the House Republican...



ObamaCare Is a Hard Sell to Seniors It's no wonder the White House is urging Democrats to focus on the economy instead of the recently passed... It's no wonder the White House is urging Democrats to focus on the economy instead of the recently passed...



Not Helping: ObamaCare Hurts Small Businesses ObamaCare's tax increases have provided endless evaluation for the policy shop at the House Republican Conference. While GOP leadership has... ObamaCare's tax increases have provided endless evaluation for the policy shop at the House Republican Conference. While GOP leadership has...



ObamaCare and Small Employers Small employers are the engines that drive the economy. One of the biggest myths is that ObamaCare does not impact... Small employers are the engines that drive the economy. One of the biggest myths is that ObamaCare does not impact...



Rep. John Kline on RedState: President Renews Threat to Workers' Secret Ballot Rep. John Kline (MN-2) posted the following blog post today on RedState: In June of 2009, the unemployment... Rep. John Kline (MN-2) posted the following blog post today on RedState: In June of 2009, the unemployment...



Pence Applauds Victory for Freedom in Missouri Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today, a... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today, a...



America Can't Afford Much More of This Recovery… Welcome to the Recovery. - Headline of the New York Times Op-Ed Authored by Obama Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, ... Welcome to the Recovery. - Headline of the New York Times Op-Ed Authored by Obama Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, ...



Obamacare and HSAs--Issues of Concern Current Status of HSAs: Enacted in 2003, Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) combine a tax-free account to pay for routine... Current Status of HSAs: Enacted in 2003, Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) combine a tax-free account to pay for routine...



ASO: Pence Calls For a Stop to Democrats' Job-Killing Tax Increases Rep. Mike Pence is on the front page of America Speaking Out today to discuss job creation and ask... Rep. Mike Pence is on the front page of America Speaking Out today to discuss job creation and ask...



How Do You Solve Fannie and Freddie? Rep. Ken Marchant Is On It Rep. Kenny Marchant (TX) appeared today on "Coffee and Markets" a podcast radio show featured on The New... Rep. Kenny Marchant (TX) appeared today on "Coffee and Markets" a podcast radio show featured on The New...



Rep. Jim Jordan Fights to "Get a Handle" on the Spending (VIDEO) Rep. Jim Jordan (OH) goes on record to recognize the GOP's fight to "get a handle" on the out... Rep. Jim Jordan (OH) goes on record to recognize the GOP's fight to "get a handle" on the out...



America's New Health Care System Revealed (VISUAL) Rep. Kevin Brady (TX), senior House Republican on the Joint Economic Committee, is back with a new and revised... Rep. Kevin Brady (TX), senior House Republican on the Joint Economic Committee, is back with a new and revised...



Small Businesses Face Higher Taxes Under Obama Plan The latest Obama economic plan regarding tax cuts will cause strife for small businessses, which will face higher taxes... The latest Obama economic plan regarding tax cuts will cause strife for small businessses, which will face higher taxes...



Graves: A Recipe for Economic Disaster Rep. Sam Graves (MO), the Ranking Republican on the House Small Business Committee, published a piece in the Ripon... Rep. Sam Graves (MO), the Ranking Republican on the House Small Business Committee, published a piece in the Ripon...



Pence: "This Administration Defines Good Policy as What the Country Can Withstand?" “The country cannot withstand more spending, more borrowing, more bailouts or more taxes” Washington, DC - U.S.... “The country cannot withstand more spending, more borrowing, more bailouts or more taxes” Washington, DC - U.S....



Pence: "We Are Facing a Fiscal Disaster" White House budget report offers a grim assessment of Washington Democrats’ $6 trillion spending spree. Washington, DC - U.S.... White House budget report offers a grim assessment of Washington Democrats’ $6 trillion spending spree. Washington, DC - U.S....



Tomorrow: Rep. Mike Pence Delivers the Weekly Republican Address (PHOTO) Rep. Mike Pence will deliver this week's Weekly Republican Address. Check GOP.gov tomorrow morning for the first look: Rep. Mike Pence will deliver this week's Weekly Republican Address. Check GOP.gov tomorrow morning for the first look:



A Federal Takeover of Wind Insurance "Government is a guarantor of liberty and is compatible with liberty only if its range is adequately restricted to... "Government is a guarantor of liberty and is compatible with liberty only if its range is adequately restricted to...



Pence Calls for Repeal of "Permanent Bailout" Financial Reform Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today in... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today in...



Spoiler Alert Shot:“House Democratic leaders are launching an eleventh-hour bid to get on offense on jobs and the economy before they... Shot:“House Democratic leaders are launching an eleventh-hour bid to get on offense on jobs and the economy before they...



The Definition of Insanity Is Doing the Same Thing Over and Over Again and Expecting Different Results. Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (July 21, 2010): “We’re talking about jobs, jobs, jobs.” Guess the “pivot to jobs”... Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (July 21, 2010): “We’re talking about jobs, jobs, jobs.” Guess the “pivot to jobs”...



Miss the Presser? Watch it Here! (VIDEO) Did you miss yesterday's GOP leadership press conference? We've got it here for you. Watch House Republicans leaders talk... Did you miss yesterday's GOP leadership press conference? We've got it here for you. Watch House Republicans leaders talk...



Dems Claim to Be Focused on Jobs -- But Where Are They? Jobs numbers continue to be disappointing even while Democrats claim to be working on ways to improve them. It... Jobs numbers continue to be disappointing even while Democrats claim to be working on ways to improve them. It...



ObamaCare's High Risk Pools and Abortion Coverage Under ObamaCare, states had the option to administer their own high risk pool for people who are sick or... Under ObamaCare, states had the option to administer their own high risk pool for people who are sick or...



The Obama Administration's Mixed Messages Rep. Paul Broun, M.D. (GA) wrote a recent blog post regarding the mixed messages of the Obama Administration. Why... Rep. Paul Broun, M.D. (GA) wrote a recent blog post regarding the mixed messages of the Obama Administration. Why...



Pence: Washington Doesn't Tax Too Little, It Spends Too Much Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, gave the following statement today at... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, gave the following statement today at...



State Unemployment Numbers Released Today: Where are the Jobs? For months, Americans have been asking President Obama, where are the jobs? State unemployment numbers are set to be... For months, Americans have been asking President Obama, where are the jobs? State unemployment numbers are set to be...



Paul Ryan Talks About an "Entreprenuerial Economy" (VIDEO) Rep. Paul Ryan (WI) talks economics on Squawk Box recently. He asks the right questions when it comes the... Rep. Paul Ryan (WI) talks economics on Squawk Box recently. He asks the right questions when it comes the...



Pence on Fox News Sunday: ""The American people are frustrated with the lack of leadership out of this administration." Watch House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence on Fox News Sunday: Watch House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence on Fox News Sunday:



Will President Obama Address America's Question: Where are the Jobs? Follow @GOPConference on Twitter | Like on Facebook | Sign Up For Email Updates President Obama will address... Follow @GOPConference on Twitter | Like on Facebook | Sign Up For Email Updates President Obama will address...



Pence: Federal Abortion Funding Must Stop MD Is latest state to cover abortion under ObamaCare Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the... MD Is latest state to cover abortion under ObamaCare Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the...



Pence Take on White House Stimulus Jobs Numbers…. "Really?" Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference delivered the following remarks on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference delivered the following remarks on...



Pence: White House's Claim That Stimulus Has Created or Saved Millions of New Jobs is "Absurd" House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence appeared on Fox News today, discussing the White House claim of job saving... House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence appeared on Fox News today, discussing the White House claim of job saving...



Brady: Stimulus Report Deserves a Pulitzer for Fiction Rep. Kevin Brady (TX) explains why the White House Council of Economic Advisers report on the "stimulus" deserves a... Rep. Kevin Brady (TX) explains why the White House Council of Economic Advisers report on the "stimulus" deserves a...



New: Oversight: It's Our Job (VIDEO) House Republicans on the Oversight Committee want the American people to know what they are doing. The Committee's message:... House Republicans on the Oversight Committee want the American people to know what they are doing. The Committee's message:...



The Hill: House GOP to make jobs a priority The Hill spotlights a GOP focus on job creation: House Republicans intend to make the economy and jobs a... The Hill spotlights a GOP focus on job creation: House Republicans intend to make the economy and jobs a...



Schock on Stimulus Propaganda Signs: "The Height of Narcissism" Rep. Aaron Schock (IL) wasn't happy to find out how much federal money was being spent on stimulus signs... Rep. Aaron Schock (IL) wasn't happy to find out how much federal money was being spent on stimulus signs...



ObamaCare's Temporary High Risk Pools: An Update ObamaCare provided $5 billion for high risk pools over two years for sick people who can’t qualify for health... ObamaCare provided $5 billion for high risk pools over two years for sick people who can’t qualify for health...



Business as Usual—Democrats Load Troop Funding With Pork-Barrel Spending Since May, House Democrats have been trying to pass $84.2 billion supplemental spending bill. The ostensible purpose of the... Since May, House Democrats have been trying to pass $84.2 billion supplemental spending bill. The ostensible purpose of the...



Democrats' "Recovery Summer" Heats Up "In politics, you can say all sorts of things that have no relationship with reality." --Thomas Sowell... "In politics, you can say all sorts of things that have no relationship with reality." --Thomas Sowell...



Republicans Respond to Job Killing Financial Bill House Republicans came out in full force last night against the Democrats' financial reform bill. Many assert the bill,... House Republicans came out in full force last night against the Democrats' financial reform bill. Many assert the bill,...



Pence Opposes Democrats' Latest Wall Street Bailout Bill “Under the guise of financial reform, Democrats are pushing yet another bill that will kill jobs, raise taxes and... “Under the guise of financial reform, Democrats are pushing yet another bill that will kill jobs, raise taxes and...



Wall Street Bailouts + Higher Taxes + Bloated Government = Zero Jobs “[T]here's no possibility to restore 8 million jobs lost in the Great Recession.” –Vice President Joe Biden, June... “[T]here's no possibility to restore 8 million jobs lost in the Great Recession.” –Vice President Joe Biden, June...



Pence: Efforts To "Deem" A Budget Are A "Fraud" "You Can’t Deem a Budget You Never Passed" Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House... "You Can’t Deem a Budget You Never Passed" Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House...



Health Care -As the White House continues to try and sell ObamaCare to the American people, it's clear the... -As the White House continues to try and sell ObamaCare to the American people, it's clear the...



Pence on the Three-Month Anniversary of ObamaCare Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today marking... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today marking...



Pence Calls Lack of Budget from House Democrats “An Historic Failure of Leadership” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement in response... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement in response...



48 out of 50 States Have Lost Jobs Since Democrats' 2009 "Stimulus" From the Ways and Means Committee and Ranking Member Dave Camp: Despite the Administration’s declaration that this is the... From the Ways and Means Committee and Ranking Member Dave Camp: Despite the Administration’s declaration that this is the...



President Obama to Skip Details in Health Care Townhall Today, President Obama will attempt to sell his health care plan to the public in a national tele-townhall meeting. ... Today, President Obama will attempt to sell his health care plan to the public in a national tele-townhall meeting. ...



May Jobs Numbers: 96 Percent Temporary Government Jobs Today, June 4, 2010, the Bureau of Labor Statistics released their May Employment Report. At first glance, the news... Today, June 4, 2010, the Bureau of Labor Statistics released their May Employment Report. At first glance, the news...



Obama Administration's Response to the Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill "In case you were wondering who's responsible, I take responsibility. It is my job to make sure that everything... "In case you were wondering who's responsible, I take responsibility. It is my job to make sure that everything...



Who Ran Up America's Debt? From the office of Rep. Kevin Brady (TX): Federal Debt Reaches $13 trillion; new report shows Democrats... From the office of Rep. Kevin Brady (TX): Federal Debt Reaches $13 trillion; new report shows Democrats...



Pence Calls Democrat "Grandson of Stimulus" Bill Another Failure U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks on the House floor today:... U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks on the House floor today:...



The Hill: GOP Moves to Repeal Healthcare Law From The Hill: House Republican leaders introduced a bill Thursday to repeal and replace the sweeping healthcare... From The Hill: House Republican leaders introduced a bill Thursday to repeal and replace the sweeping healthcare...



Wall Street Journal: Editorial: American Jobbery From the Wall Street Journal:Dissecting this week’s stimulus bill. President Obama and Democrats on Capitol Hill are publicly... From the Wall Street Journal:Dissecting this week’s stimulus bill. President Obama and Democrats on Capitol Hill are publicly...



Are We Following Greece to Economic Ruin? House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence published an op/ed in Human Events today entitled "America Following Greece to Economic... House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence published an op/ed in Human Events today entitled "America Following Greece to Economic...



Flatlines: More Bad News for Jobs 66% of Employers Bracing for Higher Costs; Consider Cutting Hours for Workers A new survey from Mercer shows... 66% of Employers Bracing for Higher Costs; Consider Cutting Hours for Workers A new survey from Mercer shows...



Throwing More Taxpayer Money at the Problem: The Typical Democrat Solution Next week, the House is expected to take up billions in dollars in spending, and tax increases, marketed by... Next week, the House is expected to take up billions in dollars in spending, and tax increases, marketed by...



PHOTOS: Great Pictures From Our Bailout Forum If you missed our "End the Bailouts: A Greek Forum" earlier today, you can view some photos from the... If you missed our "End the Bailouts: A Greek Forum" earlier today, you can view some photos from the...



Pence Goes "On the Record" to Discuss Value Added Tax, European Bailouts and Supreme Court on FOXNEWS Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, discussed the value added tax, the... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, discussed the value added tax, the...



The U.S. Follows Greece's Path to Fiscal Disaster On Sunday, May 9, 2010-the same day the EU and the IMF announced a new $1 trillion deal to protect... On Sunday, May 9, 2010-the same day the EU and the IMF announced a new $1 trillion deal to protect...



Pence Says No More U.S. Taxpayer Dollars for European Bailouts Latest Near $1 Trillion Bailout of Euro Comes on the Heels of Bailout for Greece Washington, D.C. -- U.S.... Latest Near $1 Trillion Bailout of Euro Comes on the Heels of Bailout for Greece Washington, D.C. -- U.S....



Pence on Latest Unemployment Report Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference,... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference,...



Feds Will Run High Risk Pools in At Least 18 States At least 18 states - AL, DE, FL, GA, HI, ID, IN, LA, MN, MS, ND, NE, NV, SC,... At least 18 states - AL, DE, FL, GA, HI, ID, IN, LA, MN, MS, ND, NE, NV, SC,...



President’s Budget Director Admits: Current Policy Unsustainable "Deficits of this size are serious, and ultimately unsustainable." -Peter Orszag, President's Director of the Office of... "Deficits of this size are serious, and ultimately unsustainable." -Peter Orszag, President's Director of the Office of...



Pence: “The Truth Landed With A Thud Last Thursday” "The president and Congressional Democrats passed a health care law without any idea how to pay for it." Washington,... "The president and Congressional Democrats passed a health care law without any idea how to pay for it." Washington,...



Pence: The American People Are Saying 'Enough Is Enough' Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks at a... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks at a...



CMS Confirms ObamaCare Will Increase Spending The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) released a new analysis of ObamaCare, confirming that our nation's health care... The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) released a new analysis of ObamaCare, confirming that our nation's health care...



Pence on GOP Earmark Reform Legislation “The American people want Congress to change the way we spend the people’s money.” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman... “The American people want Congress to change the way we spend the people’s money.” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman...



April 21, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference April 21, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric Cantor... Republican Leadership Press Conference April 21, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric Cantor...



April 21, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference April 21, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric Cantor... Republican Leadership Press Conference April 21, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric Cantor...



Pence: Democrats Trying to Pass Permanent Bailout for Wall Street “The left hand doesn’t know what the left hand is doing.” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman... “The left hand doesn’t know what the left hand is doing.” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman...



How Does ObamaCare Answer the Problem of Preexisting Conditions? One of the provisions in ObamaCare that has received the most media attention is the mandate that insurance policies... One of the provisions in ObamaCare that has received the most media attention is the mandate that insurance policies...



Democrats’ Message to the American People, “Budgets Don’t Matter” "Addressing the challenge of our national debt requires bold leadership and tough choices from members of both parties. Our... "Addressing the challenge of our national debt requires bold leadership and tough choices from members of both parties. Our...



Pence: the American People Aren’t Fooled By Democrat Tax Cutting Claims Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on...



Pence: the American People Aren’t Fooled By Democrat Tax Cutting Claims Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on...



Pence on FOX NEWS: “Only in Washington, D.C. would you celebrate the second largest deficit in American history.” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks...



Pence on FOX NEWS: “Only in Washington, D.C. would you celebrate the second largest deficit in American history.” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks...



CBO Confirms That America Can't Afford Minor Fiscal Tinkering "... U.S. fiscal policy is on an unsustainable path to an extent that it cannot be solved by minor... "... U.S. fiscal policy is on an unsustainable path to an extent that it cannot be solved by minor...



The Obama Fiscal Solution – Raise Taxes, Keep Spending Money "If at the end of the day we need to raise taxes, we should raise taxes." -Paul Volcker, President's Chairman... "If at the end of the day we need to raise taxes, we should raise taxes." -Paul Volcker, President's Chairman...



ObamaCare Flatlines: The Voice of the American People Polling data since the passage of the Democrats’ government takeover of health care shows what the American people really... Polling data since the passage of the Democrats’ government takeover of health care shows what the American people really...



The Obama-Pelosi Premium: Bad and Getting Worse “From all indications, we’re going to see $3 gas again this summer.” — John B. Townsend... “From all indications, we’re going to see $3 gas again this summer.” — John B. Townsend...



Pence: “Democrats’ Reconciliation Bill Doesn’t Fix Anything” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on...



Pence Addresses Threats, Vandalism and "Smears of Law-abiding Americans Exercising Their First Amendment Rights" “The American people have every right to oppose this government takeover of health care without being lumped in with... “The American people have every right to oppose this government takeover of health care without being lumped in with...



The Largest Tax Cut in History? Are They Kidding? "And when this exchange is up and running, millions of people will get tax breaks to help them afford... "And when this exchange is up and running, millions of people will get tax breaks to help them afford...



Pence: “One More Speech About the Same Bad Bill Isn’t Going to Change Any Minds in America” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks on health... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks on health...



March 23, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference March 23, 2010 Participants: - Conference Chair Mike Pence (R-IN) - Conference Vice Chair... Republican Leadership Press Conference March 23, 2010 Participants: - Conference Chair Mike Pence (R-IN) - Conference Vice Chair...



March 23, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference March 23, 2010 Participants: - Conference Chair Mike Pence (R-IN) - Conference Vice Chair... Republican Leadership Press Conference March 23, 2010 Participants: - Conference Chair Mike Pence (R-IN) - Conference Vice Chair...



Democrats to Reform the Financial Services Industry—what Could Possibly Go Wrong? Background Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were the main cause of the nation's current financial turmoil. With encouragement from Congressional... Background Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were the main cause of the nation's current financial turmoil. With encouragement from Congressional...



Legislative Digest: H.R. 4872 Senate Democrat Health Care Takeover and the Reconciliation Act of 2010 FLOOR SITUATION On Sunday, March 21, 2010, the House is scheduled consider H.R. 4872, the Reconciliation Act of... FLOOR SITUATION On Sunday, March 21, 2010, the House is scheduled consider H.R. 4872, the Reconciliation Act of...



Pence on Stupak Abortion Deal on Fox News "It is disappointing to see Members of Congress exchange 30 years of pro-life law for a piece of paper... "It is disappointing to see Members of Congress exchange 30 years of pro-life law for a piece of paper...



Pence Discusses Health Care Reform on CNN’s "State of the Union" Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made...



Pence Applauds Rejection of “Deem and Pass” Procedure "The Voice of the American People is Being Heard on Capitol Hill" Washington, DC -- Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of... "The Voice of the American People is Being Heard on Capitol Hill" Washington, DC -- Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of...



Democrat Health Care Takeover Won't Protect Military Health Plans “Although the health care legislation passed by the House explicitly exempted TRICARE from being affected, the Senate bill did not.... “Although the health care legislation passed by the House explicitly exempted TRICARE from being affected, the Senate bill did not....



The Government Takeover of Healthcare Will Destroy the Student Loan Market H.R. 4872 includes a reconciliation provision to alter federal student loan programs by eliminating the Federal Family Education Loan... H.R. 4872 includes a reconciliation provision to alter federal student loan programs by eliminating the Federal Family Education Loan...



Health Care Takeover By the Numbers The Republican Conference has compiled a list of important numbers relevant to Democrats' Senate bill combined with the proposed... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of important numbers relevant to Democrats' Senate bill combined with the proposed...



Water Torture - Another Backroom Deal for Health Care Takeover? Have the Obama Administration and Congressional Democrats dipped to a new level to secure votes for their government takeover... Have the Obama Administration and Congressional Democrats dipped to a new level to secure votes for their government takeover...



Washington Has an Expensive Habit of Underestimating the Real Cost of Government Program At today's White House Press Briefing, Press Secretary Robert Gibbs implied that American taxpayers might see more "savings" in... At today's White House Press Briefing, Press Secretary Robert Gibbs implied that American taxpayers might see more "savings" in...



Subprime Health Reform: Will The Funding Bubble Burst? "[Rising federal debt] leaves us very vulnerable to a global rise in interest rates that might be substantially beyond... "[Rising federal debt] leaves us very vulnerable to a global rise in interest rates that might be substantially beyond...



Does Speaker Pelosi Still Trust the Senate? Will skeptical House Democrats follow her lead? On Monday, Speaker Pelosi said she was "willing to trust the Senate:"... Will skeptical House Democrats follow her lead? On Monday, Speaker Pelosi said she was "willing to trust the Senate:"...



Democrat Spin Ignores the “Rough Outlook” of CBO Score Are House Democrats ready to make a $940 billion gamble on an imprecise estimate? Democrat spin on the Congressional... Are House Democrats ready to make a $940 billion gamble on an imprecise estimate? Democrat spin on the Congressional...



Democrat Spin Ignores the “Rough Outlook” of CBO Score Are House Democrats ready to make a $940 billion gamble on an imprecise estimate? Democrat spin on the Congressional... Are House Democrats ready to make a $940 billion gamble on an imprecise estimate? Democrat spin on the Congressional...



Shady Deals and Backroom Bargains in the Senate Takeover of Health Care "These negotiations will be on C-Span, and so the public will be part of the conversation and we'll see... "These negotiations will be on C-Span, and so the public will be part of the conversation and we'll see...



Pence Urges Congress to Reject the “Slaughter House Rule” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today in... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today in...



Pence: “The American People Know We Can Do Better” Monica: Congressman Mike Pence, Republican of Indiana joins us now. He's also the Republican Conference Chair. Congressman, great to... Monica: Congressman Mike Pence, Republican of Indiana joins us now. He's also the Republican Conference Chair. Congressman, great to...



Pence: Democrats Trampling on Rules of House and Senate to Pass Health Care Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on the floor... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on the floor...



Pence Calls on Pelosi to Reveal Special Deals in Health Care Bill Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today in response... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today in response...



Pence Discusses Health Care Reform on FOX News’ “On the Record, With Greta Van Susteren” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks last night... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks last night...



March 9, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference March 10, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference March 10, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



March 9, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference March 10, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference March 10, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



Pence: “It’s Time for a Spending Limit Amendment to the Constitution” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, gave the following statement today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, gave the following statement today on...



Pence Statement on Unemployment Numbers Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after...



March 3, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference March 3, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference March 3, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



March 3, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference March 3, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference March 3, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



Pence Discusses White House Summit on MSNBC: This Isn’t Good Government, It’s Bad Tv” Washington, DC - The following are excerpts from U.S. Congressman Mike Pence's appearance on MSNBC today regarding the White... Washington, DC - The following are excerpts from U.S. Congressman Mike Pence's appearance on MSNBC today regarding the White...



Obama vs. Obama: President Admits His Plan Will Raise Costs And breaks critical campaign promise in the process THAT WAS THEN: “For those who have insurance now, nothing will... And breaks critical campaign promise in the process THAT WAS THEN: “For those who have insurance now, nothing will...



Medicare Experts Disagree, Madam Speaker Speaker Pelosi charges that her plan for a government takeover of health care is the cure to save Medicare:... Speaker Pelosi charges that her plan for a government takeover of health care is the cure to save Medicare:...



Pence Calls White House Health Care Summit “Taxpayer-funded Media Event” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on...



Pence Calls White House Health Care Summit “Taxpayer-funded Media Event” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on...



Latest White House Health Care Proposal: The Same Big Government Takeover On February 22, 2010, the President released a summary of his latest health care proposal in advance of the... On February 22, 2010, the President released a summary of his latest health care proposal in advance of the...



Pence Calls President’s New Health Care Bill ‘More of the Same’ Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after...



Pence Calls President’s New Health Care Bill ‘More of the Same’ Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after...



The Party Of What? First, we were the party of no ideas: "One of our two great parties is now an... First, we were the party of no ideas: "One of our two great parties is now an...



The Party Of What? First, we were the party of no ideas: "One of our two great parties is now an... First, we were the party of no ideas: "One of our two great parties is now an...



Pence Joins House Republicans in Presenting President Obama a Copy of "Better Solutions" Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after...



Pence Joins House Republicans in Presenting President Obama a Copy of "Better Solutions" Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after...



January 27, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference January 27, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference January 27, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



January 27, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference January 27, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference January 27, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



Pence Calls on President for Action on Fiscal Discipline Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on...



Obama’s Historic Spending and Deficits Facing political fallout from this Administration's reckless spending spree, President Obama will reportedly use the State of the Union... Facing political fallout from this Administration's reckless spending spree, President Obama will reportedly use the State of the Union...



The Right Way—and the Wrong Way—to Reform Insurance Markets Background: In light of Sen.-elect Scott Brown's special election win last week, some Democrats have begun... Background: In light of Sen.-elect Scott Brown's special election win last week, some Democrats have begun...



January 20, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference January 20, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference January 20, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



January 20, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference January 20, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference January 20, 2010 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



January 13, 2010 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference January 13, 2010 Participants: - Republican Whip Eric Cantor (R-VA) - Conference Chair Mike... Republican Leadership Press Conference January 13, 2010 Participants: - Republican Whip Eric Cantor (R-VA) - Conference Chair Mike...



POLICY BRIEF: Issues to Be Resolved Between Pelosi and Reid Health Care Bills The New Year has seen Democrats once again retreat behind closed doors to finalize a single version of their... The New Year has seen Democrats once again retreat behind closed doors to finalize a single version of their...



PAJAMAS MEDIA "Dear Mr. President: Your Policies Are Damaging Women the Most" In a PJM exclusive, ten GOP congresswomen tell the president how to make 2010 a better year for struggling... In a PJM exclusive, ten GOP congresswomen tell the president how to make 2010 a better year for struggling...



“Behind Closed Doors” Washington, DC - While the Obama Administration and Congressional Democrats are planning to negotiate a government takeover of health... Washington, DC - While the Obama Administration and Congressional Democrats are planning to negotiate a government takeover of health...



Pence Denounces Closed Door Health Care Negotiations Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today in... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today in...



President’s Model for Reform? The Mayo Clinic was praised by President Obama for providing "outstanding care" "There are some places, like the... The Mayo Clinic was praised by President Obama for providing "outstanding care" "There are some places, like the...



Senate Democrat Health "Reform" Legislation: Short Summary of the Government Takeover of Health Care BACKGROUND AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY On November 18, 2009, Senator Harry Reid and the Senate Democrat leadership introduced the... BACKGROUND AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY On November 18, 2009, Senator Harry Reid and the Senate Democrat leadership introduced the...



Pence Calls Senate Health Care Bill "Washington At Its Worst" Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after the U.S.... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after the U.S....



Not a Moderate Compromise: Senate Bill is STILL a Government Takeover of Health Care While Democrats' latest back-room deal is being reported as a moderate compromise due to minor concessions being made... While Democrats' latest back-room deal is being reported as a moderate compromise due to minor concessions being made...



Not a Moderate Compromise: Senate Bill is STILL a Government Takeover of Health Care While Democrats' latest back-room deal is being reported as a moderate compromise due to minor concessions being made... While Democrats' latest back-room deal is being reported as a moderate compromise due to minor concessions being made...



Will Senate Democrats Allow An Unelected Board to Ration Americans' Health Care "The chronically ill and those toward the end of their lives are accounting for potentially 80 percent of the... "The chronically ill and those toward the end of their lives are accounting for potentially 80 percent of the...



Democrats' Fiscal Responsibility Sham "I will not sign [health care legislation] if it adds one dime to the deficit-now or in the future. ... "I will not sign [health care legislation] if it adds one dime to the deficit-now or in the future. ...



Pence Opposes Increase in the National Debt Limit: Asks “When Will It Stop?” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on...



December 16, 2009 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference December 16, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric Cantor... Republican Leadership Press Conference December 16, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric Cantor...



Even Without the Medicare Buy-in, Senate Bill Is Still A Government Takeover of Health Care While Democrats' latest back-room deal is being reported as a moderate compromise now that press reports indicate the Medicare... While Democrats' latest back-room deal is being reported as a moderate compromise now that press reports indicate the Medicare...



Tallying the Pelosi Bill's Effects on Job Destruction President Obama's recent "jobs summit," and Speaker Pelosi's renewed focus on yet another "jobs bill" full of additional government... President Obama's recent "jobs summit," and Speaker Pelosi's renewed focus on yet another "jobs bill" full of additional government...



Tallying the Pelosi Bill's Effects on Job Destruction President Obama's recent "jobs summit," and Speaker Pelosi's renewed focus on yet another "jobs bill" full of additional government... President Obama's recent "jobs summit," and Speaker Pelosi's renewed focus on yet another "jobs bill" full of additional government...



Obama vs. Obama: Who is scaring whom, Mr. President? As the president warns Republicans to "stop trying to frighten the American people," a look at his... As the president warns Republicans to "stop trying to frighten the American people," a look at his...



Senate Democrats' Moderate Compromise: Single-Payer Health Care "The irony of this late-breaking Medicare proposal is that it could be a bigger step toward a single-payer system... "The irony of this late-breaking Medicare proposal is that it could be a bigger step toward a single-payer system...



Republican Leadership Press Conference Following White House Meeting With President Obama Today December 9, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric Cantor (R-VA) - Conference... December 9, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric Cantor (R-VA) - Conference...



Democrat Health "Reform" Picks Winners and Losers While Democrats allege that their government takeover of health care will create a fairer and more equal society, provisions... While Democrats allege that their government takeover of health care will create a fairer and more equal society, provisions...



What Do the American People Need? Jobs President Obama's "jobs summit," coupled with Friday's release of November jobs numbers, once again raise serious questions about the... President Obama's "jobs summit," coupled with Friday's release of November jobs numbers, once again raise serious questions about the...



What Do the American People Need? Jobs President Obama's "jobs summit," coupled with Friday's release of November jobs numbers, once again raise serious questions about the... President Obama's "jobs summit," coupled with Friday's release of November jobs numbers, once again raise serious questions about the...



December 8, 2009 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference December 8, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference December 8, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



Pence: Democrat Policy on Spending Is “If We Got It, Spend It” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on...



Democrats’ Jobs Summit Farce "Statistics mean little for those who have lost a job, taken a pay cut, or watched their loved ones... "Statistics mean little for those who have lost a job, taken a pay cut, or watched their loved ones...



December 2, 2009 Republican Leadership Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference December 2, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference December 2, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



Government-Run Health Care: Hazardous to Patients' Health "These delays in the patient presenting with symptoms and cancer being diagnosed at a late stage inevitably costs lives. ... "These delays in the patient presenting with symptoms and cancer being diagnosed at a late stage inevitably costs lives. ...



Now Democrats Focus on Jobs? Since passage of the Democrats' trillion dollar "stimulus," more than 2.8 million jobs have been lost and unemployment stands at... Since passage of the Democrats' trillion dollar "stimulus," more than 2.8 million jobs have been lost and unemployment stands at...



CBO Confirms the Result of Democrats' Health "Reform:" Higher Premiums "Obama's plan will save a typical family up to $2,500 on premiums..."- Obama campaign handout, "Questions and Answers on... "Obama's plan will save a typical family up to $2,500 on premiums..."- Obama campaign handout, "Questions and Answers on...



Obama vs. Obama: President Signals Intent to Break Campaign Promise on Lowering Health Care Premiums During last year's campaign, then-Senator Obama unveiled a health care plan that he promised would save families up to... During last year's campaign, then-Senator Obama unveiled a health care plan that he promised would save families up to...



Obama vs. Obama: President Signals Intent to Break Campaign Promise on Lowering Health Care Premiums During last year's campaign, then-Senator Obama unveiled a health care plan that he promised would save families up to... During last year's campaign, then-Senator Obama unveiled a health care plan that he promised would save families up to...



Democrat Dithering on the U.S.—Korea FTA On November 18, 2009, President Obama arrived in South Korea, the final stop on his Asia trip. Although free... On November 18, 2009, President Obama arrived in South Korea, the final stop on his Asia trip. Although free...



Will $210 Billion in New Deficit Spending Kill American Jobs? "It is important though to recognize if we keep on adding to the debt, even in the midst of... "It is important though to recognize if we keep on adding to the debt, even in the midst of...



Will $210 Billion in New Deficit Spending Kill American Jobs? "It is important though to recognize if we keep on adding to the debt, even in the midst of... "It is important though to recognize if we keep on adding to the debt, even in the midst of...



John Campbell: House Health Care Bill Is Horrible Rep. John Campbell (CA) isn't done pointing out what's wrong with the Pelosi health care bill. Even though the... Rep. John Campbell (CA) isn't done pointing out what's wrong with the Pelosi health care bill. Even though the...



Democrats' Health Care "Ponzi Schemes" "We have grave concerns that the real effect of the provisions would be to create a new federal entitlement... "We have grave concerns that the real effect of the provisions would be to create a new federal entitlement...



GOP Talkers on the Pelosi Health Care Bill The Pelosi health care bill is 1,990 pages long, costs nearly $1.3 trillion, includes more than $729 billion in new... The Pelosi health care bill is 1,990 pages long, costs nearly $1.3 trillion, includes more than $729 billion in new...



Poll Says: More in U.S. Say Health Coverage Is Not Government Responsibility The latest Gallup poll proves that Americans do not see health care coverage as a responsibility of the government.... The latest Gallup poll proves that Americans do not see health care coverage as a responsibility of the government....



What Every Member Needs to Know About A Long-Term "Doc Fix" -UPDATED Background: As part of spending reforms included in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Congress enacted a sustainable... Background: As part of spending reforms included in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Congress enacted a sustainable...



The Washington Times: Together Against the Pelosi Plan The Washington Times today published a piece written by House Republican women standing against the Democrats' health care bill.... The Washington Times today published a piece written by House Republican women standing against the Democrats' health care bill....



Pence Calls on President to Embrace Immediate Tax Relief to Create Jobs Without Further Delay U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after President Obama announced... U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, issued the following statement today after President Obama announced...



Stimulus Jobs--Deceptive Reports & Disputed Facts "If we see money being misspent, we're going to put a stop to it, and we will call it... "If we see money being misspent, we're going to put a stop to it, and we will call it...



Statement By House GOP Leaders Boehner, Cantor, & Pence on Stupak-Pitts Amendment House Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH), House Republican Whip Eric Cantor (R-VA) and House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence... House Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH), House Republican Whip Eric Cantor (R-VA) and House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence...



Pence Calls on Members of Congress to Choose Freedom U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, gave the following statement today... U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, gave the following statement today...



Pence Calls on Members of Congress to Choose Freedom "...liberal Democrats are choosing to ignore the clear voice of the American people in bringing... "...liberal Democrats are choosing to ignore the clear voice of the American people in bringing...



Pence Urges Congress to Support the Pitts/Stupak Amendment "Let us stand for life and stand for freedom." Washington, DC... "Let us stand for life and stand for freedom." Washington, DC...



Pence Urges Congress to Support the Pitts/Stupak Amendment U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today... U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today...



House Republican Conference Policy Shop Has What You Need Keep checking the House Republican Conference Policy Shop for relevant facts and details as the health care debate continues.... Keep checking the House Republican Conference Policy Shop for relevant facts and details as the health care debate continues....



GOP Health Care Press Conference Today House Republican leaders today held a special press conference to address the impending vote on the Pelosi Health Care... House Republican leaders today held a special press conference to address the impending vote on the Pelosi Health Care...



AARP: On the Wrong Side of History—Again Even as Speaker Pelosi and President Obama attempt to trump the endorsement of purported seniors' advocacy organization AARP for... Even as Speaker Pelosi and President Obama attempt to trump the endorsement of purported seniors' advocacy organization AARP for...



Stupak-Pitts Amendment: Most Important Abortion-Related Vote Since Roe Good News: In a surprise move after hours of tumultuous... Good News: In a surprise move after hours of tumultuous...



Side-by-Side: GOP Plan Delivers Health Care Reform Americans Want From the office of House Leader John Boehner: When it comes to reforming health care, controlling skyrocketing costs is... From the office of House Leader John Boehner: When it comes to reforming health care, controlling skyrocketing costs is...



CongressDaily: AMA Faces Revolt By State Branches CongressDaily reports today on state chapters of the AMA who do not support the government-run Pelosi health care bill.... CongressDaily reports today on state chapters of the AMA who do not support the government-run Pelosi health care bill....



Video: Voices of Republican Women House Republican Whip Eric Cantor's office produced this video spotlighting House Republican women on health care in America. Women... House Republican Whip Eric Cantor's office produced this video spotlighting House Republican women on health care in America. Women...



While Democrats Ignore Unemployment, Americas Pay the Price "Our team is working with members of Congress every day on this issue (health care), and it is my... "Our team is working with members of Congress every day on this issue (health care), and it is my...



What are Democrats Doing about Job Loss? Making it Worse. Today, the unemployment rate jumped to 10.2 percent, the highest level in 26 years. Rather than working with Republicans... Today, the unemployment rate jumped to 10.2 percent, the highest level in 26 years. Rather than working with Republicans...



"House Call" Press Conference Up Close and Personal Human Events covered the "House Call" press conference yesterday with a video compilation. House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence,... Human Events covered the "House Call" press conference yesterday with a video compilation. House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence,...



Pence Statement on Latest Unemployment Numbers House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence has a lot to say about the unemployment numbers released this morning: The... House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence has a lot to say about the unemployment numbers released this morning: The...



Pence Statement on Latest Unemployment Numbers Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today after... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today after...



Pence Urges Vote on Explicit Ban of Abortion Coverage in Democrat Health Care Bill U.S. Congressman Mike Pence submitted the following remarks on the floor of the House today, urging a vote on... U.S. Congressman Mike Pence submitted the following remarks on the floor of the House today, urging a vote on...



Speaker Pelosi and AARP: Hypocrisy You Can Believe In While Speaker Pelosi attempts to tout AARP's endorsement of her government takeover of health care, some may view it as... While Speaker Pelosi attempts to tout AARP's endorsement of her government takeover of health care, some may view it as...



New Pelosi Bill Provision Would Allow Federal Bureaucrats to Ration Health Care "The chronically ill and those toward the end of their lives are accounting for potentially 80 percent of the... "The chronically ill and those toward the end of their lives are accounting for potentially 80 percent of the...



MSNBC: Pence Advocates for GOP Alternative Health Care Bill House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence appeared yesterday on MSNBC to promote the GOP health care alternative against the... House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence appeared yesterday on MSNBC to promote the GOP health care alternative against the...



Pence Hails CBO Report on Republican Health Care Bill U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today after the Congressional Budget... U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, released the following statement today after the Congressional Budget...



Pence Hails CBO Report on Republican Health Care Bill “The House Republican health care plan proves that we can lower health care costs, without launching a government takeover... “The House Republican health care plan proves that we can lower health care costs, without launching a government takeover...



AARP: Just Another Greedy Insurance Company? "Either you're a voice for the elderly or you're an insurance company-choose one....They put themselves forward as non-biased observers,... "Either you're a voice for the elderly or you're an insurance company-choose one....They put themselves forward as non-biased observers,...



GOP Health Care Solutions for America: See It Now Want common sense health care reforms our nation can afford? You got it. House Republicans have come out strong... Want common sense health care reforms our nation can afford? You got it. House Republicans have come out strong...



On the Record With Mike Pence House Republican Conference Chairman was interviewed yetserday on Capitol Hill, regarding the Pelosi health care plan. See that interview... House Republican Conference Chairman was interviewed yetserday on Capitol Hill, regarding the Pelosi health care plan. See that interview...



Values Policy Concerns With the Pelosi Health Bill On October 29, 2009, Speaker Pelosi and House Democrats introduced H.R. 3962, the Affordable Health Care for America Act. ... On October 29, 2009, Speaker Pelosi and House Democrats introduced H.R. 3962, the Affordable Health Care for America Act. ...



Republican Health Care Alternative Now Available The full text of the 219-page, common-sense Republican alternative to Speaker Pelosi’s 1,990-page government takeover of health care is... The full text of the 219-page, common-sense Republican alternative to Speaker Pelosi’s 1,990-page government takeover of health care is...



Full Summary: Speaker Pelosi's Health Care Bill FLOOR SITUATION On October 29, 2009, Speaker Pelosi and the House Democrat leadership introduced H.R. 3962, the Affordable Health Care... FLOOR SITUATION On October 29, 2009, Speaker Pelosi and the House Democrat leadership introduced H.R. 3962, the Affordable Health Care...



Federal Funding for Abortion in the Pelosi Health Bill On October 29, 2009, Speaker Pelosi and House Democrats introduced H.R. 3962, the Affordable Health Care for America Act. ... On October 29, 2009, Speaker Pelosi and House Democrats introduced H.R. 3962, the Affordable Health Care for America Act. ...



The Truth About Speaker Pelosi’s Tax Increases From the House Republican Conference Policy Shop: Even as they attempt to enact a government takeover of health care,... From the House Republican Conference Policy Shop: Even as they attempt to enact a government takeover of health care,...



How Obamacare Will Affect You By Congressman John Shadegg Rep. John Shadegg (AZ) publisheda piece at Townhall today, entitled, "How Will ObamaCare Affect the Average American?" Read the... Rep. John Shadegg (AZ) publisheda piece at Townhall today, entitled, "How Will ObamaCare Affect the Average American?" Read the...



The Republican Reading Room House Republicans, led by Rep. Burgess and the Health Caucus, hosted a reading room for Republican Members to read... House Republicans, led by Rep. Burgess and the Health Caucus, hosted a reading room for Republican Members to read...



Live Stream of Health Caucus "Virtual Reading Room" Is Here The Congressional Health Caucus is livestreaming now and we've got it embedded: The Congressional Health Caucus is livestreaming now and we've got it embedded:



Common Sense Health Care Reform From GOP Solutions for America: See a summary of the House GOP health care reform bill here. The... From GOP Solutions for America: See a summary of the House GOP health care reform bill here. The...



November 3, 2009 Republican Leadership Press Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference November 3, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference November 3, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



House Republican Virtual Reading Room Today At 2pm ET House Republicans have set up a “ Virtual Reading Room” today, where they will read through the Pelosi Health... House Republicans have set up a “ Virtual Reading Room” today, where they will read through the Pelosi Health...



Daily Fact About Women and Health Care From the office of Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers (WA): Women play significant roles in the health care industry: 90%... From the office of Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers (WA): Women play significant roles in the health care industry: 90%...



GOP Talkers: The Pelosi Health Care Bill Will Hurt Women & Families As moms, doctors, nurses, caregivers and taxpayers, women play a critical role in the health care debate85 percent of... As moms, doctors, nurses, caregivers and taxpayers, women play a critical role in the health care debate85 percent of...



Over 100 New Federal Bureaucracies Created in Pelosi Health Care Bill We've compiled a list of all the new boards, bureaucracies, commissions, and programs created in Speaker Pelosi's government takeover... We've compiled a list of all the new boards, bureaucracies, commissions, and programs created in Speaker Pelosi's government takeover...



Pelosi's Health Care Bill By the Numbers The House Republican Conference has compiled a list of important numbers relevant to Speaker Pelosi's 1,990-page health care bill.... The House Republican Conference has compiled a list of important numbers relevant to Speaker Pelosi's 1,990-page health care bill....



The Washington Examiner Spotlights GOP on Health Care Message The Washington Examiner's Byron York spotlighted the Weekly Republican Address this weekend. The piece, entitled "GOP on Health Care:... The Washington Examiner's Byron York spotlighted the Weekly Republican Address this weekend. The piece, entitled "GOP on Health Care:...



House Leader John Boehner Delivers Weekly Republican Address on Health Care House Republican Leader John Boehner delivered this week's Weekly Republican Address, focusing on health care. Here is the video:... House Republican Leader John Boehner delivered this week's Weekly Republican Address, focusing on health care. Here is the video:...



Daily Fact About Women and Health Care Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers (WA), Vice-Chair of the House Republican Conference, has been a strong leader on the health... Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers (WA), Vice-Chair of the House Republican Conference, has been a strong leader on the health...



The Pelosi Health Care Bill: Facts and Finds Continued It is 1,990 pages long so House Republicans and GOP leadership are still reading through the many details included... It is 1,990 pages long so House Republicans and GOP leadership are still reading through the many details included...



By the Numbers-Speaker Pelosi’s Health Care Bill The Republican Conference has compiled a list of important numbers relevant to Speaker Pelosi's 1,990-page health care bill:... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of important numbers relevant to Speaker Pelosi's 1,990-page health care bill:...



New Federal Bureaucracies Created in Pelosi Health Care Bill The House Republican Conference has compiled a list of all the new boards, bureaucracies, commissions, and programs... The House Republican Conference has compiled a list of all the new boards, bureaucracies, commissions, and programs...



Bad for Young Americans- Speaker Pelosi’s Health Care Takeover The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm young... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm young...



Bad for Women and Families- Speaker Pelosi’s Health Care Takeover The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm...



Bad for States-Speaker Pelosi’s Health Care Takeover The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm State... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm State...



Bad for Seniors-Speaker Pelosi’s Health Care Takeover The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm American... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm American...



Bad for Rural America-Speaker Pelosi’s Health Care Takeover The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm rural... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm rural...



Bad for Patients and Doctors- Speaker Pelosi’s Health Care Takeover The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm American... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm American...



Bad for Low-Income Households-Speaker Pelosi’s Health Care Takeover The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm individuals... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm individuals...



Bad for Business - Speaker Pelosi’s Health Care Takeover The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm American... The Republican Conference has compiled a list of provisions in the Pelosi health care bill that would harm American...



Speaker Pelosi’s Believe It Or Not In order to assist Members, staff, and interested parties seeking to read and review Speaker Pelosi's government takeover of... In order to assist Members, staff, and interested parties seeking to read and review Speaker Pelosi's government takeover of...



GOP on Health Care: in 568 Words, What's Wrong With 1,990 Pages House Republican Leader John Boehner gave the Republican radio address today, and in 568 words made a simple and compelling case... House Republican Leader John Boehner gave the Republican radio address today, and in 568 words made a simple and compelling case...



Pelosi's Health Care Plan Facts and Details Round 3 We'll be updating you with new finds from the Pelosi health care bill this weekend so stay tuned! Here are... We'll be updating you with new finds from the Pelosi health care bill this weekend so stay tuned! Here are...



For Halloween, A Real-Life Fright Show: Speaker Pelosi’s Government Takeover of Health Care Many may find the release of House Democrats' health "reform" legislation the week of Halloween particularly apt, as the... Many may find the release of House Democrats' health "reform" legislation the week of Halloween particularly apt, as the...



Fact Check and Details About Pelosi's Government-Run Health Care Bill Round 2 Today, we will continue to update and inform you about the facts inside House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's government-run health... Today, we will continue to update and inform you about the facts inside House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's government-run health...



Reading Guide - Pelosi Health "Reform" Bill In order to assist Members, staff, and interested parties seeking to read and review the health “reform” legislation (H.R.... In order to assist Members, staff, and interested parties seeking to read and review the health “reform” legislation (H.R....



House Democrat Health "Reform" Legislation: Short Summary of the Government Takeover of Health Care BACKGROUND AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY On October 29, 2009, Speaker Pelosi and the House Democrat leadership introduced H.R. 3962,... BACKGROUND AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY On October 29, 2009, Speaker Pelosi and the House Democrat leadership introduced H.R. 3962,...



Fact Check and Details About Pelosi's Government-Run Health Care Bill We will keep you updated with the latest facts and finds about the Democrats' health care bill here. You... We will keep you updated with the latest facts and finds about the Democrats' health care bill here. You...



Pence Calls Pelosi Health Care Bill A “Freight Train of Mandates, Taxes and Bureaucracy” House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence appeared on Fox News, MSNBC and CNN today to discuss the Democrats' health... House Republican Conference Chairman Mike Pence appeared on Fox News, MSNBC and CNN today to discuss the Democrats' health...



House Republicans Respond to Pelosi's Health Care Bill House Leader John Boehner (OH): The American people have spoken. Speaker Pelosi and House Democrats have ignored them. Through... House Leader John Boehner (OH): The American people have spoken. Speaker Pelosi and House Democrats have ignored them. Through...



GOP Talkers on Pelosi Health Care Plan House Republicans will oppose any effort to pass a sweeping government takeover of health care and are committed to... House Republicans will oppose any effort to pass a sweeping government takeover of health care and are committed to...



Democrats' Health Care Bill Text The text of the Democrats' health care bill can be found here. It is 1,990 pages long -- start... The text of the Democrats' health care bill can be found here. It is 1,990 pages long -- start...



Democrat Health Care Bill to Include Public Option After a widely circulated email from House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's office announced a health care press conference scheduled for... After a widely circulated email from House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's office announced a health care press conference scheduled for...



The Debt Limit and the Troops According to press reports, Democrats are planning to attach legislation to increase the national debt ceiling to the Fiscal... According to press reports, Democrats are planning to attach legislation to increase the national debt ceiling to the Fiscal...



AARP: Reform advocate and insurance salesman By Dan Eggen Washington Post Staff Writer Tuesday, October 27, 2009 The nation's preeminent seniors group, AARP, has... By Dan Eggen Washington Post Staff Writer Tuesday, October 27, 2009 The nation's preeminent seniors group, AARP, has...



State Unemployment Figures Confirm Regrettable Truths Eight months ago the President signed a $787 billion "stimulus" bill that had been rammed through the House without... Eight months ago the President signed a $787 billion "stimulus" bill that had been rammed through the House without...



Pence Calls for Transparency in Health Care Debate and Real Help to Small Businesses Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks regarding the... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks regarding the...



Pence Calls for Transparency in Health Care Debate and Real Help to Small Businesses Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks regarding the... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following remarks regarding the...



Democrats, Deficits and Debt By the Numbers "The cost of our debt is one of the fastest growing expenses in the federal budget. This rising... "The cost of our debt is one of the fastest growing expenses in the federal budget. This rising...



Democrats Cut Back-Room Deals Benefiting AARP "There's an inherent conflict of interest....They're ending up becoming very dependent on sources of income."- Former AARP Executive Marilyn... "There's an inherent conflict of interest....They're ending up becoming very dependent on sources of income."- Former AARP Executive Marilyn...



Candidate Obama vs. President Obama Even as he campaigned on a platform of change and transparency, an examination of Barack Obama's comments during the... Even as he campaigned on a platform of change and transparency, an examination of Barack Obama's comments during the...



“Stimulus” Recipients and the White House Spin Today, the White House announced the first "hard" evidence of their effort to account for jobs created by the... Today, the White House announced the first "hard" evidence of their effort to account for jobs created by the...



What Every Member Needs to Know about a Long-Term "Doc Fix" Background: As part of spending reforms included in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Congress enacted a sustainable growth... Background: As part of spending reforms included in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Congress enacted a sustainable growth...



Talking Points: A Government Takeover of Health Care Will Hurt Small Businesses The Democrat plan for a government takeover of health care would impose more than $820 billion in new tax hikes.Democrats... The Democrat plan for a government takeover of health care would impose more than $820 billion in new tax hikes.Democrats...



October 14, 2009 Republican Leadership Press Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference October 14, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference October 14, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



October 14, 2009 Republican Leadership Press Conference Republican Leadership Press Conference October 14, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric... Republican Leadership Press Conference October 14, 2009 Participants: - Republican Leader John Boehner (R-OH) - Republican Whip Eric...



Pence Disputes President’s Claim of Health Care Consensus Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on the floor of... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, delivered the following remarks today on the floor of...



Speaker Pelosi Advocates Higher, European-Style Taxes "I can make a firm pledge. Under my plan, no family making less than $250,000 a year will see... "I can make a firm pledge. Under my plan, no family making less than $250,000 a year will see...



Another "Rock Solid Deal" That Harms Seniors "But what we will do is, we'll have the [health care] negotiations televised on C-SPAN, so that people can... "But what we will do is, we'll have the [health care] negotiations televised on C-SPAN, so that people can...



Baucus "Tax on Jobs" Is Anti-Family While the bill produced by Finance Committee Chairman Baucus is being portrayed by some media outlets as a "moderate... While the bill produced by Finance Committee Chairman Baucus is being portrayed by some media outlets as a "moderate...



House Democrat Bill Nearly Double Obama's $900 Billion Spending Cap "I will not sign [health care legislation] if it adds one dime to the deficit-now or in the future. ... "I will not sign [health care legislation] if it adds one dime to the deficit-now or in the future. ...



Democrat "Compromises" Would Expand Federal Funding for Abortions "And one more misunderstanding I want to clear up-under our plan, no federal dollars will be used to... "And one more misunderstanding I want to clear up-under our plan, no federal dollars will be used to...



The Reformed CFPA-New Paint, Same Old Clunker "There's a clear cause and effect here that is as neat and predictable as a law of physics: As... "There's a clear cause and effect here that is as neat and predictable as a law of physics: As...



False Analogies to a Government-Run Health Plan "I mean, if you think about-if you think about it, UPS and FedEx are doing just fine, right? No,... "I mean, if you think about-if you think about it, UPS and FedEx are doing just fine, right? No,...



Pence: “Senate Energy Bill Just Another Jobs-Killing National Energy Tax” Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference and the American Energy Solutions Group,... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference and the American Energy Solutions Group,...



Replacing One Ignored "Trigger" With Another "I will not sign [health care legislation] if it adds one dime to the deficit-now or in the future. ... "I will not sign [health care legislation] if it adds one dime to the deficit-now or in the future. ...



House Democrats' Health "Reform" Will Harm American Economy Even as unemployment approaches 10 percent nationwide, a recent Heritage Foundation analysis found that House Democrats' government takeover of... Even as unemployment approaches 10 percent nationwide, a recent Heritage Foundation analysis found that House Democrats' government takeover of...



House Democrats' Health "Reform" Will Harm American Economy Even as unemployment approaches 10 percent nationwide, a recent Heritage Foundation analysis found that House Democrats' government takeover of... Even as unemployment approaches 10 percent nationwide, a recent Heritage Foundation analysis found that House Democrats' government takeover of...



House Democrats' "Tort Reform:" More Giveaways to Trial Lawyers Even as President Obama promised to address tort claims as part of his health "reform" proposals, House' Democrats' government... Even as President Obama promised to address tort claims as part of his health "reform" proposals, House' Democrats' government...



Trade Protectionism at the Worst Economic Time "What is prudence in the conduct of every private family, can scarce be folly in that of a great... "What is prudence in the conduct of every private family, can scarce be folly in that of a great...



If You Like Your Current Plan...don't Tell Max Baucus While the bill produced by Finance Committee Chairman Baucus is being portrayed by some media outlets as a "moderate... While the bill produced by Finance Committee Chairman Baucus is being portrayed by some media outlets as a "moderate...



AARP: Helping Seniors Or Helping Itself? "There's an inherent conflict of interest....They're ending up becoming very dependent on sources of income." - Former AARP Executive... "There's an inherent conflict of interest....They're ending up becoming very dependent on sources of income." - Former AARP Executive...



Baucus Bill Full of Budgetary Gimmicks While the bill produced by Finance Committee Chairman Baucus is being portrayed by some media outlets as a "moderate... While the bill produced by Finance Committee Chairman Baucus is being portrayed by some media outlets as a "moderate...



GOP Talking Points on Health Care House Republicans will oppose any effort to pass a sweeping government takeover of health care and are committed to working... House Republicans will oppose any effort to pass a sweeping government takeover of health care and are committed to working...



Do Seniors Need a Social Security COLA? In light of proposals being discussed to increase seniors' Social Security cost-of-living adjustment (COLA), the Republican Conference has prepared... In light of proposals being discussed to increase seniors' Social Security cost-of-living adjustment (COLA), the Republican Conference has prepared...



Democrat Health “Reform” IS a Massive Middle-Class Tax Increase "I can make a firm pledge. Under my plan, no family making less than $250,000 a year will see... "I can make a firm pledge. Under my plan, no family making less than $250,000 a year will see...



Study Admits: Government Takeover Will Raise Private Insurance Premiums A study recently published in the journal Health Affairs has confirmed what many have feared-that enrollment in a government-run... A study recently published in the journal Health Affairs has confirmed what many have feared-that enrollment in a government-run...



Pence: The Democrat Compromise for Government-run Insurance is More Government-run Insurance Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following statement today about... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following statement today about...



CBS News: Obama Admin: Cap and Trade Could Cost Families $1,761 A Year Posted by Declan McCullagh September 15, 2009 9:03 PM The Obama administration has privately concluded that a cap... Posted by Declan McCullagh September 15, 2009 9:03 PM The Obama administration has privately concluded that a cap...



Wall Street Journal Editorial: The Quietest Trillion Congratulations. You're about to own $100 billion a year in student loans. The furor over President Obama's trillion-dollar... Congratulations. You're about to own $100 billion a year in student loans. The furor over President Obama's trillion-dollar...



Wall Street Journal Editorial: The Quietest Trillion Congratulations. You're about to own $100 billion a year in student loans. The furor over President Obama's trillion-dollar... Congratulations. You're about to own $100 billion a year in student loans. The furor over President Obama's trillion-dollar...



Pence Says President’s Regulatory Reform Plan "Protects the Status-Quo" Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following statement today on... Washington, DC - U.S. Congressman Mike Pence, Chairman of the House Republican Conference, made the following statement today on...



House Democrats Break President Obama’s Promise President Obama promised in his address to Congress that, "There are also those who claim that our reform effort... President Obama promised in his address to Congress that, "There are also those who claim that our reform effort...



Congressman Pence Discusses Health Care