ANOTHER Poll: Voters Want Single-Payer
Posted by Shum Preston on October 29, 2007 - 3:02pm

The bad news? We’ve still got some organizing to do to overcome inertia among the country’s powerbrokers.

The good news? This country has a workable majority in favor of the kind of genuine healthcare reform that will move us towards the successful systems built by countries as diverse as the European democracies, Taiwan, and Canada.

Pick your theory why, but yet another poll has come out showing the public strongly in favor of a guaranteed, single-payer system for this country…and once again the reporting media minimizes and dismisses the public sentiment.

This time, it’s the LA Times poll.

Let’s head straight to the numbers. The poll offered 4 healthcare proposals to 1,209 adults nationally. Here’s how they came up:

Do you agree or disagree with the following proposals:

1. Require large companies that do not offer health insurance to pay a tax to cover the costs of insuring Americans who cannot afford to pay for their own: 62% agree, 31% disagree. ("pay or play")

2. Create a government-run, government-financed health insurance program that would cover all Americans: 53% agree, 36% disagree. ("single-payer")

3. All Americans should be required to buy health insurance. Insurance companies should be required to cover everyone, with government subsidies for those who cannot afford it on their own: 51% agree, 39% disagree. ("indiviudal mandate")

4. Give Americans a tax credit that will help make health insurance more affordable, while keeping the current system the same as it is now: 44% agree, 45% disagree. ("market-based approach")

Where does this leave us? Well first of all, the so-called market-based solution is not a legitimate choice in the eyes of the American people. We have market-based healthcare, and it is a public health nightmare, sickening and killing our population.

That leaves broad, majority support for three options: individual mandates, “pay or play” systems, or single-payer healthcare…this despite the fact that there has been a steady drumbeat of media support for individual mandate plans proposed by politicians from Mitt Romney to John Edwards to Arnold Schwarzenegger.

Interestingly, the wording of the question for individual mandates is mis-leading. It stresses the regulation of insurance companies, and the expansion of public subsidies for lower-income people. The Massachusetts experience with this system has both shown how resistant to reforms these powerful insurance companies are to regulation, and the problem of defining for patients what they can afford. Can a middle-class family making, say, $50,000 a year afford $8,000 to $10,000 per year for premiums before they pay co-pays, deductibles, and out-of-pocket expenses? Probably not, and as word gets out about the Massachusetts mess, support will likely drop.

So that leaves a “pay or play” system or single-payer as two popular options for healthcare reform and that’s where the debate should center. Shall we save our private insurance industry, build out public health, and encourage businesses to remain worried about providing healthcare--or scrap the system and build a national, non-profit, universal risk pool to offer insurance to everybody.

You’d never know it, of course, by the poll write-up the Times offered. Here’s their take on these results:

Democratic ideas for fixing the healthcare system to cover the uninsured enjoy more support among Americans than proposals coming from Republicans, a new Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll shows….

Sixty-two percent said they supported requiring large employers to help pay for coverage whereas 31% opposed it. And 51% said they favored a mandate that individuals purchase health insurance, much as drivers are required to carry auto coverage; 39% disagreed.

Tax breaks to make insurance more affordable -- a leading Republican idea -- more closely divided the public, with 44% backing that approach and 45% opposing it.

Any mention of the public’s endorsement of guaranteed, single-payer options was relegated to the last paragraphs of the article, which read:

The survey found that 53% supported the idea of extending Medicare to cover all Americans, creating a government-run system; and 36% opposed it.

But Blendon, the Harvard expert, said that finding was suspect because the poll question did not make clear that such a system would be financed by taxes.

Um, if that’s what Harvard says, maybe the reporters should have called Stanford or Yale? Everybody knows how Medicare is financed, and people like it. Moreover, the individual mandate was an idea that originated among Republicans.

The story remains that the public is far ahead of the politicians on healthcare reform. Perhaps because we’re not on the payroll of the insurance companies?