Health Policy Briefs
This policy brief discusses the rationale for creation of the Prevention and Public Health Fund; examines where spending has gone to date; and lays out the debate over preserving, cutting, or eliminating the fund altogether.

The health care reform legislation allocated the prevention fund with $15 billion over its first 10 years. But President Barack Obama signed legislation on February 22, 2012 that cuts the fund by $5 billion over 10 years to help pay for other initiatives, including a continuation of payroll tax breaks. Earlier, congressional Republicans had targeted the fund for cuts or complete elimination, arguing either that it was unnecessary and wasteful or that it would accomplish little on top of existing federally funded efforts for disease prevention and health promotion.

The Affordable Care Act of 2010 created the Prevention and Public Health Fund to invest in public health and disease prevention. Supporters consider the fund a key component of the law's overall thrust of helping to reorient US health care toward wellness, while also restraining cost growth driven by the high prevalence of chronic disease.

A 2011 study by Bobby Milstein and colleagues, published in Health Affairs, showed that public health interventions, such as enabling healthier behaviors and improving the conditions people live in, dramatically increased the impact of other measures, including expanding health insurance coverage, slowing the growth of disease prevalence, reducing deaths, and lowering costs.

Various analyses of different strategies to reduce the number of deaths and improve the cost-effectiveness of interventions have shown big payoffs to public health initiatives. The 2008 analysis cited above concluded that an investment of $10 per person annually in proven, community-based public health initiatives would return more than $16 billion within five years, or $5.60 per dollar invested.

CHANGING PATTERNS OF DISEASE : Historically, most public health funds have been aimed at addressing communicable diseases, such as flu or West Nile virus. But funding hasn't kept pace with changing needs and disease patterns. Today, the major threat to most Americans' health is chronic, noncommunicable disease, such as heart disease, cancer, and diabetes. These illnesses and their underlying causes affect more than 130 million Americans, nearly half the population. Many of these conditions are linked to unhealthy diets and low levels of activity, and they are highly preventable.

Complicating matters, there are wide variations in state and local government financing for public health, leading to disparities in infrastructure and program activities from one community to another. A 2011 analysis by the Trust for America's Health found that state spending on public health during fiscal year 2009-10 ranged from just $3.40 per person in Nevada to a high of $171.30 per person in Hawaii. Because of budget pressures, since 2008, more than 29,000 local and 16,000 state public health jobs have been lost due to layoffs and attrition. States cut nearly $392 million for public health programs in 2010 alone.

What's more, a 2008 analysis by the New York Academy of Medicine and the Trust for America's Health, a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization focused on public health, identified a $20 billion annual shortfall in public health funding. The groups said that the funding gap impaired the nation's ability to carry out basic functions, such as monitoring public health and enforcing laws, investigating health problems in the community, linking people to available services, ensuring an adequate public health workforce, and researching new prevention strategies.

A decade ago, following the 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon and the anthrax attacks thereafter, there was a temporary surge in efforts to boost public health preparedness. But overall, public health advocates generally believe that federal investments in public health have been inadequate. Less than 5 percent of national health spending is devoted to public health, according to the CMS Office of the Actuary.

Public and private sectors also need to cooperate to achieve public health, such as when the federal government collaborates with pharmaceutical companies to ensure adequate supplies of annual flu vaccine. In addition, infrastructure is required to address public health issues surrounding chronic disease prevention, including surveillance and communication to mobilize community action.

NEED FOR INFRASTRUCTURE : Achieving this goal requires a robust physical and personnel infrastructure--for example, public health labs and scientists who can help track down and identify new infectious viruses and bacteria. It also requires cooperation across multiple levels of government, such as county departments of public health working with the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) during a measles epidemic.

The term public health encompasses several core functions, including identifying and tracking disease, protecting food and water supplies, educating the public about health issues, and preparing for and responding to disease outbreaks and disasters. The mission of the public health system, as articulated by the Institute of Medicine, is "fulfillment of society's interests in assuring the conditions in which people can be healthy."