Health Policy Briefs
This policy brief focuses on eliminating fraud and abuse in Medicare and Medicaid and explores the challenges involved in putting the new tools into place.

Endowed with new powers under the Affordable Care Act and the Small Business Jobs Act of 2010, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has been adopting new tools to curb fraud and abuse in the Medicare and Medicaid programs. The new approach amounts to a paradigm shift from the earlier model, in which CMS paid providers first, then sought to chase down fraud and abuse after the fact--a process known as "pay and chase."

"Fraud" refers to illegal activities in which someone gets something of value without having to pay for it or earn it, such as kickbacks or billing for services that were not provided. "Abuse" occurs when a provider or supplier bends rules or doesn't follow good medical practices, resulting in unnecessary costs or improper payments. Examples include the over-use of services or the providing of unnecessary tests. (Another area, "waste," refers to health care that is not effective, and will be the subject of a separate Health Policy Brief.)

At a time of high federal budget deficits and unsustainable growth in health care costs, there is general agreement on the need to eliminate unnecessary spending in health care--and among the leading candidates are fraud and abuse. Despite ongoing, concerted efforts, making meaningful inroads has not been easy.

The magnitude of potential wrongdoing is such that resource-strapped federal prosecutors have adopted an unofficial threshold that requires that alleged crimes be worth at least $500,000 and be clear cut enough to make conviction a near certainty before they will take up a case. That leaves a lot of room for marginal operators to game the system for many multiples of much smaller sums.

The emphasis on rapid payment, as opposed to identifying and rooting out false or inflated claims, makes both programs susceptible to fraud. Taking advantage of this weakness, for example, Eastern European crime syndicates have lately become prevalent players in Medicare fraud, specializing in stealing the identifies of Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and then billing the programs for treatments that didn't take place at clinics that don't exist.

The programs today handle an enormous volume of transactions, making it easier for dubious claims to escape detection. Every business day, for example, Medicare administrative contractors process about 4.5 million claims from 1.5 million providers. Every month, they process 30,000 enrollment applications from health care providers and suppliers of medical equipment.

For many years, the Government Accountability Office (GAO), the investigative arm of Congress, has designated Medicare and Medicaid as being at "high risk" for fraud, abuse, and improper payments. Both programs were designed to enroll "any willing provider" and to reimburse claims quickly for services provided.

UNDERSTANDING THE PROBLEM : CMS's estimate of improper payments, which relies on random samples of claims data, is widely thought to understate the true size of the problem of fraud and abuse. In an April 2012 study former CMS administrator Donald M. Berwick and RAND Corporation analyst Andrew D. Hackbarth estimated that fraud and abuse added as much as $98 billion to Medicare and Medicaid spending in 2011.

The true annual cost of fraud and abuse in health care is not known. In fiscal year 2011 Medicare spent $565 billion on behalf of its 48.7 million beneficiaries, while federal and state Medicaid agencies served 70 million people at a combined cost of $428 billion. CMS estimated that in fiscal year 2010 these two programs made more than $65 billion in "improper federal payments," defined as payments that should not have been made or were made in an incorrect amount. Adding in improper payments made by state Medicaid programs boosts the total by about $10 billion annually.