Der Untermensch www.HolocaustResearchProject.org
Der Untermensch

"The subhuman"

The Holocaust Education & Archive Research Team has faithfully translated this infamous Nazi text from the original versions printed in both the German and Russian language. The purpose of this translation is for readers to understand the methods in which the Nazi propaganda machine would seek to dehumanize the victims of its genocidal actions.

Editor:

The Reichsführer-SS

SS Office



Berlin, 1942

DHM, Berlin

Do 56/685

Revised:

SS Office - Training Office

SS Hauptsturmführer King, SS-Obersturmführer Ludwig Pröscholdt

in conjunction with the Association of Graphic Jupp Daehler



Pictures: Atlanrik (18), the Associated Press (16), FF Bauer (3), DAF-Gau-Image (1), Georg Ebert (1), Enit (1), Helga Glassner (1), Max Göllner (3) , Hehmke-Winterer (1), Walter Hege (1), Historia Photo (1), Heinrich Hoffmann (5), country image Vienna (1), Ema Lendvai-Dircksen (2), Mauritius (6), Nibelungen Publisher (3) Orbis (7), Press Photo Center (2), Hans Retzlaff (9), Risch-Lau (1), Charloüe Rohrbach (5), collection Seiler (5), Jutta ropes (1), SS Office ( 12), SS-PF (21), Scherl (6), Sport Bild-Schimer (1), State body image (4), Ilse Steinhoff (2), Hans Tschira (4), Paula Armed Forces (3), the world (8) , Anna Winterer (1)

V E R T R I E B N O R D L A N D V E R L A G

As long as there have been men on the earth, the struggle between man and the subhuman will be the historic rule; the Jewish-led struggle against the mankind, as far back as we can look, is part of the natural course of life on our planet. One can be convinced with full certainty that this struggle for life and death is just as much a law of nature as is the struggle of an infection to corrupt a healthy body."

Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler 193 5

Just as the night rises against the day, the light and dark are in eternal conflict. So too, is the subhuman the greatest enemy of the dominant species on earth, mankind. The subhuman is a biological creature, crafted by nature, which has hands, legs, eyes and mouth, even the semblance of a brain. Nevertheless, this terrible creature is only a partial human being.

Although it has features similar to a human, the subhuman is lower on the spiritual and psychological scale than any animal. Inside of this creature lies wild and unrestrained passions: an incessant need to destroy, filled with the most primitive desires, chaos and coldhearted villainy.

A subhuman and

nothing more!

Not all of those, who appear human are in fact so. Woe to him who forgets it ! Every great creation, idea, and artistic expression on this planet were brought forth by real man. It was this true man that thought to invent and to create. It is for him there is only one objective:

T o pave the way to a higher form of existence, to give shape to the endless nothing, to make progress on the elusive quest for continuous improvement.

Thus evolved culture.

So just as the plough, modern tools and the concept of hearth and home helped to form human society and create the family, the people and the state. So then must mankind become good and great, rising above all other living creatures. Dwelling in the realm of God!

However, along side of mankind dwells the subhuman. This subhuman hates all that is created by man. This subhuman has always hated man, and always secretly sought to bring about his downfall, first like a thief, and then like a brazen killer.

The subhuman is united with his peers. Like beasts among beasts, never knowing peace or calm. The subhuman thrives in chaos and darkness, he is frightened by the light. These subhuman creatures dwell in the cesspools, and swamps, preferring a hell on earth, to the light of the sun.

But in these swamps and cesspools the subhuman has found its leader – The Eternal Jew! The Jew understands the desires and needs of his fellow creature. The Jews endeavors to corrupt and manipulate this horror of inhumanity until they are rallied towards a common goal in the destruction of true man.

Beginning as early on as the destruction of Persians, the Jew has glorified this destructive nature. Even honoring it and declaring the holiday Purim that celebrates the organized mass murder of 75,000 Aryan Persians, who died as victims of Jewish hatred and evil.

Even now world Jewry still glorifies this terrible act - as its greatest religious holiday.

The eternal hatred of the subhuman for mankind exists; they envy the clean and noble character of man. So they have tried to destroy what they hate, and from out of the vast deserts and endless steppes they have gathered hordes of their Huns whose leaders Attila, and Genghis Khan descended on western civilization bringing with them violence, fire and death, to every part of Europe they came.

The subhuman hordes would stop at nothing in their bid to overthrow the world of light and knowledge, to bring an apocalypse to all human progress and achievement. Their only goal is to make a desert wasteland of any nation or race that shines with creativity, goodness and beauty.

The only goal of the subhuman is chaos.

So for millennia this law of nature, the conflict between man and his anti-man, the subhuman has occurred. Over and over a new Attila, and new Genghis Khan, appears at the gates of Europe attempting to wreak havoc and destruction on mankind and his creations.

But today Bolshevism is the new Attila, the personification of the subhuman horde and its destructive power! But Bolshevism is not a phenomenon of just our time, not a product of our modern era. Neither has Bolshevism evolved within the framework of human history.

Bolshevism is as old as the Jew itself! Lenin and Stalin are only two who have prepared the way for this new horde!

“When a nation loses its leaders by blood and violence, the next step becomes their state, then economic, cultural and spiritual slavery. All that remains of such a nation, tainted by the mixing of blood and race, is the feeling of lost identity. They lose their own unique significance, and soon enough the nation ceases to exist. Only those that can be preserved, untainted, can prove that this nation ever existed”.

Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler 1935

On the infinite a steppes of Russian territory lay Eastern Europe. A sharp contrast is noticed when comparing central Europe with this enormous space. On both sides of the border is the same earth but not the same man.

It is the man who makes his mark on the landscape, while on the German side is planned orderly fields yielding abundant harvests; the other side is only impenetrable forests, vast and unkempt, miles of uninhabited steppes where even the rivers wind endlessly through the nothingness.

This poorly kept land which hides fertile soil could be a paradise for man, a potential "California of Europe" alive with fields and fruit, but instead it lies neglected and wasted, lost to the abyss of cultural nihilism.

This land cries out against the subhuman and his wasteful ways! This fertile black earth watered by burning tears, is only barely separated from the rest of Europe. However its Eastern European masters have not risen above their primitive ways.

The land sees only chaos and wastes because it is not cared for by true man, the bearer of high culture and genius, who would manage its development, and bring civilization to its soil instead of only cruel and endless war, and destruction.

Certainly, the developed nations of Central and Western Europe wanted to secure this land, it was their purpose. First there were the Goths and the Varangians, who based there empires in this territory and introduced culture. Then the Swedish, Flemish, the Dutch, Shwabs and Lower-Saxon settlers, attempted to bring light into the darkness. The cry for help sounded for centuries from these lands.

Even Peter the Great, Catherine II and all the rest called the German peasant and the German officer, a European scientist! A physician and engineer. But once again the forces of darkness, and the subhuman prevailed, the German spirit, which came to these lands to help, was brutally and senselessly destroyed.

The subhuman has challenged humanity, thus began the terrible invasion of Attila and Gengis Khan!

On their small ugly steppe horses, the subhuman hordes appearing as if they were part of the animal, growing out of its fur, descended onto Europe with their inhuman cry!

Their narrow eyes shone with excitement and the greedy bloodthirsty desire to reign down fire and destruction on all in their path.

The cry “the Huns come” was heard for centuries and became synonymous with fear and loathing. Russia became the stepping stone for where the subhuman ideology and doctrine burst forth against the world of light.

Repeatedly these wild barbarians with sharpened spears, cursing and foaming at the mouth came to bring destruction to the cultured west.

The red poet Peter Oreshchin in one of his writings said:

“Holy mother earth shakes under the stomping of millions of feet. The sickle of the moon was hidden behind the mosque and the cross of church. This is the end to the lights of Paris.

From the steppe rises the smoke of the victims, brought to their new god. London sinks under the waters. All of Berlin lies in ruins. The sweet moan of the noble, that perishes in combat. Hordes will sweep toward Mont Blanc and will traverse Gods valleys.

So the nomadic Kirghizs pray to a new world!”

“And here are they again here, these Huns, these splinters of inhumanity, a nightmare become reality, punch to the face of all that is kind and good.

“…at ease with their own primitive nature, in full knowledge of the repulsions from all of mankind they are a suitable tool in the hands of their master the eternal Jew! There leader in organized mass murder remains camouflaged in his civilian dress, the Jew is only invisible to the naive fools”

Mulattos and Finn-Asian barbarians, Gipsy’s and black skin savages all make up this modern underworld of subhuman’s that is always headed by the appearance of the eternal Jew.

The desire of the subhuman is for the German peasant, and all the people of the Europe to be destroyed and completely eradicated from the face of the earth.

This is the price of “humanity“. This is the fate of civilized society, to be sacrificed in blood.

European Man

In the photo → In the center - German peasant; Above to the left - Finnish officer; Above to the right - Spanish sailor; Below to the left - Dutch sailor; Below to the right - young Italian.

Jews as subhuman leaders

Now the Jew wants to walk in absolute confidence. So it made itself an officer, a commissioner, an outstanding leader of the subhuman horde. →

German Ubermensch

The German Aryan Knight stands as the bulwark against the subhuman horde, noble fighters for all that is good, keeping Europe from descending into the pit of savagery and stupidity.

← In the photo:

Above to the left - German troop officer;

Above to the right - officer Waffen SS;

Below to the left - the pilot of attack aviation;

Below to the right - the captain of submarine.

In the photo →

Above to the left - beasts in human appearance.

In the center to the left: subhuman’s “the leaders” of the underworld;

In the center to the right - the classical follower of the cult of satan;

Below - those, who left the dark and fetid ghetto of eastern cities

The subhuman will always be a subhuman, as a Jew remains a Jew, no matter by what name they call themselves: Churchill, Roosevelt, or Stalin.

Either way we are repulsed by them and Stalin along with his allies and comrades is:

Subhuman No. 1!