Homeowners can Receive $1,500 Tax Credit for Wood/Pellet Stove, Fireplace

Buyers Eligible for up to a 30 Percent Credit

News Release



HousingZone

Under the 2009 Economic Stimulus legislation, U.S. homeowners who purchase a 75-percent efficient biomass (wood or pellet) burning stove, fireplace or fireplace insert and place it into service in their home during 2009 or 2010 can receive a 30 percent tax credit for costs incurred, up to $1,500. Today the Federal Government released clarifying guidelines for qualifying biomass products.

The guidelines verify that more than 30 Quadra-Fire and Harman Home Heating products qualify including EPA-certified wood stoves, fireplaces and inserts, as well as pellet stoves, fireplaces, inserts, furnaces and boilers. Quadra-Fire and Harman are brands of Hearth & Home Technologies, based in Lakeville, Minnesota.



“Quadra-Fire and Harman Home Heating have been prominent leaders in the industry for more than 20 years,” said John Shimek, vice president of marketing for Hearth & Home Technologies. “With multiple designs and styles to choose from, our products have the most advanced technologies for fuel and heat efficiency and are backed by a limited lifetime warranty.”



For a complete listing of qualifying products and to find a dealer, visit www.quadrafire.com and www.harmanstoves.com.



After purchase, the homeowner can obtain an Official Manufacturer’s Certificate from either www.quadrafire.com or www.harmanstoves.com. It certifies that the product qualifies for the tax credit, and the homeowner can rely on the certificate when preparing his or her tax return. Homeowners are not required to submit the certificate or a product sales receipt to the government, but should retain them for their records.







The Benefits of Heating with Biomass



There are multiple benefits to installing a wood or pellet burning appliance to produce heat in your home. Financial benefits are derived for years to come with reduced heating costs. And prices for wood and pellets are predictable when compared to propane, oil and natural gas, which can fluctuate greatly.



“There are significant environmental benefits derived from heating your home with biomass,” said Dan Henry, chief technical officer for Hearth & Home Technologies. “Burning wood and pellets is considered carbon-neutral since only the carbon the tree or plant absorbed when growing is released into the air, contributing to less greenhouse gases.”



In addition, burning biomass in a Quadra-Fire or Harman EPA-certified clean-burning appliance eliminates approximately 75-percent of carbon emissions associated with fossil fuel heating.







About EPA-certified wood burning fireplaces, stoves and inserts



Technological advancements have made today’s wood stoves, fireplaces and inserts considerably more efficient than dated models. Quadra-Fire and Harman EPA-certified wood burning units are up to 85-percent efficient, producing more heat with less wood to provide warmth and comfort for many hours. They are clean-burning with less ash and minimal outside air emissions. Complete combustion is achieved through high temperatures, ample oxygen and sufficient burning of gases before they are exhausted. It can also eliminate the accumulation of creosote, a flammable chimney residue. They are perfect for homeowners who want to live green and also enjoy the crackling sounds and flickering flames of burning wood.







About pellet burning fireplaces, stoves and inserts



Pellet appliances have high combustion levels and great heating efficiencies. They are easy to operate with built-in fuel hoppers and feeding devices that move pellets in small groups to the combustion chamber. The various Quadra-Fire and Harman models have control panels or wall-mounted thermostats to control heat and minimize fuel consumption.



Pellets burn cleaner than virtually any other biomass fuel and produce low particulate matter, helping to reduce air pollution. They are made from compacted sawdust, wood chips, bark, agricultural crop waste, waste paper and other organic materials. Burning pellets is a constructive way to reuse material that may otherwise go to a landfill. Wood pellets are typically purchased in 40-pound bags for between $5 and $7, providing up to 24 hours of steady heat.







Controlling energy costs and reducing fossil fuel consumption



Increasing concerns about controlling heating costs and living green have many homeowners turning to renewable fuels for supplemental or whole home heating. For the same reasons, the U.S. government is supporting and promoting the use of biomass appliances for heat. For more information about the tax credit, visit http://www.irs.gov/.

advertisement