Tesla vs. Texas dealerships explained: Are more luxury electric cars headed our way?
Photo: Michael Macor, The Chronicle The end of the assembly line where a quality control inspection...

Tesla Motors' Lone Star ambitions won the blessing of the Texas GOP at the party convention in Dallas this month, paving the path towards a possible end to the three years of drama over the electric car manufacturer's right to sell in Texas.

RELATED: Electric cars will be big in 2017 model year

It's a dramatic incremental victory for Tesla in Texas, the nation's second-largest auto market, coming less than a year after the state's top Republican, Gov. Greg Abbott, told Bloomberg that Texas wasn't interested in the California car company's direct sales.

The debate, which surfaced officially in the last two legislative session, saw the full fury of Texas car dealers unleashed, and pit principles of conservative economics against each other.

When leaders herald a competitive marketplace with slim state control, what do they do when retailers ask for state control to maintain competition?

Since 2013, Tesla sought an exemption from state regulations that require its luxury automobiles be sold at franchised dealerships. There isn't much of a parallel elsewhere in the retail unvierse -imagine a law requiring laptop computers be sold at designated retailers like Best Buy or Micro Center. Tesla wanted to open the equivalent of an Apple Store—a single-brand shop with factory-direct merchandise—like they have opened in other states.

The Texas Franchise Law outlawed that, so Tesla in Texas ran "galleries," not stores, where employees could show the cars but not discuss their prices, or even give the web address where customers could order a Tesla from a California factory.

RELATED: Tesla opens up gallery and service center in Houston

Photo: Melissa Phillip, Houston Chronicle A Tesla Model S is shown at the Tesla Gallery and Service Center,...

Tesla founder Elon Musk, who also started Paypall and SpaceX, took his qualms to Texas lawmakers in 2013. Advocates for Texas car dealers argued that Tesla's request amounted to an unfair exemption for a single player.

Indeed, the bill filed by Rep. Eddie Rodrigues (D-Austin) carved out an exception for "a manufacturer of only all electric-powered or all battery-powered motor vehicles" which already operated dealerships elsewhere in the U.S. and never used a franchised retailer. That pretty narrowly singled out Tesla without mentioning the name.

That bill passed committee but never made it to vote. A 2013 report from the watchdog group Texans for Public Justice credited the failure to high dollar contributions from auto dealers to state lawmakers.

When the 2015 session came around, the issue reemerged and both sides upped their game. Tesla increased its spending on lobbying efforts from about $350,000 in 2013 to $1.5 million in 2015

Car dealers upped their spending even more, according to a 2015 report by Texans for Public Justice, doling out $6 million in campaign contributions during the 2014 cycle.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below. Texanomics

As the Tesla issue caught traction in the 2015 session, the Texas Automobile Dealers Association issued a "myth vs. fact" explainer.

"MYTH: Franchise laws contradict the free market," it said. "FACT: Franchise laws were put in place to prevent monopolies and promote competition in vehicle pricing and service to the consumer."

Texas car dealers argued that a Tesla exemption would open the door for all manufacturers to monopolize direct sales in Texas, and would pave the path towards certain doom for the franchised dealership industry.

The legislation, this time with bipartisan backing, stalled in committee.

RELATED: Tesla bills in reverse at the Texas Legislature

The coming 2017 session seems poised to provide a breakthrough for Tesla, now that the company has courted the sentiments of Texas republicans.

With a booth at the party's state convention in Dallas in May, a Tesla rep argued that repeal of franchise law amounted to a truer free market system. And the party agreed, adding a Tesla-friendly plank to its 2016 platform.

"We support allowing consumers in Texas to be able to purchase cars directly from manufacturers," the addition said.

That will make it very hard for the state's ruling party to continue to resist the years-long push when lawmakers convene again in Austin in January.

RELATED: Katy mall first with station for charging of all electric vehicles as industry grows

If a franchise exemption passes for Tesla in Texas, consumers will face the fresh opportunity to walk into a Tesla gallery and drive out in one of the world's foremost models of luxury electric sedans. It will probably prompt the opening of more Tesla storefronts across Texas, and could help push electric vehicle travel into the mainstream.