Candidates wage nontraditional campaigns for Harris County commissioner
Photo: Marie D. De Jesus, Staff Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Senator Rodney Ellis is the state senator for Texas' 13th state senate district. Senator Ellis stands in his home office for a portrait, Friday, March 25, 2016, in Houston. ( Marie D. De Jesus / Houston Chronicle ) less Senator Rodney Ellis is the state senator for Texas' 13th state senate district. Senator Ellis stands in his home office for a portrait, Friday, March 25, 2016, in Houston. ( Marie D. De Jesus / Houston ... more Photo: Marie D. De Jesus, Staff Image 2 of 2 Gene Locke, a former city attorney and mayoral candidate, was named by Harris County Judge Ed Emmett to complete El Franco Lee's term on Commissioners Court shown during a media conference at 1001 Preston St., Friday, Jan. 22, 2016 in Houston. ( Melissa Phillip / Houston Chronicle ) less Gene Locke, a former city attorney and mayoral candidate, was named by Harris County Judge Ed Emmett to complete El Franco Lee's term on Commissioners Court shown during a media conference at 1001 Preston St., ... more Photo: Melissa Phillip, Staff Candidates wage nontraditional campaigns for Harris County commissioner 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

The campaign for the next Harris County Precinct 1 commissioner appears in many ways like any other: candidates are raising money, seeking endorsements and sending out targeted mailers touting their credentials.

But this is not a typical election, and voters won't be heading to the ballot box. Instead, the task of picking a commissioner who will represent 1.2 million people - more than the populations of nine states - and control a $200 million budget falls to a group of 125 Democratic precinct chairs.

That's because longtime Commissioner El Franco Lee's name remained on the March 1 primary ballot after his death in early January, leaving the precinct chairs to select the party's new nominee, who will be unopposed in November.

The unusual nature of the nominating process means the campaign is less democratic than most local elections and far more intimate - built around in-depth policy conversations and targeted wooing of party insiders.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below.

Example: The presumed frontrunners, Rodney Ellis and Gene Locke, both sent flowers to female precinct chairs for Mother's Day.

Ellis, a longtime state senator, and Locke, who was tapped to serve out the final year of Lee's term, are among the four candidates who have confirmed they are seeking the Harris County Democratic Party's nomination.

Meanwhile, a trio of City Council members have mulled seeking the post without officially declaring their candidacy, fearful that doing so could force them to resign under a state "resign-to-run" provision that now applies to them. The nominee will be picked June 25, with the candidates set to present their platforms at a public forum Sunday hosted by the local Democratic Party.

Feeling pressure

Pat Frazier, a precinct chair in the Hiram Clarke neighborhood who is backing Locke, said the prospect of choosing such a powerful officeholder - one who will likely hold the position for as long as he or she wants in the Democratic stronghold - is "a lot to put on the shoulders" of such a small group.

"I would absolutely prefer that it was held to a special election and the people would actually get an opportunity to vote," Frazier acknowledged. "Houston is such a huge city."

With no candidate-filing deadline or applicable schedule for campaign-finance reporting, it is unclear how many other candidates might be running, how much money they've raised or what they're spending it on.

Even among this nebulous field, however, political scientists gave Ellis the edge because of his many years in public office and strong party ties.

"He has been in elected office for almost 30 years," University of Houston political scientist Brandon Rottinghaus said. "That clearly has cemented several of the relationships that he needs."

Touting credentials

The urban precinct covers much of Houston, curling north from the southeastern tip of Harris County - through neighborhoods such as Sunnyside, downtown, Montrose and the Bush airport area - before dipping back down through the east side. About 40 percent of the precinct's residents are black, 37 percent are Hispanic and 18 percent are white.

Once in office, commissioners - who are not term-limited - often "fly under the radar," Rottinghaus said, rarely drawing serious challengers or giving up their seats. Commissioners have a base salary of nearly $170,000 a year.

During his three decades in office, Lee focused heavily on social programs for youth and seniors, helping extend access to health care and providing other services in traditionally poor inner-city neighborhoods.

It's a mission that Locke, the current commissioner, is looking to expand. Locke announced his candidacy in March after initially signaling he was not interested.

In his roughly four months in office, Locke, a former city attorney who ran unsuccessfully for mayor against Annise Parker, has emphasized road and sidewalk projects near NRG Stadium and other areas, nuisance abatement and debris removal inside the city limits.

"I have taken on the mission to define myself as an urban county commissioner," Locke said.

If he becomes commissioner, Ellis will be giving up a seat in the state Legislature he's held for 26 years. But he called the move a "logical" transition, a chance to "impact people's lives on a micro level" after years working on the macro level.

He said he has pushed criminal justice reform and economic development as a state lawmaker, and believes his success in reaching across party lines in Austin will allow him to work well with the other commissioners, who are Republicans.

"In the reddest of red states, I've still been able to make meaningful progress on progressive issues," the outspoken Ellis said.

Race draws interest

Two others have thus far explicitly said they are seeking the office: state Senate District 13 organizer Nathaniel West and community activist Georgia Provost.

City Councilman Dwight Boykins has not formally announced his candidacy, citing concern that he could forfeit his municipal office by doing so. But he has been actively campaigning for the job.

Because voters last November extended the terms of Houston elected officials to four years, from two, those who become a candidate for another office now are subject to the so-called "resign-to-run" provision of the Texas Constitution, which applies to municipal officeholders with terms longer than two years. Though a Texas attorney general opinion issued in 2000 states that running for the nomination of a political party's executive committee does not prompt an automatic resignation, the courts have yet to formally resolve the issue.

"My best bet is that the courts would rule that (then-Attorney General John) Cornyn is correct and you don't trigger resign-to-run by seeking the nomination of the executive committee," former Harris County Democratic Party Chair Gerry Birnberg said. However, he added, "Until the courts decide the issue, there is no way to say for sure, definitively, that Attorney General Cornyn was correct."

So Boykins and other interested council members - Jerry Davis and Larry Green - have approached the campaign gingerly.

"I can neither admit or deny my interest in the seat because of the way the current law is drafted," Green said recently. "However, I can say I have been approached by several precinct judges and other community members requesting that I do move forward in trying to run for the seat."

That awkwardness was on full display three weeks ago, when Boykins was introduced as a commissioner candidate to a group of roughly four dozen gathered at an Oak Forest Area Democrats meeting.

Boykins made no mention of a bid for commissioner, however, focusing instead on his record as a council member.

"In two years, we've done some things," Boykins said, before rattling off information about a senior home repair program in his district and a job fair he launched for those who previously were incarcerated.

In a later interview, Boykins said he would seek to expand both initiatives if elected commissioner.

'Retail' politics

The top candidates have been meeting with similar small groups or chatting with precinct chairs one-on-one for weeks.

"It's very, very retail," said Grant Martin, Ellis' general consultant. "The principles are pretty much the same. It's just that every single voter is getting a lot more attention than they would in a regular campaign."

This means hand-signed letters, conversations tailored to highly specific neighborhood concerns and personal phone calls from the candidates or their surrogates.

"It's all about relationships," Locke consultant Keir Murray said. "These chairs are pretty sophisticated, so they're not particularly interested in the generic campaign messaging that goes out. It's really more about the personal touch."

Among those who will select the next commissioner is Bill Galbraith, a Montrose precinct chair who became involved in Democratic politics during the civil rights movement. Galbraith plans to support Ellis, for whom he has previously volunteered.

"He's been at the forefront of voting rights, criminal justice, health care, the kind of issues that are real core Democratic values," Galbraith said.

If Ellis earns the Democratic Party's nod for commissioner, the party would need to convene another executive committee meeting to find a replacement for him on the ballot for state senator - and quickly, as all nominations must be completed by late August.

The angling has already begun.

"Of course anybody in the (Texas) House - or any other position for that matter - is going to look at that position as something to move to, and so I fall in that category of looking at it as a possibility," said state Rep. Garnet Coleman, one of several politicians who have already expressed interest in Ellis's seat. "These seats don't change hands very often, and more than likely, whomever is selected to be the nominee for the Democratic Party, they're going to be there for a long time."