Anatomy of a murder: Intense investigation spent seven days solving the brazen killing of veteran lawman Clint Greenwood Intense, 7-day hunt for lawman's killer brought together many agencies

No one knows when William Kenny decided it was time to act. He had been seething for years, the anger gnawing at him, the list of those who had wronged him growing. Now he was going to do something about it.

On March 31, he picked up a small, black hatchback at Enterprise Rent-a-Car near Bush Intercontinental Airport.

By noon on April 1, he was checking into the La Quinta in La Porte, a $92-a-night motel popular with truckers.

The next day he drove the 10 miles to Baytown to scope out the Harris County courthouse annex where his quarry, the person he clearly saw as the source of the injustices against him, worked. This is where he would get revenge.

He returned to the courthouse later that afternoon, about 4:30 p.m., parked his car and walked over to the parking space reserved for Precinct 3 Assistant Chief Deputy Constable Clint Greenwood.

Then he got back in the car, drove a few miles down Garth Road to a RaceWay convenience store, spun a few rounds on an eight-liner machine, bought a couple of beers and left.

That evening, he ate Mexican food at El Ranchero in La Porte, a few blocks from the La Quinta.

At 6:35 a.m. the next day, he again pulled into the courthouse parking lot, parked under a tree, and walked slowly to the rear of the lot where he hid, waiting.

Greenwood arrived just before 7 a.m. and backed his SUV into his parking space. He got out and walked around the rear of his vehicle to remove something from the passenger side.

That was Kenny's moment. He stepped out from his hiding space, lifted his 9 mm and from a distance of about 20 feet, shot Greenwood in the neck.

He calmly walked back to the car, returned it to Enterprise and disappeared.

It was done.

On the hunt

The shooting of the lawman and former prosecutor shook the Houston area to its core.

Greenwood was a "cop's cop," and response to the shooting was swift and sudden.

It sparked an intense manhunt for a killer officers feared may have other targets, bringing together resources from every level of government over seven days to solve the case, according to a Chronicle review of events through sources, court documents and interviews.

Within minutes of the shooting, an impromptu command center formed inside the courthouse annex, with dozens of officers huddled in the large courtroom of Justice of the Peace Don Coffey. White boards brought in from an office supply store charted the evidence. Local businesses delivered streams of hot food and fresh coffee.

Baytown police, constables and sheriff's deputies were joined by a half-dozen seasoned Texas Rangers, prosecutors from the Harris County District Attorney's Office, Sheriff Ed Gonzalez and federal agents from the ATF, the FBI, and the U.S. Marshals Service's fugitive task force.

More Information Retracing steps 1 Car rental Kenny rented a small, black hatchback at an Enterprise near Bush Intercontinental. 2 Killing time He played eight-liners at a RaceWay near his target 3 Ambush Kenny shot Greenwood at the Harris County Baytown Couthouse on April 3 4 Suicide Kenny shot himself in the head near Ben Taub hospital the next day.

They had little to go on.

Surveillance video collected from a courthouse camera showed dark and grainy images - of a man walking, first slowly than more quickly; a small black compact car with four doors and a hatchback. Two spent 9 mm cartridges ejected near Greenwood's SUV.

The killer was either white or Hispanic, wearing a jacket with an indistinguishable insignia. They couldn't get a clear look at his face.

But it was a start. Investigators began checking off a considerable list of people who might have had a grudge against Greenwood, a law enforcement officer who had spent the past 10 years pursuing cops accused of wrongdoing.

That meant face-to-face interviews and surveillance. Sharp questions and polygraph exams.

For starters, there were nearly three dozen former deputy constables who had lost their jobs as Greenwood became assistant chief deputy in Precinct 3, with orders to clean up the operation.

Before that, Greenwood ran internal affairs and the Office of Inspector General for the Harris County Sheriff's Office and prosecuted cops accused of criminal misconduct through the district attorney's office.

One of those former officers, Greenwood told a county official just a few days before he was killed, was a "serious threat" to him and his family. But that man was in jail, and his associates came out clean.

The sheriff's department placed former District Attorney Devon Anderson under armed guard, and other potential targets were offered protection.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below.

Then they turned to the vehicle. A sticker on the windshield signaled that it was a rental. Investigators began canvassing local car rental agencies, in hopes of finding a black car rented by a man fitting the description.

But what kind of car was it? Local dealerships offered loaner cars that were driven through the courthouse parking lot so investigators could narrow their search from five compact cars to the Nissan Versa Note.

Meanwhile, officers visited businesses along the major thoroughfares in the Baytown area, collecting surveillance video from cameras operating before and after Greenwood's killing.

Festering anger

All signs of Kenny vanished after he dropped off the car Monday, nearly three hours after the shooting.

He appeared to be a man without a home. He'd moved out of a northside apartment two weeks before the shooting. His car didn't run and he didn't have a job. He was living off a credit card in cheap motels.

Life had gone downhill for Kenny since 2012 - the year of his divorce after 13 years of marriage, the year his technology business got into trouble over taxes and the year a 911 call left him so angry.

That's when the raging letters and missives began, when he created a website to air his grievances against Greenwood and dozens of other county officials he believed were covering up for corrupt officers.

The Valentine's Day call to police came from his estranged father-in-law, who told sheriff's deputies that Kenny had threatened to kill him. Deputies ultimately chalked it up to a domestic dispute, and no charges were filed.

Kenny, though, wanted his name to be cleared. He wanted charges filed against his father-in-law. And he wanted anyone who stood in his way to bear of the brunt of his wrath.

For five years, his anger festered, perhaps now, in his mind, he had achieved a measure of justice.

After the shooting, he had few options, however. He had nowhere to go.

He had already checked out of the La Quinta, and without a car, without a home, he somehow and for some reason made his way to the grounds of Ben Taub Hospital, not far from the emergency room.

Persistent danger

The trail was still cold on April 6, when thousands of law enforcement officers and other mourners turned out to remember Greenwood in a traditional police funeral at Second Baptist Church.

By then, the command center had been moved to the Baytown Police Department's Emergency Operations Center. Investigators were combing area businesses, looking for surveillance video, talking to clerks, hoping that someone had seen a dark Versa and its driver.

Some of the task force stayed to work during the funeral, which drew heightened security over concerns for the safety of the many Harris County law officials who attended the service.

The task force worked virtually round-the-clock, worried that the danger persisted.

The first hint that the investigation may have stalled came from Greenwood's widow, Leatha, after the funeral. "We need your help," she told reporters, speaking briefly after the service in her only public comments. "Somebody out there knows something … I need your help."

A break in the case

The first real break came the next Sunday afternoon, as investigators reviewed key surveillance footage from the RaceWay convenience store on Garth Road. It was 4 miles from the courthouse, and the video system produced a high-resolution image.

They saw a white man, the right height and weight, dressed in the same clothing the killer was wearing when he scouted out the annex parking lot the day before the killing.

"One of the reasons that piece of video was so important to us - the Sunday evening dry run he did at the courthouse - was the fact that he got out of his car," said Lt. Steve Dorris, with the Baytown Police Department. "We were able to see he was wearing a short-sleeved shirt and long pants."

Investigators then compared the killer's picture to the driver's license pictures of customers who had rented black compact Nissan Versas in the Houston area in the days before Greenwood's murder.

By late Sunday, April 9, nearly a full week after Greenwood's murder, police finally had a name to go with the face: William F. Kenny, 64, 6-foot-1, 210 pounds, with an axe to grind against local law enforcement.

They moved quickly to get a search warrant for his cellphone late Sunday and learned the phone was still functioning, transmitting its location to cell towers.

Late in the night, alarm bells went off when the task force realized the phone was in a four-block grid around the Harris County criminal court complex in downtown Houston. It appeared to be at the historic 1910 courthouse where two appeals courts are based.

Concerned that Kenny might be planning another attack, police notified some county officials not to go to work and scrambled to search the area early Monday morning.

They found no trace of Kenny or his cellphone, however, and turned instead to setting up a news conference to release the killer's name and photo.

That's when the final piece fell into place. A Houston police officer running routine checks on Kenny through the crime database realized the manhunt had ended.

A day after Greenwood's murder, about 8 a.m. on April 4, Kenny shot himself among some shrubs in the flower bed of a courtyard between Ben Taub hospital and an outpatient clinic.

A passer-by spotted the body, and staff from the emergency room responded. He was pronounced dead inside the hospital, from a self-inflicted gunshot to the head.

Police recovered a 9 mm Taurus semi-automatic. Ballistics confirmed Thursday it was the same gun that killed Greenwood.

Looking ahead

Today, 11 days later, the investigation continues.

Investigators want to wrap up the unknown details, to fill in as many blanks as they can, just as they would in preparation for a trial, Dorris said.

One key question remaining is where, and how, Kenny spent his final hours. Did he find another cheap motel? Did he sleep in the bushes? How did he get from the airport area to Ben Taub?

The cellphone, too, remains missing. It finally quit signaling its location, and investigators don't know how it wound up near the courthouse. Perhaps he threw it away, they say. Or sold it. Or maybe someone took it from his body.

"It's like any investigation - we want to answer as many questions as we possibly can," Dorris said. "We are finders of fact, and we owe it to Chief Greenwood and his family to answer as many questions as we can as to why this happened.

"Obviously there are some questions we may never know the answer to."

Investigators who worked on the multiagency task force also have questions about what motivated Kenny to turn his long-smoldering grudge into a cold-blooded murder.

"He's on a five-year campaign, a very meticulous campaign, and this surprises you," said one law official who worked on the case. "I wonder what the trigger point was. I wonder what brought this guy to this point."

Another task force investigator was also puzzled about the timing of Kenny's deadly actions.

"I don't know the significance of the date," the veteran investigator said. "The significance of that is something only he knew."