Texas Senate considers 'Scarlet Letter' Obamacare bill
The Affordable Care Act is unpopular among Texas leaders.

Texas legislators are considering a bill that would label patients' health insurance identification cards to show whether they purchased their coverage on the Obamacare insurance marketplace.

House Bill 1514, introduced by Rep. J.D. Sheffield, R-Gatesville, would require the cards to bear the letters QHP—for qualified health plan. The House passed the bill last week and it is expected to be considered by the Senate as soon as Thursday.

Physicians say the bill will help avoid loss of coverage for patients and prevent retroactive denials by insurance companies that will leave doctors holding the bill.

But consumer advocates — who are calling the measure the Scarlet Letter Bill — say it opens the door to discrimination.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below. Prognosis

"The bill does not solve any problems, it just labels people," said Jose Camacho, executive director of the Texas Association of Community Health Centers. "Nothing is achieved by merely labeling someone as a marketplace patient. It is not helpful, and worse, could result in providers avoiding patients who they are contractually obligated to serve."

Doctors have argued that unless they can quickly determine that a patient has an exchange plan, they could get caught in a loophole that would leave them absorbing the costs of providing their services.

Under the Affordable Care Act, some plans carry a 90-day grace period if a patient falls behind in paying the premium. Insurance companies must cover the cost of care provided in the first 30 days, even if the patient never pays the overdue premium. But in the last 60 days of the grace period, insurance companies can retroactively terminate the insurance policy and request a refund of any payments made to providers.

"Physicians are then left to attempt to collect directly from the patient for those services," said Dr. Sara Austin, who testified in support of the bill on behalf of the Texas Medical Association. "In any small business, when a customer receives services or goods but does not pay for them, the charges for those goods and services increase for those who pay."

The same situation exists for commercial plans sold outside the exchange, she said, but it is limited to a 30-day grace period.

Many insurers provide plans both inside and outside the exchange. Austin said that forces office staff to call insurers to determine whether patients have an exchange plan and whether they are in the 90-day grace period.

The designation on the card, she said, would also allow doctors to remind patients about the importance of paying the premiums on time, helping to avoid dropped coverage.

Consumer advocacy groups said the bill would neither eliminate the financial risk for providers nor help them identify when patients are in the 90-day grace period. Federal regulations already require health plans to notify providers when a patient falls in the grace period.

"There are better ways to accomplish the goals of the legislation without jeopardizing privacy or inviting discrimination," said Stacey Pogue, senior policy analysis with the Center for Public Policy Priorities, a liberal think tank in Austin. "Providers should choose which plans to take, not which patients to take based on where they got their insurance."

The bill was amended to remove the requirement to further label the cards of those who received a subsidy through the exchange by adding the letter S.

While the requirement may seem to be an example of Texas lawmakers' disdain for Obamacare, the grace period has been controversial on a national level. The American Hospital Association and the American Medical Association have complained about the way the grace-period was implemented, arguing that it effectively reduces the grace period to just 30 days.

And according to the Georgetown University Health Policy Institute, some providers are already refusing to provide medical care to people in the second and third month of the grace period. Consumer advocates in Texas fear that labeling cards as exchange plans might discourage doctors from treating those patients altogether.