Supreme Court to hear challenge to Obama's immigration action
Photo: Marie D. De Jesus Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Jessica Rangel, 25, has been in Houston for more than two decades after her mother Laura Velazquez brought her over from Tampico, Mexico, without documents. Rangel does community outreach at the immigrant advocacy group FIEL Houston. less Jessica Rangel, 25, has been in Houston for more than two decades after her mother Laura Velazquez brought her over from Tampico, Mexico, without documents. Rangel does community outreach at the immigrant ... more Photo: Marie D. De Jesus Image 2 of 2 Advocates for immigrants rally outside the Supreme Court last week. The court said it would consider a legal challenge to President Barack Obama's executive order on immigration. Advocates for immigrants rally outside the Supreme Court last week. The court said it would consider a legal challenge to President Barack Obama's executive order on immigration. Photo: DOUG MILLS, STF Supreme Court to hear challenge to Obama's immigration action 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

The Supreme Court agreed Tuesday to consider the constitutionality of an Obama administration plan that would provide work permits to nearly 5 million immigrants here illegally and shield them from deportation in what would be the president's last shot at implementing the most significant change to immigration policy in decades.

The justices' decision comes at a time when immigration has dominated the presidential campaign. The case will be heard in April and decided in June, just before the two parties' national conventions and a few months before the election. Depending on how broadly the justices rule it could have widespread implications and even if the program is enacted, a Republican president is likely to repeal it.

The court will consider what power the executive has in crafting immigration policy and whether it can choose not to deport a large group of immigrants. It could also decide whether and to what extent states can challenge federal policy.

"There's a lot of potential for this to be extremely significant," said Muzaffar Chishti, who focuses on immigration policy at the Migration Policy Institute, a nonprofit think tank in Washington, D.C.

Translator To read this article in one of Houston's most-spoken languages, click on the button below.

The president outlined his program, called the Deferred Action for Parents of Americans (DAPA), in a televised address from the White House in November 2014, saying it was necessary because House Republicans had repeatedly blocked bipartisan Senate legislation to overhaul the immigration system. He promised to grant three-year work permits to the parents of American citizens and permanent residents who have been here for at least five years and don't have serious criminal records. As many as 172,000 immigrants in Harris County and 560,000 in Texas would stand to qualify.

Abbott quick with lawsuit

Heading a coalition of 26 Republican-led states, Texas Gov. Greg Abbott sued immediately to stop the program, arguing it would place an unfair burden on them by forcing states to issue hundreds of thousands of driver's licenses. At issue is also whether the president violated a little-known federal statute, the Administrative Procedure Act, in announcing a policy change without public input and if the executive branch can decide whether or not to enforce broad aspects of immigration law.

On the eve of the program's implementation in February, U.S. District Judge Andrew Hanen in Brownsville blocked the program, starting a complicated legal process in the lower courts. In November, the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans upheld his ruling, and the Justice Department asked the Supreme Court for a review.

In deciding to take the case, the justices specifically asked the parties to address the constitutional implications of the president's executive action and whether it violates the separation of powers. Though the executive generally has wide leeway to enforce the law how it sees fit, the question is whether this goes against congressional will since lawmakers have refused to act on the same issue, said Jeffrey Rosen, who teaches at George Washington University Law School and specializes in the U.S. Constitution.

"The fact that the court seized on this as an issue indicates that it may be of interest constitutionally, the broader strategy to achieve by executive order what Congress has declined to act on," Rosen said.

The administration argues Obama is only doing what presidents from both parties have done before. For instance, Congress in 1986 gave green cards to about 3 million immigrants who had been here for at least five years. But the legislation excluded spouses and children who didn't qualify, splitting families. Though the Senate passed a bill extending that legal status to these relatives, it stalled in the House. In 1990, George H.W. Bush administratively implemented the Senate's provisions. The House later passed similar legislation.

"We are confident that the policies will be upheld as lawful," Brandi Hoffine, assistant White House press secretary, said in a statement. "They are consistent with the actions taken by presidents of both parties, the laws passed by Congress, and the decisions of the Supreme Court."

Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton, who is leading the charge against the plan, said by deciding to hear the case the court is recognizing that the president might have violated his constitutional authority.

"As federal courts have already ruled three times, there are limits to the president's authority, and those limits enacted by Congress were exceeded," Paxton said in a statement. "The court should affirm what President Obama said himself on more than 20 occasions: that he cannot unilaterally rewrite congressional laws and circumvent the people's representatives."

Previous challenges

Obama has previously asked the Supreme Court to revive his initiatives, and the court in 2012 and 2015 rejected conservative challenges to his signature healthcare law. In a 2012 case reviewing an Arizona immigration law, the court also agreed that the federal government and the president have wide discretion in implementing immigration policy.

But also important is whether Texas can bring the case to begin with. In a 2007 Massachusetts case, the court decided 5-4 that the state could force the federal government to regulate greenhouse gases.

"If the court decides Texas has standing, I think it is reasonably significant," said Chishti with the Migration Policy Institute. "Texas could then say for example, 'You can't tell us we should accept Syrian refuges because it has a cost on Texas'... It has much larger implications with respect to the division between the federal government and state when it comes to immigration policy."

Even if the court allows the program to go forward, it would be difficult to implement so soon before the presidential election in November. Hundreds of thousands of immigrants need to have their applications screened in a process the administration itself has said could take months.

Depending on the political rhetoric against immigrants, which has been a focus of the presidential campaign, many might even be too scared to apply.

Jessica Rangel, who does community outreach at the immigrant advocacy group FIEL Houston, said she believes the majority would do so despite their fear.

"They would run that risk," said Rangel, who is 25. "It would completely mean the world to them, just the possibility to ease that worry of deportation."

The University of Houston graduate has been here for more than two decades after her mother brought her over from Tampico, Mexico. Her two siblings are U.S. citizens, and she has one of Obama's work permits for so-called "Dreamers." But her mother, a housekeeper, is here illegally.

Rangel said she and her siblings worry every day about whether their only parent might be deported. She said her brother, who will vote in his first presidential election this fall, plans to hold Republicans accountable.

"There are a lot of citizen children of parents who are undocumented who are saying the exact same thing," Rangel said. "If you come here and insult our parents, we're going to make sure you don't get that presidency."