The Official Site of Huntington Park, CA!
At the March 13, 2018 reorganization meeting, Mayor Pineda was voted by his peers to serve as Mayor.



On March 16, 2015, Mayor Jhonny Pineda was sworn-in to the city council. He has been appointed by his colleagues to various organizations including: California Contract Cities Association, Gateway Cities Council of Governments, and Independent Cities Risk Management Authority Governing Board.



Mayor Pineda comes from humble beginnings. Growing up as a child farm worker, he learned the true meaning of hard work, a value he carries with him to this day. At 13, he immigrated to the United States to be reunited with his family in the City of Huntington Park.

As a youth, Jhonny understood the value of obtaining a quality education. Jhonny was the second in his family to graduate college and the first to earn a master's degree. He received his B.A. in Business Administration from California State University, San Bernardino with a concentration in Public Administration and a minor in Spanish Literature. In 2009, Jhonny graduated from the University of Redlands with an M.A. in Business Management.



He has held positions in various industries, including Agriculture, Education, Sports, Automobiles, Banking, and our local, state, and federal government. As a Legislative Aide for the U.S. House of Representatives, Jhonny helped hundreds of individuals with federal issues, including immigration, education, public safety, health care, access to affordable housing, and job security in underserved communities. Mr. Pineda has also served on the City of Huntington Park's PARC and Planning Commissions. Currently, Mayor Pineda serves as President of the California Latino Leadership Institute, a broad-based public policy, educational, and leadership development organization designed for young professionals interested in leadership development and serving their community and as President for the Gateway Cities Council of Governments. His diverse background allows him to look at local policies from various perspectives in order to decide upon the best solutions for his community.



Mayor Pineda believes that everyone deserves the opportunity to obtain an education, get a decent job, be successful, and live a fulfilling life. He wants to make sure millions of individuals get the same opportunities this country has given him. This is why he advocates on issues important to his Huntington Park community, such as immigration reform.



During his spare time, Mayor Pineda enjoys organizing community events, such as: