Move Aside Pumpkin Spice, Starbucks Unveils The Chestnut Praline Latte On November 12
Forget Pumpkin Spice Lattes, there's a new holiday drink in town. Start gearing up for the Chestnut Praline Latte, Starbucks newest, nation-wide addition to its seasonal menu.

Starbucks confirmed to HuffPost Taste via email that the company will unveil the drink on November 12. We're taking that as a cue to usher in the unofficial start of winter, since seasons are now basically determined by the release of Starbucks drinks (we're looking at you, PSL).

Though the Chestnut Praline Latte first debuted last year in a few select cities, this is the first year that it will be available nationally. The image below is of last year's Chestnut Praline Latte cups. This year's cups will debut November 1, a few weeks before the actual drink makes its appearance.

The coffee chain also released a statement saying that the Chestnut Praline Latte will mark the "arrival of the first new holiday handcrafted beverage in five years" for Starbucks. The latte will join the Gingerbread Latte and Peppermint Mocha on the winter drink menu.

Update: HuffPost Editors have tried Chestnut Praline Lattes.

The verdict: Decent

What we thought:

"Though I don't have a strong idea of what exactly a chestnut tastes like, I still don't detect any discernible chestnut flavor in this. It's just your average, sugary Starbucks latte (which isn't a bad thing, for those who are fans of them)." -Kristen Aiken

"It's yummy! Would be great drinking it by a fire somewhere listening to NSYNC's Christmas album. It'a definitely not as painfully sweet as the PSL." -Cavan Sieczkowski

"I like it and would probably drink it again but it tastes like every other sweet hot latte I've had before." -Ethan Fedida

"Sweet up front, but not nearly as cloying as its smell would suggest. Nice nutty finish" -Andres Jaugui

"Definitely starts off quite sweet but becomes a little bitter at the end, but it's not unlike most other lattes from Starbucks." -Jamie Feldman

"It's made out of liquid metal." -Carly Schwartz

“It tastes weirdly watered down to me, yet it's thick. Weird. Also has a nutty taste, but generically so -- not something I would purposely order from Starbucks." -Amanda Chan

“Tastes a little nutty, but mostly like warm, liquid sugar. Meh." -Lindsay Holmes

"It tastes like a vanilla latte -- or like dessert in a cup." -Michelle Persad

“Is it just me or did this taste like something from the General Mills International Coffee collection?” -Brie Dyas

"There's a definitive nutty taste that brings out the coffee flavor more so than other flavored hot drinks from Starbucks. It's not as sweet as you might expect from something with "praline" in its name but it's fairly satisfying. Couldn't imagine drinking more than a Tall of it. Perfect 'snowy day, walkin' down the street beverage." -Jenna Amatulli

Update: A Starbucks spokesperson initially incorrectly reported the date as November 14 -- they have corrected the date to November 12.

h/t NY Daily News

Want to read more from HuffPost Taste? Follow us on Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest and Tumblr.