Hecklers Tried To Perform An Exorcism On Ted Cruz In New Hampshire
Two hecklers tried to perform an exorcism on Texas Sen. Ted Cruz during a campaign stop in Raymond, New Hampshire, on Monday.

"Ted Cruz, look in the mirror and let the evil spirit leave, leave your power-hungry demonic soul," one of the hecklers called out from a doorway while holding up a mirror and a cross.

The Republican presidential candidate first suggested that the two men were from the campaign of Bernie Sanders, the senator from Vermont who's seeking the Democratic nomination for the presidency.

Then, he made a quip implying that progressives had no faith.

"You know the very odd thing," Cruz said. "Usually lefties don't believe in God."

The audience applauded, and the two men were escorted out.

"We just had to get rid of the evil spirit. I hope it works," one of the protesters, who was not named, told the Dallas Morning News as they left.

"He’s very hard to be in the same room with. We had to exorcise some sort of disgusting evil spirit. There’s a reason that the body is so haggard and disgusting, and the face, and it’s all so weathered and gross and hard to look at. And it’s because he’s possessed by a demon. Being in the room with evil so close, it’s just hard to even comprehend. The evil is so deep rooted and maybe if it had to confront itself..."

The newspaper posted video of the protesters as they departed the event, with one of them retching as if about to vomit:

The Dallas Morning News said a heckler attempting an exorcism interrupted a Cruz event in Iowa last week, but it was not clear if the two incidents were related.

The Washington Post's reporter Dave Weigel noticed that one of the protesters looked very much like the man who recently interrupted a Donald Trump event to call the candidate "boring."

I wonder if the "demon" heckler here is the same one who called Trump boring pic.twitter.com/2CAUZD8DZf — daveweigel (@daveweigel) February 8, 2016

That heckler is one half of the "guerilla comedy" duo The Good Liars. Here's an image of the pair from their Facebook page:

And here's an image of the men who interrupted the Cruz event:

Retching protester tries to exorcise Ted Cruz demons in New Hampshire https://t.co/SsajLfuzqD pic.twitter.com/ZfN4uTfeXE — Dallas Morning News (@dallasnews) February 8, 2016

Also on HuffPost: