Senator Tom Cotton On The Left's Descent Into The Tactics of Intimidation « The Hugh Hewitt Show
Arkansas Senator Tom Cotton joined me this morning:

Audio:

10-09hhs-cotton

Transcript:

HH: Joined now by United States Senator Tom Cotton. Senator, good morning. We have no time to talk baseball, unfortunately.

TC: Yeah, Hugh, your Indians had a tough run of it, safe to say, but hey, your Browns won the ugliest football game in recent times.

HH: Baker, Baker, touchdown maker. But let’s get to the key thing. And I remind people Senator Cotton, before he became a politician, and after he is a Harvard-trained lawyer, walked point for patrol in the suburbs and the city of Baghdad during the surge as an Army Ranger in command of soldiers. And so I don’t believe the demonstrators or the screaming mobs would have intimidated you or Todd Young or Joni Ernst or Dan Sullivan, any of the combat veterans. But what was it like last week in the Senate? And what does that say, in the hallways of the Senate buildings, and what does that say about what’s going on in politics?

TC: Yeah, you know, Hugh, even more so than Baghdad or Afghanistan, I recall basic training where I essentially had Drill Sergeant Norton screaming at me for nine straight weeks, Hugh, which is…

HH: So this is nothing compared to Drill Sergeant Norton?

TC: I say that advisedly, is that you know, part of what they do in basic training is try to teach you to perform under pressure with lots of distractions around you. And I have to say that the scene on Capitol Hill was something like that last week. You know, our office buildings are open to the public. You know, Arkansans were coming in to see me. I was sitting down with a large group of Arkansans, in fact, and there was a large group of protestors in the hallway screaming at Joni Ernst across the hallway. So I walked in and I said I don’t know what you guys did, but those people are really angry at you. But it was disruptive to a degree, Hugh, not so much for me. I mean, I’m fine, but I do feel badly about all those Arkansans who were coming in to try to make their case for this or that policy in the government, or just for grandmas and grandpas who had their kids there for a Capitol tour. It made it very hard to move around. But it was much worse than that, Hugh. I mean, Susan Collins was getting death threats, and her staff was getting rape threats. She was having, she had to be escorted by a security detail to and from her home each morning because a crazed mob was protesting outside of her home a few blocks from the Capitol. That’s when the radical left in the country has gone too far, when they’re protesting Susan Collins at her home for voting in what she thinks is the right way for the country. It’s fine to protest people outside the Capitol. It’s fine to give money to someone’s opponent. It’s fine to knock doors for them. But going to Susan Collins’ home to protest her is a bridge too far, and most Americans realize it’s a bridge too far. That’s one reason why so many Americans across the country are revolted by the crazed mob the Democratic Party under Chuck Schumer whipped up over the last three weeks.

HH: Is there any doubt in your mind, Senator Cotton, that this was planned long before it was unveiled? And by that, I mean the leak of Dr. Ford’s letter, I don’t know who did it, but I believe it was part of a campaign that was set up to occur exactly when it did. Do you agree with me?

TC: Hugh, I believe the Schumer political operation was behind this from the very beginning. We learned last week that a woman named Monica McLean was Ms. Ford’s roommate, and she was one of the so-called beach friends who encouraged Ms. Ford to go to Dianne Feinstein and the partisan Democrats on the Judiciary Committee. Well, it just turns out, it just so happens that Monica McLean worked for a Preet Bharara, the former U.S. Attorney in Manhattan, now a virulent anti-Trump critic on television and former counsel to Chuck Schumer. So I strongly suspect that Chuck Schumer’s political operation knew about Ms. Ford’s allegations as far back as July and manipulated the process all along to include taking advantage of Ms. Ford’s confidences and directing her towards left-wing lawyers who apparently may have violated the D.C. code of legal ethics and perhaps may face their own investigation by the D.C. Bar.

HH: Now when we have a summing up of the consequences of this in four weeks at the polls, I don’t believe Americans are going to forget. I think they’re going to vote to make sure Mitch McConnell remains the leader in the Senate, and Kevin McCarthy the new speaker in the House. Do you agree with me that this lasts, that this left a mark on American politics?

TC: Yes, Hugh, I think most Americans, Republicans, but as well as independents and some sensible Democrats in places like Arkansas are appalled by the left wing mobs that Chuck Schumer and the Senate Democrats whipped up over the last three weeks. I traveled to New Jersey last week, Hugh, to campaign for my good friend, Jay Webber, a Republican nominee for Congress in Northern New Jersey, in a seat Rodney Frelinghuysen is retiring from. The single biggest applause line of the night was for Brett Kavanaugh and for standing up to the House Democrats who are already threatening to investigate and impeach not only Donald Trump, but Brett Kavanaugh as well. So what the Senate Democrats have awoken across the country in Senate races, now the House Democrats are bringing into their own races by threatening to investigate and impeach a fine man and someone who will be a stellar justice, and I think there’s going to be a consequence for those Democrats in four weeks from today in the polls. But remember, Hugh, voting has already started in a lot of places, and our people are starting to go out and vote to show their revulsion at the left wing mob tactics.

HH: And I don’t think they’re going to stop. Tom Cotton, thank you, Senator from Arkansas, talk to you again next week.

End of interview.