Independent American Party
Dear Rebecca,

Thank you for your inquiry about the Independent Eagle. That is a very old publication of the Independent America Party of Nevada, from clear back in the 60’s and 70’s. You are welcome to include it in your publications. Also, you might be interested in including the information about our Party which is posted on our website, IAPN.org, and you have our permission to use those materials, as long as they are published in their original form, and not edited so as to change the meaning intended. Thank you for your interest.

However, I would like to take this opportunity to tell you why we are not “far right” as you seem to think we are. We as a society have been conditioned to think that communism is on the far left and fascism is on the far right, but this is just because of effective propaganda by the communists before and during WWII. They wanted to distance themselves from the fascists of Germany, so they characterized the fascists as being right wing extremists. But the truth is, fascism and communism are just different forms of socialism. The communists and the fascists were like two dogs fighting over the same bone.

You will recall that the official name of the Soviet Union was the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. On the other hand, the fascists in Germany called themselves NAZIs. As you may know, Nazi is just short for National Socialists. So they are two forms of the same evil, and that is the evil of tyranny. Communism and Fascism were both translated into tyrannical governments by Lenin/Stalin on one side and Hitler on the other.

This means that the political spectrum or continuum we were all taught in school is very misleading, with fascism on the far right and communism on the far left. Because they are both socialism, they don’t belong on opposite ends of the spectrum. They belong on the same end, and that is the far left, where all forms of tyranny belong. Tyranny is total government. The tyrants’ philosophy is: Everything in the State; nothing outside the State. It is total government.

At the other end of the political spectrum is zero government. That is, no government. And of course, that is anarchy. Anarchy results in chaos, because it’s every man for himself. And no one’s life, liberty, or property is safe under anarchy, just as none of those is safe under tyranny.

Our Founding Fathers struggled with this dichotomy. On one end is extreme individualism, freedom to do just whatever one wants, without boundaries. On the other end is extreme collectivism—that is, no freedom. Neither is good. Both are destructive of the life, liberty, and property of individual citizens.

The Founders, brilliant and inspired men that they were, came up with a nearly perfect solution. It is called the Constitution of the United States of America. It is the perfect balance between tyranny, total government, on one end and anarchy, zero government, on the other. They created a government which gave enough power to the government to be able to govern effectively, but then they built in an amazing system of checks on that power, checks which were designed to protect the individual from the excesses of power hungry would-be tyrants in the government. The federal government is horizontally checked by the competing powers of each of the three branches, and vertically checked by the division of power between the States and the Federal government.

Thus, the United States Constitution occupies a position precisely at the center of the political spectrum, between anarchy on the far right and tyranny on the far left.

That is why the Independent American Party is not “far right.” We are actually in the very center of the political spectrum, because our banner is the U.S. Constitution and its forerunner, the Declaration of Independence.

The reason that the Republicans and the Democrats think that we are “far right” is because they have both moved so far to the left that from their perspective the Independent American Party appears to be on the far right. They have both lost sight and understanding of the original intent of the U.S. Constitution. And that may be summed up in the words of Thomas Jefferson when he said: “In questions of power, then, speak to me not of confidence in men, but bind them down from mischief with the chains of the Constitution.”



Very truly yours,

Joel F. Hansen, Esq.

State Chairman, Independent American Party of Nevada.