IBDeditorials.com: Editorials, Political Cartoons, and Polls from Investor's Business Daily -- The Euro-Meddlers
The Euro-Meddlers

By INVESTOR'S BUSINESS DAILY | Posted Wednesday, September 02, 2009 4:20 PM PT

Global Warming: Given rising voter anger, members of the U.S. Senate can't be blamed for going wobbly on costly cap-and-trade legislation. But maybe members of the EU Parliament can buck them up. Let's hope not.

Read More: Global Warming



Not satisfied just with ruining their own continent's economy, a few Euro-pols want to come over here and do us the same favor.

The Waxman-Markey version of cap-and-trade already passed the House in June on a narrow 219-212 vote. Now these members of the European Parliament want to lend support as their green-left comrades in the U.S. Senate ponder doing the same.

With China and India saying they won't take part in this green nonsense, the Euro-socialists' only hope is to get a foolish U.S. to pass an economically ruinous cap-and-trade bill by 2012. That's when the failed Kyoto Protocol to curb greenhouse gases expires.

"We have had signals from the Senate that it would be useful to send a delegation from the European Parliament before they take a decision," said Jo Leinen, the Euro-Parliament's top green official.

"Useful"? Memo to Congress and the Euro-pols: Cap-and-trade is wildly unpopular with Americans. No matter how many suave European continentals you send here, it won't change voters' minds.

Yet, as long as they're here, we hope they'll submit to a town hall meeting or two to answer a few pointed questions, such as:

• Why did CO2 emissions actually increase by 0.8% in Europe after the first phase of their plan began in 2005?

• Why did European officials create more carbon permits than CO2 emissions, thereby causing the price of carbon to collapse?

• What should American politicians tell their tax-wary constituents, given that 56% in a recent Rasmussen poll said they wouldn't pay one penny more in taxes to cut greenhouse gases?

While they're at it, they should also address the growing number of studies that show cap-and trade would be an economic disaster.

A recent Heritage Foundation study found that the Waxman-Markey cap-and-trade bill would cost the average family of four $4,609 a year and reduce overall GDP by $9.4 trillion by 2035. Some 2.5 million jobs will disappear over the same time.

Similarly, a George C. Marshall Institute review of a number of studies found similar high costs and huge job losses, on average. Taxes, for instance, would rise $2,000 by 2030. Food costs would go up $2,500 a year. Energy prices would grow 145%.

Such economic losses are intolerable. The Euro-pols are, of course, always welcome here. We can use their tourist euros. But they might want to watch some Tea Party YouTubes before they come over and start pushing Euro-style taxes on Americans.