Background on: Motorcycle crashes
(1) Universal laws cover all riders; partial laws cover young riders or some adult riders.

(2) Alaska's motorcycle helmet use law covers passengers of all ages, operators younger than 18, and operators with instructional permits.

(3) In Delaware, every motorcycle operator or rider age 19 and older must carry an approved safety helmet.

(4) In Florida and Kentucky, the law requires that all riders younger than 21 years wear helmets, without exception. Those 21 years and older may ride without helmets only if they can show proof that they are covered by a medical insurance policy. Texas exempts riders 21 years or older if they either 1) can show proof of successfully completing a motorcycle operator training and safety course or 2) can show proof of having a medical insurance policy.

(5) Motorcycle helmet laws in Kentucky, Maine, Minnesota, and Wisconsin also cover operators with instructional/learner's permits. Maine's motorcycle helmet use law also covers passengers 17 years and younger and passengers if their operators are required to wear a helmet.

(6) In Michigan, the law requires that all riders younger than 21 years wear helmets, without exception. Those 21 years and older may ride without helmets only if they carry additional insurance and have passed a motorcycle safety course or have had their motorcycle endorsement for at least two years. Motorcycle operators who want to exercise this option also must be 21 or older and carry additional insurance.

(7) North Dakota's motorcycle helmet use law covers all passengers traveling with operators who are covered by the law.

(8) Ohio's motorcycle helmet use law covers all operators during the first year of licensure and all passengers of operators who are covered by the law.

(9) Pennsylvania's motorcycle helmet use law covers all operators during the first two years of licensure unless the operator has completed the safety course approved by the Department of Transportation or the Motorcycle Safety Foundation. Rhode Island's motorcycle helmet use law covers all passengers (regardless of age) and all operators during the first year of licensure (regardless of age).

Source: Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, Highway Loss Data Institute.