Sandra Bullock to Donald Trump: ‘Put A Plug In It’
Sandra Bullock to Donald Trump: 'Put A Plug In It'

In David Gordon Green’s “Our Brand is Crisis,” Sandra Bullock plays a ruthless political strategist who has spent her career angling to get her candidate — and not always the best candidate, not by a long shot — a big win at the polls. So it was a little strange that when the Oscar winner was asked about her political leanings at a recent event, she went a different route. “I don’t like the word ‘politics,’ because I feel like that’s the game,” she said. “That’s the show. I like ‘government.'”

At a luncheon held in the film’s honor today at Manhattan’s Four Seasons restaurant, Bullock — alongside co-stars Anthony Mackie and Zoe Kazan — participated in a twenty minute chat moderated by NBC’s Willie Geist about many aspects of the film. But things really got moving when the conversation skewed more political. When asked by an audience member about how she thinks her character would advise Donald Trump’s campaign, Bullock didn’t hold back.

Unlike her character “Calamity” Jane Bodine, Bullock said she isn’t so interested in the spectacle of politics, and she’s particularly disinterested in the performance that Republican presidential candidate Trump is currently putting on.

“Up till two days ago, I kept saying, ‘Donald Trump needs absolutely no help from anyone,’ he’s already up in the polls, but that’s shifted, I think,” she said. “Secretly, I don’t want anyone to be advised, because I want to see who everyone truly is. The thing that makes him so engaging on television is the thing that, you know, might have gotten him derailed. He just says whatever he wants to say, so I’m sure the strategist would say, ‘You gotta put a plug in it at some point. Even if you feel that way, don’t say it.'”

Conversely, she added, there is an upside to Trump’s unfiltered approach. “I’m grateful that he says it, so you know who you’re dealing with,” she said. “I’m sure someone is coming in to put a little sock in it, going, ‘okay, Donald, just don’t—'”

“Stop tweeting!,” Kazan interrupted. “Yes, stop!” Bullock laughed.

Despite her turn in the film, however, Bullock doesn’t fancy herself any kind of expert on political strategy. “I could never do this business, I don’t have the stomach for it. I would fail miserably,” she said.

Still, Bullock is optimistic about the future. “I like to think that there is still a reason behind the infrastructure that is for the greater good. Albeit, that’s naive sometimes, but I believe in the possibility of there being change,” Bullock said, citing one recent example: “You see what happens to a country and to the world when people of the same sex can get married and love each other legally. That day, you saw so much love, just explode, there’s like almost a moment of silence.”

Later, she tacked on a bipartisan perspective. “Whether it’s Democratic or Republican, moderate or independent, I don’t care — give me the best person to take care of our country and those who are already here,” she said. “That’s the person I want.”

“Our Brand is Crisis” opens Friday, October 30.

READ MORE: Toronto Review: Sandra Bullock Carries ‘Our Brand Is Crisis’

Sign Up: Stay on top of the latest breaking film and TV news! Sign up for our Email Newsletters here.