Panthera leo (African Lion, Lion)
Population:

Population Trend

This assessment is based on a time trend analysis of census data from relatively well-studied Lion subpopulations (Packer et al. 2013, plus additional unpublished data provided by contributors). Census estimates were obtained by scientific research methods including total count, individual identifications, total or sample inventory using calling stations, radio telemetry, photo databases, spoor counts and density estimates based on direct observations corrected for patrol effort. These methods are rated as producing the most reliable type of Lion population estimates by background papers for the 2006 IUCN regional Lion workshops (Table 5 in Bauer et al. 2005a, b). We did not include population estimates for sites which were based on extrapolation of Lion densities obtained by research in other areas, or informed guesstimates by researchers. The minimum number of census surveys per site over the assessment time period is two, but some sites have been more regularly monitored (Table 3 - Data Points column, in Supplementary Material). In some cases census methodology varied between years, and for some surveys accuracy may have been low, but the complete data set shows an obvious trend that is unlikely to be an artefact of methodological insufficiencies.



IUCN Red List Criteria define three generations as the relevant time span for trend assessment. Lion Generation Length (GL) is based on the formulation of Pacifici et al. (2013):

GL = R span *z +AFR Where AFR = Age of first reproduction = 3.5 yrs (Packer et al. 1998) R span = 15.5 (the age when 95% of females are no longer reproductive) - AFR = 12 yrs (Packer et al. 1998) Z = 0.29 (a constant “depending on survivorship and relative fecundity of young vs. old individuals in the population” (IUCN 2014), calculated as the slope of the linear regression between GL and Rspan for 221 mammalian species (Pacifici et al. 2013) Thus GL = 12*0.29 +3.5 = 6.98 yrs



To fill gaps between censuses conducted in non-consecutive years, we interpolated population sizes, assuming a linear change between years. For surveys conducted for only a few years between 1993 and 2014, we extrapolated to the beginning and end points based on an exponential rate of change taken from the observed growth rate for each respective subpopulation. However, all extrapolations are capped by the estimated carrying capacity for each reserve so that subpopulations that experienced dramatic population change were not assumed to have been at implausibly high totals in either 1993 or 2014. Subpopulations were first categorized according to whether or not the reserves were surrounded by a fence; unfenced subpopulations were further categorized according to geographical location with the exception of Niassa Reserve (Mozambique), treated as an outlier as discussed below.



In graph form (Figures 1-4 in the Supplementary Material) we summarize the repeated censuses of 46 different African Lion subpopulations using all available repeat-survey data. Figure 5 (in the Supplementary Material) addresses the 47th Lion subpopulation in our analysis, the only Asian subpopulation.



Outside parts of southern Africa, Lions in 23 unfenced reserves in 11 countries are estimated to have dropped by 62% between 1993 and 2014 (see Figure 1 in the Supplementary Material). Although these totals only included about 4,600 Lions in the year 1993, several surveyed areas are restricted to the best-protected portions of much larger ecosystems (e.g., the phototourism areas of Selous and Serengeti).



In contrast, the total number of Lions in six unfenced reserves in Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe only declined by about 11% (Figure 2, Supplementary Material). Note that the overall stability in southern Africa masks considerable heterogeneity: between 1993 and 2014 the monitored Lion subpopulation in a portion of the Okavango ecosystem is estimated to have declined by 46%, whereas the much smaller subpopulations in Gonarezhou and Kunene have increased dramatically.



The striking contrast between these three countries in southern Africa and the rest of the continent is probably related to the equally striking differences in human population densities (Packer et al. 2013) in Namibia (2.5/km²), Botswana (3.4) and Zimbabwe (26) vs. Benin (78), Burkina Faso (57), Cameroon (40), Cote d’Ivoire (64), Ghana (102), Kenya (67), Nigeria (189), Rwanda (420), Senegal (68), Tanzania (48), Uganda (137) and Zambia (45).



The unfenced Niassa subpopulation is estimated to have increased by over 250% since 1993 (Figure 3, Supplementary Material); despite severe bushmeat poaching the Lions are still recovering from excessive prey depletion during civil war. In addition, on a shorter time scale, Lions have benefited from extensive ivory poaching, which has provided them with sizeable quantities of elephant meat (Colleen Begg pers. comm. 2014). Human population density in Mozambique is 74/km² with sizeable numbers of people living inside Niassa Reserve, so unless management is further strengthened, this unfenced Lion subpopulation may soon experience declining food supplies and increased human-lion conflicts. These arguments strongly suggest that the ‘boom’ in the Niassa Lion subpopulation has stopped and is unlikely to be repeated in the future. We therefore consider Niassa to be a special case and treat it as an outlier in our analyses, we believe that this offers a better understanding of trends, but we note that this does not alter the assessment (with Niassa included, the assessment would still be Vulnerable A2abcd).



The 16 fenced African subpopulations (10 in South Africa, and all but one in southern Africa) have grown by 29% since 1993, most having already reached their presumed carrying capacities by 2013 (Figure 4, Supplementary Material). Note that although these numbers now total over 3,226 lions, our data come from the great majority of fenced reserves in Africa and that little further growth can be expected in these subpopulations.



Asia is home to a single contiguous subpopulation in the Indian state of Gujarat (Figure 5, Supplementary Material). While the population has stabilized inside the Gir Reserve, the so-called “satellite” population in the surrounding countryside has expanded by ~400% in the past 21 years.



The 47 sample Lion subpopulations totalled an estimated 9,615 lions in 1993 (excluding Niassa, which is treated as an outlier as described above); that number shrank by 22% to 7,455 lions in 2014 (Table 2, Supplementary Material). However, as described above, there are significant regional differences evident in population trend, and we use these to inform our inferences about population trend for the species as a whole. Table 2 (Supplementary Material) groups the sample subpopulations by region in Africa, following the IUCN (2006a, b) regional Lion conservation strategies, but combining West and Central Africa due to a small sample size for Central Africa. In Southern Africa, the sample population grew by 8%, while in sharp contrast, sample populations declined by 59% in Eastern Africa and 66% in West and Central Africa.



Table 3 (Supplementary Material) shows the estimated Lion population size in 1993 and 2014 for each of the 47 sample subpopulations with percentage change, and it can be seen that most countries had a declining trend for sample Lion subpopulations, with only four countries (India, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe) seeing a growth trend. Table 4 (Supplementary Material) groups these countries with Botswana, which had a relatively low average rate of decline for its sample populations; two out of three sample subpopulations increased; the decline documented in the Okavango subpopulation was restricted to only part of the protected area; and overall 2012 estimates for the national population suggest that it his increased since 2003 (C. Winterbach unpubl. data). Mozambique is not included in this group as the increasing trend in its Niassa subpopulation is treated as an outlier in this analysis. The sample Lion population in five countries (Botswana, India, Namibia, South Africa, Zimbabwe) grew by an estimated 12%, whereas the Lion population in the remaining African range countries declined by an estimated 61% (Table 4, Supplementary Material).



We infer population trend for the total Lion species population based on these two rates of change, as follows. In 2002, two separate country compilations of population estimates for Lions in Africa estimated the number of Lions in Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe to comprise between 1/4 to 1/3 of the total African Lion population, as shown in Table 5 (Supplementary Material). We suspect that this proportion was somewhat lower in 1993, given that the number of Lions is inferred to have increased in these countries while decreasing in the remainder, and use a figure of 1/4 or 25% for our species population trend calculation. If 25% of the Lion population increased by 12%, and 75% decreased by 60%, this results in an inferred trend of (0.75*-60%) + (0.25*12%) = -43% between 1993 and 2014 (Table 6, Supplementary Material).

This qualifies the Lion as Vulnerable, but it is of great concern that the vast majority of the population is inferred to have declined at a rate that meets the criteria for Endangered. Since our sample subpopulations were all monitored, we suspect an even greater average rate of decline for unmonitored unfenced subpopulations across much of Africa, since lack of monitoring could suggest lack of conservation effort.



Abundance

For this assessment, we do not aim to provide a new estimate of total Lion numbers, we present no new data. A recent paper summarized and updated efforts to estimate the population size of the African Lion leading to the most recent estimate of 32,000 lions in 67 Lion areas (Riggio et al. 2013). The paper presents some recent data, but where no new data were available it included unaltered numbers from earlier sources, such as Bauer and Van der Merwe (2004) and Chardonnet (2002). As a consequence, Riggio et al. (2013) include numbers from 2002 and 2004 for areas where we believe the downward trend described above occurred. We therefore consider these sources to be insufficiently precautionary for our purpose and feel that an assessment on numbers is less robust than our assessment based on trends. Considering the difficulty in interpreting Lion numbers and the availability of an alternative (see above), we decided not to use total Lion numbers for the present assessment



However, we do attempt to correct for outdated sources in the Riggio et al. (2013) estimate by application of the regional trends we found (Table 3, Supplementary Material) to the 2002 population size estimates within the respective regions (Bauer and Van der Merwe 2004, Chardonnet 2002). These are two largely independent and reasonably comprehensive sets of estimated numbers that were coherent in time. Rather than presenting these numbers as in any way current, we look at how they might be expected to have changed. We calculated estimated present Lion numbers per region (Table 7, Supplementary Material) by applying the observed trend over the subsequent 12 years, except that numbers for West Africa were taken from a comprehensive recent survey (Henschel et al. 2014) because of their greater precision. As a small modification from Chardonnet (2002) we moved the estimate for Selous ecosystem to Eastern Africa to be consistent with the regional divisions used here. The two 2002 estimates were compared in detail (Bauer et al. 2005a,b), showing the ALWG study (Bauer and Van der Merwe 2004) was more conservative and stricter on data quality. Most notably, Bauer and Van Der Merwe (2004) lacked data for Ruaha and Tarangire which may hold close to 5,000 Lions. With all these considerations, we have greater confidence in an estimate of closer to 20,000 Lions in Africa than in a number over 30,000.



Approach to Uncertainty We do not have sufficient confidence in earlier or recent species population estimates to employ them to estimate trend and for this assessment have used groupings of scientific time series site estimates as a proxy. Although these data are more numerous for Lions than for other big Panthera cats, there is still considerable uncertainty inherent in both the data (Bauer et al. 2015) and our treatment of it to estimate species population trend. Guidelines for Using the IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria (IUCN 2014) state that, "All attitudes (towards uncertainty) should be explicitly documented. In situations where the spread of plausible values (after excluding extreme or unlikely values) qualifies a taxon for two or more categories of threat, the precautionary approach would recommend that the taxon be listed under the higher (more threatened) category."

As noted in Table 2 (see Supplementary Material), if the species trend is inferred directly from the total sample population trend, the result, a decline of 22%, would qualify the species as Near Threatened rather than Vulnerable. However, considering the demonstrated significant regional differences such an approach would be inappropriate.

We treated Mozambique's Niassa subpopulation trend as an outlier and removed it from our trend analysis for reasons described above, but we also documented the effect of the exclusion. Some contributors proposed a second outlier: Tanzania’s Katavi subpopulation. Katavi has been consistently and repeatedly monitored, but the survey methodology was imprecise (vehicle transects: Caro 2011), this yielded a significant decline rate approaching 100% in a large population of over 1,100 estimated lions in the study site portion of the park in 1993 (Table 3). If Katavi would have been treated as an outlier and excluded from the analysis, inferred rate of decline would be 33%, and the rate of decline for Lions in East Africa would be 37%. Lions are still extant in Katavi (as shown in our map), although well below carrying capacity (Kiffner et al. 2008). Rather than using an arbitrary low value, we used the value documented by surveys (zero); Lions are extant but at a density so low as not to be detected. While the methodology is imprecise, it has proved reliable for carnivore monitoring in the Serengeti (Durant et al. 2011). Furthermore, the extent of decline may have been measured with lack of precision, but population decline remains uncontested. Since it is one of only two long-term monitoring programmes in Tanzania (Caro 2011) we decided that it was important to include these data and decided that there was insufficient ground to treat it as an outlier.

Another uncertainty that needs to be documented is our treatment of small fenced reserves in southern Africa. Most of the population increases have occurred in these areas where intensive management practices include translocations, stocking, contraception and euthanasia. Such management is atypical, and as pointed out by Hayward et al. (2015) the Red List Guidelines are ambiguous as to the inclusion or exclusion of fenced areas. Their exclusion from the analysis would raise the inferred Lion decline rate to 49%. Following through on our supposition that unmonitored Lion populations have undergone an even higher rate than our monitored sample, this could potentially have been interpreted as a suspected rate of decline over 50%, qualifying the Lion as Endangered. However, we did not exclude fenced populations from our assessment. Hayward et al. (2015) state that such decisions should consider the ‘type, scale, frequency and effects of the suite of management interventions’ and could be taxon specific. We consider that management of Lions in the concerned areas aims to mimic natural processes, aims to retain adaptive potential and follows a meta-population management approach. We further consider that fences have been documented as effective tools in Lion conservation (Packer et al. 2013). We find this sufficient justification for inclusion of these reserves.

National estimated rates of population change are most meaningful in practice, and these are given in Table 3 in the Supplementary Material. We did not use national rates to gauge species decline, as the sample sizes are generally small and estimates of national Lion populations imprecise. For further information about this species, see 15951_Panthera_leo_2016-1.pdf A PDF viewer such as Adobe Reader is required.