ISIS tweets “Chattanooga” as gunman begins shooting there; 4 murdered
UPDATE: New reports say this was a Pacific timestamp, and that the Tweet came three hours after the attack. More updates when available.

According to AP, the shooting started “around 10:30 or 10:45 a.m.” The Islamic State tweet warning of the attack or crowing about the attack was posted at 10:34AM. “Gunshots were fired at a military recruiting center and a Navy Reserve center in different parts of Chattanooga, Tennessee.” And the Islamic State has called on Muslims to murder American military personnel here in the U.S.

(Tweet image thanks to Pamela Geller.)

“Chattanooga shooting: 4 killed,” by Jason Hanna and Greg Botelho, CNN, July 16, 2015:

Four people were killed in shootings in Chattanooga, Tennessee, on Thursday morning, Mayor Andy Berke said. The suspected shooter is also dead, he said.

Investigators “have not determined whether it was an act of terrorism or whether it was a criminal act,” FBI special agent in charge Ed Reinhold told reporters. “We are looking at every possible avenue, whether it was terrorism — whether it was domestic, international — or whether it was a simple, criminal act.”

U.S. Attorney Bill Killian earlier told reporters that authorities were treating the shooting as an “act of domestic terrorism.”

[Previous story, posted at 2:32 p.m. ET Thursday]

Gunshots were fired at a military recruiting center and a Navy Reserve center in different parts of Chattanooga, Tennessee, late Thursday morning, officials and witnesses said.

One officer is “down” in connection with the shootings, Chattanooga Mayor Andy Berke told reporters. He was not specific about the officer’s condition.

Witnesses said a man sprayed bullets at the glass doors of a military recruiting center at a strip mall on Lee Highway, and the U.S. Navy tweeted Thursday that a shooting happened at a separate location — the Navy Reserve center on Amnicola Highway. The two sites are 7½ miles apart.

By 1:15 p.m., the “active shooter situation” was over, police tweeted.

There are no indications so far of any link to terrorism, two sources briefed on the case said.

Gina Mule, a server at a restaurant, said she saw a man who’d been in a silver convertible Mustang, firing a “high-powered rifle” at the recruiting offices at about 10:50 a.m.

She said she first heard “Pow, pow, pow!” She then went to a window, through which she said she saw the man firing shots.

“I don’t know how many shots he fired, but it was a lot,” she said.

A second witness, April Grimmett, said she was working at a hair salon near the recruiting center when she looked out a window and saw a man ducking in between cars.

“Shortly after that, we heard the (shots). It was very loud and very fast,” Grimmett said, without saying what happened to the man she had seen.

A photo that she took shows glass doors damaged by the gunfire.

“I could not believe how many bullet holes were in that door. It was insane,” she said.

Fred Wright, a salesman at a nearby auto parts store, told CNN that after he heard gunshots, three people ran into the shop, hollering they thought “someone was shooting at them.”

Wright said he called 911.

“Sounded like it was 30, 40 shots to me,” Wright said, adding that he never saw a shooter….