Johnson Controls stands by its record—Company never took auto bailout funds
Company sets record straight on misinformation about the support given to the auto industry

Contrary to recent reports and comments, Johnson Controls did not request or receive aid from the government during the financial crisis. Nor did it declare bankruptcy or seek other means of protection like many of its competitors and other suppliers did at the time.

In 2008, Johnson Controls then-COO Keith Wandell was asked by the Senate Banking Committee to testify on behalf of the automotive supply chain on proposed government support to U.S. automakers, who were struggling as a result of the financial crisis.

As a representative of the broad supply chain, Mr. Wandell encouraged the Congress to support the automakers, noting that failure of even one of them would have devastating consequences for many U.S. suppliers, particularly many small, women, and minority-owned businesses. Johnson Controls did not participate beyond this testimony. Since then, Johnson Controls has played a vital role in the recovery and growth of the U.S. economy, and continued to thrive as a leading global multi-industrial company.

In 2009, Johnson Controls was awarded a federal matching grant for joint efforts with the U.S. Department of Energy to fund development of advanced energy storage solutions for hybrid and electric vehicles. Johnson Controls was one of many participants in the program which also included several notable foreign companies. The company has behaved responsibly and been transparent in its matching and use of grant funding to support the DOE’s strategic objectives. Energy storage solutions are a strategic platform in which Johnson Controls has continued to make substantial ongoing investments, both in the United States and globally, that far exceed any government incentive it has received.

The planned merger with Tyco International is the next step in our journey to grow in the United States and globally, drive innovation, and invest in customer solutions that make buildings smarter, more secure, and more energy-efficient. This merger is motivated by the incredible opportunity to combine the global leader in building controls, HVAC, and energy, with the global leader in fire and security solutions to create the buildings and cities of the future. We’re following a growth strategy that will lead to continued investment, new end markets, expanded opportunities for our world-class workforce, and long-term value for our shareholders and customers.

Our aim is to build the best industrial company we can, advance the science of smart buildings and cities, and serve our customers today and tomorrow.

That’s what this merger is about.

Johnson Controls’ testimony before the Senate Banking Committee in 2008.

###

NO OFFER OR SOLICITATION



This communication is not intended to and does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to subscribe for or buy or an invitation to purchase or subscribe for any securities or the solicitation of any vote or approval in any jurisdiction, nor shall there be any sale, issuance or transfer of securities in any jurisdiction in contravention of applicable law.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND WHERE TO FIND IT

(800) 524-6220

(609) 720-4333

In connection with the proposed transaction between Johnson Controls, Inc. (“Johnson Controls”) and Tyco International plc (“Tyco”), Tyco will file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) a registration statement on Form S-4 that will include a joint proxy statement of Johnson Controls and Tyco that also constitutes a prospectus of Tyco (the “Joint Proxy Statement/Prospectus”). Johnson Controls and Tyco plan to mail to their respective shareholders the definitive Joint Proxy Statement/Prospectus in connection with the transaction. INVESTORS AND SECURITY HOLDERS OF JOHNSON CONTROLS AND TYCO ARE URGED TO READ THE JOINT PROXY STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS AND OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS FILED OR TO BE FILED WITH THE SEC CAREFULLY WHEN THEY BECOME AVAILABLE BECAUSE THEY WILL CONTAIN IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT JOHNSON CONTROLS, TYCO, THE TRANSACTION AND RELATED MATTERS. Investors and security holders will be able to obtain free copies of the Joint Proxy Statement/Prospectus (when available) and other documents filed with the SEC by Johnson Controls and Tyco through the website maintained by the SEC at www.sec.gov. In addition, investors and security holders will be able to obtain free copies of the documents filed with the SEC by Johnson Controls by contacting Johnson Controls Shareholder Services at Shareholder.Services@jci.com or by callingand will be able to obtain free copies of the documents filed with the SEC by Tyco by contacting Tyco Investor Relations at Investorrelations@Tyco.com or by callingPARTICIPANTS IN THE SOLICITATIONJohnson Controls, Tyco and certain of their respective directors, executive officers and employees may be considered participants in the solicitation of proxies in connection with the proposed transaction. Information regarding the persons who may, under the rules of the SEC, be deemed participants in the solicitation of the respective shareholders of Johnson Controls and Tyco in connection with the proposed transactions, including a description of their direct or indirect interests, by security holdings or otherwise, will be set forth in the Joint Proxy Statement/Prospectus when it is filed with the SEC. Information regarding Johnson Controls’ directors and executive officers is contained in Johnson Controls’ proxy statement for its 2016 annual meeting of shareholders, which was filed with the SEC on December 14, 2015. Information regarding Tyco’s directors and executive officers is contained in Tyco’s proxy statement for its 2016 annual meeting of shareholders, which was filed with the SEC on January 15, 2016.Johnson Controls Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking StatementsThere may be statements in this communication that are, or could be, “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and, therefore, subject to risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, statements regarding Johnson Controls’ or the combined company’s future financial position, sales, costs, earnings, cash flows, other measures of results of operations, capital expenditures or debt levels are forward-looking statements. Words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “intend,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “should,” “forecast,” “project” or “plan” or terms of similar meaning are also generally intended to identify forward-looking statements. Johnson Controls cautions that these statements are subject to numerous important risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors, some of which are beyond Johnson Controls’ control, that could cause Johnson Controls or the combined company’s actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements, including, among others, risks related to: Johnson Controls’ and/or Tyco’s ability to obtain necessary regulatory approvals and shareholder approvals or to satisfy any of the other conditions to the transaction on a timely basis or at all, any delay or inability of the combined company to realize the expected benefits and synergies of the transaction, changes in tax laws, regulations, rates, policies or interpretations, the loss of key senior management, anticipated tax treatment of the combined company, the value of the Tyco shares to be issued in the transaction, significant transaction costs and/or unknown liabilities, potential litigation relating to the proposed transaction, the risk that disruptions from the proposed transaction will harm Johnson Controls’ business, competitive responses to the proposed transaction and general economic and business conditions that affect the combined company following the transaction. A detailed discussion of risks related to Johnson Controls’ business is included in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Johnson Controls’ Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2015 filed with the SEC on November 18, 2015 and available at www.sec.gov and www.johnsoncontrols.com under the “Investors” tab. Any forward-looking statements in this communication are only made as of the date of this communication, unless otherwise specified, and, except as required by law, Johnson Controls assumes no obligation, and disclaims any obligation, to update such statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this communication.Statement Required by the Irish Takeover RulesThe directors of Johnson Controls accept responsibility for the information contained in this communication. To the best of the knowledge and belief of the directors of Johnson Controls (who have taken all reasonable care to ensure that such is the case), the information contained in this communication is in accordance with the facts and does not omit anything likely to affect the import of such information.

Centerview Partners LLC is a broker dealer registered with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and is acting as financial advisor to Johnson Controls and no one else in connection with the proposed transaction. In connection with the proposed transaction, Centerview Partners LLC, its affiliates and related entities and its and their respective partners, directors, officers, employees and agents will not regard any other person as their client, nor will they be responsible to anyone other than Johnson Controls for providing the protections afforded to their clients or for giving advice in connection with the proposed transaction or any other matter referred to in this announcement.

Barclays Capital Inc. is a broker dealer registered with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and is acting as financial advisor to Johnson Controls and no one else in connection with the proposed transaction. In connection with the proposed transaction, Barclays Capital Inc., its affiliates and related entities and its and their respective partners, directors, officers, employees and agents will not regard any other person as their client, nor will they be responsible to anyone other than Johnson Controls for providing the protections afforded to their clients or for giving advice in connection with the proposed transaction or any other matter referred to in this announcement.

NOT FOR RELEASE, PUBLICATION OR DISTRIBUTION, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, IN, INTO OR FROM ANY JURISDICTION WHERE TO DO SO WOULD CONSTITUTE A VIOLATION OF THE RELEVANT LAWS OR REGULATIONS OF SUCH JURISDICTION.

This communication is not intended to be and is not a prospectus for the purposes of Part 23 of the Companies Act 2014 of Ireland (the “2014 Act”), Prospectus (Directive 2003/71/EC) Regulations 2005 (S.I. No. 324 of 2005) of Ireland (as amended from time to time) or the Prospectus Rules issued by the Central Bank of Ireland pursuant to section 1363 of the 2014 Act, and the Central Bank of Ireland (“CBI”) has not approved this communication.