Navy MWR program kicks off fantasy football contest



Posted 8/20/2010 Updated 8/20/2010 Email story Print story







from Commander, Navy Installations Command Public Affairs

Navy News Service



8/20/2010 - WASHINGTON -- The Navy's Morale, Welfare and Recreation program has teamed up with the Marine Corps, Coast Guard and several sponsors to offer eligible patrons the opportunity to participate in a free, online 2010 MWR Fantasy Football League, which is open until 8 a.m. Sept. 12.



All active-duty military personnel, their family members, military retirees, Reservists, National Guardsmen, and DoD and U.S. Coast Guard civilians are eligible to participate in the contest. The participant with the top score at the end of the season will win a trip to Super Bowl XLV in Dallas, Texas. In addition, all participants will have a chance to win the national contest, with a grand prize of $100,000.



Contest participants can enroll in MWR's free "RapidDraft" Fantasy Football League at www.mwrfantasysports.com, hosted by World Fantasy Games, an online fantasy sports company. Each player will draft their team and play against 11 simulated pros from the fantasy football industry (including Hall of Fame quarterback Joe Namath), and compete directly with them throughout the season. An overall military winner will be named, which will be determined by the total accumulation of points gained during each week's games. The best player from the armed services will win a trip to Super Bowl XLV in February 2011.



All eligible patrons are allowed to draft as many teams as permitted by World Fantasy Games. Once participants are registered for their free team, they can draft their team anytime they desire before the draft deadline, 8 a.m. Sept. 12. Custom leader boards will be created for each service, and an overall military leader board will be available for ease in comparing your team to those across the entire nation. A custom championship ring will be presented to the top finisher from each service and weekly prizes will also be awarded.



"Navy MWR would like to thank World Fantasy Games, Coors Light and First Esprit de Corps for their support in bringing this exciting MWR Fantasy Football League contest to our military personnel and their families, which was made possible through the Commercial Sponsorship Program," said Gordon Digby, program manager, Navy MWR Golf/Auto Skills/Fantasy Sports, Commander, Navy Installations Command.



Commercial sponsorship is an authorized way for Navy MWR activities to offset the cost of programs and services. Sponsorship is received in the form of in-kind services and financial support in exchange for public recognition, advertising consideration and/or product promotion at MWR events.



The Department of Defense, U.S. Armed Forces and Department of Homeland Security do not officially endorse or recommend any sponsor's products or services related to this promotion.



For more information about the 2010 MWR Fantasy Football League, and to register for a free team, visit www.mwrfantasysports.com.