WMC fights back, urges 'Buy Wisconsin'
Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce, the state's largest pro-business group, announced on Thursday a new campaign "to stand up to government union boss intimidation and purchase goods and services from state businesses to save jobs."

The campaign is a response to efforts by several unions urging its members to engage in what they called "voluntary consumer activism." The group advised its members to "stand firm and not give in to the union demands."

In a statement, James S. Haney, WMC's president, said state businesses were struggling to come out of the recession. “We need to buy Wisconsin to help protect jobs and keep our state strong. If businesses fail, we lose jobs and government loses tax revenue to provide vital programs like education," Haney said.

In its statement, WMC said the groups had sent letters to state businesses urging them to publicly oppose recently passed collective bargaining legislation for public-sector workers.

The unions named were the Wisconsin Professional Police Association; Professional Fire Fighters of Wisconsin; International Association of Fire Fighters Local 311; Madison Teachers Inc.; Green Bay Education Association; Dane County Deputy Sheriffs Association, and Madison Professional Police Officers.

Haney said he didn't understand the actions taken by the unions.

“We need to stand up and support Wisconsin businesses and buy goods and services from our home grown companies,” Haney said. “When we buy from Wisconsin companies we help keep jobs in Wisconsin.”

Added Haney: “Many times, these boycotts backfire and actually result in companies getting more business."

Haney said businesses that are either threatened or extorted should contact their local district attorney.

“Some of these tactics may be illegal and should be investigated by law enforcement,” Haney said. “Businesses who are threatened or harassed for their beliefs should call their county district attorney to report these incidents.”

One Wisconsin Now, a progressive issued-oriented organization, released a statement in response to WMC: “Corporate special interests can buy Gov. Scott Walker and the Republican legislature, but you cannot buy the people of Wisconsin. Gov. Walker's unprecedented attack on the rights of working families, public education, health care access and local communities is a plot to dismantle the middle class and enrich the wealthy, corporate America and Wall Street. Gov. Walker is raising taxes on the working poor by $51 million to give corporations and the wealthy $200 million in special interest tax breaks. Gov. Walker has already called for massive deregulation and turned the taxpayer-financed Commerce Department into an unaccountable corporate petty cash fund. When will corporate America’s insatiable greed for our tax dollars end?”