The people's House: more unpopular -- and politically safer -- than ever
Congress may face voters this fall with its lowest recorded approval ratings ever in a mid-term election.

Only 15 percent of Americans approve of the job Congress is doing, according to Gallup. You might expect such dismal numbers to put politicians in peril.

But for the 435-member House of Representatives, the election outlook is the opposite.

Rarely have House elections been less competitive than they are today.

None of Wisconsin’s eight House seats appear to be in danger of changing hands. Last week’s campaign fundraising reports reflect that reality: one party is financially dominant in every contest.

Nationally, there are shockingly few House seats in play. The nonpartisan Cook Political Report identifies only 13 true “tossups” out of 435 races (along with 30 others that are “competitive” but lean toward one party).

Why are House members so safe when Congress is viewed so negatively?

Two converging trends have a lot to do with it: the growth in the number of politically one-sided House districts and the increasingly partisan behavior of voters.

Wisconsin is a great example of both.

One-sided seats. House seats have been growing more and more lopsided in their partisan makeup. A decade and half ago, Cook counted 164 competitive districts (where the partisan composition of the electorate was within five points either way of the country as a whole). Today it counts only 90.

This has happened for two main reasons. One is redistricting – the drawing of lines to favor either incumbents in general or one party in particular. The other and arguably bigger reason is our changing political geography, the “sorting” of states, regions and communities into redder and bluer enclaves, which produces more one-sided districts even without gerrymandering. Southeastern Wisconsin is a striking example of this political segregation, with the city of Milwaukee and some inner suburbs growing ever bluer and the outer suburbs growing ever redder. (You can read about this in detail in our recent Dividing Lines series).

Thanks to both trends, each one of Wisconsin’s eight U.S. House seats now clearly leans toward one party or the other in its composition. All eight House races were decided by double-digits in 2012.

In 2000, there were three House seats in Wisconsin that were almost perfectly balanced in their partisan makeup and closely mirrored the 50/50 balance of the nation as a whole. Today there are none.

What happened to those three?

One was the northern Wisconsin district represented for decades by Democrat Dave Obey and captured by Republican Sean Duffy in 2010 after Obey retired. That was as close to a 50/50 seat as almost any in the country. But in their 2011 redistricting plan, Republicans did some creative line drawing, adding GOP areas, shedding Democratic ones and giving the seat a small but critical GOP tilt.

Another was the western Wisconsin seat represented by Democrat Ron Kind. To make Obey's old seat better for Duffy, the GOP swapped Republican voters from Kind’s district for Democratic voters in Duffy’s district, making both seats safer for the party that controlled them -- and less competitive.

The third was Republican Paul Ryan’s southern Wisconsin district, which used to be a 50/50 seat but has grown modestly more Republican thanks to both redistricting and the increasing GOP tilt of Milwaukee’s southwestern suburbs.

Partisan voting. The Duffy, Kind and Ryan seats haven’t been radically redrawn and they aren’t hugely one-sided. The Kind seat gives Democrats a built-in single-digit advantage. The Duffy and Ryan seats have a similar lean toward the GOP. But that modest edge is all it takes today, because voters have hardened along party lines. The steep decline in ticket splitting and crossover voting in recent decades makes it much harder than it was in the past for a Democrat to win a Republican-leaning district and vice versa.

In 2012, only 26 of 435 House districts voted for one party for president and a different party for the House – a 90-year low in “split districts.” In 1984 there were 190 split districts, according to the “Vital Statistics on Congress.”

In Wisconsin, all eight House districts voted the same way in 2012 for President as they did for the House. Republicans comfortably won the five House seats carried by Mitt Romney, and Democrats comfortably won the three carried by Barack Obama.

Gone are the days when Republican Scott Klug of Madison won the second congressional district in a landslide the same year (1992) that Democrat Bill Clinton carried it by 18 points for president. Congressional voting mirrored presidential voting more closely in Wisconsin in 2012 than in any election in recent decades.

Seats can still change hands in a big national tide, like the one in 2010. But right now both parties by and large control the seats they “ought to” given the partisan makeup of those seats, making it very hard for either side to make big gains.

Candidates matter less

Lack of competition is not a new problem for House elections. But the driving forces behind it have changed. One of the big culprits used to be incumbency. Incumbents were so personally entrenched in their districts and they so heavily outspent their opponents that they could dominate in very competitive seats and survive in districts that tilted toward the other party.

That’s less true today. The incumbency re-election rate is down from a decade ago. An incumbent in a seat where voters are evenly divided or where they tilt toward the other party is more vulnerable today than he or she would have been 20 years ago, because it’s harder to get people to cross over and vote for the other party.

“Incumbency isn’t worth as much as it used to be in and of itself,” says political scientist Alan Abramowitz of Emory University. “The vast majority of incumbents are safe because they represent safe districts.”

In fact, the candidates themselves matter less than they used to.

“The races are more nationalized, so what’s happening is that the opportunities to pick up seats or the risks of losing seats are really based more on the partisan makeup of the district and the national political climate, and it’s less about the individual candidates,” says Abramowitz.

That is what gives so many House races their pre-determined feel. It’s not that we had tons of competitive races in the past. But they happened under the right conditions -- because an incumbent got caught napping, because a retirement created an open seat, because voters in a partisan district crossed party lines, or because of the sheer competitiveness of the district.

Today the enemies of competition are very structural: party line voting by voters and increasingly one-sided districts. When both are present, the outcome is baked in.

One consequence of the lack of competition is a pretty firm Republican hold on the House. More districts lean Republican than Democratic, because of the way the lines are drawn and the geographic concentration of Democratic voters in urban districts.

A second is that House members have little incentive to work with members of the other party and appeal to voters in the other party.

A third is that many lawmakers, as we’ve seen on the Republican side, have more to fear from primaries in their own party than from challengers in the opposing party. That is another disincentive to moderate.

And a fourth is that election outcomes are less responsive to shifts in public opinion because so few seats are in play.

Low congressional approval ratings have coincided in the past with high congressional turnover, according to Gallup, and “could produce unpredictable results this fall.”

But divided control of Congress complicates the picture, Gallup notes, since voters on both sides are apt to blame the other party for gridlock.

Partisan division in Washington has helped poison public perceptions of Congress. But partisan division in the electorate and uncompetitive seats make congressional turnover more unlikely.

The result is an overwhelmingly unpopular Congress whose members don’t have too much to fear from the voting public.



Follow Craig Gilbert on Twitter @WisVoter