Rep. Duffy clashes with Andrea Mitchell over federal shutdown
Related Coverage Fallen Milwaukee Marine cited in push to restore military death benefit

U.S. Rep. Sean Duffy got into an on-air verbal skirmish Tuesday with MSNBC host Andrea Mitchell over the government shutdown, with the Wisconsin lawmaker accusing the media of failing to do their job.

The nearly eight-minute segment turned on Duffy's assertion that President Barack Obama will not negotiate with the U.S. Congress, forcing the shutdown of some parts of the federal government.

Mitchell, host of "Andrea Mitchell Reports," told Duffy that he and other House Republicans were making a "non-negotiable demand" of the president on his health insurance program.

The real issue, Mitchell insisted, was that some families have been unable to get such federal aid as military death benefits because of the shutdown. She added the debate should not about what Duffy wants on Obamacare or what the president wants on the debt ceiling.

"Don't spin that on me," the sophomore rep responded.

Duffy said House Republicans are not trying to shut down the health care exchanges.

Rather, he said they are objecting to the Obama administration's requirement that individuals buy health insurance under the Affordable Care Act while businesses have been granted a one-year reprieve. He said Obama will not sit at the table to debate this point.

Duffy was able to trip up the veteran newswoman when he said the president and his family aren't getting their insurance through the exchanges but have a "gold-plated health-care plan."

"Well, so do you," Mitchell said.

"No, I’m not -- I’m in Obamacare," Duffy said, pointing to a requirement that federal lawmakers imposed on themselves. "I’m in Obamacare, Andrea. All members of Congress are and my family."

Duffy ended by saying TV comedian Jon Stewart was the only one asking the tough questions about the health insurance program.

"I think the media should start doing its job," Duffy said.

After a short pause, Mitchell offered a terse, "Thanks for your advice."

Afterward, conservative bloggers and media outlets were praising the second-term congressman for rendering Mitchell "speechless" at points.

"DUDE!" The Right Scoop said in its post on the matter. "Rep. Sean Duffy SCHOOLS Andrea Mitchell on fairness under Obamacare, even throws Jon Stewart in her face."

A spokesman for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, however, suggested Duffy had gone over the top in his national TV appearance.

“Congressman Duffy must be distraught because new polling shows that voting to shut down the government to win a political argument is a losing message with Wisconsin voters,” said Brandon Lorenz of the DCCC.

Lorenz was referring to a new poll funded by a liberal interest group that found 40% of those in his district approve of the job Duffy is doing while 46% disapprove. The same poll said Duffy trailed 48%-45% to a generic Democratic opponent. Those numbers are within the poll's margin of error.

Duffy won his last contest with 56% of the vote.

The survey was one of 24 conducted by Democratic pollster Public Policy Polling for the liberal activist group MoveOn.org in GOP-controlled House districts to gauge the possible impact of the shutdown on 2014 midterm elections.

On Oct. 2-3, the pollster interviewed 1,084 registered voters in Duffy's district, with an equal percentage of Republicans and Democrats being questioned. The poll had a margin of error of 3 percentage points.

Nearly three in five respondents said they oppose Congress "shutting down major activities of the federal government as a way to stop the health care law from being put into place." A majority also would oppose federal lawmakers "holding back on increasing the nation’s borrowing limit, which could result in a default," in an attempt to block Obamacare.

Duffy spokeswoman Cassie Smedile dismissed the poll and its findings.

"This is exactly what one would expect from an ultra liberal special interest polling firm," Smedile said via email.