Kloppenburg, Donald release ads in Supreme Court race
State Supreme Court Justice Rebecca Bradley (left), Circuit Court Judge Joe Donald (center) and Appeals Court Judge JoAnne Kloppenburg are facing off in the Feb. 16 state Supreme Court primary. Credit: Journal Sentinel files

All Politics Blog From Milwaukee, Madison and beyond, a daily dose of political news and glimpses behind the scenes SHARE

By of the

Madison — In the final days before a three-way primary for state Supreme Court, two candidates have launched TV ads — one attacking Justice Rebecca Bradley as being "backed to the hilt by right-wing special interests" and one arguing politics have no place on the courts.

Milwaukee County Judge Joe Donald and Appeals Court Judge JoAnne Kloppenburg debuted their ads in recent days as they challenge Bradley, who was appointed to the state Supreme Court by Republican Gov. Scott Walker in October.

The two who perform best in the Feb. 16 primary will advance to the April 5 general election.

Bradley has not run her own TV ad, but is benefiting from about $1 million in spending by the conservative Wisconsin Alliance for Reform.

Kloppenburg's ad includes a photo of Bradley with Walker and notes he appointed her to three different courts in as many years and is strongly backed by conservative groups. It goes on to note Donald has supported Bradley in the past.

"JoAnne Kloppenburg — she's different," the narrator says in the ad. "We can count on her. Independent. Principled. Experienced."

Donald narrates his ad and doesn't mention his opponents. It begins with a blurry image of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump on a TV screen. Later, it shows someone closing a laptop that features a picture of Bradley and Walker.

"Politics. It's on our TVs, our radios, our computer screens and in our mailboxes," Donald says. "But the one place it shouldn't be is in our courts. I'm Judge Joe Donald and for 20 years I've been guided by the simple belief that rich or poor, black or white, Republican or Democrat, under the law, we are all the same."

Donald's ad is to begin running Tuesday in the Milwaukee and Green Bay markets at a cost of about $150,000, according to his campaign. Kloppenburg's ad began running statewide on Saturday and the buy cost more than $200,000, according to Kloppenburg's campaign.

Bradley's campaign manager, Luke Martz, in a statement criticized her opponents, saying Bradley had "run a positive campaign from day one."

"We are disappointed that our opponents feel compelled to attack Justice Bradley at every opportunity," Martz said in his statement.

Also Monday, the candidates released figures that showed Bradley had outraised her opponents in January, but had less money on hand than they did as of Feb. 1.

Bradley pulled in about $88,000, Kloppenburg about $56,000 and Donald about $36,000. Bradley had about $107,000 available as of the beginning of the month, compared to about $269,000 for Kloppenburg and about $207,000 for Donald.