New audio: Union official said Wisconsin lawmakers told of Tomah VA deaths in 2008
The administration building at the Veteran's Affairs Medical Center center is shown in Tomah in March 2015. The medical center came under scrutiny when whistleblowers claimed that a doctor was overprescribing opioid painkillers. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

It's been a year since the scandal over the overprescribing of opioids at the Tomah VA Medical Center first broke, but Wisconsin federal lawmakers are still being asked the same questions:

When did they learn about the problems, and what did they do about them?

Both Wisconsin senators — Tammy Baldwin, a Democrat, and Ron Johnson, a Republican — have spent a year trying to make up for their early inaction by leading the effort to correct the problems at the VA hospital.

Now Republican Party officials are releasing audio of an interview in which a top union official said to a sheriff's detective in 2009 that she believed unspecified members of Wisconsin's congressional delegation were aware of "unreported, unexpected deaths" at the VA hospital.

Authorities have identified numerous veterans who died under suspicious circumstances at the facility, which became known as "Candy Land" for its wide distribution of narcotic painkillers.

In the two-minute audio, Lin Ellinghuysen — president of the local chapter of the American Federation of Government Employees, which represents about 900 medical and support staff at the Tomah hospital — talked to a Juneau County sheriff's detective about the problems at the facility on July 31, 2009.

She said in the interview that she had taken her concerns to Washington about the "horrendous things" going on at the hospital. Republicans say the audio ties former U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold, a Democrat challenging Johnson later this year, more directly to the troubled facility. Democrats deny the link.

"I do believe that, though, the walls of Jericho are shaking a little bit right now because April of this year I wrote a letter to congressmen and senators," Ellinghuysen told Detective Ben Goehring during the 2009 interview.

This is a reference to her much-debated memo to another union official outlining the overprescription of narcotics to veterans at the Tomah hospital. The memo is marked as being hand-delivered to Feingold, U.S. Rep. Ron Kind and then-U.S. Rep. David Obey, all Democrats. Ellinghuysen has since said the document — featured now in two anti-Feingold attack ads — never actually made it to them.

In her interview with the detective, Ellinghuysen then said, "And I talked with them last summer also because horrendous things were coming down with people who had worked there 30 years, 25 years, and I just had to go external because nothing else was working.

"And I — they know enough now about what's going on at the Tomah VA, and they have found out — I do believe -- that there have been unreported, unexpected deaths. We must, we have a process where there's unexpected deaths at our VA. We have a process we have to go external and report to our bosses, and sometimes we have to go to joint commissions, surveyors, sometimes all the way to Washington."

But who exactly did Ellinghuysen talk to in D.C. about the "unexpected deaths"?

Republicans say it's clear that Feingold was among those in the conversations. They point out that he is one of three politicians named in Ellinghuysen's memo.

"Senator Feingold received repeated warnings about the problems at the Tomah VA as early as 2008, but time and time again he failed to act," said Pat Garrett, spokesman for the Republican Party.

But Feingold's Democratic allies note that the audio doesn't identify the former senator by name, leading them to suggest that the GOP is hyping the audio to divert attention from Johnson's failings.

"Senator Johnson did nothing when informed of the terrible problem at the Tomah VA, and instead of doing his job to protect our veterans, he's misled the public, blamed his staff and refused accountability," said Brandon Weathersby, spokesman for state Democratic Party.

Last year, No Quarter reported that Johnson office staff referred whistleblower complaints about the hospital to Johnson's committee aides, but no one took them to the then-chairwoman of the U.S. Senate Subcommittee on Federal Contracting Oversight or her staff so they could authorize a probe.

Kind's office said he was not alerted by Ellinghuysen to the Tomah drug problems until last year.

Amanda Sherman, communications director for Kind, said he and his staff have met and talked many times with the union rep about labor-management problems at the Tomah facility and they have helped veterans having problems with their care there. But that, she said, is as far as it got.

"The office has no record of Ms. Ellinghuysen bringing the problem of over-prescription of opiates to Rep. Kind's attention prior to 2015," Sherman said.

Reached Sunday, Ellinghuysen said she had a foggy memory about her 2008 meetings with Kind and Feingold.

She said the main focus of her discussion with Feingold was on nursing shortages at the VA hospital and that she talked with Kind about David Houlihan, the former chief of staff at the facility who was dubbed "the candy man" by patients. She said she was upset with Houlihan for his authoritarian manner and treatment of staff and for writing prescriptions for patients he had not seen. He has since been fired.

Ellinghuysen said the issues were related primarily to "administration and personnel." She said she doesn't remember bringing up the narcotics problem or the unexpected deaths with Kind or Feingold in 2008.

"If I did, it was a secondary issue," she said. "Out of fear, we didn't get specific about patients."

Ellinghuysen said she did give detailed accounts about all of these issues to the Office of Inspector General six or seven years ago, but nothing came of it. She also complained to the detective about what led the Tomah clinical psychologist to commit suicide in 2009. But, again, she said her complaints were ignored.

Over the past year, Ellinghuysen said she has worked closely with Johnson and Baldwin to help correct the problems at Tomah. But she said she disliked that she is the focus of attacks on Feingold, whom her union has endorsed in the past. It also gave $9,000 to the Middleton Democrat from 2005 to 2010.

"I feel used," she said. "I feel used by Sen. Johnson."

But Garrett, the GOP spokesman, accused Ellinghuysen of playing politics by trying to modify what she told a sheriff's detective six years ago.

"Now (Feingold's) political allies are revising history and covering up Feingold's inaction in order to protect his political reputation," Garrett said Sunday.