Menominee application for Kenosha casino to receive fresh look
The odds that dice could be rolling at the shuttered Dairyland Greyhound Park increased significantly Tuesday when Menominee tribe officials disclosed that the federal government will withdraw its rejection of the tribe's bid to open an off-reservation casino in Kenosha.

As part of a settlement of a lawsuit the tribe brought against the federal government in 2009, the U.S. Department of Interior will tell the tribe what portions of the 2004 casino application must be updated, said Rory Dilweg, the tribe's attorney. Then, the application to open an $800 million casino complex in Kenosha will be given a fresh review.

"It definitely puts our project back on line again," said Randal Chevalier, chairman of the Menominee tribe. "We were very optimistic when the application went into the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and we remain that way today."

Added Laurie Boivin, chairman of the tribe's Kenosha Gaming Authority, "It's the most positive thing that's happened with this project in a long time."

The foundation for the settlement was laid in June when the Obama administration revoked a rule that was imposed in the waning days of President George W. Bush's administration. That rule had made it virtually impossible for a tribe to open an off-reservation casino because it stated that the farther a new casino is from a tribe's reservation, the tougher it becomes to win approval. The Menominee reservation is in Keshena, some 200 miles from Kenosha.

The Bush administration also rejected bids to open off-reservation casinos in Beloit and Lafayette County.

Negotiations aimed at resolving the Menominee tribe's lawsuit began when the Obama administration struck down the rule.

"We believe this is the most efficient judicial resolution of an issue mooted by a now-defunct policy," said Nedra Darling, spokeswoman for the Interior Department.

While the settlement puts the application back on track, there are still several hurdles that must be overcome before slot machines and gaming tables could be installed at the former track. Among them: The tribe, which has seen several financing proposals disappear as the application languished, now must seek new financing for the project.

Also, "It's always a long shot to get off-reservation land into trust for gaming application," Dilweg said, noting that only three such deals have been approved nationally.

First among the off-reservation casinos approved nationally was the Potawatomi Bingo Casino in Milwaukee's Menomonee Valley.

Word of the settlement came one day after the Potawatomi tribe paid the city and county of Milwaukee $5.47 million each. The two annual fees total 3% of the tribe's net gaming revenue at the casino, which means gamblers lost nearly $365 million in the year ended June 31. That was an increase of about 4% over $350 million in gaming revenue the previous fiscal year.

The Potawatomi have spent millions of dollars fighting efforts by the Menominee to open a casino in Kenosha, which would be located just off Interstate 94, because of fears the competition would cut into profits at the Milwaukee casino.

"About 20% of their business comes from Illinois," said a source close to Milwaukee casino. "You do the math."

The source asked not to be named because the tribe closely guards internal marketing and financial information.

Menominee Chairman Chevalier said he hopes the Potawatomi will drop their opposition, although he acknowledged they have given no indication of doing so.

"I understand they're trying to protect their market," Chevalier said. "It is ironic and it's unfortunate."

Even if the Menominee persuade the Interior Department to approve their application, the matter would then move to Republican Gov. Scott Walker, who has veto power over any off-reservation casino proposal in Wisconsin.

When Walker was Milwaukee County executive, he opposed the Menominee bid for a Kenosha casino because of the negative impact it would have on the Potawatomi casino.

Asked whether Walker still opposes the project, Cullen Werwie, Walker's press secretary, was noncommittal. "We will evaluate this casino after the federal government completes its review," he said in an emailed statement.

Michael McCabe, executive director of the Wisconsin Democracy Campaign - a campaign finance watchdog group - predicted campaign coffers may benefit from the Menominee effort to open a Kenosha casino and any other off-reservation proposals that may resurface.

McCabe noted that tribal involvement in campaigns - through direct contributions as well as supporting special interest groups that spend millions supporting or opposing candidates - spiked when there were projects seeking governmental approval.

"Now that another casino project is coming back and its approval is again up in the air, it's pretty likely that you are going to see the spigots open," McCabe said.

In 2006, the Democracy Campaign said that the Potawatomi tribe "reportedly funneled at least $1 million to the Greater Wisconsin Committee, which spent more than $4 million on issue ad activity - most it on behalf of Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle during the 2006 election year."

Ken Walsh, a lobbyist and spokesman for the Potawatomi, said the tribe would oppose the Menominee application, which he repeatedly called "flawed." He declined to say whether the tribe would provide more funds to Republicans, because of Walker, or to Democrats because the Interior Department is part of a Democratic administration.

The Potawatomi "are supporters of committees and candidates who are supporters of Indian country and supporters of issues that are important to the Potawatomi," Walsh said. "The Potawatomi feel very comfortable with Democrats and Republicans."