Uline's move to bring jobs
SHARE

By of the

When Milwaukee's Jos. Schlitz Brewing Co. went out of business nearly three decades ago, descendents of the founding Uihlein family held onto their entrepreneurial streak.

On Thursday, Dick Uihlein, the great-grandson of the brewery's founder announced that he will bring the headquarters of his own company to Wisconsin from the Chicago suburb of Waukegan.

Uline Inc., a privately held, family-run company that distributes boxes, bubble-wrap and other goods used for shipping, said it agreed to accept over $6 million in incentives and aid from Wisconsin in order to build a new distribution center and company headquarters in Pleasant Prairie. In the process, Uline will bring 1,000 jobs to the Wisconsin side of the state border by 2010.

"I'm delighted to welcome them to Wisconsin," said Gov. Jim Doyle, who was on hand in the town of Pleasant Prairie to make the announcement.

Uline is investing about $100 million in the project, with construction beginning later this year. The company will move 650 employees from its Illinois facility to the new center when it opens in 2010. Given the company's own growth projections, it expects to hire an additional 350 employees by the time Uline moves, said Chief Financial Officer Frank Unick.

The news is certain to cheer the economic strategists of southeastern Wisconsin, who anticipate that the region's economy will grow as commerce picks up along the I-94 business corridor between Milwaukee and Chicago.

Doyle mentioned that Chicago-area businesses are expanding northward, including hospital equipment maker Hospira Inc. and possibly pharmaceutical giant Abbott, which has purchased land near Pleasant Prairie for expansion.

"We did evaluate sites in both Illinois and Wisconsin," Unick said. Wisconsin got the nod because it had a "huge shovel-ready site" that was close to an expressway and to Uline's existing headquarters, he said. Pleasant Prairie is only a 15-minute drive from the current location in Waukegan.

State incentives also played a role.

Doyle announced that the Uline site has been designated as an Enterprise Zone, enabling the company to earn up to $1.7 million annually in refundable income tax credits by creating jobs that pay more than $30,000 a year. Uline can also receive job training funds up to $1.5 million. Doyle also announced that the state will provide a $1 million Transportation Economic Assistance grant, and Kenosha Area Business Alliance will provide a $2 million forgivable loan to support the project.

Uline was founded in 1980 by Dick and Liz Uihlein in the basement of their home in Lake Forest, Ill. Today, the company has grown to over 2,300 employees with six branch locations in the United States and one each in Mexico and Canada. It calls itself a pure distribution company that doesn't manufacture anything it sells.

"It is a little like coming home," said Dick Uihlein.

He noted that his family tree is full of entrepreneurs, bankers and philanthropists. "My relatives, the Uihleins, have played an important role in Milwaukee's history."

The distribution center will be 1 million square feet. The headquarters will be 200,000 square feet and house the corporate officers and personnel in marketing, information technology, merchandising and finance. The campus will be located just west of I-94 and south of Route 165.

"When I heard that Uline was looking to build a new headquarters, I knew we had to do all we could to bring them here," Doyle said.

"The Bears may have beat the Packers twice this season, but we won this battle and I couldn't be happier."