Wisconsin slips in health care quality ranking
Wisconsin has consistently ranked first or second in health care quality since a federal agency began tracking states' performance.

This year, the state wasn't in the top five.

The quality of care in Wisconsin hasn't suddenly gotten worse - the state ranked seventh in the country. Its overall score was only slightly lower than states among the top five.

But the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, or AHRQ, which compiles the annual snapshots, has added and refined the measures used to gauge performance each year. And Wisconsin's drop in the rankings raises the question whether other states are improving at a faster rate.

Wisconsin's ranking was based on 121 out of 125 possible measures of health care quality for doctors, hospitals, nursing homes and home health care. That's more than most states track and report.

"It shows Wisconsin is paying attention to health care quality and measurement," said Karen Ho, a research analyst who belongs to the team at AHRQ that works on the state snapshots.

Examples of the measures include deaths from breast cancer, avoidable hospitalizations, infections after surgery and vaccination rates for children.

The federal agency uses the measures to give states an overall score. Wisconsin's score was 59.09.

To put that in perspective, the score for New Hampshire, the top performing state, was 65.49. The score for Louisiana, the worst performing state, was 27.33.

Half of the states had scores below 46.43.

All of the states, including Wisconsin, did much better on some measures than others.

The state does better than average in 49 measures, such as vaccinating children and limiting avoidable hospitalizations for hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, according to the agency.

But it performs below average in 27 measures, such as adequate dialysis and certain infections stemming from medical care.

Wisconsin also does a dismal job in providing care to African-Americans that is similar to the care given to whites.

"There are always things we can do better," said Kelly Court, chief quality officer for the Wisconsin Hospital Association and the Wisconsin Collaborative for Healthcare Quality, which focuses on developing and reporting health care quality for physician practices.

That's true for every state. The annual snapshot makes clear that health care quality can vary widely. Even the best-performing states do poorly in some areas.

"It's a varied picture in each state," Ho said.

The same holds true for some hospitals and health systems.

"This is an area where you can be really quite good in one area, and perhaps have a lot of work to do in another," Janet M. Corrigan, president and chief executive of the National Quality Forum, said earlier this year. Her organization helps develop quality measures.

The variation exists even when poor quality care, such as infection rates, can seriously harm patients. Some states - and some hospitals and health systems - simply have put more effort into improving health care quality and safety than others.

At the same time, the measures that track health care quality are far from perfect and continue to evolve.

"There still is a dearth of good measures of patient safety across all settings of care." Ho said.

Whether some of the measures are linked to better outcomes for patients also has been questioned. And some of the data is more than 2 years old.

For now, the annual snapshots focus more on quality of hospital care than other settings, partly because more measures are available and the measures are more refined.

But the effort, begun in 2003, provides a benchmark. The federal agency also has added and refined the quality measures. Ho said that work will continue.

"We tweak it every year," she said.

Read the report

To see the AHRQ report, go to statesnapshots.ahrq.gov

RANKING THE STATES

Below are the 2010 scores for the states with the best and worst health care quality.

Best performing states

1. New Hampshire - 65.49

2. Minnesota - 64.46

3. Maine - 62.61

4. Massachusetts - 60.74

5. Rhode Island - 59.57

7. Wisconsin - 59.09

Worst performing states

50. Louisiana - 27.33

49. New Mexico - 28.72

48. Oklahoma - 29.49

47. Kentucky - 29.83

46. Texas - 31.90