5 years later, MillerCoors carries on Miller legacy
Joe Arnot inspects Coors Light packaging and and labeling for quality Tuesday at the MillerCoors brewery in Milwaukee. Credit: Michael Sears

SHARE

By of the

In some ways, it's almost as if Miller Brewing Co. hasn't changed since July 1, 2008.

The Milwaukee Brewers still play at Miller Park, about a mile or so from the State St. brewery where Frederick Miller launched the business nearly 160 years ago — with the big Miller "soft cross" logo looming over the 100-acre grounds.

Miller Lite continues to sponsor the annual UPAF Ride for the Arts and other community events, while the Miller Lite Oasis remains one of Summerfest's most popular stages.

But the company behind all that is MillerCoors LLC, a joint venture that combined Miller Brewing and Coors Brewing Co. On Monday, MillerCoors marks five years of operations — a period that saw the company establish a new headquarters in Chicago, while maintaining both its Milwaukee brewery and a large corporate office on nearby Highland Blvd.

MillerCoors' annual net income has increased since it was launched — even as its sales volume declined — thanks largely to cost savings from the merged operations, along with beer price increases. The company, owned by Molson Coors Brewing Co., which is based in Denver and Montreal, and London-based SABMiller Plc, has lost market share as it tries to sell mainstream brands such as Coors Light, Miller Lite and Miller High Life in a world where craft beers are gaining popularity.

In Milwaukee, the number of brewery employees hasn't changed compared with the head count from five years ago, according to MillerCoors. But there are around 40% fewer office workers, partly because of jobs shifting from Milwaukee to Chicago.

Now, MillerCoors is starting a technology upgrade project that will bring another 240 jobs over the next six to 12 months to the Highland Blvd. offices, a number that includes both company employees and outside consultants. Even before those jobs are added, Milwaukee has more corporate employees than either the Chicago headquarters or the MillerCoors corporate offices in Golden, Colo., where Coors Brewing was based.

"People don't realize how significant (Milwaukee) is," said Kelly Grebe, who on Monday becomes MillerCoors general counsel after serving nearly three years as deputy general counsel. She is among the highest-ranking MillerCoors executives based in Milwaukee.

Millions in savings

SABMiller and Molson Coors executives said five years ago that combining Miller Brewing and Coors Brewing would result in a more competitive company, with reduced shipping, production and administrative costs.

Industry analysts say the joint venture has cut those costs. MillerCoors says the total savings over five years is nearly $900 million.

According to financial reports, those savings have helped boost the company's underlying net income, a figure that doesn't include special items, to $1.22 billion in 2012 — up 37% from $892 million in 2009, the joint venture's first full year.

During that same period, annual revenue increased 3%, to $7.76 billion from $7.57 billion, while volume sales dropped by 6%.

MillerCoors controlled 27.6% of the U.S. beer market at the end of 2012, down from 29.5% in 2008, according to trade publication Beer Marketers Insights.

Much of that market share drop is tied to the continued decline of Miller Lite, Miller High Life, Miller Genuine Draft and Milwaukee's Best, said Benj Steinman, publisher.

"The whole Miller legacy has really struggled," Steinman said.

The company's biggest challenge is to shore up its mainstream brands, including Coors Light, Coors Banquet and Keystone Light, he said.

Meanwhile, MillerCoors is increasing its sales of craft and specialty beers, through both the Blue Moon and Leinenkugel's labels, as well as new brands that include Redd's Apple Ale and Third Shift Amber Lager.

Craft, specialty and imported brands amount to 7% of the company's annual sales volume. MillerCoors wants to increase that share to 11% by 2016, according to a recent presentation to investors.

Growth opportunities

The State St. brewery and the company's satellite Milwaukee brewery just north of downtown play big roles in the MillerCoors strategy.

At the main brewery, where Lite, High Life and Genuine Draft once accounted for over three-fourths of the annual production, those brands now total about half of the volume, said Andy Moschea, brewery plant manager. Coors Light, MillerCoors' top-selling brand, is now a big part of the production in Milwaukee and other legacy Miller breweries throughout the nation — which has helped reduce shipping costs.

Also, strong growth at the company's Chippewa Falls-based Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Co. division has led to Leinenkugel beers being produced at the State St. brewery.

That production flexibility is an advantage in a U.S. beer industry characterized by slow overall growth, and a growing preference among drinkers for a variety of new brands, including craft beers, Moschea said.

Since the joint venture, MillerCoors has invested over $100 million in the Milwaukee brewery, much of that through equipment upgrades, and energy and water conservation measures, Moschea said. In December, MillerCoors bought a warehouse adjacent to its brewery for future expansion.

"They're projects that speak to the long-term viability of the brewery," he said.

The brewery has 750 employees, the same number it had five years ago. Meanwhile, the brewery's annual production has increased by 19%, which Moschea attributes to operating more efficiently, and adding temporary employees to work on weekends.

"The brewery is very busy," he said. The facility does contract brewing, including brewing Schlitz and Pabst beers.

MillerCoors has eliminated some positions through attrition, with employees taking on more work created when their colleagues retired, said Lance Agbuis, president of Brewery Workers UAW Local 9.

The company's increased use of temporary employees brought complaints when some temps were bypassed for permanent jobs despite years of service, he said. MillerCoors has lately changed its evaluation system to make the hiring criteria more consistent, Agbuis said.

Also, the satellite brewery at 1515 N. 10th St., overlooking I-43, where Leinenkugel's brands and other specialty beers are brewed, will expand into a neighboring building that was recently purchased.

At the Highland Blvd. offices, MillerCoors has 607 employees, compared with 977 in July 2008.

The 2009 opening of the downtown Chicago headquarters moved more than 200 sales and marketing jobs, along with the top executives, away from Milwaukee and Golden. Additional workforce reductions occurred at the Highland Blvd. offices.

Community company

Still, Milwaukee today has more office jobs than either Chicago (445) or Golden (592), according to the company. The operations at the Milwaukee offices include legal, finance, human resources, engineering, procurement and MillerCoors University, an award-winning employee training program.

MillerCoors is launching what it calls a business transformation project, which will bring around 240 more jobs to the Milwaukee offices, Grebe said.

While an exact breakdown hasn't yet been determined, more than half will be MillerCoors employees, including around 10 new hires and the rest transferred employees from other cities, said Jonathan Stern, MillerCoors media relations director. The remaining jobs will be filled by consultants.

Most of the employees and consultants will be in Milwaukee for two to three years. They will work on creating new processing systems for MillerCoors, with a major focus on information technology, she said.

"Five years ago, we really just cobbled together existing systems," Grebe said.

Meanwhile, MillerCoors has played a strong role in the community, despite Chief Executive Officer Tom Long and other executives being based in Chicago, Grebe and Moschea said.

Along with marketing alliances at the Summerfest grounds, State Fair Park and other venues, MillerCoors supports community organizations that include the Milwaukee Urban League, AIDS Resource Center of Wisconsin and United Community Center.

At the brewery, an increase in volunteer work and community involvement includes new employee resource groups for women, African-Americans, Hispanics, Asian-Americans and members of the LGBT community, Moschea said. That's resulted in such efforts as an information booth at June's PrideFest.

"You've got to feel good about a company when you're engaged in the community, and so visible," Moschea said.