Private-sector employment rose 13,800 in June, state says
Wisconsin employers added an estimated 13,800 private-sector jobs last month in what the state Department of Workforce Development called "the largest month-to-month gain for any month since September 2003," preliminary estimates showed Thursday.

Also in June, the state's preliminary unemployment rate fell to 6.8% from 7.0% in May. Wisconsin's unemployment rate has fluctuated within a range from 6.7% to 7.1% throughout the past 18 months.

Although monthly state-level employment estimates are imprecise and nearly always prone to major revisions, June's jobs report was good news.

"It's a pretty decent labor market report," said Brian Jacobsen, an economist at Wells Fargo Funds Management in Menomonee Falls.

"The bulk of the gains continue to be in the lower wage leisure and hospitality industries," Jacobsen said. The increases also include temporary staffing employment, he said, "so it's difficult to say that these are high-quality jobs that are being created. Low-quality jobs are better than no jobs."

June's estimated gains are greater than the margin of error for monthly state jobs data, which is unusually wide by standards of government statistics. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, which collects data for the 50 states, Wisconsin's monthly employment estimates can be off by more than 9,000 jobs in either direction in any given month.

Meanwhile in the government sector, Wisconsin's state agencies and state-run universities added an estimated 2,900 new jobs in the month, while public school and municipal and county agencies added several hundred more. The wide gains in the state sector in a single month — it's unlikely that state employment actually fluctuates by nearly 3,000 from one month to the next — highlight the imprecision of the monthly data.

Even so, the estimated gains in the private sector, plus the gains in the overall government sector, meant that Wisconsin added 17,500 estimated new non-farm jobs in June, which amounts to "the largest month-to-month gain for any month since April 1992," according to Thursday's statement from the Department of Workforce Development.

The monthly payroll numbers and unemployment report stem from separate sets of data that measure the labor market with different methodologies. Economists, as well as the state agency, acknowledge that the monthly data is prone to inaccuracy. That's because the government bases its monthly findings on sparse sample sizes, creating a wide margin of error. The government collects payroll tallies through a sampling of no more than 3.5% of the state's employers, from which it extrapolates to create a statewide trend, while it bases the unemployment rate on a survey of 0.06% of the state's households.

The monthly numbers tend to move up and down, at least until the revisions are made months later. As recently as April, the state lost 20,800 private-sector jobs.

Even so, June's data is the second report in the last month to show an uptick in hiring in Wisconsin.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics last month released a far more accurate report — called the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages — that showed Wisconsin accelerated its pace of job creation in 2012, ranking 33rd among the 50 states in private-sector job growth for the year, up from a rank of 41 in the previous 12-month period.

Even with the gains, Wisconsin continued to trail the national recovery, as well as most of its neighboring Midwestern peer states. The U.S. grew private-sector jobs at a rate of 2.3% in 2012, compared with 1.4% growth last year in Wisconsin.

While the monthly survey is based on a notoriously small sample, the Quarterly Census is based on a census of 96% of the state's public- and private-sector employers, making it the most comprehensive and accurate reading of hiring in America. But census data are released with a time lag of as long as seven months, which means it sometimes gets less attention than the monthly numbers, which are released within two weeks of each month's end.

Job creation trends remain one of the state's most hotly debated political issues. Gov. Scott Walker made job creation his No. 1 campaign promise, vowing that the state would add 250,000 private-sector jobs by the end of his four-year term.

Wisconsin gained 62,082 private-sector jobs during Walker's first two years, putting him at one-fourth of the number needed to meet his promise.