State ranks high in health care but low on access for minorities
Wisconsin remains one of the top states in the country for the quality of its health care system and its access to health care. But the state's strong overall performance masks a long-standing flaw: African-Americans and Latinos are much less likely to receive the same quality of care or have the same access as whites.

The disparities can be seen in the annual State Snapshots compiled by the federal Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The report is based on more than 100 measures of quality and access to care.

Wisconsin ranked third in the country, behind Minnesota and Massachusetts, this year, and it consistently ranks as one of the top states in the overall performance of its health care system.

Wisconsin received an overall score of 63.74 compared with a score of 67.38 for top-ranked Minnesota. In contrast, West Virginia, the worst performing state, received a score of 31.18.

But Wisconsin does much more poorly when its performance is broken down by race.

"In many states we see patterns like this, but it does seem to be very pronounced in Wisconsin," said Ernest Moy, a physician and medical officer for the Center for Quality Improvement and Patient Safety at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.

The measures range from vaccination rates to hospital readmissions for patients with congestive heart failure to insurance coverage.

Overall, Wisconsin met or exceeded the benchmark for 66 measures and was close to the benchmark for 69 other measures. It scored poorly on 14 measures. Benchmarks were not available for 25 measures.

The benchmark is the average performance of states in the top 10% for the specific measure.

Wisconsin did less well when its performance was broken down by race.

Similar — though lesser — gaps exist between people with low incomes and those with high incomes.

"The health care system serves the majority of the population very well," said Donna Friedsam, health policy programs director of the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute. "Hispanics and African-Americans are less well served."

The state's strong overall performance, she added, hides this.

The gap — it exists throughout the country — is often attributed to behaviors that affect health and to so-called socio-economic determinants of health, such as poverty, low levels of education, substandard housing, poor diet, lack of exercise and stress.

Friedsam and other researchers agree those are factors.

"But people also are hesitant to look at how our system and processes might not serve well people outside the majority," Friedsam said.

Wisconsin also has relatively few people who are African-American or Latino in its health care workforce, and not just among doctors and nurses but also among managers, she said. The result can be a lack of understanding of the challenges facing people who are African-American or Latino.

Examples of measures in which the state performed poorly for African-Americans include:

■Infant mortality for low birth weight infants.

■Hospital admissions for patients with congestive heart failure.

■Hospital admissions for patients with asthma who are 65 and older.

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality issued its first report in 2003 and has been adding measures and refining its methodology since then.

"It gives a broader snapshot of the overall health system," Moy said.

Benchmarks were added when available in recent years. So, too, were breakdowns by race and income for many of the performance measures.

Measures are not available for every state. And Moy said some states don't release certain information on hospital quality.

The reports have shown improvements in the overall quality of care every year, Moy said. But there has been no improvement in the gap between whites compared with African-Americans and Latinos.

Wisconsin stands out for its acute, chronic and preventive care. It also does well on measures to gauge how well doctors and nurses communicate with patients. And it does well overall on care for people on with diabetes and vaccination rates.

Examples of measures in which the state's performance was among the best in the country include:

■Deaths per 1,000 adult hospital patients with pneumonia.

■Avoidable hospital admissions for pneumonia among adults.

■Deaths per 1,000 hospital patients who have had heart bypass surgery.

■Hospice patients who received the right amount of pain medication.

Examples of measures in which the state's performance was weak include:

■The rate of avoidable hospital admissions of adults with high blood pressure.

■The rate of hospital admissions for patients with uncontrolled diabetes but without other complications.

■Avoidable hospital admissions for high blood pressure.

■Hospital admissions for children with asthma.

Kelly Court, chief quality officer of the Wisconsin Hospital Association, said many health systems and hospitals already have initiatives in place to improve the quality of care tracked by these measures.

None of the top-performing states does well on every measure.

"The top 10 states do excel in many things," Moy said. "There are plenty of things they don't do well in."

This is particularly true when broken down by race.

"You can have a high-performing health care system but still leave some people behind," said Patrick Remington, associate dean for public health and a professor at the UW School of Medicine and Public Health.

No simple answers exist.

But Remington said the state should be able to do better on more of the measures for African-Americans and Latinos.

"We should stop talking about this problem," he said, "and start looking for solutions."