Holloway security guard charged with four misdemeanors
A security guard for Acting County Executive Lee Holloway was charged Monday with forcing his way into a Holloway apartment and threatening a tenant with a gun.

Milwaukee prosecutors filed four misdemeanor counts against Eric L. Turner, 39, the same day Milwaukee police released reports that link Holloway and his wife, Lynda, to the run-in.

Turner initially told authorities that he went to the apartment building to look for an individual who had been evicted from the premises, a search that led him to tenant Thelma Murphy's apartment, according to incident reports. He denied passing along a message to Murphy from her landlord.

But the security guard changed his story when an officer told him that Murphy quoted Turner as saying that the Holloways wanted her out of her apartment, the report said. Turner then said he was told to go to Murphy's apartment to tell her that she would be receiving an eviction notice, a story that he repeated later in the police interview.

"Turner again stated he was sent over to Murphy's residence to deliver a message from the Holloways," said the six-page incident report dated Jan. 12.

Reached early Monday, Turner said he was unaware of the charges.

"I can't say anything right now," Turner said. "I have to talk to my attorney."

News of the Jan. 5 incident and Turner's arrest were first reported by the Journal Sentinel's No Quarter column earlier this month.

Murphy, 51, said she was pleased with the decision by the Milwaukee County district attorney's office to charge Turner.

"He's getting what he deserves," said Murphy, who moved into the Holloways' apartment complex at 2061 W. Atkinson Ave. last summer.

Holloway issued a statement Monday chiding the media for calling his county office about personal matters. His statement didn't address Turner's charges or the police reports.

He is one of five candidates running in the Feb. 15 primary to finish the final year of Gov. Scott Walker's term as county executive.

For years, Holloway has had trouble maintaining his properties. The city has filed six lawsuits against his real estate firm in Municipal Court, and his 15 duplexes and apartment buildings have more than 100 outstanding building code violations.

In addition, city police have been called to his properties more than 860 times in the past two years.

According to the criminal complaint, Turner is charged with pointing a firearm, criminal trespass, disorderly conduct and bail-jumping because the incident violated conditions of his release last fall in an unrelated Waukesha County criminal case.

If convicted of the new charges, he could face up to 42 months behind bars and fines of up to $31,000.

Entered uninvited

The complaint said Turner barged into Murphy's apartment on Jan. 5, threw items on the floor as he searched for an evicted tenant, then pointed a gun at Murphy and said he'd be back.

The police reports give a more detailed description of the incident.

In an interview with police, Murphy said Turner showed up at her apartment wearing a black face mask, a black vest, Army pants and black boots while carrying a large black gun. He said he was looking for a former tenant who went by the name B.J. She said Turner then entered her apartment uninvited and began throwing items around the place, according to the report.

Before leaving, she told authorities, Turner pointed his firearm at her face and said, "Thelma Murphy, I know who you is, and the Holloways want you out, and I'll be back."

Two maintenance workers for the Holloways told police they witnessed part of the run-in. One of them said he saw Turner wearing a duty belt that included pepper spray, handcuffs and a gun. He also said Turner pulled the firearm out of the duty belt when he entered Murphy's apartment, something the second worker also said.

The pair said they couldn't hear the discussion between Turner and Murphy.

Turner told police that he had been in court with Lynda Holloway earlier in the day on Jan. 5, and that she had driven him back to the Atkinson Apartments. While they were there, he said, he was ordered to check the building for the evicted tenant, whose name he couldn't recall. He said his search led him to Murphy's apartment.

"Turner stated at no time did he have a firearm, but he does own a black, .40-caliber Glock handgun," said one of the incident reports. "Turner stated he is currently out on bail and not supposed to commit (any) crimes."

Last year, Turner was charged in Waukesha County with carrying a concealed weapon and possession of drug paraphernalia. He pleaded not guilty to the two misdemeanors.

As a condition of his release, he is not supposed to use or have a gun unless he has a "valid license as an armed security officer and to follow all rules of his license."

According to the criminal complaint, Turner's private security guard license expired Aug. 31 and has not been renewed.

Murphy maintains that her problems with Holloway began in August after she injured herself falling down what she describes as a shoddy, unlit stairwell in the apartment building. Since then, the real estate firm run by Holloway and his wife has filed three different lawsuits trying to evict her, the most recent on Jan. 6 - the day after the incident with Turner.

Holloway has said he has no knowledge of what happened between his security guard and Murphy, though he did call her a "bad tenant."

Last week, Murphy filed a negligence suit against the Holloways over injuries she suffered in the August fall.

Another Holloway tenant - Laura Dyer, 30 - was charged last week with three misdemeanors for busting up Murphy's apartment just days after the media reported on Murphy's clash with Turner and the Holloways.

Bruce Vielmetti of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.