Man dead in Madison police shooting had been subject of violence complaints
Tony T. Robinson Jr., 19, seen at left in a state Department of Corrections mugshot, was shot and killed Friday night by Madison Officer Matt Kenny. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Madison — Before Tony T. Robinson was a shot by a police officer inside a house on Friday, events that night were quickly spiraling out of control for the teen.

Madison police were called when he started jumping in front of cars on Williamson St., on the city's east side, according to a police radio scanner. Then in swift succession, Robinson apparently hit a friend and tried strangling someone else.

Robinson, 19, who was black and unarmed, was killed by an officer who was called to the incident, which apparently started at a gas station and ended with Robinson's death in a two-story house across the street.

Robinson had been convicted for his role in a felony armed robbery last April.

The shooting quickly drew comparisons by some with other recent high-profile killings by police of black men across the country: Dontre Hamilton at Red Arrow Park in Milwaukee, Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., and Eric Garner in New York City.

In Madison, Robinson's death sparked protests Friday, Saturday and Sunday.

Shortly after 3 p.m. Sunday, around 100 protesters carrying a large white banner reading "Black Lives Matter" walked down Williamson St. as police cordoned off the area to traffic. They carried smaller signs that read "Not one more," "It's not fair" and "Why not try love?" as they chanted Robinson's name and "No justice, no peace."

Robinson was shot by Officer Matt Kenny, according to Madison police.

In a Dane County dispatch recording, which was posted online by a website called Liberty News, the dispatcher says witnesses reported that no weapons had been seen. A few seconds later, the dispatcher says Robinson entered a residence at 1125 Williamson St. and tried to strangle someone.

The dispatcher says the person being strangled was a "patron," apparently a customer from the gas station across the street.

About 20 seconds after Kenny entered the residence, he can be heard breathing loudly and saying, "shots fired." Seven seconds later, Kenny yells, "shots fired, start an ambulance — at least one."

The shooting occurred about 6:30 p.m. Friday. Robinson died at a hospital.

"There's no doubt that we have to be clear about this: He was unarmed," Madison Police Chief Mike Koval told reporters on Saturday. "That's going to make this all the more complicated for the investigators, for the public to accept."

The state Department of Justice's Division of Criminal Investigation will conduct an independent review of the shooting, as required by state law.

Kenny, 45, was injured Friday night during the altercation with Robinson, but his injuries weren't significant and he wasn't hospitalized, Madison police spokesman Joel DeSpain said. As a matter of protocol, a blood sample was taken from the officer.

This is the second time that Kenny has killed someone in the line of duty. On July 15, 2007, he shot and killed Ronald Brandon, 48, who was white, after Brandon pointed what turned out to be a pellet gun at Kenny. The officer did not know the weapon was a pellet gun, and the district attorney cleared Kenny.

After serving nine years in the U.S. Coast Guard, Kenny started working at the Madison Police Department in 2002. He is a member of the department's mounted patrol and has worked with the special weapons and tactics team.

2014 armed robbery

DeSpain confirmed Sunday that Robinson was arrested April 25 with three other people in connection with an armed home invasion at a Madison apartment.

According to a department incident report, Robinson, then 18, was arrested with the two other men and one woman shortly before 6 a.m. as they were fleeing an apartment with electronics, a shotgun and other property. Police were called when a witness saw several men, one armed with a long gun, enter the building.

No injuries were reported in the case, police said. Robinson pleaded guilty to felony armed robbery and received three years of probation, according to court records.

Community members said Robinson graduated from Sun Prairie High School in 2014 and was preparing to enroll in college.

On Sunday afternoon, a makeshift memorial of brightly colored balloons, bouquets of flowers, candles in glass bottles and small stuffed animals drew passers-by on the busy street in front of the two-story duplex where Robinson was shot.

Three homes were still roped off with yellow police tape, so pedestrians walked on the other side of the street. Some stopped to take pictures. Traffic occasionally backed up as cars slowed while several uniformed police officers stood next to the house and in a parking lot across the street.

The memorial included a portrait of a smiling Robinson in his high school graduation gown and cap hugging a woman and the words "Ferguson to Madison. Black Lives Matter." On the sidewalk next to the gas station across from the home, someone had left a cardboard sign with the words "This is not fair!! Enough with RACISM!!"

Outside the house, Kathleen Gilbertson knelt in the snowbank next to the memorial. She wiped away tears. She said Robinson was her nephew's best friend, and she had known Robinson for six or seven years.

"Friendly guy, sweet guy, always helped people out. Always had a smile on his face," Gilbertson said of Robinson, adding that he was a father figure to his younger siblings.

"I think police are trained to defuse situations, and they did not do that," Gilbertson said. "I don't understand why they had to use lethal force. He didn't shoot anybody. He didn't even have a weapon. They didn't have to shoot him."

From @MegJonesJS, a memorial with balloons and flowers is seen outside the Madison home where Tony Robinson Jr. died. pic.twitter.com/zEC1YTdrfi — Journal Sentinel (@journalsentinel) March 8, 2015

'I have no answers'

Among those drawn to the scene was Irving Smith, who held up a one-word sign: "Why" as he leaned on a trash receptacle across from the home Sunday afternoon. He has lived in Madison for 35 years and recited statistics that he said show Madison police arrest far more black males compared with whites.

"I want to know why police shot this man five times. It doesn't make any sense to me," said Smith, who is white.

Paul Hendrickson stood on the sidewalk surveying the scene as his corgi dog Spy sat at his feet.

"I work with black youth in the area. It really hurts to know this could be them," said Hendrickson. "I needed to come pay my respects and cry. I have no answers for the black kids I work with about how we're going to fix this."

At the Social Justice Center two blocks from the scene, dozens of families with small children responded to a Facebook invite to meet Sunday afternoon and talk about Robinson's death. Kristen Brock-Petroshius organized the gathering and printed a guide with talking points "to have a space for kids and families to talk," she said. Many of the families marched in the protest that moved down Williamson St., pushing strollers and carrying children on their shoulders.

Chin Zorig showed up with his wife and son after seeing the Facebook post. His 5-year-old son, Teven, carried a small yellow sign that said "Black Lives Matter."

"It happened in Ferguson. I can't believe it's happening here," Zorig said. "We want to say as a community that we care for people of all colors being treated equally."

Mary Spicuzza of the Journal Sentinel staff reported for this story from Madison.