Another 'insane' gunfight injures two kids
In the wake of a shooting that Mayor Tom Barrett called "insane," police on Thursday arrested a felon who got into a gunfight while driving a van carrying seven children and their mother.

Bullets hit two of the children, a 10-year-old boy and an 11-year-old girl, who were taken to the hospital — but only after the driver was dropped off and the mother got behind the wheel. The children remained hospitalized Thursday; their injuries are not considered life-threatening, police said.

The mother had recently received all seven children, ranging in age from 2 to 11 years old, back into her custody after allegations of child abuse, Police Chief Edward Flynn said at a news conference.

Now, the children have been referred back to child welfare officials; they were not in the care of their mother Thursday. Earlier in the day, inspectors from the city's Department of Neighborhood Services condemned the house where the mother resided after finding it filled with feces, cockroaches and bedbugs.

"Do these kids have a chance? Do kids have a chance who are put in harm's way by reckless parents?" Flynn said.

The driver of the van, who was taken into custody on a probation violation, was driving in the 2800 block of N. 37th St. about 7 p.m. Wednesday when the altercation began. He had left prison in 2012 after reaching his mandatory release date. He had been convicted of shooting at a Milwaukee police officer who was trying to question him during an armed robbery investigation in 2007.

Police have not yet identified other people involved in the shooting; they continue to investigate.

"Any man who's in a vehicle where there are seven children and decides to get in a gunbattle is a coward because he's putting those children's life in danger, and I don't care what the dispute is, you do not put the lives of seven children in danger," Barrett said.

Enraged and engaged

So far this year, 13 children under the age of 14 have been shot in Milwaukee.

Earlier this week, Pastor Don Darius Butler led funeral services for one of them: Sierra Guyton, a 10-year-old girl struck by gunfire as she and her sister visited a playground at Clarke Street School.

On Thursday, Butler stood with Flynn, Barrett and Pastor John V. McVicker on the block where the 10-year-old boy and an 11-year-old girl had been shot.

"Every citizen of good will, of decency, of conscience should be enraged and should get engaged with any kind of activity that will cease this kind of violence that visits us too often," Butler said.

Flynn and Barrett pledged an increased police presence in the north side neighborhood for at least the next four days.

"We are going to make sure that the good people who live in this neighborhood can have their kids play outside in the summer just as every single parent in this city, in this county, in this state in this country, wants to have happen," Barrett said.

Although homicides are down compared with this time last year, the city is averaging one more shooting each week, Flynn said.

The number of shootings remains stubbornly high despite the department's efforts to take guns off the streets.

Milwaukee police have confiscated 1,341 firearms in the city — and that figure that does not include the 353 firearms turned in during the gun buyback this spring led by faith leaders.

For perspective, Flynn said, Milwaukee police had confiscated 1,190 as of July 6 — a 26% increase over last year. That figure barely trailed the New York City Police Department, which had confiscated 1,359 firearms as of July 6, according to figures provided by the police.

"We have remorseless, reckless criminals in possession of high-quality firearms shooting at each other, and they don't care who they hit," Flynn said.

Shelly Bishop lives in Walker's Point — where she can walk her poodle at 2 a.m. by herself and feel safe, she said — but often comes to the area of N. 37th and Hadley streets to visit her fiancé. She doesn't come after dark; that's when things get bad, she says.

But sunlight was still streaming in the window Wednesday evening when she heard a boom-boom-boom and asked her daughter, an Army veteran, if the sound was gunshots or firecrackers.

"This whole radius," she said motioning up and down the street, "they know the people involved. They're afraid of retaliation."

Jesse Garza of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.

SHOOTINGS INVOLVING KIDS in 2014

So far this year, 13 children under the age of 14 have been shot in Milwaukee. Some examples:

■ A 4-year-old boy who accidentally shot himself March 19 in his home in the 2900 block of N. 45th St. with a handgun police suspected of belonging to a man who lived in the home who is a convicted felon.

■ An 11-year-old girl who was shot, along with a 29-year-old man, May 14 in an alley in the 4000 block of N. 25th St.

■ A 4-year-old who accidentally shot himself May 3 with a gun his mother left in her car.

■ A 4-year-old boy who was shot June 14 while with a 21-year-old man in the 2100 block of S. 15th St.

■ An 11-year-old girl who was shot in the leg June 15 during an attempted robbery at Sparkle Foods in the 2500 block of W. Hopkins St.