Change in focus leads to decrease in auto thefts
SHARE

By of the

After a 52% spike in auto thefts last year, Milwaukee police have managed to reverse the increase by focusing on some of the city's most prolific offenders.

As of mid-August, the number of cars reported stolen was down 11% over the same period last year, according to Milwaukee Police Department statistics.

Police and prosecutors say it is because they arrested more than 30 of the most notorious offenders last fall.

The 11% drop is an improvement from last year, but this year has still seen more than 3,890 auto thefts as of mid-August. That's much less than the 2014 year-end total of 6,657, but not much less than the 2013 total of 4,385.

Most offenders are young, and the most prolific of them travel in groups.

Last year, 72% of those arrested for an auto theft-related crime in the city of Milwaukee were under 20. The youngest person charged was 9. One of the most frequent offenders had fingerprints in 53 cars, Milwaukee Police Detective Eric Draeger said.

Of the 964 juveniles referred to prosecutors for charges related to auto theft since 2010, nearly a quarter of them were referred more than once. But that fraction of the offenders accounted for more than 40% of the total of referrals.

One 14-year-old has been referred to prosecutors for auto theft five times in the past year.

Devin Spencer is among the repeat car thieves.

He pleaded guilty in three separate auto theft-related cases Feb. 27, and was sentenced to 21/2 years in prison, with three years of extended supervision.

Like many frequent offenders, he hung out with other car thieves. His stepbrother, Rickey Majors, was charged with Spencer in two of the cases and was sentenced to a year in prison and a year of extended supervision. Another one of Spencer's friends, Kemont Boyd, rode with Spencer in several stolen cars and was charged with armed robbery and stealing a car in November. He pleaded guilty to the armed robbery and the auto theft charge was dropped Aug. 26. He is to be sentenced in November.

It's groups of friends — or rather, rings of car thieves — like these that police say steal large numbers of cars in the city.

"They're organized around the idea of stealing cars, for the purpose of being seen by their friends," Draeger said. "And it becomes a social activity.

"If we go after the right people, those numbers drop."

Majors and Spencer were both 17 when they were arrested. Boyd was 16.

Often, 16-year-olds are charged as juveniles, but Boyd was charged as an adult.

Though juveniles only made up 38% of arrests for auto theft-related crimes last year, police arrested more than two times as many juveniles in 2014 as they did in 2013.

Of the juvenile cases referred to the Milwaukee County district attorney between 2010 and mid-2015, 72% were charged, according to data from Milwaukee County Delinquency and Court Services.

This rate is similar to what prosecutors see with felony firearm possession and drug possession cases, according to Milwaukee County Chief Deputy District Attorney Kent Lovern.

Of juveniles charged, about 60% ended up on probation and 12% were incarcerated. For the rest, some were referred to prosecutors but no charges have been filed; some are awaiting trial and some were referred to adult court.

Method plays role

The way in which a car is stolen plays a role in whether the case is prosecuted, as different methods leave behind different forms of evidence. There are three main ways thieves steal cars in Milwaukee.

■ Peelie: A peelie is when a thief digs his or her hands under the weather-stripping on the outside of the window and "peels" down the window. Once inside, he or she uses a flat-head screwdriver to start the car. This works better on some models, particularly mid-2000s Dodge and Chrysler vehicles, than others.

When thieves reach their hands over the top of the window, they often leave a distinct, four-finger print at the top of the window. Sometimes, police also find the screwdriver a thief left behind.

■ Hop-in: The thief gets in a car when it is already running. It's the type of theft police warn of in cold winter months when someone starts his or her car and leaves it running to warm it up; thieves can then simply open the door and drive off.

■ Steal the keys.

To secure a conviction, prosecutors need to prove the thief knew the car was stolen and prove the car was driven in the jurisdiction of the court. Finding the thief with the keys or matching fingerprints to a suspect is useful evidence, but not enough to secure a conviction on its own, Lovern said.

Police don't always match fingerprints to a suspect, but when they do, they can then go to the car's owner and ask if the owner let the suspect drive the car. When the owner says "no," police have probable cause and enough evidence to arrest the suspect, Draeger said.

Though fingerprints are not enough to convict, arrests can still yield confessions.

To get that additional information, police interview those they arrest, passengers in the stolen car and bystanders.

Even when a person is arrested for being a passenger in a stolen vehicle, prosecutors still have to prove the passenger knew the car was stolen, Lovern said.

If a person steals and drives a car, he or she can receive a sentence of six years and a $10,000 fine. A person who drives a vehicle he or she knew was stolen can face up to three years and six months and a fine of up to $10,000. These two charges are felonies.

A person who rides in a vehicle he or she knew was stolen can face a sentence of up to nine months and a fine of $10,000. This is a misdemeanor.

First-time offenders can sometimes plead down the felony charge of driving a stolen car to a misdemeanor, but only when the offender has no prior record and no aggravating factors, such as fleeing and a hit-and-run, are present, Lovern said.

Case provided evidence

Police had plenty of evidence to work with on Spencer's case: When they interviewed him for the theft of a black Ford Explorer, he had the keys on him; he admitted to police he rode in a Lexus he knew was stolen, and he once admitted stealing a Dodge Caravan, according to several criminal complaints filed with the Milwaukee Circuit Court between September and November 2014.

The Caravan that Spencer admitted to stealing had its ignition damaged in a way consistent with a peelie, though Spencer denied to police that he was the one who altered the ignition.

When Spencer confessed to stealing the Caravan, he told police he needed a way home.

When police interviewed Boyd, he told them that he, Spencer and others were riding in a stolen Jeep when two of their friends got out of the car to steal a white Lexus.

Spencer and Boyd then got into the white Lexus. While riding in the stolen car, another one of Boyd and Spencer's friends wanted to steal a car, too. When they pulled into a gas station and saw a black Lexus running, the friend got in and drove off, according to a criminal complaint.

When thieves are driving a stolen car and a police officer tries to pull them over, they often just drive off, knowing police are unlikely to chase them.

In 2010, Milwaukee police adopted a policy to only chase a person fleeing in a car if police have probable cause someone in the car is committing a violent felony or is an immediate threat to public safety.

Though this policy has cut down on the number of people injured in police chases, criminals have been taking advantage of it.

Sometimes it ends in disaster: When police tried to pull over a 14-year-old for allegedly driving a stolen Chrysler Sebring in June, he drove off and only made it two blocks before being T-boned by another car. The juvenile, whose name is not being used because he is a minor, has been charged with an auto theft-related felony, a felony fleeing charge and misdemeanor hit-and-run.

Kevin Crowe of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.