10 Wisconsin children rescued, 100 suspects arrested in sex trafficking case
By of the

Ten children in Wisconsin were rescued from child trafficking and 100 suspects were arrested over the weekend as part of a nationwide FBI investigation.

The number of children picked up here was the second highest state total, according to the FBI and the state Department of Justice. Ten juveniles also were recovered in Detroit, according to the FBI. Only San Francisco had more, with 12.

During a similar operation last year, six children were recovered and 60 suspects arrested in Wisconsin. This year's roundup targeted Milwaukee, the Madison/Wisconsin Dells area and the Fox Valley, according to the FBI, which worked with the Milwaukee Police Department and several other state agencies in the sweep.

"We know child sex trafficking occurs in Wisconsin, and with newly added resources, we want those looking to prostitute children to know that their organized crime won't be tolerated here," Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen said in a new release.

The FBI announced the results of Operation Cross Country VII in Washington, D.C., on Monday morning. Nationwide, 105 juveniles were recovered, and 159 suspected pimps were arrested, not including the 100 arrests in Wisconsin, which were for other charges and warrants. The three-day operation covered 76 U.S. cities.

Milwaukee police Detective Lynda Stott, who has worked on several successful prosecutions of pimps, said that unfortunately there are "easily more than a dozen" other cases in the pipeline.

She said understanding how girls get caught up in prostitution can be very difficult, but they're generally desperate to please the traffickers, who often promise a romantic relationship before forcing the girls to sell sex, and then keep all the money.

The operation "reinforces that it's a problem occurring in every community across the country," said Staca Shehan, with the Center for Missing and Exploited Children. "Child sex exploitation is not just in other countries or just big cities."

Shehan said, "Children are targeted because of their vulnerability. Especially if they've been a victim of sex exploitation, abuse or neglect. And if the child has been involved with social services or foster care, that's another layer of risk.

"These traffickers are great at reading people. They look at these victims and quickly assess, 'Do they need an older boyfriend? A protector? A supplier? Do they just want to feel cool?'"

Undercover agents with the FBI and local law enforcement agencies prowl known prostitution areas to find and contact girls subjected to prostitution, then offer to connect them with social services.

The rescued victims ranged in age from 14 to 17. One girl found in Oklahoma City had been rescued during a raid last year in the Pacific Northwest, an FBI agent told the Associated Press.

Stott said she's also seen that in Milwaukee. Like any criminal, she said, prostitutes learn a way to make money when they're desperate.

"It doesn't make them any less of a victim if they're minors," Stott said.

In Detroit, 18 suspected pimps were arrested, the Free Press reported.

Prosecutors have won convictions and stiff sentences for several notorious pimps in Milwaukee in recent years, including Todd "HK" McMillian, Todd "King Tut" Carter, Derrick "Snooky" Avery, Michael Lock and Sean Patrick.