Provision slipped into budget dilutes teacher license rules
The panel response to news about a provision the Legislature's budget panel slipped into the budget during a late-night session.

By of the

Anyone with a bachelor's degree could be hired and licensed to teach sixth- through 12th-grade English, math, social studies or science in Wisconsin under a provision slipped into the state budget proposal by a Republican lawmaker.

And any person with relevant experience — even a high school dropout — could be licensed to teach in any other non-core academic subject in those grades, according to the provision.

Critics argue the changes, if approved, would dramatically lower Wisconsin's teaching standards.

The teacher certification provision was approved as part of a package of K-12 budget items by the Legislature's Joint Finance Committee last week in a 1:30 a.m. vote. It was proposed by Rep. Mary Czaja (R-Irma). She said she pursued the measure to help rural schools find and retain qualified teachers in hard-to-fill subjects.

But a rural schools leader said that's not what rural schools asked for.

"Heavens no," said Jerry Fiene, executive director of the Wisconsin Rural Schools Alliance. "This totally destroys any licensure requirements that we have in Wisconsin. It's very concerning."

Fiene said rural school district leaders have been looking for flexibility to expand options for degreed, licensed teachers. For example, allowing a credentialed English teacher already on staff to teach another subject if he or she has relevant experience.

And some districts seeking to expand technical education offerings have asked for credentialing flexibility, like the ability to hire someone with experience — but maybe not a bachelor's degree — to teach hands-on classes such as construction.

The question is how far Czaja's proposal goes.

In an interview, Czaja said the idea was to help schools fill specific niche areas, not to help people bypass a four-year degree and some kind of formal teacher training.

But when pressed about the impact of the broader provision, Czaja agreed it might make it easier to become a teacher in Wisconsin than in any other state.

"The districts are going to be the ones that hire these people, and I firmly believe that they're not going to throw somebody in there that isn't doing a good job," Czaja said. "This is just flexibilities. They don't have to use it."

Czaja couldn't name any districts that had asked for the broader flexibilities.

Rigor of training

Wisconsin offers two main avenues to become a licensed teacher. Candidates can complete a degree in education and other requirements, then be recommended for a state license by their college or university. Alternative teacher training programs are geared toward people who already have bachelor's degrees. These programs often allow people to teach on temporary licenses in high-needs areas while they complete training and other requirements for a full-fledged state license.

Measure criticized

State Superintendent Tony Evers said in a recent interview on the television show "Here and Now" that the budget provision would essentially eliminate teacher licensing standards, putting Wisconsin below the teacher expectations of states with the lowest achievement levels in the country.

"It essentially takes the licensing system out of the state's hands and puts it in 424 school districts' hands," Evers said. "If you're a buddy of the superintendent or the principal, you go in and say, 'Gosh, I want to teach here,' he or she says yes, you've got a license."

The proposal comes amid continuing discussion over the rigor and selectivity of university teacher education programs.

Jon Bales, executive director of the Wisconsin Association of School District Administrators, said there are issues in Wisconsin around the recruitment of would-be teachers and the quality of their preparation. But he said the provision championed by Czaja is shortsighted and wouldn't solve the problem.

"This is characteristic of bad and ineffective policy," Bales said. "We think this puts all kids at risk."

Christina Brey, spokeswoman for the state teachers union, said teaching requires more than subject-matter expertise. Licensure, she said, provides some assurance that the person has received training in how to teach children.

"Children all across the state deserve to have teachers who have proven they can do the job," Brey said.

In a four-page letter this week to Assembly and Senate lawmakers, the Wisconsin Association of Colleges for Teacher Education said the changes would compromise the quality of adolescent education.

The association urged lawmakers to amend the budget, saying that putting unprepared teachers into classrooms was not only unwise and unfair, but "threatens the very foundation of a strong, competitive workforce."

The state budget proposal is not final. It must be passed by both houses of the Legislature and signed by Gov. Scott Walker. Walker had proposed easing teacher certification provisions in his original budget request.