MPS per-pupil spending fourth highest among 50 largest districts in nation
SHARE Click image to enlarge.

By of the

Of the 50 largest school districts by enrollment in the United States, Milwaukee Public Schools spent more per pupil than all but three East Coast districts in the 2009-'10 school year, according to public-school finance figures released by the Census Bureau on Thursday.

MPS ranked near the top among large districts by spending $14,038 per pupil in the 2010 fiscal year. It was outspent by the New York City School District, with the highest per-pupil spending among large districts - $19,597 - followed by Montgomery County Public Schools near Washington, D.C., and Baltimore City Public Schools in Maryland, which spent $15,582 and $14,711, respectively, per pupil that year.

MPS officials on Thursday acknowledged Milwaukee's high per-pupil costs in comparison with other large districts, but they also pointed to unique local factors that drive up the cost, particularly the city's high rate of poverty, the district's high rate of students with special needs and other long-term costs, such as aging buildings and historically high benefit rates for MPS employees that the district is working to lower.

"The cost of doing business for Milwaukee Public Schools and Wisconsin is relatively high," Superintendent Gregory Thornton said. "But because of legacy and structural costs, we were not geared toward driving those dollars back into the classroom."

"What we have to be is more effective and efficient," he said.

The school finance statistics come from the latest Public Education Finances Report, an annual census report that provides information on revenue, expenditures, debt and assets of the country's elementary and secondary public school systems.

On average, the nation's K-12 public school systems spent $10,615 per pupil in 2009-'10, which represented a 1.1% increase from the 2008-'09 school year. Wisconsin's public school districts spent $11,364 per pupil on average, according to the report. That places Wisconsin 18th out of 50 states and the District of Columbia in terms of per-pupil spending.

There are other districts in Wisconsin that spend more per pupil than MPS, but because they have much lower enrollment, they don't show up in the top-50 list of large districts. For example, Nicolet High School on Milwaukee's wealthier North Shore spends more than $17,000 per pupil, according to census figures.

Neighboring Maple Dale-Indian Hill spends $14,916 per student, according to the report. And Fox Point Joint 1 and Glendale-River Hills school districts spend $13,098 and $13,311 per-pupil, respectively - not as high as MPS, but still well above the state average.

Two hours north in Green Lake, where multimillion-dollar vacation homes surround the community's main attraction, the Green Lake School District spends $15,773 per pupil.

Bob Peterson, president of the Milwaukee Teachers' Education Association, said there are no simple answers as to why Milwaukee spends so much more per student than all but a few of its large-city school district peers.

"Of all those big cities, we're among the poorest and least educated, we've got a high rate of joblessness and some of the highest health care costs in the country," he said. "It's easy to scapegoat the schools for our problems, but we don't point to multinational corporations that have taken tens of thousands of family-sustaining jobs out of this city. That has a huge impact on the quality of life for children."

Dale Knapp, research director for the Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance, said Wisconsin has always been relatively high in benefits for school and public employees, compared with other states.

Costs rose in recession

So he was particularly interested in looking at the change in school expenditures between 2008-'09 and 2009-'10, the point at which the full impact of the recession was starting to hit state governments.

The report notes that total expenditures by public school systems were $602.6 billion in 2009-'10, a 0.4% decrease from 2009. That decrease marks the first time since the Census Bureau began annually publishing school system finance statistics that expenditures by school systems went down from the previous year.

Knapp zeroed in on school wages and salaries on a per-student basis for Wisconsin, and noticed they rose about 3.5% between 2008-'09 and 2009-'10, while wages and salaries nationally increased only 0.5% on a per-pupil basis during that time.

In employee benefits, Wisconsin saw an increase between those years of 4.5%, while nationally, benefits increased 0.3% on a per-pupil basis, Knapp said.

"Our salaries and benefits continued to grow in the way they had been, roughly speaking, but in the nation as a whole, they were close to flat," Knapp said.

The latest census report does not reflect legislation signed by Gov. Scott Walker in early 2011 that limited collective bargaining and made it easier for school districts and other state governments to shift more of the cost of benefits to public workers, and to unilaterally make other changes to employees' wages and work rules.

The reductions in school spending included in the biennial budget Walker introduced in 2011 obligated districts to use the "tools" of Act 10 to balance their budgets, but numbers reflecting those changes won't show up in the census school finance report until two years from now, when the 2011-'12 data is released.

Thornton detailed the changes MPS is making to become more effective and efficient, such as closing 19 buildings in the two years he's been with the district.

Thornton said the administration is working to lower the district's benefit rate, which had hovered around 70 cents in benefits for every dollar paid to an employee in salary. Some of those changes were negotiated with unions, such as health care changes agreed to in the latest contract with the teachers union. The contract expires next summer.

The district recently announced it would end a second pension that had been available to MPS teachers, and Thornton's latest strategy includes a proposal to raise the minimum number of hours required for an MPS employee to receive benefits from 20 hours per week to 30 hours per week.

If approved by the Milwaukee School Board, it could save the district $4.5 million, Thornton said.