MPS' retiree benefit costs drop by $1 billion
The Walker administration's landmark union bargaining law helped Milwaukee Public Schools shave more than $1 billion from its long-term benefit obligations to retirees, a new analysis says.

Though the savings can't be used for classroom expenses, it shrinks a looming financial burden to meet promises to retirees in the form of health care and other nonpension benefits.

A new actuarial report released Monday showed the district's total obligation to retirees dropped to about $1.4 billion in July 2011, compared with a projected $2.4 billion when the costs were calculated in July 2009.

While the district championed the savings Monday as putting the district on a better financial footing, unanswered was the effect of a Dane County judge's ruling Friday overturning Act 10 and what happens now as the case heads toward appeal.

The primary reason the future obligation dropped is the district raised eligibility requirements for retirement benefits other than pension and changed the design of health care plans, which Act 10 freed the district to pursue.

That leaves questions about whether some of the predicted savings can still be realized once the bulk of MPS employees' contracts - including teachers' - expire next summer.

The latest actuarial valuation of the district's nonpension benefit obligation was conducted by consultants Gabriel Roeder Smith & Co. If the conditions upon which the report is framed stay in place, MPS is predicted to face a $1.8 billion liability by the year 2019 instead of a $4.9 billion liability.

"This is an important step upon which we will continue to build," Milwaukee Public School Board President Michael Bonds said in a statement provided by MPS.

The road to lower long-term health care costs started in late 2010, when the district finalized contracts with unions that called for a new health care plan administrator.

Under Act 10, the School Board in November 2011 approved increasing the health care premium contributions from employees, increasing the age and years of service needed to be eligible for the district's retiree health benefits and increasing the amount of sick leave that needed to be accumulated in order for the board to subsidize the benefit.

Those changes went into effect for some district employees whose contracts expired this summer but are not scheduled to affect the majority of the district's workers - including about 5,000 members of the Milwaukee Teachers' Education Association - until the end of June 2013.

Bob Peterson, president of the MTEA, didn't offer specific thoughts on the report, but said last week the union was encouraged by the prospect of returning to the tradition of bargaining collectively over labor issues.

MPS officials on Monday touted the savings overall.

District spokesman Tony Tagliavia said the board's actions, including those enabled by Act 10 and those negotiated through collective bargaining, cut $1.4 billion from the district's expected long-term liability as of fiscal year 2012. The majority of that figure - almost $1.1 billion - came from the board using Act 10 to change the eligibility requirements for nonpension retirement benefits, Tagliavia said.

Retirements to jump

MPS is expected to see an increase in its actuarial liabilities in one key area: retirements.

Because of the changes in the eligibility conditions for post-employment benefits, and because many teachers close to retirement age want to ensure that they receive the benefits outlined in the current contract, MPS is expecting a larger-than-usual amount of retirements at the end of this year.

Superintendent Gregory Thornton said at a public event last week that he anticipated losing 500 to 700 teachers at the end of 2012-'13.

The anticipated accelerated retirements resulted in an increase in actuarial liabilities of about $266 million for MPS, according to the report.

A presentation about the report that's scheduled to be discussed at a School Board committee meeting Tuesday warns that MPS still faces challenges regarding its other post-employment benefit obligations.

The annual cost of those obligations still outpaces the district's annual contribution, though the latest changes have slowed that discrepancy. Also, the district will be burdened by the rate of medical inflation, the fact that more members are living longer and therefore using more health care services, and the fact that the ratio of active retirees in MPS to those still working is close to 1:1.