Sheriff seeks $6 million for House of Correction improvements
Milwaukee County Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. is seeking more than $6 million to upgrade the House of Correction in Franklin, including new video surveillance equipment, an Internet-based visitation system and four security gates for closing off areas of the sprawling lockup in case of a disturbance.

The money will be part of Clarke's 2010 budget request and comes on the heels of glowing reviews he has gotten for overhauling operations at the facility since he took it over in January.

Staff overtime, which hit record levels last year, is down 67%, according to a sheriff's office memo to the County Board. A new management team has been put in place and old leaders of the House have quit or retired. Dozens of shortcomings highlighted in a 2008 federal audit have been fixed.

"The sheriff's office has stayed within the budget, even with taking over the deficit-prone House of Correction," the report says.

Despite all that, in his first six months of running what Clarke has renamed "County Correctional Facility South," he's uncovered "numerous deficiencies . . . that require additional resources to repair, remodel or newly construct," the memo states.

Among the improvements the sheriff is seeking: $2.6 million for a digital surveillance camera system, which would record inmate movement in virtually all areas; $1.9 million for converting a dining hall into an inmate dorm; $430,000 for video visitation via computer screens; and an unspecified sum for installation of electronic security gates to seal off sections of the facility in case of an uprising.

Preventing violence

The upgrades are needed to reduce the potential for violence and escapes, the report says.

Richard Schmidt, a sheriff's inspector in charge of the House of Correction and the county jail, said he was prompted to seek money for the gates after viewing a training film on prison riots that included a case in which inmates took over an entire prison. Two were left dead in that uprising, he said.

"I don't want that to happen here," Schmidt said.

The request goes to County Executive Scott Walker and the County Board for consideration in next year's budget. Walker has warned of a possible $90 million shortfall in 2010 and he's ordered many county departments to cut millions from their requests. But Clarke's office was one of the few areas of county government not asked to tighten its belt because of its role in protecting public safety.

Walker set the 2010 budget target for the House of Correction at $45.6 million, a $1 million increase.

Improvements cited

Among improvements noted in the report: A drop in overtime expenses for the first six months of the year to under $600,000, a fraction of last year's record of $4.5 million. The closing of the county's former work-release center and a reorganization of correctional officers helped lower staff costs this year, the report says.

The report lists 17 vacancies for correctional officers. Nearly 500 employees work at the House of Correction, including about 300 correctional officers.

A spate of retirements and resignations this year has created a staff shortage, said Kevin Schoofs, president of correctional officers Local 567. Forced overtime is again being assigned due to the shortages, he said. Heavy use of forced overtime was one of the factors that led county officials to switch management at the House of Correction.

Penni Secore, staff representative for District Council 48 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, said Clarke's report glosses over problems. She said his reorganization eliminated 24 union jobs, which forced some correctional officers to take on extra duties.

Sheriff's Inspector Kevin Carr said the reorganization fixed problems with overlapping duties between union and management.

Less work-release

The report also notes that a much smaller number of work-release inmates are held overnight in specially designated units at the county jail. Clarke trimmed the work-release rolls to 76 as of late June by strictly enforcing rules, taking away the privilege from 118 inmates during the first half of the year for falsifying work records, drinking, drug use or other infractions.

Inmate fights and vandalism have declined at the House this year, which the sheriff's report attributed to a strict policy of discipline and efforts to get criminal charges filed.

"We are just eons away from where we were with that facility a year ago," said Supervisor Lynne De Bruin.