Courthouse adds security with guard layoffs
Three sets of security guards are staffing entrances at the Milwaukee County Courthouse complex and two other county buildings for the next two weeks as the county transitions into an all-privatized security force.

County supervisors Wednesday questioned whether security coverage made sense in light of a budget shortfall. In addition to the county's 20-some security guards, up to 10 guards from G4S Wackenhut and about a dozen sheriff's deputies - some getting overtime pay - have been covering the security checkpoints.

"Why on earth do we have deputy sheriffs guarding our guards?" asked Supervisor Marina Dimitrijevic.

Officials said the extra help was brought in to make sure security was not compromised during the transition to a privatized force. During the changeover that began Saturday, Wackenhut is being paid up to $45,000 to provide guards to fill in for absent county workers who've already gotten their pink slips, said Jack Takerian, interim public works director.

Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. also agreed to provide security oversight at the request of County Executive Scott Walker, Clarke said. The fear was that many of the 27 county guards would call in sick or take vacation during their final two weeks on the job. The last official work day for them is March 12.

But most county guards have reported for work, Takerian said. The extra Wackenhut guards will be scaled back if not needed, he said.

Irate supervisors said Wednesday that Walker overstepped his authority by laying off 76 workers, including the security personnel, and some vowed to try to stop him from privatizing courthouse security.

Walker's unilateral actions created an emergency that didn't exist, said Supervisor Michael Mayo Sr. He said the legal argument justifying Walker's actions under emergency statutory authority was "poppycock."

Walker has said he relied on legal advice from the county corporation counsel as well as an outside law firm before issuing layoff notices. Acting County Corporation Counsel Timothy Schoewe said Walker was justified in hiring a security firm on an emergency basis.

Schoewe also said Walker was on solid legal ground with the layoffs to help fill a budget shortfall.

Dimitrijevic said she planned to introduce legislation aimed at undoing Walker's plan to award a $1.1 million annual contract to Wackenhut to take over the security checkpoints.

The County Board in November rejected Walker's plan to privatize security as part of the 2010 budget and that policy should prevail, Dimitrijevic said. Last Friday, Walker fired all 27 security guards and also issued layoff notices to 49 other county workers.

"If (Walker) can do that, then I don't even know why we show up," Dimitrijevic said during a meeting of the County Board's Transportation and Public Works Committee. She said she'll try to get her resolution heard at the March 18 meeting of the full County Board.

The 76 layoffs will save the county about $1.8 million this year, leaving a $6.3 million budget hole for 2010.