Clarke rehiring 29 of 48 laid-off deputies
Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. said Monday dangerously low staffing at the county jail was forcing him to rehire 29 of 48 deputies who were laid off earlier this year as part of a large budget cut to the sheriff's office.

Clarke's hiring move comes as overtime costs have risen in his department, jailer turnover has increased and action on hiring new jailers has lagged.

The department has 260 deputies and 481 jailers.

The sheriff said he had been unable to hire qualified jailers for more than half the 60 openings and blamed the county's personnel department in part for inaction on testing jailer job candidates. He said the department provided only 24 candidates for 60 jailer vacancies and it would take nearly six months before they are fully trained.

Further complicating the hiring, many jailer applicants are rejected because they fail drug screening, have a serious criminal record or fail a written test, Clarke said.

That has resulted in mandatory overtime in the department, with some deputies and jailers going a month without a day off, he said.

"When officers go long stretches without an off day, it causes burnout and fatigue that in a correctional setting will lead to mistakes," Clarke said. That could mean inmates released in error or mistakenly housed near rival gang members at the jail, the sheriff said.

Jailers are paid less than deputies, don't have arrest powers and lack some of the training deputies get.

Clarke said he had taken the first step toward calling back laid-off deputies and would rehire officers who are willing to come back. Though deputies are paid more than jailers, the laid-off deputies could be put to work right away because they would need no additional training.

The sheriff said he had a constitutional duty to keep the jail running properly that he wouldn't shirk, even if it means busting his 2012 budget. He said having too few or overly tired jailers on duty posed a safety risk to themselves, inmates and the public.

"I'm not going to balance my budget at the expense of public safety," Clarke said in an interview.

Overtime at the jail and the County Correctional Facility-South in Franklin is up 50% so far this year, Clarke said, with more than 90,000 overtime hours worked. He said he didn't have a tally of the cost. The sheriff's budget for 2012 includes $2.8 million for overtime.

Clarke said he could pay for some of the cost of calling back the 29 deputies from his 2012 budget in part by reducing inmate program spending. He may completely eliminate spending on educational and other inmate programs, if necessary, Clarke said. The sheriff has had a long-running disagreement with some judges and county supervisors over jail program spending.

"I don't know why we try to turn the jail into a school," Clarke said. "It's not a job training center."

Clarke said he will ask the County Board to provide supplemental funding for any remaining costs. Clarke said he didn't know yet how much in additional funding would be required.

The cost of rehiring the 29 deputies would come to about $2.35 million a year, or about $56,000 in salary and $25,000 in benefit costs per deputy, said Roy Felber, president of the Milwaukee County Deputy Sheriffs Association.

He said the rehiring announcement was welcome news.

"It's a really good thing," Felber said. "It's a little late, but we'll take it when we can."

The union has a pending lawsuit over the layoffs, arguing that 32 of the 48 layoffs should be rescinded because there were that many retirements and resignations of deputies last year before the layoffs.

Kevin Schoofs, president of the jailers' union, said Clarke's frequent firings of correctional officers had contributed to the staff shortage. He said Clarke had recommended 32 jailers for firing since April 2011, but 21 were able to retain their jobs through appeals to the county's Personnel Review Board.

Clarke criticized County Executive Chris Abele for the deputy cuts, saying they were not well thought-out. Abele and the County Board cut more than $11 million from the sheriff's budget this year to help offset a projected deficit.

Abele said in a statement that the county personnel office had been working with Clarke's office on recruiting and retaining correctional officers. Abele's office noted that the sheriff got some $1.2 million in July to hire 20 deputies. But Clarke said that didn't add to his budget or allow any hiring, it only made good on an earlier agreement to transfer savings from deputy contract concessions.