Board overrides dozens of Chris Abele's budget vetoes
SHARE

By of the

The County Board swept aside on Thursday 38 of County Executive Chris Abele's 39 budget vetoes, underscoring an ongoing split in county government.

Supervisors quickly overrode Abele's vetoes with little discussion, completing work on the county's 2014 budget with a tax levy that will stay frozen at this year's $279.3 million. It marks the first time in a decade there was no levy increase.

The overall budget for next year is $1.3 billion.

The board action means salary cuts to six top Abele aides will take effect, a board move Abele has characterized as payback for his support for a new state law limiting the board's authority.

The veto overrides also retain a $1.6 million county employee health insurance subsidy, could stave off Abele's push for hiring a Texas firm to take over management of the county bus system and protected Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. from some of the major cuts Abele had sought.

The sole Abele veto that was sustained eliminated $100,000 in funding the board had wanted to give the AIDS Resource Center of Wisconsin for HIV prevention. The board's budget amendment on the topic would have transferred the sum away from case management services for former patients of the Mental Health Complex.

That veto was sustained by the bare minimum of seven votes needed.

The board action also could slow the pace of shifting patients from the Mental Health Complex to community settings. Veto overrides kept in place studies on the impact of the move, which Abele said would be redundant.

Supervisor Peggy Romo West said a community study was advocated by executives from four hospital systems and was needed to ensure vulnerable patients are cared for properly and don't wind up back in institutional care.

Abele said his vetoes represented a compromise "that would have lowered taxes, improved services and added money to the county's rainy day fund.

"While I was hoping for a different outcome, the board's votes won't discourage me from continuing to fight for a Milwaukee County government the community can be proud of," Abele said in a prepared statement.

Board Chairwoman Marina Dimitrijevic said the veto overrides demonstrated unity among supervisors on issues important to constituents.

The board and Abele agreed on a tax levy freeze, a major issue, she said.

"How much we spend, the board and (Abele) agreed on," Dimitrijevic said.

Abele initially proposed a levy freeze, but if his vetoes had been sustained, the levy would have dropped by $1.6 million.

Supervisor David Cullen criticized Abele for two unusual vetoes that created new meaning from paragraphs of text by selectively vetoing words and letters. That's a power that state voters took away from the governor in the 1990s.

Cullen, a former legislator, said state lawmakers should act to rein in that authority.

Abele vetoed a study on the future of the O'Donnell Park garage the board wanted and tried to cut the $1 million in parking revenue from the facility. He sliced 15 lines of text on the topic to accomplish the veto, through selective editing.

The board voted 18-0 on that override.

Supervisors should have a say in whether the facility is sold, Supervisor Patricia Jursik said. Abele aides have been in discussion with officials at Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance about a possible sale of the O'Donnell garage.

Supervisors also voted 10-8 to pursue a state Supreme Court appeal of a last week's ruling saying the county erred when it cut the pension "multiplier" for county workers, which had the effect of reducing credit toward pensions by 20%.

The state Appeals Court said the pensions couldn't be cut for current employees, but could for new hires.

Supervisor John Weishan Jr. said the board should skip another appeal and stand by the county's promise to employees in 2000, when the pension multiplier was increased as part of a pension enhancement package that included the "backdrop" lump sum benefit.

Others argued in favor of the appeal, noting that it could cost the county $2 million a year in higher pension costs unless last week's ruling is overturned.

Facebook: fb.com/steve.schultze3

Twitter: twitter.com/SteveSchultzeJS