David Clarke opens door for possible run against Tom Barrett
Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. Credit: Kristyna Wentz-Graff

SHARE

By of the

Milwaukee County Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. is making some noise about running for mayor against Tom Barrett in 2016.

In an interview this week with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Clarke, who has been highly critical of Barrett's tenure as mayor, said he was sizing up a possible run. But he said he would not make a decision until after his re-election bid as sheriff this fall.

"After that, I'm going to sit down with some trusted people...to see about the viability of a candidacy against an incumbent," Clarke said.

Does he mean Barrett?

"Sure, the viability of taking on an incumbent mayor. That's an uphill climb. But I do think running for governor in the recall weakened him. He's vulnerable. I'm going to sit down with people I know and I trust who will be honest with me whether it's viable to take on an incumbent mayor and actually win. I'm not a guy who runs just to run," Clarke said.

Clarke charged that Barrett, first elected in 2004, lacks vision.

"I have 7,800 reasons to be critical of Mayor Barrett. That's about what I pay in property taxes per year," he said.

Patrick Curley, Barrett's chief of staff, said Friday that Clarke was talking about running for mayor as a diversionary tactic.

"He doesn't want to talk about his record as sheriff," Curley said. "His record is lousy."

Clarke faces at least one opponent. He is Chris Moews, a lieutenant with the Milwaukee Police Department.

Barrett closed 2013 with nearly $350,000 in his campaign fund. He raised about $206,000 last year, including $64,000 in the second half of 2013, according to the report he filed Friday.

The mayor's campaign fund spent about $21,000 more than it took in in the last half of the year.

Major payments went to campaign consultant G Strategies LLC.

These were the largest donation totals from individuals to Barrett's campaign in the six-month period ending Dec. 31:

John Duggan, construction consultant, The Concord Group, Milwaukee, $2,500; Pratap Singh, executive vice president, K. Singh & Associates, Elm Grove, $2,500; Ziad Salameh, principal-in-charge, ZS LLC, Milwaukee, $2,500; Daniel Lau, civil engineer, Camp Dresser & McKee Inc., Milwaukee office, $2,400; Jamil Bou-Saab, vice president, Terra Engineering, Chicago, $2,000; Karen Steingraber, president, Terra Engineering, Chicago, $2,000.

Camp Dresser & McKee (CDM Smith) employees donated at least $5,850. CDM is a global engineering and construction firm that has won contracts awarded by the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District.

Clarke's latest campaign report shows a balance of $11,000.