Lawsuit seeks to block county funds to repair Estabrook Dam
The Estabrook Dam on the Milwaukee River just south of Hampton Ave. is the subject of debate over whether the county should pay for repairs or demolish the structure Credit: Journal Sentinel files

By of the

The Milwaukee Riverkeeper is asking a circuit court judge to block the Milwaukee County Board from spending several million dollars in public funds this year on what the environmental group calls a private purpose: repairing the Estabrook Park dam on the Milwaukee River.

In a lawsuit filed Monday, the Milwaukee Riverkeeper says repairs will enable dam gates to be closed so that a large, shallow pond can be restored upstream solely for the recreational enjoyment of a small number of adjoining private property owners.

Repairing the deteriorated dam serves no public purpose and achieves no public benefits even though the project will cost $3.4 million to complete and an additional $2.2 million in operating and maintenance costs over the next 20 years, the lawsuit says. Repair costs include the addition of a fish passage around the north end of the dam.

The board-approved dam repair project is an improper use of public funds for a private purpose, the lawsuit says.

After 20 years, the dam would need to be removed or rebuilt "at great additional cost," according to the lawsuit.

Under state law, repairs to municipally owned dams that benefit private property owners must be financed and paid for with special assessments on the properties, according to the lawsuit. County officials do not intend to charge any special assessments for the dam project.

Repairs are scheduled to begin in late June if state environmental officials approve all permits and plans by mid-May.

The state Department of Natural Resources has scheduled a public hearing Tuesday in Glendale to receive public comments on the department's preliminary analysis of the environmental impacts of repairs, fish passage construction and proposed dam operating plans.

"Removal of the dam will cost far less than repair," an estimated $1.7 million for demolition compared to $3.4 million for repairs, and eliminate ongoing operating and maintenance costs, according to the lawsuit.

"If repaired, Milwaukee County residents will be footing the bill for this structure for the next 20 years, and maybe even beyond that, for the benefit of a few homeowners," Riverkeeper Cheryl Nenn said Monday. "With such a high price tag, we need to make sure that this is a project that truly benefits the public and the taxpayer."

Milwaukee Riverkeeper is an advocate for demolition of the 1930s-era dam on the border of Glendale and Milwaukee. The county Parks Department recommended removal in 2015.

County Executive Chris Abele, the Milwaukee Common Council, Shorewood Village Board and the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District's commission support removal.

County Board Chairman Theodore Lipscomb Sr. has justified the repairs for the purpose of restoring the artificial pond for upstream property owners, including about 40 properties in Glendale.

On Monday, Lipscomb said the lawsuit ignores the fact that the impoundment behind the dam extends upstream through two major public parks: Estabrook and Lincoln. Loss of the impoundment would alter public recreation in those parks, he said.

Dam removal guarantees several environmental benefits, according to Nenn, of Riverkeeper. Among them: better fish passage than repairing the dam; reduced flood risk to upstream property owners; elimination of the shallow, stagnant pond that would be held back by the structure; and improved water quality for fish, mussels and other aquatic life.

The dam has two structures: a dam with floodgates north of an island in the river and a fixed spillway south of the island. A line of ice barriers protects the gated dam.

Dam gates have been fully open since 2008 after state inspections found numerous safety problems and confirmed the need for extensive repairs.

The Riverkeeper subsequently sued the county. In 2012, a county circuit judge declared the dam a nuisance and required the county to repair the problems or demolish it.

The DNR gave the county a deadline of December 2016 for work — repair or demolition — to be done.

Public hearing and comments

The public is invited to comment on the Wisconsin DNR's draft environmental impact analysis of Milwaukee County's proposed repairs and operation of Estabrook Park dam.

Public hearing: 5:30 to 9 p.m. March 22 at Glenn Hills Middle School, 2600 W. Mill Road, Glendale.

Written comments accepted through April 6. Mail to: Kristina Betzold, Department of Natural Resources, 2300 N. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive, Milwaukee, WI, 53212. Send email to: DNREstabrook@wi.gov.