How Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett's proposed budget will affect you
Mayor Tom Barrett on Tuesday will deliver his proposed 2014 budget to members of the Common Council, a $1.44 billion plan he says demonstrates his commitment to economic development and public safety and stabilizing the city's neighborhoods.

The budget, the product of what Barrett called "a lot of heavy lifting," attempts to balance the desire for more economic opportunity with the need to set aside millions of dollars for more police services, reducing the city's growing inventory of tax-foreclosed homes and keeping the pension system healthy.

"If you look at the external forces that have befallen the city and other American cities, you are going to talk about the concept of whether cities can manage themselves," Barrett said Monday in an interview. "The sharp contrast is in Milwaukee. Careful, multiyear systematic changes have allowed us to get through the Great Recession without having our residents up in arms about the diminution of services or a significant increase in taxes."

The $1.44 billion budget is down $55 million from this year. The total proposed tax levy is $254.3 million, an increase of 1.6%, or $3.98 million. That's a city tax levy increase of $4.85 for the typical homeowner.

The average Milwaukee home is assessed at $103,229. While final tax rates for city purposes will likely change, the preliminary estimate is a tax rate of $10.61 for each $1,000 of assessed value. That's $1,095.26 for the average Milwaukee home.

The impact of the proposed increases to the tax levy and higher municipal service charges is an estimated $18.44 to the typical homeowner, or 1.3%.

One proposed change will affect many residents: eliminating the practice of sanitation crews grabbing your garbage and recycling carts in the cold-weather months and rolling them out to the street for collection. Ending the practice will reduce labor time and reduce the possibility of injury, city budget director Mark Nicolini said.

Here's the breakdown of proposed municipal service charges:

■ For property owners with one garbage cart, the annual solid waste fee will be $187 in 2014, a $7.20 increase.

■ Approximately 20% of city residents have two or more garbage carts. Those who do will be charged $15 a quarter for each cart after the first cart. The extra cart charge was $13 in 2013. There is no extra charge for additional recycling carts.

■ The proposed snow and ice control fee would be 85.5 cents per frontage foot, or $34.23 per typical property with 40 feet of street frontage. That is an increase of $1 a year above the current rate.

■ The proposed local sewerage charge rate will increase 4% to $1.34 per 100 cubic feet of water. The typical residential user pays $90.57 a year for local service.

■ The proposed local storm water charge per equivalent residential unit will increase 5% to $67.76 on an annual basis for one- to four-unit residential properties.

Barrett's budget, which will be vetted by aldermen over several weeks, includes his plan to hire 100 more police officers in two separate recruiting classes, and keep 50 officers who were hired with federal stimulus dollars on the payroll with city dollars. Cost estimate: $4.5 million.

The total proposed police budget is $243.7 million, $6.2 million more than this year.

Barrett also is proposing spending $11.7 million on a multiyear plan to stabilize neighborhoods rocked by 1,000 tax-foreclosed homes. Many of those homes are blighted and vacant and in need of demolition. Others would be rehabbed with the hope of selling them, city officials say.

The mayor also plans to move ahead with the city's partnership with Northwestern Mutual. The company hopes to begin construction next fall on a downtown office tower and hopes to add 1,900 jobs by 2030 at that location. Barrett also said economic development efforts will continue at the Reed Street Yards, Century City and The Brewery projects.

The budget also includes a sizable employer contribution for pensions: $61.6 million. Of that amount, $13.4 million will come from a reserve account.

Many cities, including Chicago and Detroit, are facing serious problems with underfunded pension systems. Milwaukee's system is in good shape, Barrett said.

The budget calls for no layoffs next year, and Barrett is calling again for three furlough days for all employees with the exception of firefighters.