Panel rejects much of Chris Abele's budget for sheriff's department
The Milwaukee County Board's budget panel Monday rewrote much of County Executive Chris Abele's overhaul of Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr.'s budget, including rejecting Abele's plan to pay nearly $1 million to have the Milwaukee Police Department take over patrols of the lakefront and other parks.

The board's finance committee voted 9-0 to dump Abele's proposals to make deep cuts in the sheriff's budget but agreed to restore only 15 of 25 deputy positions assigned to the sheriff's division that includes park patrols.

The panel also voted to reverse Abele's proposals to shift the sheriff's 911 emergency call system to a new county department, as well as the county executive's plan to relocate Clarke's unit for catching work release inmates in an electronic monitoring program who escape to the district attorney's office.

In another move, the panel voted unanimously to cut Abele's proposed $400,000 security detail budget for himself to $100,000. Abele has gone without security since he won the office in April 2011 but said he reluctantly had decided to ask for protection because of unspecified threats.

Although Abele had said he wanted to take bids from private security firms or local law enforcement for the security detail, the supervisors' version would assign the task to Clarke.

Raisa Koltun, an aide to Abele, told supervisors they weren't taking Abele's security request seriously. She said Abele would agree to having the sheriff provide the protection as long has he could select the deputy assigned to him.

Supervisor Jason Haas voted for the cheaper protection plan for Abele but said Abele had the financial wherewithal to pay for his own security.

The finance panel also revised Abele's plan to have the county contribute $350,000 to expand the City of Milwaukee's gunshot locator system, voting instead to give half that sum, or $175,000. The system, called ShotSpotter, uses sensors to help pinpoint where guns have been fired.