Tom Barrett's proposed 2016 budget would keep levy flat
Mayor Tom Barrett’s will present his budget proposal to Milwaukee aldermen on Tuesday. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE

By of the

Mayor Tom Barrett's proposed $1.55 billion spending plan for 2016 holds the city's tax levy at the current level and knocks more than a dime off the tax rate.

The budget also draws a line in the sand in what, with this year's homicide numbers spiking well beyond last year's, has already become a political issue in the 2016 mayoral election: police staffing.

While the proposed budget Barrett will present to aldermen on Tuesday would grow by $35 million, that increase would be covered by non-levy funding. The proposed levy is the same as last year's, $256.7 million.

The tax rate would drop 12 cents, from $10.71 per $1,000 of assessed value to $10.59.

That means the tax on a median-valued home of $104,000 would dip $13, to $1,101.

For the most part, fees would remain stable. Snow and ice removal would remain the same, $37.35. So would sanitary sewer, $93.28.

Despite a well-regarded intergovernmental recycling agreement between the city and Waukesha County, the average solid waste fee would nudge up $2.53, to $196.93. The fee would likely have been unchanged but for a cut in the state's recycling grant.

The average storm-water sewer fee would grow by $5.05, to $76.89.

In the Police Department's massive $278 million operating budget, a relatively small item has grabbed most of the attention. The mayor wants to spend $880,000 to equip 1,200 beat officers with body cameras.

Though some members of the public have expressed suspicion, the proposal has been welcomed by both Milwaukee Police Chief Edward Flynn and Milwaukee Police Association President Mike Crivello.

Two other items in the police budget go together like a carrot and a stick.

The carrot: Barrett would end furloughs, a longtime point of contention between the police union and the administration.

The stick is two-pronged. The budget would allow the department to hire only enough new officers to keep its sworn force at its current strength, 1,880, which Crivello has said is not enough; and the city will ask police officers to contribute to their pensions.

"We've taken the meaningful first step by canceling the furloughs for police," the mayor said in an interview.

"In exchange, what we are looking for is for all of them to pay toward their pensions, as all general city employees do and a majority of police do around the state of Wisconsin."

The pension issue gives Barrett a response to those such as Ald. Bob Donovan, a candidate for mayor, who have cited the city's murder rate as reason to add more officers to the force.

If police contributed to their pensions, Barrett said, "it would not be difficult to fund 20 additional officers."

Barrett called the coming debate "an equity issue."

"We have to resolve this disparity, where sanitation workers, who have some tough working conditions, and public health nurses, who have some tough working conditions, contribute to their pensions," he said.

"For those who want to add police officers, I think it's important to put that in context," Barrett said.

"Those who have been most vocal about the furlough days, those who have been most critical about the staffing levels, have been entirely silent about the pension payments."

Here are some other highlights from Barrett's proposed budget:

Libraries. Hours will remain the same, and the city will move forward on the Forest Home and Mill Road library projects.

City Hall. It's sinking. The mayor calls it "The Leaning Tower of Milwaukee." The city would spend $13 million in 2016 as it begins on the northeast end to shore it up.

Health. The budget includes $345,000 for lead abatement.

The city would continue its trauma informed care effort. Also, with an eye to Minneapolis' success, Milwaukee would add two positions to the Health Department to coordinate citywide efforts to address youth violence.

"This is geared more toward community engagement, community involvement, providing services so that we can have larger groups working on youth violence," Barrett said.

Streets. The city would re-top 22 miles of streets through its high impact paving program and replace 15 miles of streets using traditional methods.

Storm water. The city, working with Milwaukee County, would spend $1.5 million at Dineen Park on the north side and $2.8 million at Copernicus Park on the south side to reduce basement flooding in surrounding neighborhoods.

Neighborhoods. The budget directs $10.9 million toward Milwaukee neighborhood revitalization and stabilization programs, such as loans, demolitions and accelerated foreclosures on abandoned houses.

"We are making sure the neighborhoods know we are investing in them, that they are as important to me as any other part of the city," Barrett said.