150 years and transit's condition is 'guarded'
It's like having a birthday party for someone who's in the hospital. This summer, the Milwaukee County Transit System marks the 150th anniversary of public transit in Milwaukee, but, given the system's dire financial condition, the celebration has been, to say the least, muted. As much as transit supporters want to honor the occasion, their first concern has to be the health of the patient, and the prognosis in this case is guarded.

Although its current maladies are serious, they shouldn't overshadow the transit system's central role in Milwaukee's history. Even before the city's population crossed the 50,000 threshold, there was demand for some form of mass transit. "The city that is without its street railroads now-a-days," wrote the Milwaukee Sentinel in 1859, "is regarded by travelers as being decidedly behind the age."

It was one of Milwaukee's founding fathers, George Walker, who answered the call. In 1859, he organized the River and Lakeshore City Railway and laid a ribbon of tracks on the east side of the Milwaukee River. His first horse-drawn cars rumbled down Water St. on May 30, 1860 - exactly 150 years ago last Sunday.

Like most of his other ventures, the railway failed to make money for George Walker, but the idea had such promise that three horsecar companies were in operation by 1880, running nearly 100 cars on 30 miles of track. All were in business to make money - a nickel at a time - and there were no transfers between lines. In Milwaukee and elsewhere, mass transit began as private transit.

Horsecars may have beat walking, but they had some definite disadvantages, including slow speeds and mountains of manure that fed a staggering pollution problem. A growing number of Milwaukeeans wanted "rapid transit" that had nothing to do with hooves and harnesses, and a technological revolution made it possible. The city's first electric streetcars appeared on W. Wells St. on April 3, 1890 - racing downtown, the Milwaukee Sentinel reported, like "streaks of lightning on roller skates." Within months, every line in the city was electrified.

Urban mass transit was suddenly a growth industry, and businessmen elsewhere began to hatch dreams of empire. One of their first projects was the North American Company, a New York-based conglomerate that focused its early efforts on Milwaukee. Soon after it was launched in 1890, North American began to buy up the overlapping streetcar lines and mismatched power plants that constituted the city's electric service. They were combined in America's first unified utility, an 1896 creation called The Milwaukee Electric Railway & Light Co., or TMER&L. We know the firm today as We Energies.

TMER&L's leader was John I. Beggs, a penny-pinching autocrat whose stated goal was to give Milwaukee "an ideal system of street car transportation." He did just that, growing the rail network from 130 miles of city track in 1896 to 376 miles stretched across southeastern Wisconsin in 1911.Annual ridership soared from 28 million to 132 million during the same period, and the utility's profits routinely topped $1 million a year.

Beggs and his successors weathered financial panics, political opposition and periodic labor troubles to build the system, but a new technology forced them to practically start from scratch. When automobiles began to take over the city's streets in the 1920s, TMER&L experienced stagnant ridership and shrinking transit profits. Hoping to stem the tide, the company began to operate gasoline buses in 1920, and trackless trolleys - buses tethered to overhead wires - made their debut in 1936. Year by year, the system's balance shifted from steel rails to rubber tires.

Although mass transit was a mandated public service, TMER&L finally concluded that there was more money to be made on the power and light side of the business.

In 1938, the utility spun off its transit system as a free-standing subsidiary. The Transport Co. came into being with low expectations and proceeded to meet every one of them.

Although World War II pushed ridership to record levels, the long-term trend was shrinkage and disinvestment. The system was put on the block in 1947, and, to the dismay of transit officials, not a single bidder stepped forward - not even the city of Milwaukee, whose Socialist mayors had long campaigned for public ownership.

It was not until 1952 that a consortium of private investors took the system off the utility's hands. They modernized the fleet (retiring the last streetcar in 1958) and operated with modest success for nearly two decades. By 1975, however, the system was in such distress that it was purchased, with major federal assistance, by the people of Milwaukee County. Public transit was finally and officially public transit.

The Milwaukee County Transit System prospered as a public enterprise. With up-to-date equipment, convenient routes and reasonable fares, MCTS held its own in competition with the automobile, and the industry's leaders noticed. In 1987 and again in 1999, the system earned recognition as the best in America.

MCTS was a marked success for a quarter-century, but the news since 2000 has been unrelentingly bad: a woeful tale of service cuts, fare hikes and shortsighted financial decisions. Faced with a gaping hole in their budget, system officials even diverted federal money intended for equipment purchases to operating expenses.

It's no accident that the system's steepest decline has coincided with the administration of County Executive Scott Walker. Since taking office in 2002, Walker has demonstrated a remarkably one-dimensional approach to the business of government. He resembles a doctor who has a single cure for every disease: amputation. "Cut, cut, cut," Walker cries, and once-proud institutions, from our transit system to our parks system, shrink for lack of funding.

Even after a majority of his constituents voted for a sales tax increase to fund transit in 2008, the one-trick pony of Wisconsin politics refused to budge.

He was aided, ironically, by Gov. Jim Doyle, a Democrat, who vetoed legislation authorizing the increase. It was imperative, Doyle argued, to find a regional solution for our transit problems. But what's the point of new service between counties when mass transit in the state's largest county faces such challenges? It's like building a bridge across a river whose banks are crumbling into the water.

Although the trends are ominous, our transit system has been able to open a couple of birthday presents in 2010. More than $25 million in federal stimulus funds will pay for 45 new buses, and Scott Walker has made an election-year promise to increase county support for the system. Based on past behavior, however, neither offer is likely to be repeated, and a long-term solution remains as elusive as ever.

Although congratulations are mixed with commiseration, the men and women who operate our transit system and pilot its buses have reached a major milestone this year. From horsecars to steel rails to rubber tires, they and their ancestors have been moving Milwaukeeans for 150 years, and their efforts have been critical to our community's growth.

So happy birthday anyway, Milwaukee County Transit System, and may there be better birthdays ahead.

John Gurda, a Milwaukee historian, writes for the Crossroads section on the first Sunday of each month.