The power of second chances
Wisconsin Lt. Gov. Rebecca Kleefisch: She is advocating help for prisoners to ensure they become productive citizens once released. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE

By

Earlier this week, I received a letter from Todd, an inmate at one of our state's correctional institutions. I don't know what Todd is in for, but I do know what he's hoping to do when he's out. Todd tells me that he's an apprentice in a CNC machining class and that he's excited for his new job as soon as he returns.

Todd is one of the 97% of prisoners who will be returning to our communities at the conclusion of his sentence — very few people are given a life sentence. The overwhelming majority of those inside prison will be back on the outside, returning to our neighborhoods and communities. The question for us as policy-makers is: What can we do to set them up for success, so that they make good life choices that put them on the path to being productive members of society rather than returning to a life of delinquency and dependency?

We know what sets up someone for success upon re-entry: family, friends, a job, housing and the life skills you need to operate in modern society. And the policies we make as government can equip people to make the right choices when they're back outside. Let me give you a few examples.

Thanks to our Wisconsin Fast Forward program, Racine Correctional Institution is partnering with Gateway Technical College to offer CNC machining classes in a mobile tractor trailer turned classroom. Milwaukee Area Technical College is offering special night classes for inmates to learn CNC machining. These are great programs because a machinist averages about $43,000 or more a year in Wisconsin. I've been privileged to speak at graduations for these programs and have heard firsthand from real people the confidence, enthusiasm and optimism they feel. They can move their lives forward and put the past behind them.

Jobs are important — essential even — for successful re-entry, but a supportive community of family and friends is equally vital. Last year, I presented a Read to Lead grant to Kettle Moraine Correctional Institution, which used it to buy DVDs so that fathers could read books to their children on tape and then the kids could read along with dad at home. Fostering ongoing relationships eases the transition when a family member returns to the home after years away in an institutional setting.

Jobs and family, community and accountability — these are the touchstones of successful re-entry, a topic I discussed in depth earlier this week in remarks to the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The reason I'm passionate about this topic is because I see the difference it makes in the lives of people like Todd.

Here's how he closed his letter to me: "I know that I have a lot of people who don't yet trust me, but in time I will prove myself that because of my treatments, schooling and most of all God, I am never going back, but just forward to positive things."

For Todd and so many others, prison is what it must be — a punishment for violating the rules of our society — but it also can be a springboard to a better life.

Rebecca Kleefisch is lieutenant governor of Wisconsin.