Johnson leads race for GOP Senate bid
Election 2010

Political newcomer Ron Johnson's rapid rise to front-runner status in the Republican field for U.S. Senate has reduced the outcome of September's primary election to a formality in the eyes of political insiders.

The Oshkosh businessman's badly underfunded rivals in the run-up to a November matchup with Sen. Russ Feingold have little hope of getting their message out widely, but their critique of Johnson could carry into the general election.

Dave Westlake, an intense former Army officer also making his first bid for public office, says Johnson's personal riches from years as a business owner leave him out of touch with common concerns.

Westlake, campaigning as a hard-line conservative and self-described constitutional purist, has pounced on Johnson's repeated need to clarify his own bluntly conservative views as evidence that he is not ready for prime time. A favorite of some tea party groups, Westlake has highlighted Johnson's decision to limit his exposure to the open-ended candidate forums held by those groups.

Milwaukee plumber Stephen Finn, a last-minute Republican entry, says Johnson needs to offer more specific prescriptions on core issues such as balancing the budget.

"He gives you a reason not to vote for Feingold but no reasons to vote for him." Finn said. "He speaks in generalities."

Johnson, by his own account, was slow to offer specific policy positions to match up with his outspoken views on government spending, climate change, health-care reform and job creation. He has tried to make a virtue out of his "rookie" status as a campaigner, saying he is learning as he travels the state.

As for his ability to relate to people's concerns, Johnson says he is in tune with unhappiness over federal deficit spending. He has promised to trim the sails slowly but surely, though he has offered few specifics. A government downsizing, he says, will help the average Wisconsinite's pocketbook and job prospects.

This is a guy with opinions, strong ones: the notion of man-made global warming is "lunacy;" President Barack Obama's health-care reforms are "the greatest threat to our personal freedom in my lifetime."

Johnson entered the race just before the GOP convention in May, and was not slickly packaged for broad public consumption. He has made up for lost ground, showing off a self-assured style and a CEO's quick-study skills. His well-financed campaign has quickly ramped up efforts to introduce him and to portray Feingold as an out-of-touch Washington insider, big spender and career politician.

Focus on Feingold

Johnson's personal wealth, combined with fund raising, puts him in a position to go toe-to-toe with Feingold. The pair already have traded many charges in statewide ads, and polls show a virtual dead heat. Feingold has ripped Johnson as a wealthy elitist who would rubber stamp a Republican agenda that is out of the mainstream.

Along the campaign trail, Johnson's plain-spoken style also has put him on the defensive repeatedly.

Johnson has found himself explaining or modifying his statements on gun rights, global warming, selling BP stock, taking government aid for his company, and the business climate in China compared to the United States. He also got tangled up on the issue of drilling for oil in the Great Lakes. He left the first impression that he did not oppose it, before coming out aggressively against it as Feingold aired an ad on the subject.

One of Johnson's strengths is his biography.

He stresses, above all, his private sector experience of watching a bottom line and creating jobs at Pacur Inc., the plastic packaging firm he runs in Oshkosh.

Johnson says career politicians such as Feingold deepened the crisis by trying to stimulate the broken economy in 2009 with a $780 billion recovery package of what he views as misguided tax cuts, insufficient infrastructure spending and wrongheaded bailouts for state and local governments. His campaign has tried to tie Feingold directly to the stimulus bill by pointing out instances around the country where Johnson feels money was wasted.

An accountant who helped build a business would know better, Johnson says.

Supporters of Johnson sometimes use the phrase "self-made man" to describe him, saying he started a business from nothing. Johnson himself says he's never said that. He acknowledges that he signed on to a family business with a ready-made major customer connected to the family when Pacur got going in 1979.

Pat Curler is Pacur's namesake and Johnson's brother-in-law. He is a member of the business family that over the past several decades has turned Neenah-based packaging giant Bemis Co. into a multinational force.

Firms associated with the Curler family still provide more than $9 million of annual business to Pacur, SEC filings show.

Curler was president of Pacur at its birth. Johnson married into the Curler family after meeting Jane Curler in Minnesota, where he was in school.

"It was an opportunity for Pat to get into business for himself, and I just kind of came along for the ride as the accountant," Johnson said in May.

Johnson said his early role was crucial and his responsibilities grew rapidly. He later rose to become general manager before buying the company back in the late 1990s from an international firm that had acquired it.

"I bought it in 1997, me and my immediate family," Johnson said.

Pacur employs about 120 workers in a modern non-union plant.

Grass-roots run

Westlake, of Watertown, began campaigning in 2009 and is the sole survivor from a group that once included Madison-area developer Terrence Wall and (very briefly) former state Commerce secretary Dick Leinenkugel.

Westlake, who sports orange ties and shirts in an echo of red-vested GOP insurgent Lee S. Dreyfus three decades ago, has attracted a dedicated core of volunteers, but has raised very little to fund a traditional statewide campaign.

He polls fairly well in hypothetical matchups with Feingold, though, and is trying to use social networking to transmit his patriotic rhetoric and uncompromising hard-right views to a broader audience.

Westlake is relentlessly optimistic about his chances of beating the odds against him. He says that Johnson would just be the latest wealthy candidate to fall to Feingold, who is seeking a fourth term.

It didn't help that his partner in a small printing supplies company sued him in mid-August, alleging mismanagement and improper use of a personal line of credit. Westlake has denied the allegations, which stem from his ownership of a fledgling company called High IQ.

Finn may have the best claim to common-man status. He's been mostly unemployed since early 2009, and he is on the verge of losing his south side Milwaukee home to foreclosure.

He's developed detailed views on a variety of issues, but has had trouble getting invited to campaign events. Finn first surfaced at the filing deadline for nomination papers in July.

The primary is Sept. 14.

Stephen M. Finn

Age: 44

Address; time in state: Milwaukee; lifelong state resident

Occupation: Master plumber

Elective offices: None

Other government experience: None

Education: Milwaukee Technical High School

Family: Married, one child

Ronald H. Johnson

Age: 55

Address; time in state: Oshkosh; state resident since 1979

Occupation: Owner and president, Pacur Inc., Oshkosh

Elective offices: None

Other government experience: None

Education: Bachelor's degree in business administration/accounting, University of Minnesota; attended University of Minnesota graduate school, 1977-'79

Family: Married, three children

David B. Westlake IV

Age: 36

Address; time in state: Watertown; 31 years

Occupation: Co-owner, High IQ LLC, Watertown

Elective offices: None

Other government experience: None

Education: Bachelor's degree in environment science and environmental engineering, U.S. Military Academy at West Point; MBA, University of Chicago Booth School of Business

Family: Married, three children