Assembly sends equal pay measure to Doyle
Madison - Employers that violate equal pay laws would face punitive damages in court, under a bill passed Wednesday by the Assembly and sent to Gov. Jim Doyle.

Doyle supports the bill and is expected to sign it.

The bill sparked a vigorous and sometimes emotional debate in the Assembly, but it ultimately passed 51-47 after clearing the Senate with a party-line 18-15 vote Tuesday. Democrats control both houses.

Opponents argued that it will put an added burden on employers and make it harder for them to create jobs.

But supporters said it's necessary to enforce laws that require men and women to be paid equally and questioned why there even was a debate about whether to punish employers for practicing discrimination. The bill would apply to businesses and state government agencies with more than 15 employees.

"This bill is a long time coming," said Rep. Christine Sinicki (D-Milwaukee), who co-authored the bill with Sen. Dave Hansen (D-Green Bay).

The pay gap for Wisconsin women has gotten wider in recent years, according to the Wisconsin Women's Council.

Research by the Center on Wisconsin Strategy shows that the state's women now earn about 77 cents on the dollar compared with men, down from the 78 cents on the dollar that Wisconsin women earned in the 2008 report, the council said.

Opponents said it would discourage job creation by putting an additional burden on employers, especially small businesses, and sought to fix a problem that had already been addressed.

"We have laws against discrimination, and they should be pursued and enforced," said Rep. Jeff Stone (R-Greendale). "What we don't need to do is pile on . . . and create an environment that discourages entrepreneurism."

Maximum punitive damage awards would vary according to the size of the business.

Under the bill, maximum punitive damages for a business with 16 to 100 employees would be $50,000; 101 to 200 employees, $100,000; 201 to 500 employees, $200,000; more than 500 employees, $300,000.

Business leaders have said a punitive damage award of $300,000 would be the nation's highest.

Damages paid would be in addition to attorney fees and other costs judges could award.