Walker touts frugality in first TV ad
In his first TV ad in the race for governor, Milwaukee County Executive Scott Walker tells voters he has returned part of his salary to taxpayers because of his belief in limited government.

"My wife was like, 'We're doing what?' " the Republican says in the spot. "But we believe that government spends too much and that included my salary."

The 30-second ad comes 2 ½ weeks after Republican rival Mark Neumann became the first candidate for governor to hit the airwaves. Walker's ad begins running statewide Thursday.

Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett, a Democrat, has not run any ads and has said he did not expect to spend money on television as early as Walker and Neumann.

Walker's ad, shot in his Wauwatosa home, says he returned $370,000 to taxpayers over eight years. It casts him as frugal and directs voters to BrownBagMovement.com, a site that touts his fiscal tightness by mentioning he packs his own lunch every day.

The full pay for Walker's job is $129,611 a year. He returned $60,000 annually in the years following his 2002 election, but scaled that back to $10,000 a year after his April 2008 re-election - a change that prompted criticism Wednesday from Mike Tate, chairman of the state Democratic Party.

"Scott Walker promised to give back 47 percent of his pay and then broke that promise in each of the last two years," Tate said in a statement. "He also makes noises about working for the people who eat their lunches out of brown bags, while the tax cuts he proposes would benefit only the richest one percent of Wisconsinites."

Walker's ad does not mention he's running for governor. Keith Gilkes, Walker's campaign manager, said voters will be well aware of what office he is running for by fall.

Neumann, a homebuilder and former congressman from Nashotah, has run two ads and is debuting a third Friday.

In his new ad, Neumann does not mention his Republican affiliation, but instead describes himself as a conservative.

"Some days, it's hard to tell Republican insiders from liberal Democrats," Neumann says. He closes the 30-second spot with: "Let's start a revolution, let's take Wisconsin back."

Neumann's campaign manager, Chip Englander, said Walker's move to the airwaves is a response to Neumann's TV spots.

"It's not surprising that Walker is finally responding with his first ad. He's in trouble because we're on offense and he's on defense," Englander said in a statement.

Gilkes said Walker's campaign has long intended to run ads at this stage, regardless of Neumann's plan.