Russ Feingold says ad blaming him for VA inaction is misinformed
Democrat Russ Feingold (left) on Wednesday pushed back against a third-party ad that accused him of ignoring problems at the troubled Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center. He is challenging Republican Sen. Ron Johnson (right) in a rematch of their 2010 race. Credit: Journal Sentinel files

SHARE

By of the

Former U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold pushed back Wednesday against an advertisement that accused him of ignoring problems at the troubled Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

A third-party group, Wisconsin Alliance for Reform, placed the full-page ad in Tuesday's Green Bay Press-Gazette with a tagline: "When leaders fail to take action, deadly consequences can follow."

The advertisement claimed "Feingold received a memo outlining the over-prescription of narcotics to veterans." Five years after the 2009 memo was written by a union official, a 35-year-old former U.S. Marine named Jason Simcakoski died from a mixture of medications while being treated by doctors at the facility.

The 2009 memo came from Lin Ellinghuysen, president of the American Federation of Government Employees local at Tomah. It was addressed to another union official, Ben Balkum, and marked as being "hand-delivered" to Feingold, then a U.S. senator, as well as U.S. Rep. Ron Kind and then-Rep. Dave Obey.

"The ad claims that somehow our office knew about this. That's not true," Feingold said during a campaign stop in Milwaukee. "There's no record in our office at all that we knew about it. Rep. Kind says the same thing about his office. Apparently someone was intending to give the information to our office, but there's no record that we ever got it. So it's not true."

Ellinghuysen told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel that she made an error in marking the memo as being hand-delivered to the Democratic lawmakers. She said she made an assumption but that the deliveries did not occur.

Ellinghuysen said the print ad was "not truthful."

Chris Martin of Wisconsin Alliance for Reform defended the advertisement.

"All we have to go on is what she provided," Martin said of Ellinghuysen's handwriting on the memo.

Feingold said his Republican opponent, U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, is the "guy who dropped the ball" on problems at the Tomah VA.

In 2014, Johnson's staff failed to refer a whistleblower's complaints about the Tomah facility to a U.S. Senate oversight committee.

Feingold noted that Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin fired one aide and disciplined others for mishandling complaints about the troubled facility. For months, Baldwin's office took no public action on an inspector general's report that detailed problems at the facility.

Feingold said Johnson did not punish any members of his staff. Johnson defeated Feingold in 2010. The two men are in a rematch U.S. Senate race.

Even though the advertisement came from a third-party group, Feingold said "this is an attempt obviously of someone who is in a bad position."

Johnson's campaign disputed Feingold's assertions.

"Senator Feingold can play the blame game if he wants, but Ron took action as soon as he personally learned about the problems at the Tomah VA, and will remain focused on his work," said campaign spokesman Brian Reisinger. "Ron is leading the only bipartisan investigation of what happened, as chairman of the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, and is working to pass legislation to protect whistleblowers who try to prevent tragedies like this from happening in the first place."