DOT puts brakes on 5 major road projects in budget crunch
SHARE I-39/90 through Janesville is seen from a state Department of Transporation highway camera.

By of the

Madison — The state Department of Transportation is delaying five major road projects for at least two years because it doesn't have the money for the work under the state budget crafted by Gov. Scott Walker and his fellow Republicans in the Legislature.

The delays — including on some stretches that already have orange barrels on the road — could end up being longer because legislators for years have been unable to come up with ways to find new revenue for highways.

The delays on the five projects will likely have a cascading effect that will push off work on future projects, but the department hasn't said what those could be.

Among the stalled projects are a major interchange in Madison, expansions in the Fox Valley and the widening of Interstate 39/90 from the Illinois state line to Madison.

The delays will cause the cost of the projects to rise because of inflation. Estimates of the added costs are expected in February.

Work on the projects won't stop, but it will slow down.

Officials have the ability to tap into an additional $350 million that could mitigate the delays but so far haven't done so.

Walker wanted to borrow a record $1.3 billion over two years for transportation, but GOP lawmakers said that was too much. In a compromise, they agreed to borrow $500 million initially. The department was given the ability to ask for an additional $350 million, which would be released with the approval of the Legislature's budget-writing Joint Finance Committee.

The department hasn't asked for the additional bonding, and Senate Republicans have expressed reluctance to release it even if the department asked.

Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) plans to discuss issuing additional bonding with Walker and Assembly leaders in a meeting this week, said his spokeswoman, Myranda Tanck. In a written statement, she noted Senate Republicans "have had concerns about the level of proposed transportation bonding throughout the budget process."

The delays surprised Sen. Roger Roth (R-Appleton), who told WHBY-AM this month he did not expect any delays on Highway 10/441 in the Fox Valley. The highway is being expanded and reconstructed between Highway 41 and Highway 47.

But the $482 million project is one of those the DOT is pushing back, putting off its completion until 2021. Construction began last year, so drivers will have to put up with road work on that stretch for at least seven years under the revised schedule.

"Everything we'd been hearing over the course of the summer was the 441/10 project was going to be a main focus and priority for them," Roth said of the DOT on Tuesday.

He said he was unsure if he would support issuing additional bonds to get the project back on track, saying the state had to balance road building with its overall debt load. He noted he doesn't sit on the budget committee that has the power to issue the extra bonds.

"That is a decision that I don't get to make," Roth said.

Sen. Jon Erpenbach of Middleton, a Democrat who sits on the budget committee, said he backed issuing the additional bonds and urged Walker to call a special legislative session to address long-term funding for roads.

"In the end, it's very bad for our economy to do that," he said of the delays. "And it's only going to cost more."

The five projects will face two-year delays, said DOT spokeswoman Peg Schmitt. But that time frame assumes lawmakers will inject more money into roads in the future.

If they don't, the delays will be even longer.

Republicans for years have said they want to put more money toward roads, but have rejected raising gas taxes and registration fees.

"We're very concerned about what kind of impact these delays have obviously on the construction industry, on the industries that supply and support our industry. But we're also concerned about the impacts they have on the various parts of the state and their local economies," said Pat Goss, executive director of the Wisconsin Transportation Builders Association.

In addition to Highway 10/441, the department is delaying:

■ Widening I-39/90 from four lanes to six from the Illinois state line to Madison. Construction on the $1.2 billion project began this year and was to be finished in 2021. Now, it won't be done until at least 2023.

■ Expanding and reconstructing the Verona Road Interchange on Madison's Beltline and the surrounding area. The $251 million project, begun in 2013, is having its completion date moved from 2019 until at least 2021.

■ Reconstructing 11 miles of Highway 15 near New London in Outagamie County. Preliminary work has been done on the $148 million project, which runs between Highway 76 and Highway 45. Completion is being delayed until at least 2021.

■ Improving Highway 23 between Fond du Lac and Plymouth. The $151 million project has already been put on hold because of litigation by environmentalists.

The project was to begin next year, but the DOT agreed this summer to reopen its environmental review because of a lawsuit brought by 1,000 Friends of Wisconsin.

The project could get restarted with the approval of U.S. District Judge Lynn Adelman in Milwaukee. But even if OK'd by the judge, Highway 23 will remain stalled because of DOT's latest plans.

Schmitt gave 2020 as a tentative date for completion of that project.