Railing against college debt, Warren fires up Feingold rally
Madison — Russ Feingold may be the Democrat running for U.S. Senate in Wisconsin in 2016, but it was U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) who dominated the stage Saturday when she laid out a liberal vision for the country in a rousing speech before hundreds of students at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Warren backed Feingold, criticized his Republican opponent in next year's race, U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, and made the case that students need help in dealing with crushing loans for college.

With the nation's $1.3 trillion in outstanding student loan debt, more taxpayer dollars to support state schools are needed, Warren said.

"Every student needs a debt-free option to get a college diploma, period," she said.

She dished out tough words on Johnson, attempting to tie him to Charles and David Koch, politically influential conservative industrialists.

"Ron Johnson believes that the Koch brothers are going to buy this race. He thinks that billionaires will decide who is going to be the senator from Wisconsin," she said. "All I can say is we have news for him."

Warren said Johnson voted with most other Republicans in the U.S. Senate to block her efforts to help students refinance their college debt at a lower interest rate. To pay for her measure, Warren would have raised taxes on the wealthy.

"Your current senator, Ron Johnson, is one of the guys out front to make sure that when the choice is between tax loopholes for billionaires or reducing the interest rate on student loans, Ron Johnson stands strong for the billionaires," she said.

A Johnson campaign spokesman said Warren's appearance ties Feingold to the liberal wing of the Democratic Party.

"Feingold and Warren's ultra-partisan rhetoric and big government giveaway proposals remind Wisconsinites why they voted him out of office in 2010, and will keep him from returning in 2016," Brian Reisinger said.

Regarding student loan debt, Reisinger said Johnson has supported legislation that stabilized interest rates.

"Unlike Senator Feingold, Ron is willing to confront the tough challenge of making college more affordable," Reisinger said.

Talking about loans on first dates

Warren drew the loudest cheers as she outlined Democratic goals, including strengthening Social Security, backing immigration reform and boosting the minimum wage.

"We believe that workers have a right to come together," she said, her voice drowned out by the audience.

For his part, Feingold focused on student debt. A UW graduate, he said he paid $451 in college tuition as an incoming freshman who lived in Sellery Hall in August 1971.

In travels across Wisconsin, Feingold said, people expressed great concern about the cost of higher education. Feingold said one student even told him that students talk about college loans on first dates.

"We need a better ice breaker for kids," he said.

He said student debt nationally is "an economic crisis."

"I believe it is our moral responsibility that you can get a start in life yourself," he said. "I believe it is a denial of the American dream that you have to put up with this."

After the speech, Warren waded into the crowd, posing for photos and talking with students.

Jen Bizzotto, a first-year law student, looked on and shouted toward Warren: "Tell me how to be you."

"She has the substance behind the rhetoric," Bizzotto told a reporter.

James DePolas, a freshman, said, "I think she would be a great presidential candidate. She is standing up for us."

Earlier, Warren participated in a fundraiser for Feingold at a private home in Middleton. Donations ranged from a minimum of $100 per person up to $5,400 for a top-tier sponsorship for four people.