Ron Johnson defends vote against VA funding
SHARE Ron Johnson

By of the

In an interview with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel Thursday, U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, a Republican from Oshkosh, defended his vote against a bipartisan measure to address scheduling problems at Veterans Affairs facilities but vowed to continue to work to fix what he called a broken system.

"The finest among us deserve the best quality health care system," Johnson said. "They need to be able to access it and access it in time."

On Wednesday, Johnson was one of only three Senators to vote against the legislation that would allow the VA to contract with private medical facilities, enabling veterans facing long waits to get quicker treatment. The VA would also be able to use $500 million from its current budget to hire more medical staff.

Democratic Party of Wisconsin chair Mike Tate ridiculed Johnson's vote.

"Tea Party embarrassment Ron Johnson is so blinded by his devotion to a radical, Ayn Rand-ian brand of extremism that he cast one of only three votes against a measure to help veterans get the health care they need and deserve," Tate said in a statement.

Johnson detailed his reservations with the legislation in the interview and a detailed statement he released Wednesday. He said he preferred another bill that he co-sponsored that would provide "common sense reforms," including the ability for veterans to receive treatment outside the VA system.

Johnson blamed Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) for rushing "a different bill onto the floor of the Senate without even an estimate of costs."

He said the Senate should have delayed the vote after finally receiving a "pretty jaw-dropping piece of information" from the Congressional Budget Office.

Johnson said the CBO "came back and said just the first two years would cost $35 billion, and every year after that $50 billion."

The bill will be taken up in the House and is expected to be finalized in a House-Senate conference.

"Hopefully, we'll come up with a bill that actually fixes the problem, that doesn't mortgage our children's future further...," Johnson said.

"I want to fix the problem and I think the best way to fix it is that we give veterans the ability to exit the system if they're not given quality care in a timely manner or if they're too far from a VA system" facility, Johnson added.