GOP leaders debate how to cut taxes with $912 million in extra money
Republican Assembly Speaker Robin Vos said Thursday he likes the idea of using the state’s 16 technical colleges or its 72 counties as vehicles for cutting property taxes and returning most of the surplus to taxpayers. Credit: Scott Bauer

SHARE

By of the

Madison — As the Legislature's budget office Thursday projected the state will take in $912 million more than previously expected through the summer of 2015, Republicans launched their debate on how — and how much — to cut taxes.

The state will close its 2013-'15 budget with $1.04 billion in its main account, up from the $130 million that was previously expected, the Legislative Fiscal Bureau reported.

Meanwhile, the top lawmaker in the Assembly, Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester), argued for using as much of that money as possible for a property tax cut and delivering the cut through the state's 16 technical colleges or its 72 counties.

That would mark a change from a smaller, $100 million property tax cut being distributed through K-12 schools that was approved in October. The effects of that cut vary widely by school district because of the complexities and quirks of the school funding formula.

"The method is still being discussed, but my preference is to have it go to something that gives a reduction to every (property) taxpayer, not just some," Vos said in an interview Thursday.

Gov. Scott Walker has said he wants some of the money to go to property tax cuts, but a spokeswoman cautioned Thursday that no decisions have been made on how to make those cuts.

The governor said in a statement that he's working with lawmakers on a plan.

"The additional revenue should be returned to taxpayers because it's their money," Walker said. "The days of billion-dollar deficits and double digit tax increases are over, and we have led ourselves into a new era of financial responsibility and continued investment in Wisconsin's priorities."

Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) said many Senate Republicans want to ensure they have enough money set aside to ensure the next two-year budget starts in good shape. That two-year budget, which would begin in July 2015, by one measure faces a $725 million shortfall.

Senate Republicans will support tax cuts, but they are still reviewing whether they want to put the focus on property taxes or income taxes, Fitzgerald said.

Senate President Mike Ellis (R-Neenah) said he wants to keep money on hand to soften or eliminate the structural deficit in the next budget, and also wants to provide a property tax cut of as much as $100 to $200 per bill.

But Ellis also cautioned that lawmakers need to be mindful that the growth in tax collections could be just a short-term boon.

"We need to be a little careful," Ellis said.

The fiscal bureau reported that the bulk of the projected surplus — $893 million — came from higher-than-expected tax revenue. In addition, agency spending and cost-saving measures came in $37.6 million better than expected, but fees and other revenue raised by agencies came in $18.4 million below expectations.

State law requires that half the extra tax collections in each of the budget's two years, $443 million in total, be deposited in the state's rainy-day fund to help cover emergencies. That fund currently has about $279 million in it, enough to cover spending from the state's main account for about a week.

However, any state tax cuts passed by lawmakers would decrease the required deposits to the rainy-day fund by lowering the amount of extra tax money that comes in.

Not everything in the fiscal bureau report was rosy. The report, for example, doesn't account for a projected $93million shortfall in the state's Medicaid health programs for the needy or a projected $18.9 million shortfall in the state's welfare-to-work program.

In an opinion column submitted to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, David Riemer, a former budget director for Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle, urged state officials to fix those shortfalls first.

"A responsible homeowner would never install a hot tub (however enjoyable that would be) before fixing a leaky roof or replacing a broken furnace," Riemer, now part of the liberal Community Advocates Public Policy Institute, wrote along with his colleague Mike Bare.

The report showed the transportation fund would end the budget cycle with $83million more than originally expected but warned that account faces a $336.2 million shortfall in the next two-year budget.

On top of that, another $775 million will be needed during that period to pay for the Zoo Interchange and Hoan Bridge, though the Department of Transportation will bond for part of those Milwaukee-area projects.

As the Journal Sentinel first reported Wednesday, Walker will detail in next week's "state of the state" speech a plan to cut property taxes and reduce how much is withheld in income taxes from workers' pay throughout the year. The withholding changes would mean that Wisconsin residents would see more money in each paycheck upfront rather than in their spring income tax refunds.

The news comes as the governor and lawmakers head into their fall re-election campaigns.

Vos said Thursday that he would prefer to use a different form of local government than schools to distribute the cut to property taxpayers. That's because the state formula for distributing aid to schools provides very different amounts of state money to each district depending on their property tax base, number of needy students and so on.

That means that some taxpayers benefited more than others from a $100 million cut to school property taxes in October, Vos said.

Assembly Minority Leader Peter Barca (D-Kenosha) said he agreed with Vos that the state's formula for funding schools isn't a fair way to distribute property tax cuts.

"I'm glad he recognizes the error of their ways. There were a lot of districts that got absolutely nothing," Barca said.

This fall, Democrats argued for putting the property tax credit into the so-called First Dollar Credit and would prefer that method, Barca said. That credit, averaging about $67 currently per parcel, goes toward each property that has a structure, such as a home.

Barca said that he was open to sending more state aid to technical colleges to lower property taxes, but he also wanted to let the colleges use some of that money to train workers and offset past cuts.

Property taxes are levied mostly by schools and local governments, rather than the state. To cut them, Walker and lawmakers last fall gave more state aid to schools but required they cut their property tax levies by the same amount — thus reducing the size of property tax bills that went out in December.

Walker said Wednesday his approach to this latest property tax proposal would be similar though not identical.

In an interview last month, Walker floated the idea of removing technical colleges from the property tax rolls in future years. To do that, the state would have to substantially boost the aid it gives the technical colleges, shifting costs from local governments to the state.

The total statewide property tax levy by technical colleges in December 2013 was $797 million, according to to the fiscal bureau. Of that, $615 million was for the colleges' day-to-day operations and $182 million was to cover debt for large investments such as buildings and equipment.

The amount taxed by technical colleges varies widely, from $1.25 per $1,000 of property value for Wisconsin Indianhead Technical College in northwestern Wisconsin to $2.48 for Western Technical College in La Crosse.

Other tax cuts also are being considered by GOP lawmakers.

Vos last month endorsed a plan to create limited sales tax holidays in August and November — one for computers, clothes and back-to-school supplies and one for energy-efficient appliances. The Assembly leader supports pairing that tax change with a proposal to eliminate the alternative minimum tax, which is levied against tax filers with large numbers of deductions.

Twitter: twitter.com/patrickdmarley and twitter.com/jasonmdstein