Walker rejects full Medicaid expansion, says 224,000 more to be covered
SHARE Click image to enlarge.

By of the

Madison - The state would turn down a full expansion of the BadgerCare program under the federal health care law, but 224,600 more state residents would still gain coverage as the law takes effect, under a proposal unveiled Wednesday by Gov. Scott Walker.

Speaking to an audience of hundreds at a meeting here of business lobby Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce, Walker said his plan would cover somewhat fewer people than a full expansion of Medicaid as provided under the federal health care law, which he said would cover 252,700 people, or 28,100 more than his own approach. But the Republican governor said that his proposal, which shrinks state health programs by a few thousand patients, would reduce the role of government in people's lives and make them more independent.

"Some people will portray this as not caring about people. I think it's just the opposite. I care too much about the people of this state not to empower them to control their own destiny," Walker told the audience.

The governor's plan involves allowing extremely poor adults without dependent children to enroll in BadgerCare while shifting those adults in the program with somewhat higher incomes into a federal marketplace scheduled to debut in 2014. His plan would not add to Medicaid spending, but would also forgo the short-term savings in the program that the state would realize if it did a full expansion, the governor said.

Walker said that the state would not force people out of Medicaid if the exchange fails to start on time in January.

Democrats and advocates for the uninsured said Walker should have chosen to expand Medicaid by taking the full federal funding that is being offered for three years under the federal health care law.

U.S. Rep. Ron Kind, a La Crosse Democrat who sits on the House Ways and Means Committee, said that the federal money was in place and Walker was "putting politics before people in Wisconsin."

"I do not foresee a better deal being offered to Wisconsin or any other state in our lifetime," Kind said.

Walker's health secretary, Dennis Smith, said in a conference call with reporters that the changes would not be applied to the elderly and disabled who are served by Medicaid but would be put in place for those who qualify for the program based on income.

The changes would mean an estimated 87,000 people would be dropped from Medicaid and have to get insurance from the exchanges. At the same time, projections show 82,000 who currently don't qualify for Medicaid would become eligible for the program.

The net result is that the state would provide Medicaid to 5,000 fewer people, according to the estimates. But over the next two years, state taxpayers would have to put an additional $650 million into Medicaid because of rising costs, Smith said.

He said the changes would ensure that the state was providing services for the most needy while allowing others to access insurance through the exchanges. The proposal needs to be approved by lawmakers and signed into law by Walker, and then approved by federal authorities. Smith said he was confident the federal government would sign off on it, given its past guidance.

Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills), co-chair of the Joint Finance Committee, said Walker was taking the right approach. She said she worries federal money now available for a Medicaid expansion could be withdrawn in future years.

"There's no certainty with the federal government," she said.

Jon Peacock, research director of the Wisconsin Council on Children and Families, said Walker was taking credit for the federal government's expansion of coverage.

He said the governor's proposal would push tens of thousands of Medicaid recipients into the private insurance marketplaces being set up under the federal health care law. Peacock said he feared some of those adults wouldn't have enough income to buy coverage through the federal system and would lose their health care.

A single person with income at the poverty level set by the federal government - $11,490 a year - would pay a maximum premium of $228 - or $19 a month - for the coverage through the exchanges. A family of four with income just above the poverty level - $23,550 - would pay a premium of up to $468.

Walker said last year that the state would not seek to partner with the federal government in setting up those marketplaces, known as exchanges, in Wisconsin. The governor said Wednesday that the proponents of those same exchanges shouldn't complain if he turns to them now.

"Nineteen dollars a month isn't an unreasonable amount," Walker said. "Any reasonable conclusion shows that it's extremely affordable."

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said he shared Walker's skepticism of a Medicaid expansion and how much money the federal government might provide for it.

"I have always been very leery about taking a promise from the federal government at face value," Vos said.

So far, six Republican governors, including those in Ohio and Michigan, have agreed to the Medicaid expansion, while 14 have turned it down. Nationally, 19 states plus the District of Columbia appear to be on track to expand their Medicaid programs, although some governors are encountering opposition from their state legislators.

Groups representing Wisconsin hospitals and community health centers support the expansion, as do advocates for the uninsured. But conservatives such as Walker and other GOP leaders have been wary.

Last week's memo from the Legislative Fiscal Bureau made a preliminary estimate that the state would save $66 million in the first three years, but then end up over the next four years paying back those savings and up to $67 million more because of increasing costs to the state. However, those state numbers are dwarfed by the federal money available - a projected $4.38 billion, or 66 times the state's investment - to provide health care through 2020.

The costs of Medicaid are shared by the state and federal government, with federal taxpayers picking up just under 60% in Wisconsin.

But from January 2014 through the end of 2016, the federal health care law covers the full cost of expanding Medicaid coverage for adults with incomes of up to 133% of the federal poverty level. Starting in 2017, the coverage for those new enrollees drops gradually, reaching 90% of its initial coverage by 2020.

President Barack Obama's administration has advised states that the 100% federal funding would not be available for Medicaid expansions that stop short of those called for under the federal health care law. But federal officials have said they would consider approving requests such as Walker's with the usual 60% matching funds.

Robert Laszewski, a consultant with Health Policy and Strategy Associates LLC, said that a Medicaid expansion would provide offsetting savings to states like Wisconsin by reducing the indirect cost shifting to health insurers and employers for uncompensated care of the needy in emergency rooms.

Laszewski, a former insurance executive who is critical of the Affordable Care Act, also said the governor's contention that the federal government could lower its contribution in future years holds for all federal money.

"Then don't take highway money. Don't take education money," he said. "Don't take any federal money. Of course they (federal government) can renege."

***

87,000

Estimated number of people dropped from Medicaid who would need to get insurance from exchanges

82,000

Estimated number of people who currently don’t qualify for Medicaid but would become eligible for the program

$650 million

Additional money state taxpayers would have to put into Medicaid because of rising costs over the next two years

Journal Sentinel reporters Guy Boulton and Patrick Marley and The Associated Press contributed to this report.