Firm says businesses will pay more for Wisconsin highway signs
Madison — Gas stations, hotels and fast-food restaurants could pay more — perhaps significantly more — to advertise their businesses on familiar blue highway signs, under a new contract the state Department of Transportation plans to issue.

The company that has taken care of the signs for nearly three decades is fighting the move, saying the department's decision to give the work to an out-of-state vendor will cost Wisconsin businesses nearly $10 million over the 12-year life of the contract.

The state defends its bidding process and said the winning company's costs are not final and could be lower after negotiations with the DOT.

For 28 years, Milwaukee-based Derse-Wisconsin Highway Business Signs has run the program that tells drivers what restaurants, gas stations and hotels are available off interstate exits. Derse charges businesses to put their logos on the blue signs, so the program does not cost the state anything.

In December, after analyzing proposals, the DOT decided to award the work instead to Interstate Logos, a subsidiary of billboard giant Lamar Advertising Co. Interstate Logos and its affiliatesrun the blue-sign program in every other state — 22 in all — that contracts for such work. (In the remaining states, the departments of transportation directly run their sign programs.)

Derse is trying to overturn the decision, saying the change will add costs to most businesses. The company plans to submit a formal protest to the state Department of Administration this week, is encouraging its customers to call Administration Secretary Mike Huebsch to complain and on Monday launched a "Save Our Signs" page on Facebook.

Derse charges businesses based on the number of signs they use. For its next contract with the state, it was proposing to charge $21 a month for signs along the interstate and $10 a month for signs along exit ramps. Interstate Logos proposed charging $46 per month for signs on the interstate, with no additional charge for signs on ramps.

In short, businesses that need only interstate signs would pay more than twice as much under Interstate Logos' proposal. Businesses that need both interstate signs and ramp signs would pay 48% more under Interstate Logos' plan.

Businesses that have interstate signs in both directions — but no ramp signs — would pay $600 more a year.

"This is a great deal for Interstate, but a very bad deal for Wisconsin businesses," attorneys for Derse wrote in a filing last month opposing the DOT's decision.

Whether the prices proposed by Interstate Logos will materialize isn't clear, however. Denise Solie, DOT's business management administrator, said the department will now enter negotiations with Interstate Logos to determine what prices the firm will charge. The final contract could include prices lower than what Interstate Logos proposed, she said.

"It's premature," she said Tuesday. "We don't know what the costs are going to be because we haven't negotiated them yet."

Floyd Williams, president of Interstate Logos, directed questions to the DOT because the agency oversaw the procurement process. He declined to comment on Derse's criticism about his company's prices.

Don Carroll, vice president and general manager of the Baraboo Candy Co., said Derse helped his company qualify for the blue sign program as an attraction about a year and a half ago.

A price increase of 50% would be disappointing because it likely wouldn't come with additional service, he said.

Carroll said he feared giving the work to a company headquartered in Louisiana would cost Wisconsin jobs — a move that he said conflicted with Gov. Scott Walker's declaration that the state is "open for business."

"It doesn't seem Wisconsin is open for business — his motto," Carroll said. "It seems we're farming more things out then bringing (business) in."

The competition for the new contract was tight, with just 22 points on a 1,000-point scale separating the two vendors. Interstate Logos scored 848 points and Derse 826 points.

The contract is to be good for 10 years, with a possible two-year extension.

Derse filed a protest with the DOT last month for its plan to award the contract to Interstate Logos. The department last week rejected the protest, and Derse plans by Thursday to submit another challenge to the process with the Department of Administration, according to the company.

In its initial protest, Derse contended the work should not go to Interstate Logos because it was not registered as a business in Wisconsin at the time it submitted its proposal and did not appropriately quote its prices to DOT.

It also argued Interstate Logos runs a monopoly and could further jack up prices in the future. It noted the company charges as much as $200 per month for signs in some states.

"Interstate can charge these exorbitant rates...in other states because Interstate has done there what they plan to do here — drive competition out of existence," Derse's attorneys wrote in their initial protest.

In response, Transportation Secretary Mark Gottlieb wrote that the methods the department used to seek proposals and analyze them were fair. He maintained Derse had not shown the department violated any specific laws or procurement rules and said pricing was just one of many factors used to grade the two companies' proposals.

Interstate Logos as a business is now registered with the state, and it was allowed to submit its proposal to the DOT before doing that, Gottlieb wrote. He noted the DOT has the ability to approve what fees the vendor charges businesses for the signs, which will prevent price gouging.

"Derse was the sole provider of the (sign) program for many years and held the same monopolistic position in Wisconsin that it now finds objectionable," Gottlieb wrote.

Derse contended the DOT "changed the rules of the competition" by allowing Interstate Logos to offer bundled prices — that is, to include the cost of the ramp sign with the cost of an Interstate sign. Derse argued the DOT had told vendors they needed to detail costs for each type of sign they would make available to businesses.

Gottlieb responded that Interstate Logos had provided prices for all signs, but that it was simply charging no fee for certain types of signs. "This meets the criteria state in the instructions... as $0 is a price," he wrote.

Twitter: twitter.com/patrickdmarley