Fitzgerald: Scott Walker would sign abortion bill without exemptions
Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald says the Republican governor doesn’t want exceptions for rape and incest included in the bill that would ban abortions after 20 weeks. Credit: Associated Press

By

Madison— As he prepares to launch a presidential bid, Gov. Scott Walker wants a 20-week abortion ban to come to his desk soon, and he doesn't want it to include exemptions for rape and incest, according to one legislative leader.

Another top lawmaker who met with Walker on the issue could not recall whether the governor specifically asked that the bill leave out such exceptions.

The state Senate passed the bill without exemptions this month and Assembly leaders are now determining when to pass it. Both houses are controlled by Walker's fellow Republicans.

Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) told The New York Times that in a meeting Walker had asked that the measure not include the exemptions. Fitzgerald spokeswoman Myranda Tanck confirmed Tuesday that Fitzgerald made those comments to the Times.

In an interview, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said he did not recall Walker specifically saying he wanted such exemptions left out of the bill, but Walker would sign the bill whether they were included or not. Vos said the meeting occurred a month or two ago.

"I think it's fair to say that he did not have to have exceptions for rape and incest," Vos said of Walker's comments.

Vos said his caucus has not decided when to take up the bill or whether to amend it to include the exceptions. Lawmakers — who are in a stalemate over transportation and other budget issues — are weighing whether to take up the abortion ban this summer or put it off until the fall.

The budget is supposed to be complete by the time the new fiscal year starts July 1, but lawmakers and Walker appear sure to miss that deadline. There is no immediate crisis if the budget is late because funding for state programs continues at existing levels.

Vos said lawmakers are making progress on the budget and he is optimistic they will finish it soon. But, he added, "We could be here all summer."

Walker spokeswoman Laurel Patrick said it is common for Walker to call for legislative action, as he did in the case of the abortion ban. But she did not answer whether Walker had asked that exemptions specifically be left out of the bill, as Fitzgerald said.

Walker said in an open letter in March that he was willing to sign a 20-week abortion ban after repeatedly declining to spell out where he stood on the issue in last year's re-election campaign.

This month, he said he would sign it regardless of whether it had exceptions for rape and incest. He said he thought people were concerned about rape or incest "in the initial months" of a pregnancy.

But he has avoided publicly addressing whether he thinks such exceptions would be a good idea.

The bill would make it a felony to perform abortions after 20 weeks after fertilization except when the life of the mother is in immediate danger. Doctors who do would face up to 31/2 years in prison and a fine of up to $10,000.

Wisconsin Right to Life and other backers of the measure say it is intended to prevent abortions at the point that fetuses feel pain.

The Wisconsin Medical Society and other opponents say fetuses cannot feel pain at that stage of development and the ban would prevent abortions in instances where severe fetal anomalies develop.

Similar laws have been struck down in some other states because of U.S. Supreme Court rulings that protect the right to abortion until viability, which is generally 24 weeks of gestation.