Recalls this year cost taxpayers more than $14 million
By of the

Madison - The recall election against Gov. Scott Walker and a related primary together cost state and local taxpayers more than $14 million - less than originally expected but still a hefty unbudgeted expense.

The rough totals for the May 8 recall primary and the June 5 general election were put together by the Government Accountability Board and included both the state elections agency's own costs and those of local governments.

Previously, the accountability board had estimated the state and local costs for the two elections would reach $18 million. The somewhat lower costs were no consolation to Rep. Robin Vos (R-Rochester), a supporter of the GOP governor who is seeking to limit future recall elections to cases of misconduct in office.

"I'm more committed than ever to recall the recalls in the state of Wisconsin. It's an outrage that (this money) was wasted on these unnecessary elections, with most of the financial burden on local governments," Vos said.

Both Walker and Lt. Gov. Rebecca Kleefisch won their recall elections, becoming the first governor and lieutenant governor in the nation's history to do so. Democrats did win one state Senate recall election also held on June 5, giving them narrow control of the state Senate at least through the November elections.

Labor and other recall groups gathered more than 1 million signatures to force recall elections for Walker, Kleefisch and three GOP state senators following the governor's approval of a law repealing most collective bargaining for most public employees. The recall groups said their effort and the resulting costs were needed to make their voices heard as voters.

The May 8 recall primary cost local taxpayers $6.3 million, and the June 5 recall cost local taxpayers nearly $7.2 million. State taxpayers paid an additional $663,000 for the accountability board's costs.

The recall elections were not out of line with the cost of other statewide elections. For instance, the April 3 presidential primary cost $7.6 million for local governments. The difference for the recalls is that they were not a regularly scheduled election and local officials hadn't budgeted for them.

A separate round of Senate recall elections last year cost state and local taxpayers $2.1 million, the accountability board has estimated.