Scott Walker defends Wisconsin economy in trip to Minnesota
By

St. Paul, Minn.— Likely GOP presidential candidate Scott Walker hopped across the border Thursday to mingle with Minnesota Republicans and, while there, discounted suggestions that Wisconsin's economy has performed worse in his time as governor than its Democratic-led neighbor.

Walker's closed-door session with legislators — and later gatherings with top business leaders and a conservative group — come as he nears an announcement on a White House campaign after taking several preliminary steps toward a bid, including hiring staff and taking repeated trips to states with early primaries.

His economic stewardship of Wisconsin is certain to draw attention if he runs. Walker maintained that his state has made significant gains since he took office and insisted that any unfavorable comparison to Minnesota's performance required context.

"You've had the advantage of other than a two-year period of having Republicans in charge of at least one part of government for some time. Before we came into office, for many years there was a Democrat governor, a Democrat assembly and a Democrat Senate," Walker said, noting the state's peak 9.2% unemployment rate before his election in 2010 and its 4.6% standing now.

"You look at where we were at, where we started and where we're at today, there has been a dramatic change," he told reporters following his meeting with GOP lawmakers.

Minnesota's jobless rate has consistently been lower than Wisconsin's but also it never climbed as high during the Great Recession. Minnesota's unemployment rate has also tumbled from above 7% at Gov. Mark Dayton's first election to 3.7% now.

At Marquette University Law School on April 10, Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald spoke glowingly about Minneapolis and St. Paul.

"The Twin Cities are kicking our butt," Fitzgerald said. "We see Minnesota flourishing because of the Twin Cities."

Fitzgerald, a Juneau Republican, said Wisconsin is inextricably tied to the fortunes of Milwaukee.

For that reason, the Milwaukee Bucks and public officials must strike a deal to fund a new arena in downtown Milwaukee, which would boost the fortunes of the city, he said.

Fitzgerald made the comments at "On the Issues" with Mike Gousha, distinguished fellow in law and public policy, who hosts the show.

Wisconsin has trailed the national average in private-sector job growth since six months after Walker took office. He fell short of a signature campaign promise to create 250,000 private-sector jobs, although 145,000 new positions appeared, and Wisconsin ranked 40th nationwide in private-sector job growth in the 12-month period ending in September.

As he tours the country, Walker has boasted that new businesses are starting up in Wisconsin at a higher rate than the rest of the country and that income growth for residents exceeds the national average.

Democrats seized on Walker's visit to Minnesota to draw distinctions between the two neighboring states, saying Wisconsin is lagging under the Republican governor's leadership.

"Scott Walker's economic vision is a complete and total failure," Democratic National Committee Vice Chairman R.T. Rybak said in a conference call with reporters.

Rybak said Walker had "eviscerated public education in Wisconsin" and "deeply divided the state."

Walker's trip to Minnesota is just the latest trip for the likely presidential candidate as he crisscrosses the country in advance of an official decision about the 2016 race.

Walker has said he won't make a formal decision until after the state budget plan in finished. His two-year spending plan is currently being considered by the Legislature's Joint Finance Committee.

On Friday, Walker will be attending a fundraiser for U.S. Rep. Rod Blum (R-Iowa) in Cedar Rapids and one for county parties in Sheldon in northwestern Iowa. On Saturday, he will be in the Des Moines area for a fundraiser for U.S. Rep. David Young (R-Iowa) and an event hosted by the Iowa Faith & Freedom Coalition that features numerous potential presidential candidates.

Mary Spicuzza, Patrick Marley and Lee Bergquist of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.