Scott Walker backs GOP plan to overhaul civil service system
Madison— Just three days after ending his presidential run, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker sought to reassert his conservative credentials Thursday by backing a proposed overhaul of the state's civil service system for 30,000 employees, saying its safeguards against political patronage in hiring and firing state workers need to keep up with the times and the crush of retiring baby boomers.

Four years after repealing most collective bargaining for most public employees, Walker and two top Republican lawmakers are seeking to: eliminate the state's civil service exams, replacing them with a résumé-based system for merit hiring; stop allowing longtime employees to avoid termination by "bumping" other workers with less seniority out of their jobs; and shorten by more than half the process for employees to appeal their dismissal or discipline.

"The process to protect merit is still there, even in the reforms you're proposing," Walker told Assembly Republicans in a half-hour meeting Thursday. "Those legitimate, merit-based protections are all completely in place, but it gets rid of some of the nonsense."

More than a century ago, good-government groups engineered the civil service system as a way to place qualified workers in taxpayer-funded jobs and weed out partisan hacks. The bill's authors, Sen. Roger Roth (R-Appleton) and Assembly Majority Leader Jim Steineke (R-Kaukauna), argued it's become too rigid and slow to allow the state to operate efficiently and hire the best new workers before other employers snatch them up.

"We can't afford to be working with the same rules as we have for 100 years," Steineke said. "If you don't make (hiring) decisions in a few weeks, people are generally gone, especially as the job market picks up as the economy improves."

Major civil service rewrites or even eliminations have been showing up in other states and sometimes passing in recent years. This Wisconsin proposal is sure to get heavy scrutiny, given that controversy has surrounded all GOP actions on the state workforce since Act 10, Walker's 2011 repeal of most collective bargaining for most public workers in Wisconsin.

At the time, the governor said unions weren't needed to protect public workers from politics because the civil service system would continue.

The Walker administration has been contemplating changes to the civil service system since at least last year, saying hiring workers too often takes months to achieve. Walker's administration secretary at the time, Mike Huebsch, told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel in June 2014 that the administration was not considering changes to bumping, but the Roth and Steineke bill would end that practice.

Senate Minority Leader Jennifer Shilling (D-La Crosse) didn't see the proposal as a sure deal for taxpayers.

"The repeal of civil service protections is an invitation to more corruption in a Republican administration that continues to be plagued by scandals, cronyism and special interest influence," Shilling said.

Over the past decade, the Journal Sentinel has regularly reported on cases in which applicants with ties to Democratic and Republican politicians were hired for plum jobs.

Brian Deschane, the 27-year-old son of a prominent Walker supporter with no college degree and two drunken driving convictions, resigned from his $81,500-per-year state job in April 2011 following public criticism over his appointment. Three months earlier, the newspaper reported that at least a dozen political appointees of then-Democratic Gov. Jim Doyle had found permanent state jobs in the months before Walker was sworn in as governor in January 2011.

During his re-election campaign for governor last year, Walker didn't directly respond to a request from the Journal Sentinel to lay out his position on the civil service system. His challenger, Mary Burke, said she was open "to updating our civil service protections and policies" to address the problem of an aging workforce.

Roth and Steineke said they intended no changes to the core of the civil service system that grew out of Progressive Era reforms and sought to stifle Tammany Hall-style patronage in which politicians rewarded their party's supporters with jobs and left taxpayers with the bill.

"We fully embrace the civil service system," Roth said. "To think that (patronage) wouldn't happen again, political cronyism, if we get rid of it, is naive."

The lawmakers said there's a growing need to hire workers quickly and effectively in state government because 23% of state workers will be eligible for retirement within five years and 40% in 10 years.

Republicans have already made changes in recent months, eliminating the Office of State Employment Relations as part of the state budget and replacing it with a new Division of Personnel Management in which Walker can appoint the person responsible for the state's merit hiring rules.

Walker said he knew of cases of state employees spending large parts of their days watching pornography but said they couldn't be fired under state rules. He also said two state employees couldn't be fired even though they had had sex in state facilities, and a parole agent couldn't be terminated after being caught doing drugs with a parolee.

"Most people in this state look at that and say, 'That just doesn't make any sense. That's nonsense. We've got to fix that,'" Walker said in his meeting with Assembly Republicans.

Assembly Minority Leader Peter Barca (D-Kenosha) said the state should not tolerate such behavior from its employees but predicted the legislation would go much further than Republicans were claiming.

"I think when you see that bill, your jaws will drop," Barca said.

One of the examples Walker cited was of a Shawano probation and parole officer who was fired in 2004 for viewing pornography and other inappropriate websites on his work computer for more than five hours a day for months. An arbitrator reinstated him to his job in 2005 after finding that the Department of Corrections had given others light punishments for misusing state computers.

The governor also spoke of a short-order cook who did well enough on the civil service exam that he had to be interviewed for a financial examiner job in 2013, though he did not get it.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) and Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) said they expected to pass the legislation this fall or early next year. Both houses are controlled by Walker's fellow Republicans.

Union officials expressed deep skepticism of the plan and said if Republicans want to attract and retain employees they shouldn't have cut their take-home pay and eliminated collective bargaining and other job protections.

"These rules exist to ensure state employment decisions are based on what you know, not who you know. Any changes coming from a governor who is clearly obsessed with silencing workers, punishing foes and concentrating his own political power should be viewed with alarm," said a statement from Rick Badger, executive director of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees Council 32.

The latest proposal won't be released until next week but the legislators said it would:

■Drop the exams that job candidates for state government are often required to take in favor of a résumé system.

■Make the new personnel division within the Department of Administration responsible for all hiring rather than individual state agencies.

■Define "just cause" for firing employees to make it clear that the state could dismiss employees for showing up to work drunk, being physically violent, engaging in sexual harassment, stealing taxpayer goods or not showing up to work for three days in a year with no notification.

■Shorten the appeals process by more than half for employees being disciplined or fired, which can last up to a year and a half.

■Require an annual performance review of all state workers and set aside $6 million for merit pay bonuses.

■End the ability of senior employees to bump less tenured colleagues out of jobs in the event of layoffs.

The American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees arose out of an attempt by Democrats who had won the 1932 elections to roll back the state's 1905 civil service law to make way for more political patronage.

Wisconsin isn't the only state reconsidering this legacy of the Progressive Era — Colorado, Arizona, Florida and Georgia have all made changes in recent years.