Scott Walker's plan to borrow nearly $1 billion, hire 700 workers hits speed bumps
Madison - On the first day of state budget briefings Tuesday, Assembly Republicans again signaled they are troubled by Gov. Scott Walker's plan to borrow nearly $1 billion and add more than 700 workers to the state payroll over the next two years.

"I don't think you probably put on your brochure we're going to grow the size of government," Rep. John Nygren (R-Marinette) told Walker's administration secretary, Mike Huebsch.

Nygren is the co-chair of the budget-writing Joint Finance Committee and his comment came as the panel began its monthslong review of Walker's proposed budget. The committee will work on the budget through the spring and then advance it to the Legislature, which is expected to act on it by the end of June.

The Legislature is controlled by Walker's fellow Republicans, and lawmakers' concerns over bonding and the number of state workers will figure heavily in their deliberations. The committee is made up of eight senators and eight representatives, but the Assembly Republicans were the most vocal on those issues Tuesday.

Huebsch, a former Assembly speaker, said the additional jobs are essential and concentrated in the departments of Revenue, Transportation and Health Services.

Adding auditors and agents at the Department of Revenue would allow the state to collect more money and ensure fairness in taxation, Huebsch said.

Hiring engineers - the Department of Transportation wants to take on 180 more - is necessary because state jobs at that agency have been "cannibalized in recent years," he said.

More workers are needed at the Department of Health Services to comply with new federal rules, such as the federal Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, according to Huebsch.

The Department of Transportation contends it would net $5.6 million in savings over two years by hiring engineers and others because state employees cost less than private consultants. Nonetheless, the DOT would continue to contract for much of its engineering work.

In fiscal year 2011, more than 70% of engineering projects were outsourced, Transportation Secretary Mark Gottlieb said in a recent interview. Hiring the 180 employees would bring that down to 63% - the same level as 2009, but still above the 56% of projects that were outsourced in 2002, Gottlieb said.

"We believe adding these positions gives us additional technical expertise," Gottlieb said in the interview.

Gottlieb's agency is to brief the committee on its proposed budget Wednesday. Almost all the money Walker wants to borrow would go toward transportation projects, such as the Zoo Interchange and the Hoan Bridge in Milwaukee, Huebsch said.

"You need to invest in those projects if you're going to make sure your infrastructure is strong," Huebsch told the committee.

He also noted interest rates are low, which he said meant the state could purchase money while it is "on sale."

But lawmakers said they were concerned that increased debt payments would gobble up the transportation budget.

"While money is 'on sale,' I don't see that (debt service) line bending down," Rep. John Klenke (R-Green Bay) told Huebsch.

Rep. Dean Knudson (R-Hudson) said he, too, was bothered by the amount of borrowing Walker proposed.

"We're making a big increase (in borrowing). Do you see this as a one-time increase?" Knudson asked Huebsch. "Do you see this as the new normal. . . . What I'm getting at is the sustainability of it."

Huebsch said he saw higher borrowing as temporary, saying the state was making "once-in-a-generation-type expenditures" for major projects.

"I don't necessarily believe this is the new normal because there are a finite number of projects you can do," he said. "There's a limit to the number of projects you can do."

But Klenke suggested a longer term plan for transportation funding is needed.

"It just seems to me that in the long range we're always going to have roads to repair and projects to do," Klenke said.

In an interview, Klenke said he wants to find ways to increase funding for transportation. He noted that tax increases are "off the table in current conversations" but said there may be ways to find some additional money within the state budget for road projects.