U.S. Supreme Court upholds Obamacare subsidies on 6-3 ruling
What does the Supreme court ruling mean for Wisconsin? Patrick Marley and Daniel Bice give their thoughts.

By

In a ruling that preserves health insurance for millions of Americans, including an estimated 166,000 people in Wisconsin, the U.S. Supreme Court has upheld a key provision in President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act, averting potential chaos in the market for insurance sold directly to individuals and families.

Thursday's 6-3 decision maintains subsidies established by Obamacare to help low- and middle-income people buy health insurance in more than 30 states, including Wisconsin, that opted not to set up their own online marketplaces under the law. Those states instead have relied on the federal government to operate their marketplaces.

Nationally, 10.2 million people have signed up for health insurance on the state and federal marketplaces. That includes 8.7 million who are receiving average subsidies of $272 a month to help pay their premiums. Of those receiving subsidies, 6.4 million were at risk of losing that aid because they live in states that did not set up their own insurance marketplaces.

Groups representing health systems, physicians, health insurers and community health centers in Wisconsin applauded the decision.

"The loss of premium assistance would most certainly have triggered a large increase in the number of uninsured," Eric Borgerding, president and chief executive of the Wisconsin Hospital Association, said in a statement. "The disruption to our health care system and broader insurance markets would have been substantial."

Health systems throughout the state have seen a drop in their bad debt expense as more people have gotten insurance through the marketplaces and Gov. Scott Walker's expansion of BadgerCare Plus, the state's largest Medicaid program.

But opponents of the law, including Walker, remain committed to changing or repealing it.

"Today's Supreme Court ruling upholding the administration's implementation of Obamacare means Republicans in the House and Senate must redouble their efforts to repeal and replace this destructive and costly law," Walker said. "From the beginning, it was clear that Obamacare would fail the American people, and this has proven to be true across the country and in Wisconsin."

Walker and other opponents have said that many people are paying much higher insurance premiums because of regulations imposed by the law.

In Wisconsin, the insurance subsidies are available to people with incomes between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty threshold — $11,770 for an individual and $95,400 for a family of four this year — and who are not offered affordable health insurance from an employer.

In all, about 183,000 people in Wisconsin have bought health plans on the marketplace, with about 90% of them receiving subsidies.

"Premium subsidies are an essential part of the market created by the Affordable Care Act, and eliminating the subsidies would have threatened access to those on the marketplace," said Phil Dougherty, senior executive officer of the Wisconsin Association of Health Plans, which represents health insurers based in Wisconsin.

The law's requirements that health plans accept people with pre-existing medical conditions, that individuals have health insurance, and that subsidies be made available are all interconnected, Dougherty said earlier this week.

"They allow the market to function," he said. "You remove one of those — premium subsidies — and the system doesn't work."

R.J. Pirlot, executive director of the Alliance of Health Insurers, which represents many of the large national health insurers operating in the state, said the court ruling would provide more certainty for insurers.

The Wisconsin Medical Society, the state's largest group representing physicians, supported the Supreme Court's decision but said improvements to the law still are needed.

"The challenge before us is to maintain and improve upon the provisions in the Affordable Care Act that are working and to change those that are not," said Rick Abrams, chief executive of the medical society. "The goal is always to provide the highest quality, most cost effective care for all Americans regardless of their economic situation in life."

Abrams had warned earlier in the week that losing the subsidies "would throw everything into disarray."

"The progress we have made in insuring more people will be compromised at best and totally lost at worst," he said.

But Abrams also stressed that Congress should focus on improving the law.

"The Affordable Care Act is not perfect," he said. "It has good components, and it has other components that need to be fixed."

One common criticism of the law is its requirement that health insurance must cover a package of essential benefits. Another is the law's complexity and the subsequent onslaught of rules and regulations.

Those rules, which still are being written, have put a significant administrative burden on businesses, said Charlie Stevens, a lawyer who specializes in employment law at Michael Best & Friedrich.

At the same time, he doesn't expect the country to go back to where it was before the Affordable Care Act.

He noted that many of the provisions in the law are popular. They include requiring health insurers to cover people with pre-existing health problems, allowing children to remain on a parent's health plan until they are 26 and eliminating lifetime limits on benefits. And the insurance industry has adapted to many of the new requirements.

"We are in a different place now," he said.

Like Abrams, Stevens hopes Congress will look at what is working and what isn't in the law. He would like to see more flexibility, for instance, in how health plans are designed.

The lack of flexibility also frustrates the National Federation of Independent Businesses.

Bill G. Smith, the state director for the group, said the law doesn't do enough to control health care costs and that the association remains disappointed in the Affordable Care Act.

"Did we really need to have all this law — the mandates and taxes — to help people buy health insurance?" Smith asked.

Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the majority opinion in support of the law. He was joined by Justices Anthony Kennedy, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. Roberts was the key vote to uphold the law in a previous challenge in 2012, and he apparently played a similar role in this case.

Dissenting this time were Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito.

At issue was wording in the Affordable Care Act that said subsidies would be available to people who purchase insurance on exchanges "established by the state." Opponents challenged whether that meant subsidies should be disallowed in states that did not set up their own exchanges — Wisconsin among them.

Roberts said the text and structure of the law made clear that Congress intended the insurance subsidies to be available nationwide.

"Had Congress meant to limit tax credits to state exchanges, it likely would have done so in the definition of an 'applicable taxpayer' or in some other prominent manner," he wrote. "It would not have used such a winding path of connect-the-dots provisions about the amount of the provision."

Eliminating the subsidies in states with federal exchanges "could well push a state's individual market into a death spiral," he wrote.

In a dissent he summarized from the bench, Scalia said, "We should start calling this law SCOTUScare," using the "SCOTUS" acronym for the Supreme Court.

Health insurers that have committed to selling plans on the marketplaces were particularly relieved by the ruling.

Security Health Plan has sold 30,000 health plans on the marketplace in Wisconsin, and an estimated 98% of the customers are receiving federal subsidies.

Many of them would be unable to afford health insurance without the subsidies, said Marty Anderson, director of consumer marketing for Security Health Plan, an affiliate of Marshfield Clinic.

Anderson said he's also happy he won't have to be monitoring the doings of the Supreme Court so closely.

"It's been an interesting ride," he said.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.