Wisconsin officials discuss streamlining civil service rules
Madison — Three years after repealing most collective bargaining for Wisconsin's public workers, Gov. Scott Walker and his appointees want to remove red tape that slows hiring for state jobs — protections that union officials see as safeguards against political patronage.

In recent months, administration officials told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel multiple times that they weren't looking to change the state's century-old system for placing qualified workers in public service and weeding out partisan hacks.

But when the newspaper received records through the state open records law detailing the early-stage discussions, state officials acknowledged they were taking some early steps, saying that they hadn't disclosed the planning previously because it is modest in scope.

In an interview, four top appointees of the Republican governor stressed they intended no changes to the core principles of the civil service system: hiring workers based on merit and firing them only for just cause. That system grew out of Progressive-era reforms and sought to stifle Tammany Hall-style patronage in which politicians rewarded their party's supporters with jobs and left taxpayers with the bill.

Administration Secretary Mike Huebsch said he wants to respond to an aging work force and looming retirements by modernizing a hiring process that can take months of painstaking effort.

"What you have intercepted in those emails is the very first meeting, the very first discussions on a more coordinated basis," said Huebsch, who was among those trading the emails on possible changes. "For years...it's been anecdotal but now I said, 'We really do need to address this.'"

With major civil service rewrites showing up in other states recently, any proposal will receive close scrutiny here. Controversy has surrounded all of Walker's actions on the state workforce since his 2011 repeal of most collective bargaining for most public workers in Wisconsin.

Marty Beil, executive director of the Wisconsin State Employees Union and a bitter critic of the governor, said he was suspicious of why the Walker administration was proceeding so quietly and not working closely with the Office of State Employment Relations, which is responsible for the civil service.

"It seems to me that this is more politically motivated than functionally motivated. This is not being done on its merits," Beil said.

Growing turnover

In 1905 — a time when the country was still moving away from blatant political patronage jobs — Wisconsin's civil service law passed under then Gov. Robert M. La Follette with the original slogan of "The best shall serve the state."

Walker cited the law during the legislative fight over repealing most collective bargaining, saying that union contracts weren't needed because the state's civil service law would protect public employees from political favoritism or retribution.

Huebsch said the governor and his administration are still committed to the principles of the law but that the state would face a crisis if it doesn't speed up its hiring process. With the baby-boom generation rolling into retirement, the state will face growing turnover in its ranks — at the state Department of Administration, for instance, 53% of the workers are 50 or older.

Wisconsin is not the only state rethinking its hiring practices.

"It's not uncommon in this era of civil service reform to see hiring managers wanting more options and wanting the procedure sped up," said Jerrell Coggburn, professor and chair of the Department of Public Administration at North Carolina State University.

The changes detailed by Huebsch are not as significant as those playing out in some other states such as Arizona, Colorado and Tennessee.

At a March conference organized by the Alliance to Transform State Government Operations, Huebsch asked a Tennessee official for a summary of the changes passed in that state, according to Danielle Barnes, general counsel for the Tennessee Department of Human Resources.

Rebecca Hunter, commissioner of the Tennessee agency, emailed Huebsch on April 1 to share the lengthy legislation that ended the previous hiring system in place of a new one; revamped the way employees' performance is evaluated; reduced layoff notices to 30 days from 90 days,and eliminated "bumping" there.

In the practice of bumping, also present in Wisconsin, one terminated employee with greater seniority can sometimes take a position from someone who has worked for the state for less time. That second person could then bump another junior employee and so on.

Tennessee Republican Gov. Bill Haslam got the legislation through the GOP-controlled House in his state with some Democratic backing after making some compromises with the Tennessee state employees union.

"What made this bill successful is that it was the governor's bill, not the department's, and we ran it like a campaign," Hunter wrote to Huebsch.

Huebsch's assistant forwarded the email to the deputy secretaries of three department: Chris Schoenherr of Administration, Matt Moroney of Natural Resources and Kevin Moore of Health Services. A week later Moroney shared with the group an article on problems with the federal civil service system.

"Good stuff! Keep disseminating this info. We will all be meeting soon to begin this discussion," Huebsch responded.

'We lose people'

In an April 24 interview, Schoenherr told Journal Sentinel reporters that the state wasn't looking at civil service reform.

In an interview Tuesday with all four men, Huesbsch and the three deputy secretaries said there was a misunderstanding. The Walker administration is only looking at streamlining hiring practices, not making big civil service changes such as ending bumping or removing just cause protections on worker firings, he said.

Moore and Moroney said that it can take several months to fill a vacant state position, frustrating both managers and job applicants who may end up taking another job.

"It's a huge time commitment," Moroney said. "We lose people all the time — good quality people — late in the hiring process."

Huebsch said the state's civil service law won't necessarily see any changes and that it might be enough to request that the state employment relations office revise its hiring handbook. Huebsch said he raised this possibility to Office of State Employment Relations head Greg Gracz about three weeks ago.

First Huebsch and later Gracz himself said that Gracz still didn't know enough about the potential changes to be interviewed. Beil, the union leader, said Gracz was responsible for the civil service system and should be involved in any changes.

Peter Fox, who served under GOP Govs. Tommy Thompson and Scott McCallum as the secretary of the agency that became the Office of State Employment Relations, said that the public should be open to ways to improve the civil service system but cautious about making changes. The existing rules, though sometimes complex, were put in place to ensure that taxpayer money isn't wasted, he said.

"The reason is that it has to protect itself from so many people wanting to game the system," Fox said.

The changes in Tennessee haven't drawn universal praise.

Jonathan Stephens, attorney for the Tennessee State Employee Association, said he has received many calls from concerned applicants passed over for jobs. Stephens said streamlining the state's hiring process "lends itself to preferential treatment."

"I don't know that it is working the way they proposed it would," Stephens said.

But attorney Mark Travis praised his state's law. In an October 2012 publication of the Tennessee bar, Travis, the director of the Tennessee Center for Workforce Relations, said the civil service law had replaced an "antiquated patchwork of law and regulation" with "objective and performance-based hiring and retention procedures."

The debate is happening in other states. Coggburn, the North Carolina professor, said over the past 15 years he has witnessed more states allowing public employees to be hired and fired at will.

"We haven't seen the wholesale abuses we anticipated on these sorts of things, but only time will tell," Coggburn said.

Colorado's Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper promoted a package of changes in civil service employment that included ending bumping.Arizona's Republican Gov. Jan Brewer signed into law an overhaul of personnel rules in her state in 2012 that transferred employees to "at will" status — in which they could be fired without having to justify the move — if they opted for a modest pay raise.

Florida and Georgia have also moved to the "at will" model. But Huebsch said Wisconsin wouldn't.

"We can remove none of those protections. They must stay in place,...," he said. "We wouldn't go back to that (patronage) system for anything."

Journal Sentinel reporter Patrick Marley contributed to this article.