Kohler workers vote to approve new contract
Sheboygan — He wouldn't say what his name was beyond Jim, but he easily reduced the variables he and some 2,000 fellow Kohler Co. workers faced Sunday to the most basic equation:

"You vote yes, you have a job," he said. "You vote no, you don't have a job. Plain and simple."

After 22 years at Kohler, he thought he had no choice but to accept a concessionary contract that will freeze wages, raise health care costs for many and set up second-tier pay for new employees.

His co-workers came to the same conclusion: They voted, 62% to 38%, to gulp hard and swallow a five-year contract no one seemed to like.

"We're damned if we do and damned if we don't," Debbie Kreif, a 16-year Kohler veteran from Sheboygan, said as she left the balloting at Sheboygan North High School. "Nobody that I know of can afford a strike."

In accepting what Kohler termed its final offer, the employees bucked the leadership of their union, United Auto Workers Local 833, which had recommended voting down the proposal.

Local president Dave Bergene said the vote was no endorsement of management.

"I don't believe they took the company's side," he said. "I believe they voted based on how it would affect them."

That gets to the heart of the decision workers faced Sunday, and the advantages the company had in contract negotiations that stretched over four months.

For the members of Local 833, the choice was between concrete, immediate self-interest in the worst labor economy in 70 years, or putting themselves at financial risk to try to preserve high wages for future workers - people they don't even know.

Encapsulating that choice were the contract's provisions for a two-tier workforce and potentially extensive use of temporary, "flexible" labor.

Current production employees at Kohler make good wages - averaging about $22.50 an hour. The temps, any new hires and workers called back after more than 2 1/2 years on layoff will get 35% less than the current jobs pay, or slightly more than $14.50 an hour on average.

While current workers must accept a five-year wage freeze, the contract gives them two $1,000 bonuses over the period.

Bergene is convinced the bonuses helped swing the vote, along with a brutal economic downturn that has seen Sheboygan County shed nearly one-fifth of its manufacturing jobs in three years.

But although the contract might be perceived as appeasing current workers, he said, those who come afterward will pay the price.

"It totally destroys the future," he said.

Kohler Co., not surprisingly, sees it exactly opposite. From the company's perspective, the contract preserves Sheboygan County operations - the firm makes plumbing fixtures, engines and generators here - that it has said are increasingly noncompetitive.

Without a change, Chairman and CEO Herbert Kohler said last week in a letter to employees, "this location will continue to shrink."

The two-tier pay scale is a key step in cutting costs, along with the contract provision letting the firm use roughly one temporary employee for every four regular workers in any given division. Temporary employees will get no benefits unless they work 1,000 hours in a given year, a union representative said.

"Two-tier and flexible workforce really go a long way toward resetting the clock on wages and benefits here in Sheboygan County," Paul Kardish, a Kohler staff attorney and member of management's bargaining team, said Sunday.

Kardish believes that sort of resetting is necessary across much of U.S. manufacturing to compete in a global economy.

In securing a two-tier system, Kohler follows an increasingly well-trod path. The major American automakers, heavy-equipment maker Caterpillar and Wisconsin's Harley-Davidson and Mercury Marine all have won similar concessions.

"The people at Mercury Marine got plucked, Harley-Davidson got plucked and now we're getting plucked," said John Keller, 57, an enameling worker with 32 years at Kohler.

Keller spoke before the vote results were announced but correctly predicted the outcome.

"Where are you going to go?" he asked rhetorically. "It sounds like they're threatening us, they're going to move other jobs out of the country."

In a statement, Kohler spokesman Todd Weber said the company was pleased with the vote.

"This new contract includes significant compromises made by both teams, and today's decision helps ensure that our Sheboygan County manufacturing operations will be sustainable into the future, while minimizing the impact on our current associates," he said.

There will, however, be impact. Besides the wage freeze, the contract will increase union workers' health insurance costs. They now pay an average of about 3% of medical premiums, Herbert Kohler said in his letter. The proposal would raise that to 12%, he said, but offer a high-deductible option at the current contribution rate.

Ben Braeger, 34, of Sheboygan, estimates the new contract will cost him a few thousand a year more for his family coverage. Where he now pays $35 a month toward premiums, his share initially will go to $250 a month, then rise to $440 a month by the end of the contract, he said.

"I'm not pleased with higher insurance payments, but it's a junk economy," he said. "What are you going to do?"

About 1,850 Local 833 members are active employees at Kohler, Bergene said. A few hundred more are on layoff - a fact that should mitigate effects of the two-tier wage scale if the company adds permanent employees.

Out of about 2,200 active and laid-off employees eligible to vote Sunday, nearly 1,900 cast ballots.