Gov. Scott Walker opens door for tax overhaul in 2015 budget
- selected newswatch item - Gov. Scott Walker opens door for tax overhaul in 2015 budget Madison — Gov. Scott Walker isn't promising big on tax cuts or reform, not yet, but one year out from his re-election bid he's talking big. In an interview with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Walker opened the door to a host of potential tax overhauls in his February 2015 budget, from eliminating or flattening the income tax to dropping technical colleges from local property tax rolls. Those changes could involve both outright cuts and shifts of income or property taxes onto the sales tax. »Read Full Article



Firefighters battle blaze at Brown Deer house Firefighters are battling a blaze that broke out at a Brown Deer home Monday morning. The fire began at 5:05 a.m. at 8581 N. 63rd St., according to North Shore Fire/Rescue. Firefighters from Wauwatosa, Milwaukee and other surrounding areas are providing mutual aid, officials said. »Read Full Article

Recent real estate transactions for the Milwaukee area Use our search form to peruse recently completed residential real estate transactions for the Milwaukee metro area. »Read Full Article

Madison woman flown to hospital after I-90 rollover crash A 40-year-old Madison woman was injured during a rollover crash on I-90 eastbound near Stoughton early Monday, according to the Wisconsin State Patrol. The woman was driving about 1:15 a.m. when she drifted into the median and overcorrected, sending her car spinning into the right ditch. The vehicle rolled over. »Read Full Article

Snowmobiler hurt after falling through ice in northern Wisconsin Eagle River — An Illinois man is being treated for hypothermia after his snowmobile fell through the ice on a lake in northern Wisconsin. Authorities in Vilas County got a call Sunday about 7 p.m. from a woman who said her husband's snowmobile had broken the ice on Eagle Lake. She said her husband was submerged chest-deep in the water. »Read Full Article

Successive suicide bombings in Russia kill over 30 MOSCOW (AP) A suicide bomber killed 14 people aboard an electric bus in the southern Russian city of Volgograd during the Monday morning rush hour, and authorities believe it was the work of the same group that set off a bomb at the railway station a day earlier. Together more than 30 people were killed in the explosions, putting the city of one million on edge and highlighting the terrorist threat Russia is facing as it prepares to host February's Winter Games in Sochi, President Vladimir Putin's pet project. While terrorists may find it hard to get to the tightly guarded Olympic facilities, the bombings have shown they can hit civilian targets elsewhere in Russia with shocking ease. »Read Full Article

Samsung sells 110-inch ultra-HD TV for $150,000 SEOUL, South Korea (AP) Samsung said a 110-inch TV that has four times the resolution of standard high-definition TVs is going on sale for about $150,000 in South Korea. The launch Monday of the giant television set reflects global TV makers' move toward ultra HD TVs, as manufacturing bigger TVs using OLED proves too costly. »Read Full Article

Wind chill advisory in effect for southeast Wisconsin Say goodbye to the early winter thaw. Southeast Wisconsin is in another extreme cold spell. A wind chill advisory took effect Sunday evening and remains in effect until noon Monday, according to the National Weather Service. Temperatures plummeted Sunday morning and afternoon, and the wind chill Sunday night was expected to hit as low as minus 25. »Read Full Article

Plymouth police looking for man after failed robbery attempt Plymouth police are looking for a man who tried to rob the Marshall's Westside Pantry in downtown Plymouth at 6:55 p.m. Sunday. A male entered the convenience store, demanded money from the clerk and made threats, but the clerk refused to open the register and pressed the panic alarm, said Lt. Richard J. Vander Sande of the Plymouth Police Department. »Read Full Article

Fire, possible explosion destroy Milwaukee house, damage 2 others Michael Sears A fire accompanied by the sound of an explosion destroyed a house on Milwaukee's northwest side Sunday morning, damaging two neighboring houses and forcing the evacuation of several neighboring homes. Fire investigators were walking through the destroyed house Sunday, trying to confirm the cause of the blaze. »Read Full Article

GOP lawmakers seek creation of tax holidays Madison — As Gov. Scott Walker considers ideas for a major overhaul of state taxes, the Assembly is pondering a more modest tax cut that could be quickly enacted. Rep. Chad Weininger (R-Green Bay) and Sen. Rick Gudex (R-Fond du Lac) introduced a proposal 10 months ago to create two weekends a year on which targeted items would be exempt from the sales tax. »Read Full Article

Crashes tie up traffic on I-43 in New Berlin A series of crashes on I-43 in Waukesha County forced several lane closures Sunday morning as the onset of colder weather made for slippery roads in southeast Wisconsin. Several crashes around 8:40 a.m. Sunday closed the highway northbound at Moorland Road in New Berlin until just after 10 a.m., the state Department of Transportation said. »Read Full Article

Federal health market surpasses 1 million signups Special Section

The Affordable Care Act went into effect Oct. 1. Find videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare in our special section. Go to section HONOLULU (AP) A December surge propelled health care sign-ups through the government's rehabilitated website past the 1 million mark, the Obama administration said Sunday, reflecting new vigor for the problem-plagued federal insurance market. Combined with numbers for state-run markets due in January, that should put total enrollment in the new private insurance plans under President Barack Obama's health law at about 2 million people through the end of the year, independent experts said. »Read Full Article

Milwaukee Art Museum will be free Jan. 2 Whether you have friends and family still in town for the holidays or not, the Milwaukee Art Museum, 700 Art Museum Drive, will be an especially nice place to visit Thursday. First, admission is free for everyone, groups excluded, from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m. That's true every first Thursday of the month, thanks to Target. Also, at 6:15 p.m. Thursday, there will be a special lecture about the museum's feature exhibition, "Thomas Sully: Painted Performance," which is in its final days and closes after Sunday. »Read Full Article

Foreclosure bills aim to remedy damage to Wisconsin cities State Rep. Evan Goyke (D-Milwaukee) says he will introduce on Monday a package of five foreclosure-related bills to address ongoing housing issues dating back to the housing crisis in 2008. The Milwaukee Democrat has two co-sponsors, Rep. LaTonya Johnson and Sen. Nikiya Harris, also Milwaukee Democrats. But in a weekend interview, Goyke said he anticipates having support from some of the majority Republicans for some of his proposed bills. »Read Full Article

Belt buckle deflects bullet aimed at man in Fond du Lac A man might have been saved by a belt buckle that deflected a bullet shot at him Saturday morning, according to the Fond du Lac Reporter. Police detained two men and later released one of the two men after the shooting. Officers say four shots were fired. The only one that struck the victim was deflected by the belt buckle, Fond du Lac Police Lt. Ed Wenzel said, according to the news report. Police believe an altercation led to the shooting at the intersection of Main and Second streets, but they're still trying to learn details.