House Speaker Paul Ryan met with Foxconn as Wisconsin tries to lure tech firm
Buy Photo House Speaker Paul Ryan shakes hands with a worker at WPC Technologies in Oak Creek on Thursday. (Photo: Michael Sears / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

MADISON - House Speaker Paul Ryan met with officials from Foxconn Technology Group as part of a broad effort by Wisconsin officials to bring the company to the Badger State, the Janesville Republican said Friday.

“I’ve met with Foxconn at (Gov.) Scott Walker’s request,” Ryan told reporters after receiving an award from a Boy Scout council at a Madison hotel. "There is great potential there."

Wisconsin officials are hoping to bring the Taiwanese maker of iPhones and Sharp high-definition televisions to Racine County or another part of the state.

The company considered siting the plant, which would employ thousands, in Janesville but ruled out that location in June, according to the Janesville Gazette.

In his remarks to reporters,Ryan said he would decide later on what to do on health care if the Senate is unable to pass legislation overhauling the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said this week he would look to shore up insurance markets with the help of Democrats if he can’t get an Obamacare replacement bill through his house. Ryan expressed skepticism toward that idea but did not rule it out.

“It’s pretty hard to stand up a collapsing law,” Ryan said.

At a stop in Milwaukee on Friday, Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin said McConnell's comments were the first time she had heard him "open a door" to bipartisan work on the Affordable Care Act.

"He cracked the door open, conceding that right now he can't see how he gets 50 votes in the Senate among his own party to repeal the Affordable Care Act," Baldwin said during a round-table discussion with Disability Rights Wisconsin.

Ryan on Putin, town halls

Ryan said he was not surprised Russian President Vladimir Putin had denied to President Donald Trump on Friday that his country had interfered with last year's U.S. election.

“I would expect Vladimir Putin to deny clearly what he has done over the years,” Ryan said.

Putin’s stance makes plain the importance of continuing congressional investigations into the issue, Ryan said.

He said he hoped to pass a bill raising the federal government’s debt limit this month, but that it may take longer.

“We will pass the debt limit before it's reached,” he said.

Ryan spoke to reporters for 13 minutes after the Boy Scout event and after holding Wisconsin events Thursday that were open to the media but not the general public.

He said he was looking for “creative ways” to meet with constituents, rather than holding traditional town hall meetings that anyone can attend. A town hall can turn into a “screaming fest” as protesters from outside his district try to get on TV, he said.

Having reporters at some events can stifle conversations with constituents, he said.

“I find when you guys are there, people tend to clam up,” Ryan told reporters.

He said instead of those types of events, he was holding telephone town halls, office hours and events that are limited to certain people.

Also Friday, David Yankovich dropped his challenge to Ryan and endorsed fellow Democrat Randy Bryce of Caledonia in next year's election. Yankovich moved from Ohio to Kenosha in May so he could challenge Ryan.

Also running against Ryan as a Democrat is Cathy Myers, who sits on the Janesville School Board.

Bill Glauber of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report from Milwaukee.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2u0Daj5