Milwaukee County Board's 2012 travel cost taxpayers more than $15,000
If you think that members of the Milwaukee County Board are up in arms over proposals to cut their pay, just imagine how upset they would be if someone threatened to slice their travel budget.

Records show that county supervisors jetted to such locales as Virginia Beach, Va., and Washington, D.C., to attend various conferences in 2012. Closer to home, the board sent a total of nine supervisors and staffers to the annual conference of the Wisconsin Counties Association in La Crosse in September, billing taxpayers for the costs.

Among the key speakers at the association's conference was former Senate Majority Leader Chuck Chvala, a Madison Democrat who resigned his state job in 2005 after pleading guilty to a felony count of misconduct in office.

Total tab to taxpayers for County Board travel in 2012: more than $15,000.

On top of that, Chairwoman Marina Dimitrijevic and Supervisor Mark Borkowski traveled to Poland for five days in June to visit one of Milwaukee County's sister cities: Bialystok. The trip was paid for with a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation through Sister Cities International. With another grant from the group, Dimitrijevic went in August to visit with officials in Buffalo City, South Africa. She and her husband were accompanied by two officials from the Milwaukee-based Center for International Health, a group founded by the county and funded with federal dollars.

The county paid minimal expenses for Dimitrijevic's and Borkowski's travel.

"As the reports detail, all travel was covered by Sister Cities," said Bill Zaferos, spokesman for Dimitrijevic. "Yes, her husband was in Africa, and personal funds were used for his travel."

Supervisors long have had a reputation for going far and wide to attend conferences and visit with "sister cities."

No Quarterdocumented at least two jaunts by Lee Holloway to South Africa while he was board chairman. He was accompanied by Supervisor Michael Mayo and a staffer from the Center for International Health on one of the excursions.

Nothing has changed under Dimitrijevic.

"It is hard to believe the County Board is interested in reforming itself when they are taking trips to Poland, South Africa and sending nine people to a party in La Crosse along with other destinations like Virginia Beach and Washington, D.C.," said Orville Seymer, a longtime leader of the conservative Citizens for Responsible Government.

Seymer made the records requests for County Board travel and provided the documents to the Journal Sentinel.

Among the supervisors with the most frequent flier miles is veteran Supervisor Willie Johnson Jr.

Johnson said the County Board typically sends three or four individuals to the Wisconsin Counties Association's annual conference. But he said county officials wanted to demonstrate a show of force in 2012 because Johnson was in the running to become second vice chairman of the organization, a position he eventually won. As a result, he will become chairman of the group in late 2014.

It cost the taxpayers nearly $5,000 to send the contingent to the event.

In addition, Johnson said membership in the group has been good for Milwaukee County. Other members of the association have helped Milwaukee County fight a proposal by state Rep. Joe Sanfelippo, a West Allis Republican and former supervisor, to cut the pay of Milwaukee County supervisors from $50,679 a year to about $24,000 if voters agreed in a 2014 binding referendum.

"They are definitely against what the Legislature is doing," Johnson said of the other members of the Wisconsin counties group.

Along with that, Johnson also spent nearly $2,000 to attend the National Forum for Black Public Administrators meeting in Virginia Beach in April 2012 and an additional $1,600 to go to the National Association of Counties convention in Pittsburgh in July. Johnson said these two groups hold seminars on timely topics, such as a session he attended several years ago in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., on the foreclosure crisis.

But the veteran legislator found it a little more difficult when asked to identify one thing that he learned while convention-hopping in Virginia Beach, Pittsburgh or La Crosse last year.

"Not off the top of my head," Johnson replied.

No doubt, he'll be able to refresh his memory when he hits the road once again to attend this year's gathering of the black administrators' forum in Atlanta in three weeks.

Eye for an eye

Gov. Scott Walker likes to tell people and politicians not to "personalize your differences."

"Over the years, I passed that on to many others with the simple reminder that your opponent today may be your ally tomorrow," Walker said in his "state of the state" address.

But in Walker's latest fundraising letter, the first-term Republican governor accuses his "vengeful" and "bitter" opponents of doing just that by making their fight with him "personal." He then predicted that those critics will "rant, rave, smear and distort" his message.

The letter hits up donors for his 2014 re-election bid, making no mention of Walker's presidential aspirations.

"Our rivals are gearing up with their usual bad ideas and shameless TV attacks," writes Walker, who is penning a memoir titled "Unintimidated." "They are bitter and vengeful and defeating me is personal for them." (Emphasis in the original.)

In the note, Walker said he is trying to raise $175,000 in the next 25 days. The governor wrote, "As hard as our first two races were, our next one could be even tougher."

Walker said President Barack Obama and U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin have kept open their campaign offices around the state "with their staffs preparing for the next battle." Union bosses are also prepared to try to defeat him, Walker said. There are also, he noted, more Democrats than Republicans in Wisconsin.

"It's going to be another bruising campaign bankrolled by Big Government Labor Unions and vast amounts of out-of-state liberal money," Walker predicted.

Democratic Party Chairman Mike Tate said the letter is the latest effort by Walker to blame the state's problems on others.

"While Scott Walker wallows in self-pity, he also continues to distort a record of economic failure," Tate said.

A Walker campaign staffer declined to say what kind of response the letter has gotten. "Contributions to the Friends of Scott Walker will be detailed in our next campaign finance report," Walker campaign spokeswoman said Nicole Tieman via email.

Building code violation

State Democratic Party officials dropped plans to solicit donations at an event held last week in a state museum.

The event for Wisconsin's Outstanding Women was held at 5:30 p.m. Thursday at the Wisconsin Historical Museum in Madison. State Rep. JoCasta Zamarripa (D-Milwaukee) was the keynote speaker.

State law bars individuals from making or receiving political donations in state buildings.

Originally, attendees were asked to pay $10, but an invitation said "donations of any amount are graciously accepted." Checks were to be written to the state Democratic Party.

Tate, the Democratic Party boss, said party officials decided not to collect checks at the event once they became aware of the issue.

"Our understanding was that accepting contributions to cover the cost of the event was acceptable, but to be safe we will not be accepting donations tonight at the event," Tate said. "We regret any error."

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice.