A Journal Sentinel Watchdog Update - Child-care audit finds 600 overdue inspections, other problems
Cashing in on Kids | A Journal Sentinel Watchdog Update

State auditors identified a string of regulatory gaps in Wisconsin's child-care program, including more than 600 sites with overdue inspections and at least 200 criminal background checks that hadn't been done.

Auditors found eight cases in which convicted felons or those who had abused or neglected children were living in child-care facilities or were employed by them.

The findings were released Thursday in the state Legislative Audit Bureau's final phase of its comprehensive audit of the troubled Wisconsin Shares program.

Lawmakers ordered a full-blown audit of the $350 million program in February in the wake of a Journal Sentinel investigation that exposed fraud, abuse and shoddy oversight of the program. In the first phase of the audit released in June, auditors found state regulators had misspent an estimated $20 million in 2008 alone.

The audit released Thursday focused on regulation and was gleaned from information as of June 2009.

Among its discoveries:

• In the past five years, the state Department of Children and Families has issued sanctions to nearly 2,000 child-care providers for committing serious and persistent infractions of the rules. In some cases, regulators allowed them to continue operating, despite the gravity of the problems.

For example, three of the four licensed facilities that were issued 16 or more sanctions continued to operate as of November, auditors found.

One licensed group facility in Dane County, for instance, received 16 sanctions, repeated citations for inaccurate child, medical and attendance records, and inadequate supervision of children. The center - not named in the audit - received $562,300 in Wisconsin Shares payments from January through November.

• Regulators fail to penalize child-care providers who do not keep accurate attendance records. Attendance records provide the basis for receiving taxpayer subsidies.

In a random sample of 100 facilities with attendance record citations, auditors found that 42% of the state-licensed facilities and 82% of the county-certified facilities had not been assessed for payment errors.

In its investigation, the Journal Sentinel found centers billing the state for children not actually in their care and corrupt providers hiring parents simply to enroll their children in their centers.

• In as many as 181 cases, regulators tried five or more times to visit child-care centers that were supposed to be in operation, but nobody answered the door or allowed them in.

• Child-care certifiers in Racine have the highest caseload of any county in the state, with an average of 170 cases per worker. The state's average is about 100 cases. Nationally recommended standards vary from 50 to 75.

• Auditors found more than 300 individuals involved with child care who had past criminal offenses that required further investigation. Regulators could not provide evidence that those investigations had been completed.

"It's startling," said state Rep. Peter Barca (D-Kenosha), co-chairman of the Joint Legislative Audit Committee. "Clearly, there is still work to be done."

Reggie Bicha, secretary of the state Department of Children and Families, said the audit confirmed much of what regulators already know and are working to fix.

"That's a good independent body that's saying we're headed in the right direction. We just need more time to clean up 13 years worth of problems in these programs," Bicha said.

Wisconsin Shares was launched in 1997, primarily to help women join the workforce by covering the cost of child care. Veteran fraud investigators say they recall the system being set up with few safeguards.

Bicha said his department has already corrected many of the problems most recently outlined by auditors.

For example, in August, the department launched KidStat, a data-driven effort to identify child-care providers who are overdue for inspections and to flag providers with the most rule violations. In addition, the department created a high-risk unit in Milwaukee to oversee providers who present significant concerns, Bicha said.

And the department now works with the state Department of Justice to keep a record of the more than 20,000 people who are employed in the child-care industry.

Still, other lawmakers expressed impatience and frustrations that serious troubles continue to surface.

"What do you have to do, hit these bureaucrats over the head with a broomstick to get them do their job?" said state Rep Mark Gundrum (R-New Berlin). "It's so disturbing that with hundreds of millions of tax dollars and hundreds of bureaucrats, that they're not able to root out and correct these problems on their own."

State Rep. Samantha Kerkman (R-Powers Lake) said taxpayers "have every right to be outraged by what the audit bureau found." Kerkman sits on the Joint Legislative Audit Committee.

"This program has proven to be a tragic waste of millions of taxpayer dollars, and the safety of the children enrolled was seriously jeopardized," Kerkman said in a written statement.

State Sen. Robert Jauch (D-Poplar) and state Rep. Tamara Grigsby (D-Milwaukee) also issued written statements in response to the audit.

"As the Audit Bureau highlights in its evaluation, Democrats have taken many steps to reform Wisconsin Shares," Grigsby wrote.

The Joint Legislative Audit Committee plans to hold a hearing on the recent findings in January.