Juneau Empire - Alaska's Capital City Online Newspaper
Young hopeful for Ketchikan bridges

KETCHIKAN - The possibility of federal funding for proposed bridges in Ketchikan remains "very strong," according to U.S. Rep. Don Young.

Young, R-Alaska, expects Congress to approve highway legislation in mid-July and that it likely will contain money for the Ketchikan access project, linking the city to its island airport.

"I can't guarantee you anything, but it's still very strong," Young said while in Ketchikan for a House subcommittee hearing.

The proposed $315 million Gravina Access Project that would link Revillagigedo and Gravina islands by building bridges to a third island between them.

Young included up to $125 million for the project in the $284 billion, six-year Transportation Equity Act-Legacy for Users bill approved by the House in March. In May, the Senate approved a $295 billion version of the transportation funding bill.

Young is chairman of the House-Senate conference committee that has been trying since early June to reconcile the House and Senate versions of the bill while also arriving at an overall level of spending that the White House will accept.

On June 30, committee negotiators removed a major roadblock by agreeing to spend $286.5 billion and allocating specific amounts to various types of transportation funding. Now, said Young, the committee is reconciling specific items contained in the bills.

Young said he's bothered by criticism describing the Ketchikan project as an expensive "bridge to nowhere."

"These people keep saying it's nowhere, they're just smoking pot," Young said.

He also disagreed that the project is about connecting Ketchikan to its airport on Gravina Island.

"This is about opening the island," Young said.

"There's state-owned and borough-owned land. It gives the opportunity for Ketchikan to grow. ... Once they build the bridge across, you have the opportunity to expand, and growth occurs, and that's the whole idea of bridges - to get across a body of water."

Kenai won't extend manager's contract

KENAI - The Kenai City Council will not extend the contract of city manager Linda Snow.

The decision came during an executive session that followed the council's regular meeting last week.

"We just decided in the best interest of the city we would not renew the city manager's contract," said Kenai Mayor Pat Porter.

Citing the confidentiality of an executive session, Porter would not give specifics on the decision.

"I truly cannot go into what went on during that executive session," Porter said.

Snow's contract expires July 16.