Side-by-Side Comparison of Major Health Care Reform Proposals Share On March 23, 2010, President Obama signed into law the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and a week later, signed into law the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, which made some changes to the comprehensive health reform law. This interactive side-by-side provides detailed summaries of the final new health reform law, as well as more than a dozen other comprehensive proposals put forward during the year-long reform debate in Congress. The online tool allows users to compare the law and other bills, plans and proposals with one another across key characteristics. In addition to the summaries offered here, the Foundation also has prepared an implementation timeline for the new law, as well as detailed descriptions of the Medicare and Medicaid provisions, and a summary of the coverage provisions in the law. Instructions:

1. Select one or more proposals.

2. Select one or more topics. The Generate Comparison button will appear on the right, just above the proposals. Click for results.

3. Your results will appear with the options to Print the Comparison, or Create a Different Comparison. Information updated 6/18/10 Summary of Final Health Care Reform Law (.pdf) Download a printable comparison of the new health reform law (the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act), the House-passed Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, and last year's House-passed bill (.pdf) Download a printable version of the three Congressional authorizing committee proposals (.pdf)

Download a printable side-by-side comparison of all proposals and topics (.pdf)



Download a printable side-by-side comparison of all proposals and topics (.pdf) When printing, please adjust your printer settings to landscape. Please choose one or more proposals: (Select All | Deselect all) Final Health Reform Law Senate Bill House Bill Senate Finance Committee Senate HELP Committee House Tri-Committee Representative John Boehner Senators Tom Coburn & Richard Burr & Representatives Paul Ryan & Devin Nunes Representative John Conyers Representative John Dingell Senator Bernie Sanders Representative Pete Stark Senators Ron Wyden & Bob Bennett Former Majority Leaders: Senators Howard Baker, Tom Daschle, & Bob Dole Representative Tom Price (Republican Study Committee) Select All | Deselect all) Please choose one or more topics for comparison: Overall approach to expanding access to coverage

Overall approach to expanding access to coverage Individual mandate

Individual mandate Employer requirements

Employer requirements Expansion of public programs

Expansion of public programs Premium and cost-sharing subsidies to individuals

Premium and cost-sharing subsidies to individuals Premium subsidies to employers

Premium subsidies to employers Tax changes related to health insurance and to financing health reform

Tax changes related to health insurance and to financing health reform Creation of insurance pooling mechanisms Benefit design

Benefit design Changes to private insurance

Changes to private insurance State role

State role Cost containment

Cost containment Improving quality/health system performance

Improving quality/health system performance Long-term Care

Long-term Care Prevention/Wellness

Prevention/Wellness Other investments

Other investments Financing Representative John Boehner

Common Sense Health Care Reform and Affordability Act

(Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 3962) Senate Bill

Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act

(H.R. 3590)

House Bill

Affordable Health Care for America Act

(H.R. 3962)

Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (P.L. 111-148)

as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 Representative Stark

AmeriCare Health Care Act of 2009 (H.R. 193)

Senate HELP Committee

Affordable Health Choices Act

(S. 1679)

Senators Wyden and Bennett

Healthy Americans Act

(S. 391) Representative Dingell

National Health Insurance Act (H.R. 15)

Representative Conyers

U.S. National Health Care Act (H.R. 676)

Senate Finance Committee

America’s Healthy Future Act of 2009

Senators Tom Coburn & Richard Burr

& Representatives Paul Ryan & Devin Nunes

Patients' Choice Act of 2009

(S. 1099 and H.R. 2520)

Senator Bernie Sanders

American Health Security Act of 2009

(S. 703)

House Tri-Committee

America’s Affordable Health Choices Act of 2009

(H.B. 3200)

Former Majority Leaders: Senators Howard Baker, Tom Daschle, & Bob Dole

Crossing Our Lines: Working Together to Reform the U.S. Health System

Representative Tom Price (Republican Study Committee)

Empowering Patients First Act

(H.R. 3400) Overall approach to expanding access to coverage Implement state high-risk pools or reinsurance programs to provide coverage to people with pre-existing medical conditions. Establish Association Health Plans through which employers can purchase coverage. Permit insurers to sell health insurance policies across state lines. Provide bonus payments to states that reduce per capita health insurance premiums and/or that reduce the proportion of uninsured nonelderly residents. Require most U.S. citizens and legal residents to have health insurance. Create state-based American Health Benefit Exchanges through which individuals can purchase coverage, with premium and cost-sharing credits available to individuals/families with income between 100-400% of the federal poverty level (the poverty level is $18,310 for a family of three in 2009) and create separate Exchanges through which small businesses can purchase coverage. Require employers to pay penalties for employees who receive tax credits for health insurance through an Exchange, with exceptions for small employers. Impose new regulations on health plans in the Exchanges and in the individual and small group markets. Expand Medicaid to 133% of the federal poverty level. Require most individuals to have health insurance. Create a Health Insurance Exchange through which individuals and smaller employers can purchase health coverage, with premium and cost-sharing credits available to individuals/families with incomes up to 400% of the federal poverty level (the poverty level is $18,310 for a family of three in 2009). Require employers to provide coverage to employees or pay into a Health Insurance Exchange Trust Fund, with exceptions for certain small employers, and provide certain small employers a credit to offset the costs of providing coverage. Impose new regulations on plans participating in the Exchange and in the small group insurance market. Expand Medicaid to 150% of the poverty level.

Require most U.S. citizens and legal residents to have health insurance. Create state-based American Health Benefit Exchanges through which individuals can purchase coverage, with premium and cost-sharing credits available to individuals/families with income between 133-400% of the federal poverty level (the poverty level is $18,310 for a family of three in 2009) and create separate Exchanges through which small businesses can purchase coverage. Require employers to pay penalties for employees who receive tax credits for health insurance through an Exchange, with exceptions for small employers. Impose new regulations on health plans in the Exchanges and in the individual and small group markets. Expand Medicaid to 133% of the federal poverty level. Create a new public plan, modeled on Medicare, as default coverage for all Americans. Individuals in a qualified group plan or Medicare may opt out of AmeriCare. Require employers and individuals to contribute toward the cost of the plan, with federal premium subsidies available for individuals below 300% FPL. Use Medicare's administrative structure to govern the plan. Financed by premium contributions from employers and individuals, state maintenance of effort payments, and from general revenue. Require individuals to have health insurance. Create state-based American Health Benefit Gateways through which individuals and small businesses can purchase health coverage, with subsidies available to individuals/families with incomes up to 400% of the federal poverty level (or $73,240 for a family of three in 2009). Require employers to provide coverage to their employees or pay an annual fee, with exceptions for small employers, and provide certain small employers a credit to offset the costs of providing coverage. Impose new regulations on the individual and small group insurance markets. Expand Medicaid to all individuals with incomes up to 150% of the federal poverty level. Require most Americans to purchase private coverage (called Healthy Americans Private Insurance or HAPI) meeting certain standards, with federal subsidies available for individuals/families up to 400% of the federal poverty level. State-based Health Help Agencies administer the offering of HAPI plans, which have to meet federal benefit and other standards. Employers can continue to sponsor health plans but many are unlikely to do so because the favorable tax treatment for individuals of employer-paid and insurance is eliminated. Create a national health insurance program for individuals meeting eligibility requirements. Require states to administer the program and provide for equivalent care for "needy" individuals who do not meet eligibility requirements. A National Health Insurance Board determines allotments for the classes of covered services. Financed by a value-added tax imposed on certain transactions. Create a public health insurance program for all U.S. residents. Replace employer coverage and eliminate the Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP programs. Individuals are not required to pay premiums or cost-sharing. Require conversion to a non-profit health care system. Provide for global budgets for hospitals and negotiate annual reimbursement rates with physicians and other non-institutional providers. Finance program by redirecting current federal and state health care spending, impose an employer/employee payroll tax, and leverage additional taxes. Require most U.S. citizens and legal residents to have health insurance. Create state-based health insurance exchanges through which individuals can purchase coverage, with premium and cost-sharing credits available to individuals/families with income between 100-400% of the federal poverty level (the poverty level is $18,310 for a family of three in 2009) and create separate exchanges through which small businesses can purchase coverage. Assess a fee on certain employers that do not offer coverage for each employee who receives a tax credit for health insurance through an exchange, with exceptions for small employers. Impose new regulations on health plans in the exchange and in the individual and small group markets. Expand Medicaid to all individuals with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level. Create state-based health insurance exchanges through which private plans offer coverage meeting certain benefit and other standards. Employers can continue to provide coverage to their employees, but the current tax preference for employer-sponsored insurance will be replaced with a tax credit of $2,290 for individuals and $5,710 for families to provide incentives for insurance coverage. Maintain Medicaid coverage for low-income people with disabilities, but integrate low-income families currently eligible for Medicaid into private insurance. Create a state-based public health insurance program for all U.S. residents. Replace employer coverage and eliminate the Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP programs. Individuals are not required to pay premiums or cost-sharing. Provide for global budgets for hospitals and negotiate annual reimbursement rates with physicians and other non-institutional providers. Finance program by redirecting current federal and state health care spending, impose an employer/employee payroll tax, and leverage a new health care income tax. Require individuals to have health insurance. Create a Health Insurance Exchange through which individuals and smaller employers can purchase health coverage, with premium and cost-sharing credits available to individuals/families with incomes up to 400% of the federal poverty level (or $73,240 for a family of three in 2009). Require employers to provide coverage to employees or pay into a Health Insurance Exchange Trust Fund, with exceptions for certain small employers, and provide certain small employers a credit to offset the costs of providing coverage. Impose new regulations on plans participating in the Exchange and in the small group insurance market. Expand Medicaid to 133% of the poverty level. Require all Americans and legal residents to have health insurance. Create state-based health insurance exchanges through which individuals and employers can purchase health coverage, with premium credits available to individuals/families with incomes up to 400% of the federal poverty level. Require employers to provide coverage to employees or pay a fee based on annual payroll, with exceptions for certain small employers, and provide certain small employers a credit to offset the costs of providing coverage. Impose new regulations on plans participating in the exchanges and in the individual and small group insurance markets. Expand Medicaid to 100% of the poverty level. Allow people who purchase coverage in the individual market to deduct the cost of premiums from their income taxes. Provide refundable tax credits to individuals and families with incomes below 300% FPL to purchase insurance in the individual market. Establish Association Health Plans and Individual Membership Associations through which employers and individuals can purchase coverage. Implement state high-risk pools or reinsurance programs to provide coverage for people with pre-existing health conditions. Require states to provide coverage to 90% of children with family incomes below 200% FPL as a condition for expanding child eligibility to 300% FPL, and require states to provide vouchers to children eligible for Medicaid and CHIP, to be used to purchase private insurance. Individual mandate No mandate for coverage Require U.S. citizens and legal residents to have qualifying health coverage. Those without coverage pay a tax penalty of the greater of $750 per year up to a maximum of three times that amount ($2,250) per family or 2% of household income. The penalty will be phased-in according to the following schedule: $95 in 2014, $495 in 2015, and $750 in 2016 for the flat fee or .5% of taxable income in 2014, 1.0% of taxable income in 2015, and 2% of taxable income in 2016. Beginning after 2016, the penalty will be increased annually by the cost-of-living adjustment. Exemptions will be granted for financial hardship, religious objections, American Indians, those without coverage for less than three months, undocumented immigrants, incarcerated individuals, if the lowest cost plan option exceeds 8% of an individual’s income, and if the individual has income below 100% of the poverty level. Require individuals to have "acceptable health coverage". Those without coverage pay a penalty of 2.5% of their adjusted income above the filing threshold up to the cost of the average national premium for self-only or family coverage under a basic plan in the Health Insurance Exchange. Exceptions granted for those with incomes below the filing threshold (in 2009 the threshold for taxpayers under age 65 is $9,350 for singles and $18,700 for couples), religious objections and financial hardship. (Effective January 1, 2013) Require U.S. citizens and legal residents to have qualifying health coverage. Those without coverage pay a tax penalty of the greater of $695 per year up to a maximum of three times that amount ($2,085) per family or 2.5% of household income. The penalty will be phased-in according to the following schedule: $95 in 2014, $325 in 2015, and $695 in 2016 for the flat fee or 1.0% of taxable income in 2014, 2.0% of taxable income in 2015, and 2.5% of taxable income in 2016. Beginning after 2016, the penalty will be increased annually by the cost-of-living adjustment. Exemptions will be granted for financial hardship, religious objections, American Indians, those without coverage for less than three months, undocumented immigrants, incarcerated individuals, those for whom the lowest cost plan option exceeds 8% of an individual’s income, and those with incomes below the tax filing threshold (in 2009 the threshold for taxpayers under age 65 was $9,350 for singles and $18,700 for couples). All U.S. residents are entitled to coverage under AmeriCare. Individuals may choose not to enroll in the AmeriCare plan if they have coverage under a group health plan. Require individuals to have qualifying health coverage. Enforced through a minimum tax penalty of $750 per individual per year (maximum penalty per family of 4 times the individual penalty). Exemptions to the individual mandate will be granted to residents of states that do not establish an American Health Benefit Gateway, members of Indian tribes, those for whom affordable coverage is not available, those without coverage for fewer than 90 days, and those with incomes below 150% FPL. Require all citizens over age 19 to have insurance along with dependent children. Those without coverage are subject to a financial penalty based on the number of uncovered months and the weighted average of HAPI premiums. Individuals meeting certain requirements are entitled to benefits under the National Health Insurance Program. All individuals residing in the US are covered under the United States National Health Care Act (USNHC). Require U.S. citizens and legal residents to have qualifying health coverage. Enforced through a tax penalty of $750 per adult per year. The penalty will be phased-in according to the following schedule: $0 in 2013; $200 in 2014; $400 in 2015; $600 in 2016; and $750 in 2017. Exemptions will be granted for financial hardship, religious objections, American Indians, and if the lowest cost plan option exceeds 8% of an individual’s income or if the individual has income below 133% of the poverty level. No requirement for individuals to have coverage. Permit states to establish procedures to automatically enroll individuals into low-cost, high-deductible coverage through the exchange and to provide incentives to individuals to maintain coverage from year to year. All individuals residing in the US are entitled to coverage under the American Health Security Act. Require individuals to have “acceptable health coverage”. Those without coverage pay a penalty of 2.5% of modified adjusted gross income up to the cost of the average national premium for self-only or family coverage under a basic plan in the Health Insurance Exchange. Exceptions granted for dependents, religious objections, and financial hardship. Require all Americans and legal residents to have health insurance that meets minimum creditable coverage standards. Enforcement options include: default enrollment in basic coverage through an employer or the exchange when starting a job, tax penalties including loss of federal deductions or exemptions, and a “fair share” fee added to income tax liability to reflect the cost of uncompensated care. Exceptions granted for religious objections and financial hardship. No requirement for individuals to have coverage. Permit employers to automatically enroll individuals in the lowest cost group health plan as long as they can opt out of coverage. Employer requirements Permit employers that offer health coverage to automatically enroll employees into the group health plan provided the individual is given the option to decline coverage. Assess employers with 50 or more employees that do not offer coverage and have at least one full-time employee who receives a premium tax credit a fee of $750 per full-time employee. Employers with more than 50 employees that offer coverage but have at least one full-time employee receiving a premium tax credit, will pay the lesser of $3,000 for each employee receiving a premium credit or $750 for each full-time employee. For employers that impose a waiting period before employees can enroll in coverage, require payment of $400 for any full-time employee in a 30-60 day waiting period and $600 for any employee in a 60-90 day waiting period. (Effective January 1, 2014)

Exempt employers with fewer than 50 employees from any of the above penalties.

Require employers that offer coverage to their employees to provide a free choice voucher to employees with incomes less than 400% FPL whose share of the premium exceeds 8% but is less than 9.8% of their income and who choose to enroll in a plan in the Exchange. The voucher amount is equal to what the employer would have paid to provide coverage to the employee under the employer’s plan and will be used to offset the premium costs for the plan in which the employee is enrolled. Employers providing free choice vouchers will not be subject to penalties for employees that receive premium credits in the Exchange. (Effective January 1, 2014)

Require employers with more than 200 employees to automatically enroll employees into health insurance plans offered by the employer. Employees may opt out of coverage. Require employers to offer coverage to their employees and contribute at least 72.5% of the premium cost for single coverage and 65% of the premium cost for family coverage of the lowest cost plan that meets the essential benefits package requirements or pay 8% of payroll into the Health Insurance Exchange Trust Fund. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Eliminate or reduce the pay or play assessment for small employers with annual payroll of less than $750,000: Annual payroll less than $500,000: exempt Annual payroll between $500,000 and $585,000: 2% of payroll; Annual payroll between $585,000 and $670,000: 4% of payroll; Annual payroll between $670,000 and $750,000: 6% of payroll.

(Effective January 1, 2013)

Require employers that offer coverage to automatically enroll into the employer’s lowest cost premium plan any individual who does not elect coverage under the employer plan or does not opt out of such coverage. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Require a government study of the impact of employer responsibility requirements and recommend to Congress whether an employer hardship exemption is appropriate. (Report due January 1, 2012)

Assess employers with 50 or more employees that do not offer coverage and have at least one full-time employee who receives a premium tax credit a fee of $2,000 per full-time employee, excluding the first 30 employees from the assessment. Employers with more than 50 employees that offer coverage but have at least one full-time employee receiving a premium tax credit, will pay the lesser of $3,000 for each employee receiving a premium credit or $2,000 for each full-time employee, excluding the first 30 employees from the assessment. (Effective January 1, 2014)

Exempt employers with fewer than 50 employees from any of the above penalties.

Require employers that offer coverage to their employees to provide a free choice voucher to employees with incomes less than 400% FPL whose share of the premium exceeds 8% but is less than 9.8% of their income and who choose to enroll in a plan in the Exchange. The voucher amount is equal to what the employer would have paid to provide coverage to the employee under the employer’s plan and will be used to offset the premium costs for the plan in which the employee is enrolled. Employers providing free choice vouchers will not be subject to penalties for employees that receive premium credits in the Exchange. (Effective January 1, 2014)

Require employers with more than 200 employees to automatically enroll employees into health insurance plans offered by the employer. Employees may opt out of coverage. Require employers to contribute at least 80% of the AmeriCare premiums for employees or at least 80% of the cost of the group plan if the employer provides qualifying employee coverage. Employers with fewer than 100 employees will be given an additional three years to come into compliance with this provision. A surcharge may be imposed on employers to prevent adverse selection. Require employers to offer health coverage to their employees and contribute at least 60% of the premium cost or pay $750 for each uninsured full-time employee and $375 for each uninsured part-time employee who is not offered coverage. For employers subject to the assessment, the first 25 workers are exempted.

Exempt employers with 25 or fewer employees from the requirement to provide coverage. Require employers to contribute an amount equal to a percentage of the average premium of their workforce times the number of workers. Percentage of the average premium varies for large and small employers from 2% to 25%.

For the first two years, permit employers previously providing health insurance to increase their workers’ wages by the amount of the health insurance premium in lieu of the employer shared responsibility payment described above.

Employers who continue to sponsor health plans must provide information on HAPI plans to employees.

Require employers to deduct individual and family premiums from workers’ payroll. No provision. No provision. Assess employers with more than 50 employees that do not offer coverage a fee for each employee who receives a tax credit for health insurance through an exchange. The penalty is the lesser of a flat dollar amount equal to the average national tax credit for each full-time employee receiving a tax credit or $400 times the total number of full-time employees in the firm.

Exempt employers with 50 or fewer employees from the penalty.

Require employers with 200 or more employees to automatically enroll employees into health insurance plans offered by the employer. Employees may opt out of coverage if they have coverage from another source. Not specified. Prohibit employers from offering health benefits that duplicate those provided by State health security programs. Require employers to offer coverage to their employees and contribute at least 72.5% of the premium cost for single coverage and 65% of the premium cost for family coverage of the lowest cost plan that meets the essential benefits package requirements or pay 8% of payroll into the Health Insurance Exchange Trust Fund. [E&L Committee amendment: Provide hardship exemptions for employers that would be negatively affected by job losses as a result of requirement.]

Eliminate or reduce the pay or play assessment for small employers with annual payroll of less than $400,000:

Annual payroll less than $250,000: exempt



Annual payroll between $250,000 and $300,000: 2% of payroll;



Annual payroll between $300,000 and $350,000: 4% of payroll;



Annual payroll between $350,000 and $400,000: 6% of payroll. [E&C Committee amendment: Extend the reduction in the pay or play assessment for small employers with annual payroll of less than $750,000 and replace the above schedule with the following: Annual payroll less than $500,000: exempt

Annual payroll between $500,000 and $585,000: 2% of payroll;

Annual payroll between $585,000 and $670,000: 4% of payroll;

Annual payroll between $670,000 and $750,000: 6% of payroll.] Require employers that offer coverage to automatically enroll into the employer’s lowest cost premium plan any individual who does not elect coverage under the employer plan or does not opt out of such coverage. Require employers to offer coverage to their employees or pay a fee based on the percentage of payroll. The fees would range from 1% of payroll for firms with annual payrolls between $1 million and $2 million and 3% of payroll for firms with annual payrolls above $3 million.

Exempt small businesses with payrolls less than $1 million. Permit employers to offer employees a defined contribution for the purchase of health insurance in the individual market.

Require employers to disclose to employees the total amount the employer spends on the employee’s health insurance premium. Expansion of public programs No provision. Expand Medicaid to all individuals under age 65 (children, pregnant women, parents, and adults without dependent children) with incomes up to 133% FPL based on modified adjusted gross income (MAGI). All newly eligible adults will be guaranteed a benchmark benefit package that at least provides the essential health benefits. To finance the coverage for the newly eligible (those who were not previously eligible for a full benchmark benefit package or who were eligible for a capped program but were not enrolled), states will receive 100% federal funding for 2014 through 2016. Beginning in 2017, financing for the newly eligible will be shared between the states and the federal government through an increase in the federal medical assistance percentage (FMAP). For states that already cover adults with incomes at or above 100% FPL, the percentage point increase in the FMAP will be 30.3 in 2017 and 31.3 in 2018. For all other states, the percentage point increase in the FMAP will be 34.3 in 2017 and 33.3 in 2018, except Nebraska, which will continue receiving 100% federal funding for newly eligibles after 2017. Beginning in 2019, all states will receive an FMAP increase of 32.3 percentage points for the newly eligible. The increased FMAP for all states, except Nebraska, will be capped at 95%. Certain states not eligible for the enhanced federal funding because they had already expanded Medicaid to adults with incomes above 133% FPL will receive a 2.2 percentage point increase in their FMAP for parents and childless adults who are not newly eligible for 2014 through 2019 or a .5 percentage point increase in the FMAP for 2014 through 2016. (Effective January 1, 2014)

Require states to maintain current income eligibility levels for children in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) until 2019 and extend funding for CHIP through 2015. CHIP benefit package and cost-sharing rules will continue as under current law. Beginning in 2015, states will receive a 23 percentage point increase in the CHIP match rate up to a cap of 100%. CHIP-eligible children who are unable to enroll in the program due to enrollment caps will be eligible for tax credits in the state Exchanges. Expand Medicaid to all individuals under age 65 (children, pregnant women, parents, and adults without dependent children) with incomes up to 150% FPL. Provide Medicaid coverage for all newborns who lack acceptable coverage and provide optional Medicaid coverage to low-income HIV-infected individuals (with enhanced matching funds) until 2013 and for family planning services to certain low-income women. In addition, increase Medicaid payment rates for primary care providers to 100% of Medicare rates by 2012. Require states to submit a state plan amendment specifying the payment rates to be paid under the state’s Medicaid program. The coverage expansions (except the optional expansions) and the enhanced provider payments will be financed with 100% federal financing through 2014 and 91% federal financing beginning in year 2015. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Repeal the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and require enrollees in separate state CHIP programs with incomes above 150% FPL to obtain coverage through the Health Insurance Exchange beginning in 2014. Children with incomes above 150% of poverty enrolled in Medicaid - expansion CHIP programs will keep Medicaid coverage and states will receive the enhanced CHIP match rate for these children starting in 2014. CHIP enrollees with incomes between 100% and 150% FPL will be transitioned to Medicaid and states will receive the CHIP enhanced match rate for children above current levels and up to 150% FPL. Require a report to Congress with recommendations to ensure that coverage in the Health Insurance Exchange is comparable to coverage under an average CHIP plan and that there are procedures to transfer CHIP enrollees into the exchange without interrupting coverage or with a written plan of treatment. (Report due by December 31, 2011)

Expand Medicaid to all non-Medicare eligible individuals under age 65 (children, pregnant women, parents, and adults without dependent children) with incomes up to 133% FPL based on modified adjusted gross income (as under current law and in the House and Senate-passed bills undocumented immigrants are not eligible for Medicaid). All newly eligible adults will be guaranteed a benchmark benefit package that meets the essential health benefits available through the Exchanges. To finance the coverage for the newly eligible (those who were not previously eligible for at least benchmark equivalent coverage, those who were eligible for a capped program but were not enrolled, or those who were enrolled in state-funded programs), states will receive 100% federal funding for 2014 through 2016, 95% federal financing in 2017, 94% federal financing in 2018, 93% federal financing in 2019, and 90% federal financing for 2020 and subsequent years. States that have already expanded Medicaid eligibility to adults with incomes up to 100% FPL will receive a phased-in increase in the federal medical assistance percentage (FMAP) for non-pregnant childless adults so that by 2019 they receive the same federal financing as other states (93% in 2019 and 90% in 2020). States have the option to expand Medicaid eligibility to childless adults beginning on April 1, 2010, but will receive their regular FMAP until 2014. In addition, increase Medicaid payments in fee-for-service and managed care for primary care services provided by primary care doctors (family medicine, general internal medicine or pediatric medicine) to 100% of the Medicare payment rates for 2013 and 2014. States will receive 100% federal financing for the increased payment rates. (Effective January 1, 2014)

Require states to maintain current income eligibility levels for children in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) until 2019 and extend funding for CHIP through 2015. CHIP benefit package and cost-sharing rules will continue as under current law. Provide states with the option to provide CHIP coverage to children of state employees who are eligible for health benefits if certain conditions are met. Beginning in 2015, states will receive a 23 percentage point increase in the CHIP match rate up to a cap of 100%. CHIP-eligible children who are unable to enroll in the program due to enrollment caps will be eligible for tax credits in the state Exchanges. Create a new public plan, covering medical, dental, podiatric, home-nursing, hospital, and auxiliary services. A National Health Insurance Board, in consultation with a National Advisory Medical Council determines the scope of benefits consistent with the statute.

Continue Medicare, but enrollees may be transferred into the new program in the future. Medicare beneficiaries are covered under the new program for services that are not covered by Medicare.

Require states to provide equivalent services to those not eligible under the new plan. Current federal Medicaid funds and other federal funds provided to states under the Social Security Act are available for this purpose Expand Medicaid to all individuals (children, pregnant women, parents, and adults without dependent children) with incomes up to 150% FPL. Individuals eligible for Medicaid will be covered through state Medicaid programs and will not be eligible for credits to purchase coverage through American Health Benefit Gateways.

Grant individuals eligible for the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) the option of enrolling in CHIP or enrolling in a qualified health plan through a Gateway. Eliminate Medicaid and CHIP as comprehensive coverage programs and instead provide supplemental, wrap-around coverage for low-income beneficiaries. Provides for a modified Medicaid long-term care services program. Create a new public plan, covering medical, dental, podiatric, home-nursing, hospital, and auxiliary services. A National Health Insurance Board, in consultation with a National Advisory Medical Council determines the scope of benefits consistent with the statute.

Continue Medicare, but enrollees may be transferred into the new program in the future. Medicare beneficiaries are covered under the new program for services that are not covered by Medicare.

Require states to provide equivalent services to those not eligible under the new plan. Current federal Medicaid funds and other federal funds provided to states under the Social Security Act are available for this purpose. Create a new public plan, the USNHC program, that provides coverage for a comprehensive set of benefits, including long-term care services, to all US residents.

Eliminate the Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP programs as beneficiaries of these programs are eligible for the USNHC program.

VA health programs will remain independent for 10 years after which they will either remain independent or be integrated into the USNHC program. The Indian Health Service will remain independent for 5 years after which it will be integrated into the USNHC program. Expand Medicaid to all individuals (children, pregnant women, parents, and adults without dependent children) with incomes up to 133% FPL (to be implemented in 2014). Adults with incomes between 100-133% FPL will have the option of obtaining coverage through Medicaid or with federal subsidies through the exchange. All newly eligible adults will be guaranteed a benchmark benefit package that at least meets the minimum creditable coverage standards. Require states to provide premium assistance to any Medicaid beneficiary with access to employer-sponsored insurance if it is cost-effective for the state. To finance the coverage for the newly eligible (those who were not previously eligible for a full benchmark benefit package or who were eligible for a capped program but were not enrolled), states will receive an increase in the federal medical assistance percentage (FMAP). Initially, the percentage point increase in the FMAP will be 27.3 for states that already cover adults with incomes above 100% FPL and 37.3 for other states. These percentage point increases will be adjusted over time so that by 2019, all states will receive an FMAP increase of 32.3 percentage points for the newly eligible. High need states—those with total Medicaid enrollment that is below the national average for enrollment as a percentage of the state population and unemployment rates of 12% or higher for August 2009—will receive full federal funding for the newly eligible for five years.

Require states to maintain current income eligibility levels for children in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) until 2019. CHIP benefit package and cost-sharing rules will continue as under current law. Beginning in 2014, states will receive a 23 percentage point increase in the CHIP match rate up to a cap of 100% and a .15 percentage point increase in the Medicaid match rate. CHIP-eligible children who are unable to enroll in the program due to enrollment caps will be eligible for tax credits in the state exchanges. Restructure the Medicaid program to provide acute care only to low-income people with disabilities, children in foster care, low-income women with breast or cervical cancer, and certain TB-infected individuals. Integrate low-income families into private insurance by providing them with a tax credit plus other financial support. Eliminate the entitlement for long-term care services under Medicaid and replace it with a block grant to states for long-term care services for eligible elderly and disabled individuals.

Allow private facilities to compete with Veteran’s Administration facilities to provide care to veterans.

Allow eligible American Indians to access medical care outside of Indian Health Service facilities. Create a new state-based American Health Security Program that provides coverage for a comprehensive set of benefits to all U.S. residents.

Eliminate the Medicare, Medicaid, and CHIP programs as beneficiaries of these programs are eligible for State Health Security Programs.

Veteran’s Affairs and Indian Health Service programs remain independent. Expand Medicaid to all individuals (children, pregnant women, parents, and adults without dependent children) with incomes up to 133% FPL. Newly eligible, non-traditional (childless adults) Medicaid beneficiaries may enroll in coverage through the Exchange if they were enrolled in qualified health coverage during the six months before becoming Medicaid eligible. Provide Medicaid coverage for all newborns who lack acceptable coverage and provide optional Medicaid coverage to low-income HIV-infected individuals and for family planning services to certain low-income women. In addition, increase Medicaid payment rates for primary care providers to 100% of Medicare rates. [E&C Committee amendment: Require states to submit a state plan amendment specifying the payment rates to be paid under the state’s Medicaid program.] The coverage expansions (except the optional expansions) and the enhanced provider payments will be fully financed with federal funds. [E&C Committee amendment: Replace full federal financing for Medicaid coverage expansions with 100% federal financing through 2014 and 90% federal financing beginning in year 2015.]

Require Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) enrollees to obtain coverage through the Health Insurance Exchange (in the first year the Exchange is available) provided the Health Choices Commissioner determines that the Exchange has the capacity to cover these children and that procedures are in place to ensure the timely transition of CHIP enrollees into the Exchange without an interruption of coverage. [E&C Committee amendment: Require that CHIP enrollees not be enrolled in an Exchange plan until the Secretary certifies that coverage is at least comparable to coverage under an average CHIP plan in effect in 2011. The Secretary must also determine that there are procedures to transfer CHIP enrollees into the exchange without interrupting coverage or with a written plan of treatment.] Expand Medicaid to all individuals with incomes up to 100% FPL. Initially, all individuals eligible for Medicaid and CHIP will obtain or retain coverage through state Medicaid programs. After five years, the HHS Secretary will be authorized to permit Medicaid and CHIP eligible individuals to enroll in the exchange provided such coverage does not result in increased cost sharing or loss of benefits.

Allow states to create a state plan option to provide another choice of coverage in the exchange. The state plan may be modeled after state self-insured plan, co-op plans with consumer boards, or other designs. The state plan must be actuarially sound; cannot be managed by the same entity that regulates the state’s insurance markets; cannot leverage participation in public programs as a means of developing provider networks; cannot be provided special advantages with respect to risk adjustment, premium rating, reserve rules, marketing, and automatic enrollment; and must be self-sustaining. If, after five years, HHS determines that affordability and coverage goals have not been met, a proposal for a federal or a state plan to be offered in the exchanges will be considered by Congress under an expedited procedure. Require states to achieve coverage for 90% of children with family incomes below 200% FPL who are eligible for public coverage before they can expand CHIP for children with family incomes between 200% FPL and 300% FPL. Require states to provide premium assistance for Medicaid and CHIP enrollees with access to employer-sponsored insurance. Require states to offer vouchers to individuals who would otherwise be eligible for Medicaid and CHIP for the purchase of alternative private health insurance. Premium and cost-sharing subsidies to individuals No provision. Provide refundable and advanceable premium credits to individuals and families with incomes between 100-400% FPL to purchase insurance through the Exchanges. The premium credits will be tied to the second lowest-cost silver plan in the area and will be set on a sliding scale such that the premium contributions are limited to 2.8% of income for those at 100% FPL to 9.8% of income for those between 300-400% FPL, except that for those with incomes between 100 and 133% FPL, the premium contribution is limited to 2% of income. (These are the provisions as drafted; however, individuals with incomes less than 133% FPL are intended to get their coverage through Medicaid.)

Increase the premium contributions for those receiving subsidies annually to reflect the excess of the premium growth over the rate of income growth .

Provide cost-sharing subsidies to eligible individuals and families with incomes between 100-200% FPL. For those with incomes between 100-150% FPL, the cost-sharing subsidies will result in coverage for 90% of the benefit costs of the plan. For those with incomes between 150-200%, the cost-sharing subsidies will result in coverage for 80% of the benefit costs of the plan. American Indians with income less than 300% FPL will not be subject to any cost-sharing requirements.

Limit availability of premium credits and cost-sharing subsidies through the Exchanges to U.S. citizens and legal immigrants who meet income limits. Employees who are offered coverage by an employer are not eligible for premium credits unless the employer plan does not have an actuarial value of at least 60% or if the employee share of the premium exceeds 9.8% of income. Legal immigrants who are barred from enrolling in Medicaid during their first five years in the U.S. will be eligible for premium credits.

Require verification of both income and citizenship status in determining eligibility for the federal premium credits.

Ensure that federal premium or cost-sharing subsidies are not used to purchase coverage for abortion if coverage extends beyond saving the life of the woman or cases of rape or incest (Hyde amendment). If an individual who receives federal assistance purchases coverage in a plan that chooses to cover abortion services beyond those for which federal funds are permitted, those federal subsidy funds (for premiums or cost-sharing) must not be used for the purchase of the abortion coverage and must be segregated from private premium payments or state funds.

Provisions related to the premium and cost-sharing subsidies are effective January 1, 2014. Provide affordability premium credits to eligible individuals and families with incomes up to 400% FPL to purchase insurance through the Health Insurance Exchange. The premium credits will be based on the average cost of the three lowest cost basic health plans in the area and will be set on a sliding scale such that the premium contributions are limited to the following percentages of income for specified income tiers:

133-150% FPL: 1.5 - 3% of income





150-200% FPL: 3 – 5.5% of income





200-250% FPL: 5.5 - 8% of income





250-300% FPL: 8 - 10% of income





300-350% FPL: 10 - 11% of income





350-400% FPL: 11 - 12% of income

(Effective January 1, 2013) Index the affordability premium credits after 2013 to maintain the ratio of government to enrollee shares of the premiums over time.

Provide affordability cost-sharing credits to eligible individuals and families with incomes up to 400% FPL. The cost-sharing credits reduce the cost-sharing amounts and annual cost-sharing limits and have the effect of increasing the actuarial value of the basic benefit plan to the following percentages of the full value of the plan for the specified income tier:





133-150% FPL: 97%





150-200% FPL: 93%





200-250% FPL: 85%





250-300% FPL: 78%





300-350% FPL: 72%





350-400% FPL: 70% (Effective January 1, 2013) Lower the out-of-pocket spending limits established in the essential benefits package ($5,000/individual and $10,000/family) for eligible individuals and families with incomes up to 400% FPL to the following amounts: 133-150% FPL: $500/individual; $1,000/family



150-200% FPL: $1,000/individual; $2,000/family



200-250% FPL: $2,000/individual; $4,000/family



250-300% FPL: $4,000/individual; $8,000/family



300-350% FPL: $4,500/individual; $9,000/family



350-400% FPL: $5,000/individual; $10,000/family

(Effective January 1, 2013) Limit availability of premium and cost-sharing credits to US citizens and lawfully residing immigrants who meet the income limits and are not enrolled in qualified or grandfathered employer or individual coverage, Medicare, Medicaid (except those eligible to enroll in the Exchange), TRICARE, or VA coverage (with some exceptions). Individuals with access to employer-based coverage are eligible for the premium and cost-sharing credits if the cost of the employee premium exceeds 12% of the individuals’ income.

Require verification of both income and citizenship status in determining eligibility for the federal premium and cost-sharing credits.

Prohibit federal premium subsidies from being used to purchase a health plan in the Exchange that includes coverage for abortions except to save the life of the woman or in cases of rape or incest. Individuals receiving federal subsidies may purchase supplemental coverage for abortions but that coverage must be paid for entirely with private funds.

Provide refundable and advanceable premium credits to eligible individuals and families with incomes between 133-400% FPL to purchase insurance through the Exchanges. The premium credits will be tied to the second lowest cost silver plan in the area and will be set on a sliding scale such that the premium contributions are limited to the following percentages of income for specified income levels: Up to 133% FPL: 2% of income

133-150% FPL: 3 – 4% of income

150-200% FPL: 4 – 6.3% of income

200-250% FPL: 6.3 – 8.05% of income

250-300% FPL: 8.05 – 9.5% of income

300-400% FPL: 9.5% of income

Increase the premium contributions for those receiving subsidies annually to reflect the excess of the premium growth over the rate of income growth for 2014-2018. Beginning in 2019, further adjust the premium contributions to reflect the excess of premium growth over CPI if aggregate premiums and cost sharing subsidies exceed .54% of GDP.

Provide cost-sharing subsidies to eligible individuals and families. The cost-sharing credits reduce the cost-sharing amounts and annual cost-sharing limits and have the effect of increasing the actuarial value of the basic benefit plan to the following percentages of the full value of the plan for the specified income level: 100-150% FPL: 94%

150-200% FPL: 87%

200-250% FPL: 73%

250-400% FPL: 70%

Limit availability of premium credits and cost-sharing subsidies through the Exchanges to U.S. citizens and legal immigrants who meet income limits. Employees who are offered coverage by an employer are not eligible for premium credits unless the employer plan does not have an actuarial value of at least 60% or if the employee share of the premium exceeds 9.5% of income. Legal immigrants who are barred from enrolling in Medicaid during their first five years in the U.S. will be eligible for premium credits.

Require verification of both income and citizenship status in determining eligibility for the federal premium credits.

Ensure that federal premium or cost-sharing subsidies are not used to purchase coverage for abortion if coverage extends beyond saving the life of the woman or cases of rape or incest (Hyde amendment). If an individual who receives federal assistance purchases coverage in a plan that chooses to cover abortion services beyond those for which federal funds are permitted, those federal subsidy funds (for premiums or cost-sharing) must not be used for the purchase of the abortion coverage and must be segregated from private premium payments or state funds.

Provisions related to the premium and cost-sharing subsidies are effective January 1, 2014. Low-income individuals (family income <200% FPL) are not required to pay premiums and are not subject to deductibles and co-insurance.

Provide premium subsidies and reduced deductibles for individuals with family incomes between 200% and 300% FPL.

Limit OOP costs for deductibles and coinsurance to 5% of income for those between 200 and 300% FPL, and 7.5% of income for those between 300 and 500% FPL.

No deductibles and coinsurance for pregnancy-related services and covered benefits provided to children (up to age 24). Provide premium credits on a sliding scale basis to individuals and families with incomes up to 400% FPL to purchase coverage through the Gateway. The premium credits will be based on the average cost of the three lowest cost qualified health plans in the area, but will be such that individuals with incomes less than 400% FPL pay no more than 12.5% of income and individuals with incomes less than 150% FPL pay 1% of income, with additional limits on cost sharing.

Limit availability of premium credits through the Gateway to U.S. citizens and lawfully residing immigrants who meet income limits and are not eligible for employer-based coverage that meets minimum qualifying criteria and affordability standards, Medicare, Medicaid, TRICARE, or the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program. Individuals with access to employer-based coverage are eligible for the premium credits if the cost of the employee premium exceeds 12.5% of the individuals’ income. Provide premium subsidies for individuals and families with incomes between 100 and 400% FPL; those with incomes below 100% FPL would not pay premiums.

Provide a health care standard tax deduction for individuals and families with incomes above 100% FPL; would phase-out at higher income levels. Individuals are not required to pay premiums to obtain coverage. Individuals are not required to pay premiums to obtain coverage nor are they charged copayments or coinsurance for covered benefits. Provide refundable and advanceable premium credits to individuals and families with incomes between 133-400% FPL in 2013, and including individuals and families with incomes between 100-133% FPL in 2014, to purchase insurance through the health insurance exchanges. The premium credits will be tied to the second lowest-cost silver plan in the area and will be provided on a sliding scale basis from 2% of income for those at 100% FPL to 12% of income for those between 300-400% FPL.

Exclude individuals with incomes below 100% FPL from eligibility for the premium credits. These individuals will be eligible for coverage through the Medicaid program.

Provide cost-sharing subsidies to eligible individuals and families with incomes between 100-200% FPL. For those with incomes between 100-150% FPL, the cost-sharing subsidies will result in coverage for 90% of the benefit costs of the plan. For those with incomes between 150-200%, the cost-sharing subsidies will result in coverage for 80% of the benefit costs of the plan.

Limit availability of premium credits and cost-sharing subsidies through the exchanges to U.S. citizens and legal immigrants who meet income limits. Employees who are offered coverage by an employer are not eligible for premium credits unless the employer plan does not have an actuarial value of at least 65% or if the employee share of the premium exceeds 10% of income.

Require verification of both income and citizenship status in determining eligibility for the federal premium credits. Provide a qualified health insurance credit of $2,290 for individuals and $5,710 for families to be used to purchase health insurance. Individuals enrolled in Medicare or military coverage and people with disabilities enrolled in Medicaid are not eligible for the tax credit. Any tax credit amount exceeding the cost of a health insurance plan purchased by an individual or family will be deposited into a medical savings account.

Provide a supplemental debit card to families with incomes below 200% FPL to be used to pay for private health insurance costs. The amounts available on the debit cards range from $5,000 for families with incomes below 100% FPL to $2,000 for families with incomes between 180 and 200% FPL. Additional amounts provided for pregnancy ($1,000) and infants under age 1 ($500). Individuals are not required to pay premiums to obtain coverage nor are they charged copayments or coinsurance for covered benefits. Provide affordability premium credits to eligible individuals and families with incomes up to 400% FPL to purchase insurance through the Health Insurance Exchange. The premium credits will be based on the average cost of the three lowest cost basic health plans in the area and will be set on a sliding scale such that the premium contributions are limited to the following percentages of income for specified income tiers: 133-150% FPL: 1.5 - 3% of income 150-200% FPL: 3 - 5% of income 200-250% FPL: 5 - 7% of income 250-300% FPL: 7 - 9% of income 300-350% FPL: 9 - 10% of income 350-400% FPL: 10 - 11% of income [E&C Committee amendment: Replaces the above subsidy schedule with the following: 133-150% FPL: 1.5 - 3% of income 150-200% FPL: 3 – 5.5% of income 200-250% FPL: 5.5 - 8% of income 250-300% FPL: 8 - 10% of income 300-350% FPL: 10 - 11% of income 350-400% FPL: 11 - 12% of income] [E&C Committee amendment: Increase the affordability credits annually by the estimated savings achieved through adopting a formulary in the public health insurance option, pharmacy benefit manager transparency requirements, developing accountable care organization pilot programs in Medicaid, and administrative simplification.] [E&C Committee amendment: Increase the affordability credits annually by the estimated savings achieved through limiting increases in premiums for plans in the Exchange to no more than 150% of the annual increase in medical inflation and by requiring the Secretary to negotiate directly with prescription drug manufacturers to lower the prices for Medicare Part D plans.] Provide affordability cost-sharing credits to eligible individuals and families with incomes up to 400% FPL. The cost-sharing credits reduce the cost-sharing amounts and annual cost-sharing limits and have the effect of increasing the actuarial value of the basic benefit plan to the following percentages of the full value of the plan for the specified income tier: 133-150% FPL: 97% 150-200% FPL: 93% 200-250% FPL: 85% 250-300% FPL: 78% 300-350% FPL: 72% 350-400% FPL: 70%

Limit availability of premium and cost-sharing credits to US citizens and lawfully residing immigrants who meet the income limits and are not enrolled in qualified or grandfathered employer or individual coverage, Medicare, Medicaid (except those eligible to enroll in the Exchange), TRICARE, or VA coverage (with some exceptions). Individuals with access to employer-based coverage are eligible for the premium and cost-sharing credits if the cost of the employee premium exceeds 11% of the individuals’ income [E&C Committee amendment: To be eligible for the premium and cost-sharing credits, the cost of the employee premium must exceed 12% of individuals’ income.]. Provide tax credits on a sliding scale basis to individuals and families with incomes up to 400% FPL to purchase insurance through the Health Insurance Exchanges and families with incomes below 100% FPL will be enrolled in Medicaid and pay no premiums. Within the exchange, those with incomes between 100 and 150% FPL will pay 2% of income; those with incomes between 150 and 250% FPL will pay 5% of income; those with incomes between 250 and 350% FPL will pay 10% of income; those between 350 and 400% FPL will pay 12.5%. The tax credits will be refundable and advanceable.

Limit premiums for individuals and families with incomes above 400% FPL to no more than 15 percent of their income. Provide a refundable tax credit of $2,000 for individuals and $5,000 for a family of four with incomes up to 200% FPL for the purchase of health insurance in the individual market. Phase down the credit for individuals and families with incomes between 200% FPL and 300% FPL. Citizens and legal permanent residents of the United States are eligible for the tax credit.

Permit individuals eligible for other health benefit programs, including Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP, TRICARE, Veterans’ Affairs, the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program, and subsidized group coverage to receive a tax credit instead of coverage through the program.



Premium subsidies to employers No provision. Provide small employers with no more than 25 employees and average annual wages of less than $50,000 that purchase health insurance for employees with a tax credit. Phase I : For tax years 2010 through 2013, provide a tax credit of up to 35% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium if the employer contributes at least 50% of the total premium cost or 50% of a benchmark premium. The full credit will be available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of less than $25,000. The credit phases-out as firm size and average wage increases. Tax-exempt small businesses meeting these requirements are eligible for tax credits of up to 25% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium. Phase II : For tax years 2014 and later, for eligible small businesses that purchase coverage through the state Exchange, provide a tax credit of up to 50% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium if the employer contributes at least 50% of the total premium cost. The credit will be available for two years. The full credit will be available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of less than $25,000. The credit phases-out as firm size and average wage increases. Tax-exempt small businesses meeting these requirements are eligible for tax credits of up to 35% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium.

Create a temporary reinsurance program for employers providing health insurance coverage to retirees over age 55 who are not eligible for Medicare. Program will reimburse employers or insurers for 80% of retiree claims between $15,000 and $90,000. Payments from the reinsurance program will be used to lower the costs for enrollees in the employer plan. Appropriate $5 billion to finance the program. (Effective 90 days following enactment through January 1, 2014) Provide small employers with fewer than 25 employees and average wages of less than $40,000 with a health coverage tax credit for up to two years. The full credit of 50% of premium costs paid by employers is available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of $20,000 or less. The credit phases-out as firm size and average wage increases and is not permitted for employees earning more than $80,000 per year. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Create a temporary reinsurance program for employers providing health insurance coverage to retirees over age 55 who are not eligible for Medicare. Program will reimburse employers for 80% of retiree claims between $15,000 and $90,000. Payments from the reinsurance program will be used to lower the costs for enrollees in the employer plan. Appropriate $10 billion over ten years for the reinsurance program. (Effective 90 days after enactment) Provide small employers with no more than 25 employees and average annual wages of less than $50,000 that purchase health insurance for employees with a tax credit.

Phase I : For tax years 2010 through 2013, provide a tax credit of up to 35% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium if the employer contributes at least 50% of the total premium cost or 50% of a benchmark premium. The full credit will be available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of less than $25,000. The credit phases-out as firm size and average wage increases. Tax-exempt small businesses meeting these requirements are eligible for tax credits of up to 25% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium.

: For tax years 2010 through 2013, provide a tax credit of up to 35% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium if the employer contributes at least 50% of the total premium cost or 50% of a benchmark premium. The full credit will be available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of less than $25,000. The credit phases-out as firm size and average wage increases. Tax-exempt small businesses meeting these requirements are eligible for tax credits of up to 25% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium.

Phase II : For tax years 2014 and later, for eligible small businesses that purchase coverage through the state Exchange, provide a tax credit of up to 50% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium if the employer contributes at least 50% of the total premium cost. The credit will be available for two years. The full credit will be available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of less than $25,000. The credit phases-out as firm size and average wage increases. Tax-exempt small businesses meeting these requirements are eligible for tax credits of up to 35% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium.

: For tax years 2014 and later, for eligible small businesses that purchase coverage through the state Exchange, provide a tax credit of up to 50% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium if the employer contributes at least 50% of the total premium cost. The credit will be available for two years. The full credit will be available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of less than $25,000. The credit phases-out as firm size and average wage increases. Tax-exempt small businesses meeting these requirements are eligible for tax credits of up to 35% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium. Create a temporary reinsurance program for employers providing health insurance coverage to retirees over age 55 who are not eligible for Medicare. Program will reimburse employers or insurers for 80% of retiree claims between $15,000 and $90,000. Payments from the reinsurance program will be used to lower the costs for enrollees in the employer plan. Appropriate $5 billion to finance the program. (Effective 90 days following enactment through January 1, 2014) No provision. Provide qualifying small employers with a health options program credit. To qualify for the credit, employers must have fewer than 50 full-time employees, pay an average wage of less than $50,000, and must pay at least 60% of employee health expenses. The credit is equal to $1,000 for each employee with single coverage and $2,000 for each employee with family coverage, adjusted for firm size (phasing out as firm size increases) and number of months of coverage provided. Bonus payments are given for each additional 10% of employee health expenses above 60% paid by the employer. Employers may not receive the credit for more than three consecutive years. Self-employed individuals who do not receive premium credits for purchasing coverage through the Gateway are eligible for the credit.

Create a temporary reinsurance program for employers providing health insurance coverage to retirees ages 55 to 64. Program will reimburse employers for 80% of retiree claims between $15,000 and $90,000. Program will end when the state Gateway is established. Payments from the reinsurance program will be used to lower the costs for enrollees in the employer plan. No provision. No provision. No provision. Provide small employers with fewer than 25 employees and average annual wages of less than $40,000 that purchase health insurance for employees with a tax credit.

Phase I : For tax years 2011 and 2012, provide a tax credit of up to 35% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium if the employer contributes at least 50% of the total premium cost or 50% of a benchmark premium. The full credit will be available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of less than $20,000. Tax-exempt small businesses meeting these requirements are eligible for tax credits of up to 25% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium.



Phase II : For tax years 2013 and later, for eligible small businesses that purchase coverage through the state exchange, provide a tax credit of up to 50% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium if the employer contributes at least 50% of the total premium cost or 50% of a benchmark premium. The credit will be available for two years. The full credit will be available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of less than $20,000. Tax-exempt small businesses meeting these requirements are eligible for tax credits of up to 35% of the employer’s contribution toward the employee’s health insurance premium.

Create a temporary reinsurance program for employers providing health insurance coverage to retirees ages 55 to 64. Program will reimburse employers or insurers for 80% of retiree claims between $15,000 and $90,000. Appropriate $5 billion to finance the program. Not specified. No provision. Provide small employers with fewer than 25 employees and average wages of less than $40,000 with a health coverage tax credit. The full credit of 50% of premium costs paid by employers is available to employers with 10 or fewer employees and average annual wages of $20,000 or less. The credit phases-out as firm size and average wage increases and is not permitted for employees earning more than $80,000 per year.

Create a temporary reinsurance program for employers providing health insurance coverage to retirees ages 55 to 64. Program will reimburse employers for 80% of retiree claims between $15,000 and $90,000. Payments from the reinsurance program will be used to lower the costs for enrollees in the employer plan. Appropriate $10 billion over ten years for the reinsurance program. Provide small employers with fewer than 25 employees who are mostly low-wage with tax credits to help offer coverage to their workers. Provide small employers (50 and fewer employees) with a temporary tax credit to adopt auto-enrollment procedures and to contribute toward coverage for employees who choose to purchase private coverage in the individual market. Tax changes related to health insurance and to financing health reform Change health savings account (HSA) requirements by allowing health insurance premiums for high-deductible health plans to be paid tax-free from an HSA. Impose a tax on individuals without qualifying coverage of the greater of $750 per year up to a maximum of three times that amount or 2% of household income to be phased-in beginning in 2014.

Impose an excise tax on insurers of employer-sponsored health plans with aggregate values that exceed $8,500 for individual coverage and $23,000 for family coverage (these threshold values will be indexed to the consumer price index for urban consumers (CPI-U) plus one percentage point). The threshold amounts will be increased for retired individuals age 55 and older who are not eligible for Medicare and for employees engaged in high-risk professions by $1,350 for individual coverage and $3,000 for family coverage. In the 17 states with the highest health care costs, the threshold amount is increased by 20% initially; this increase is subsequently reduced by half each year until it is phased out in 2015. The tax is equal to 40% of the value of the plan that exceeds the threshold amounts and is imposed on the issuer of the health insurance policy, which in the case of a self-insured plan is the plan administrator or, in some cases, the employer. The aggregate value of the health insurance plan includes reimbursements under a flexible spending account for medical expenses (health FSA) or health reimbursement arrangement (HRA), employer contributions to a health savings account (HSA), and coverage for dental, vision, and other supplementary health insurance coverage. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Exclude the costs for over-the-counter drugs not prescribed by a doctor from being reimbursed through an HRA or health FSA and from being reimbursed on a tax-free basis through an HSA or Archer Medical Savings Account. (Effective January 1, 2011)

Increase the tax on distributions from a health savings account or an Archer MSA that are not used for qualified medical expenses to 20% (from 10% for HSAs and from 15% for Archer MSAs) of the disbursed amount. (Effective January 1, 2011)

Limit the amount of contributions to a flexible spending account for medical expenses to $2,500 per year increased annually by the cost of living adjustment. (Effective January 1, 2011)

Increase the threshold for the itemized deduction for unreimbursed medical expenses from 7.5% of adjusted gross income to 10% of adjusted gross income for regular tax purposes; waive the increase for individuals age 65 and older for tax years 2013 through 2016. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Increase the Medicare Part A (hospital insurance) tax rate on wages by 0.9% (from 1.45% to 2.35%) on earnings over $200,000 for individual taxpayers and $250,000 for married couples filing jointly; funds deposited into the Medicare Part A Trust Fund. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Eliminate the tax deduction for employers who receive Medicare Part D retiree drug subsidy payments (Effective January 1, 2011)

Impose new fees on segments of the health care sector:

$2.3 billion annual fee on the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector (effective for sales after December 31, 2008);



$2 billion annual fee on the medical device manufacturing sector increasing to $3 billion after 2017 (effective for sales after December 31, 2009); and



Annual fees on the health insurance sector of $2 billion in 2011, $4 billion in 2012, $7 billion in 2013, $9 billion in 2014-2016, and $10 billion in 2017 and thereafter (effective for net premiums written after December 31, 2009).

Limit the deductibility of executive and employee compensation to $500,000 per applicable individual for health insurance providers. (Effective January 1, 2009)

Impose a tax of 10% on the amount paid for indoor tanning services. (Effective January 1, 2010) Impose a tax on individuals without acceptable health care coverage of 2.5% of adjusted income above the filing threshold up to the cost of the average national premium for self-only or family coverage under a basic plan in the Health Insurance Exchange. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Impose a tax of 5.4% on individuals with modified adjusted gross income exceeding $500,000 and families with modified adjusted gross income exceeding $1,000,000. (Effective January 1, 2011)

Permit only prescribed drugs to be reimbursable through a health savings account, Archer medical savings account, health reimbursement arrangement, or flexible spending arrangement for medical expenses. (Effective January 1, 2011)

Increase the tax on distributions from a health savings account that are not used for qualified medical expenses to 20% (from 10%) of the disbursed amount. (Effective January 1, 2011)

Limit the amount of contributions to a flexible spending arrangement for medical expenses to $2,500 per year. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Impose a tax of 2.5% of the price on the first taxable sale of any medical device. (Effective January 1, 2013) Impose a tax on individuals without qualifying coverage of the greater of $695 per year up to a maximum of three times that amount or 2.5% of household income to be phased-in beginning in 2014.

Impose an excise tax on insurers of employer-sponsored health plans with aggregate values that exceed $10,200 for individual coverage and $27,500 for family coverage (these threshold values will be indexed to the consumer price index for urban consumers (CPI-U) for years beginning in 2020). The threshold amounts will be increased for retired individuals age 55 and older who are not eligible for Medicare and for employees engaged in high-risk professions by $1,650 for individual coverage and $3,450 for family coverage. The threshold amounts may be adjusted upwards if health care costs rise more than expected prior to implementation of the tax in 2018. The thresholds will be increased for firms that may have higher health care costs because of the age or gender of their workers. The tax is equal to 40% of the value of the plan that exceeds the threshold amounts and is imposed on the issuer of the health insurance policy, which in the case of a self-insured plan is the plan administrator or, in some cases, the employer. The aggregate value of the health insurance plan includes reimbursements under a flexible spending account for medical expenses (health FSA) or health reimbursement arrangement (HRA), employer contributions to a health savings account (HSA), and coverage for supplementary health insurance coverage, excluding dental and vision coverage. (Effective January 1, 2018)

Exclude the costs for over-the-counter drugs not prescribed by a doctor from being reimbursed through an HRA or health FSA and from being reimbursed on a tax-free basis through an HSA or Archer Medical Savings Account. (Effective January 1, 2011)

Increase the tax on distributions from a health savings account or an Archer MSA that are not used for qualified medical expenses to 20% (from 10% for HSAs and from 15% for Archer MSAs) of the disbursed amount. (Effective January 1, 2011)

Limit the amount of contributions to a flexible spending account for medical expenses to $2,500 per year increased annually by the cost of living adjustment. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Increase the threshold for the itemized deduction for unreimbursed medical expenses from 7.5% of adjusted gross income to 10% of adjusted gross income for regular tax purposes; waive the increase for individuals age 65 and older for tax years 2013 through 2016. (Effective January 1, 2013)

Increase the Medicare Part A (hospital insurance) tax rate on wages by 0.9% (from 1.45% to 2.35%) on earnings over $200,000 for individual taxpayers and $250,000 for married couples filing jointly and impose a 3.8% tax on unearned income for higher-income taxpayers (thresholds are not indexed). (Effective January 1, 2013)

(Effective January 1, 2013) Eliminate the tax deduction for employers who receive Medicare Part D retiree drug subsidy payments (Effective January 1, 2013)

Impose new annual fees on the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector, according to the following schedule:

$2.5 billion in 2011;



$2.8 billion in 2012-2013;



$3.0 billion in 2014-2016;



$4.0 billion in 2017;



$4.1 billion in 2018; and



$2.8 billion in 2019 and later.

Impose an annual fee on the health insurance sector, according to the following schedule:

$8 billion in 2014;



$11.3 billion in 2015-2016;



$13.9 billion in 2017;



$14.3 billion in 2018



For subsequent years, the fee shall be the amount from the previous year increased by the rate of premium growth. For non-profit insurers, only 50% of net premiums are taken into account in calculating the fee. Exemptions granted for non-profit plans that receive more than 80% of their income from government programs targeting low-income or elderly populations, or people with disabilities, and voluntary employees’ beneficiary associations (VEBAs) not established by an employer. (Effective January 1, 2014) Impose an excise tax of 2.3% on the sale of any taxable medical device. (Effective for sales after December 31, 2012)

Limit the deductibility of executive and employee compensation to $500,000 per applicable individual for health insurance providers. (Effective January 1, 2009)

Impose a tax of 10% on the amount paid for indoor tanning services. (Effective July 1, 2010)

Exclude unprocessed fuels from the definition of cellulosic biofuel for purposes of applying the cellulosic biofuel producer credit. (Effective January 1, 2010)

Clarify application of the economic substance doctrine and increase penalties for underpayments attributable to a transaction lacking economic substance. (Effective upon enactment) Individual premium payments for AmeriCare coverage are considered a tax and subject to withholding. Impose a minimum tax on individuals without qualifying health care coverage of $750 per individual per year (maximum family penalty of 4 times the individual penalty). Reform the tax code to eliminate the exclusion of the value of health insurance plans offered by employers from workers' taxable income (with exceptions, such as for employer-paid retiree health coverage and coverage through a collectively bargained plan).

Provide a new health care standard deduction that phases out for higher income taxpayers. No provision. No provision. Impose a tax on individuals without qualifying coverage of $750 per adult per year to be phased-in beginning in 2014.

Impose an excise tax in 2013 on insurers of employer-sponsored health plans with aggregate values that exceed $8,000 for individual coverage and $21,000 for family coverage (these threshold values will be indexed to the consumer price index for urban consumers (CPI-U) plus 1%). The threshold amounts will be increased for retired individuals age 55 and up and for employees engaged in high-risk professions by $1,850 for individual coverage and $5,000 for family coverage. In the 17 states with the highest health care costs, the threshold amount is increased by 20% initially; this premium increase is subsequently reduced by half each year until it is phased out in 2015. The tax is equal to 40% of the value of the plan that exceeds the threshold amounts and is imposed on the issuer of the health insurance policy, which in the case of a self-insured plan is the plan administrator or, in some cases, the employer. The aggregate value of the health insurance plan includes reimbursements under a flexible spending account for medical expenses (health FSA) or health reimbursement arrangement (HRA), employer contributions to a health savings account (HSA), and coverage for dental, vision, and other supplementary health insurance coverage.

Conform the definition of medical expenses for purposes of employer provided health coverage (including HRAs and health FSAs), HSAs, and Archer medical savings accounts to the definition for purposes of the itemized deduction for medical expenses. This change will exclude the costs for over-the-counter drugs not prescribed by a doctor from being reimbursed through an HRA or health FSA and from being reimbursed on a tax-free basis through an HSA or Archer MSA.

Increase the tax on distributions from a health savings account that are not used for qualified medical expenses to 20% (from 10%) of the disbursed amount.

Limit the amount of contributions to a flexible spending account for medical expenses to $2,500 per year.

Increase the threshold for the itemized deduction for unreimbursed medical expenses from 7.5% of adjusted gross income to 10% of adjusted gross income for regular tax purposes. Individuals age 65 and older are exempt from the increased threshold.

Impose new fees on segments of the health care sector:

$2.3 billion annual fee on the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector;



$4 billion annual fee on the medical device manufacturing sector; and



$6.7 billion annual fee on the health insurance sector. Reform the tax code to eliminate the exclusion of the value of health insurance plans offered by employers from workers’ taxable income.

Allow individuals and families purchasing high-deductible health plans that are less than the value of the tax credit to deposit the excess amount into a medical savings account.

Change health savings account (HSA)requirements by allowing health insurance premiums for high-deductible health plans to be paid tax-free from an HSA, increasing the allowable contribution amounts for people with chronic conditions, and permitting high-deductible health plans to cover preventive services, maintenance costs of chronic diseases, and concierge-style primary care services. Impose a new health care income tax on individuals of 2.2% of taxable income Impose a tax on individuals without acceptable health care coverage of 2.5% of modified adjusted gross income. Cap the income tax exclusion for employer-sponsored insurance at the value of the FEHBP standard option and index that amount by medical inflation over time. Exempt retirees and individuals covered by collectively bargained agreements until those agreements expire. Reform the tax code to permit individuals and families to deduct the amount paid for premiums purchased in the individual market from taxable income. Cap the deduction at the value of the national exclusion for employer-sponsored insurance.

Provide tax credits to individuals and families with incomes below 300% FPL to purchase health insurance in the individual market.

Allow physicians to deduct costs related to providing uncompensated care required under Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA). Limit the deduction amount to the Medicare payment amount for the services provided. Creation of insurance pooling mechanisms Establish certified Association Health Plans through which member employers can purchase health coverage for their employees. Permit Association Health Plans to determine what benefits will be covered under the plans they offer and allow the same variations in premiums as is permitted in the small group market. Create state-based American Health Benefit Exchanges and Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) Exchanges, administered by a governmental agency or non-profit organization, through which individuals and small businesses with up to 100 employees can purchase qualified coverage. Permit states to allow businesses with more than 100 employees to purchase coverage in the SHOP Exchange beginning in 2017. States may form regional Exchanges or allow more than one Exchange to operate in a state as long as each Exchange serves a distinct geographic area. (Funding available to states to establish Exchanges within one year of enactment and until January 1, 2015)

Restrict access to coverage through the Exchanges to U.S. citizens and legal immigrants who are not incarcerated.

Require the Office of Personnel Management to contract with insurers to offer at least two multi-state plans in each Exchange. At least one plan must be offered by a non-profit entity and at least one plan must not provide coverage for abortions beyond those permitted by federal law. Each multi-state plan must be licensed in each state and must meet the qualifications of a qualified health plan. If a state has lower age rating requirements than 3:1, the state may require multi-state plans to meet the more protective age rating rules. These multi-state plans will be offered separately from the Federal Employees Health Benefit Program and will have a separate risk pool.

Create the Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan (CO-OP) program to foster the creation of non-profit, member-run health insurance companies in all 50 states and District of Columbia to offer qualified health plans. To be eligible to receive funds, an organization must not be an existing health insurer or sponsored by a state or local government, substantially all of its activities must consist of the issuance of qualified health benefit plans in each state in which it is licensed, governance of the organization must be subject to a majority vote of its members, must operate with a strong consumer focus, and any profits must be used to lower premiums, improve benefits, or improve the quality of health care delivered to its members. (Appropriate $6 billion to finance the program and award loans and grants to establish CO-OPs by July 1, 2013)

Create four benefit categories of plans plus a separate catastrophic plan to be offered through the Exchange, and in the individual and small group markets:

Bronze plan represents minimum creditable coverage and provides the essential health benefits, cover 60% of the benefit costs of the plan, with an out-of-pocket limit equal to the Health Savings Account (HSA) current law limit ($5,950 for individuals and $11,900 for families in 2010);



Silver plan provides the essential health benefits, covers 70% of the benefit costs of the plan, with the HSA out-of-pocket limits;



Gold plan provides the essential health benefits, covers 80% of the benefit costs of the plan, with the HSA out-of-pocket limits;



Platinum plan provides the essential health benefits, covers 90% of the benefit costs of the plan, with the HSA out-of-pocket limits;



Catastrophic plan available to those up to age 30 or to those who are exempt from the mandate to purchase coverage and provides catastrophic coverage only with the coverage level set at the HSA current law levels except that prevention benefits and coverage for three primary care visits would be exempt from the deductible. This plan is only available in the individual market.

Reduce the out-of-pocket limits for those with incomes up to 400% FPL to the following levels:

100-200% FPL: one-third of the HSA limits ($1,983/individual and $3,967/family);



200-300% FPL: one-half of the HSA limits ($2,975/individual and $5,950/family);



300-400% FPL: two-thirds of the HSA limits ($3,987/individual and $7,973/family). These out-of-pocket reductions are applied within the actuarial limits of the plan and will not increase the actuarial value of the plan. Require guarantee issue and renewability and allow rating variation based only on age (limited to 3 to 1 ratio), premium rating area, family composition, and tobacco use (limited to 1.5. to 1 ratio) in the individual and the small group market and the Exchange.

Require qualified health plans participating in the Exchange to meet marketing requirements, have adequate provider networks, contract with essential community providers, contract with navigators to conduct outreach and enrollment assistance, be accredited with respect to performance on quality measures, use a uniform enrollment form and standard format to present plan information.

Require qualified health plans to report information on claims payment policies, enrollment, disenrollment, number of claims denied, cost-sharing requirements, out-of-network policies, and enrollee rights in plain language.

Require the Exchanges to maintain a call center for customer service, and establish procedures for enrolling individuals and businesses and for determining eligibility for tax credits. Require states to develop a single form for applying for state health subsidy programs that can be filed online, in person, by mail or by phone. Permit Exchanges to contract with state Medicaid agencies to determine eligibility for tax credits in the Exchanges.

Permit states the option to create a Basic Health Plan for uninsured individuals with incomes between 133-200% FPL who would otherwise be eligible to receive premium subsidies in the Exchange. States opting to provide this coverage will contract with one or more standard plans to provide at least the essential health benefits and must ensure that eligible individuals do not pay more in premiums than they would have paid in the Exchange and that the cost-sharing requirements do not exceed those of the platinum plan for enrollees with income less than 150% FPL or the gold plan for all other enrollees. States will receive 95% of the funds that would have been paid as federal premium and cost-sharing subsidies for eligible individuals to establish the Basic Health Plan. Individuals with incomes between 133-200% FPL in states creating Basic Health Plans will not be eligible for subsidies in the Exchanges.

Permit states to prohibit plans participating in the Exchange from providing coverage for abortions. Require plans that choose to offer coverage for abortions beyond those for which federal funds are permitted (to save the life of the woman and in cases of rape or incest) in states that allow such coverage to create allocation accounts for segregating premium payments for coverage of abortion services from premium payments for coverage for all other services to ensure that no federal premium or cost-sharing subsidies are used to pay for the abortion coverage. Plans must also estimate the actuarial value of covering abortions by taking into account the cost of the abortion benefit (valued at no less than $1 per enrollee per month) and cannot take into account any savings that might be reaped as a result of the abortions. Prohibit plans participating in the Exchanges from discriminating against any provider because of an unwillingness to provide, pay for, provide coverage of, or refer for abortions.

Require Exchanges to submit financial reports to the Secretary and comply with oversight investigations including a GAO study on the operation and administration of Exchanges

Unless otherwise noted, provisions relating to the American Health Benefit Exchanges are effective January 1, 2014. Create a National Health Insurance Exchange, through which individuals and employers (phasing-in eligibility for employers starting with smallest employers) can purchase qualified insurance, including from private health plans and the public health insurance option.

Restrict access to coverage through the Exchange to individuals who are not enrolled in qualified or grandfathered employer or individual coverage, Medicare, Medicaid, TRICARE, or VA coverage.

Create a new public health insurance option to be offered through the Health Insurance Exchange that must meet the same requirements as private plans regarding benefit levels, provider networks, consumer protections, and cost-sharing. Require the public plan to offer basic, enhanced, and premium plans, and permit it to offer premium plus plans. Prohibit the public plan from providing coverage for abortions beyond those permitted by federal law (to save the life of the woman and in cases of rape and incest). Finance the costs of the public plan through revenues from premiums. Require the public health insurance option to negotiate rates with providers so that the rates are not lower than Medicare rates and not higher than the average rates paid by other qualified health benefit plan offering entities. Health care providers participating in Medicare are considered participating providers in the public plan unless they opt out. Permit the public plan to develop innovative payment mechanisms, including medical home and other care management payments, value-based purchasing, bundling of services, differential payment rates, performance based payments, or partial capitation and modify cost-sharing and payment rates to encourage use of high-value services.

Create a Consumer Operated and Oriented Program (CO-OP) to facilitate the establishment of non-profit, member-run health insurance cooperatives to provide insurance through the Exchange. (Effective six months following enactment)

Create four benefit categories of plans to be offered through the Exchange:

Basic plan includes essential benefits package and covers 70% of the benefit costs of the plan;



Enhanced plan includes essential benefits package, reduced cost-sharing compared to the basic plan, and covers 85% of benefit costs of the plan;



Premium plan includes essential benefits package with reduced cost-sharing compared to the enhanced plan and covers 95% of the benefit costs of the plan;



Premium plus plan is a premium plan that provides additional benefits, such as oral health and vision care.

Require guarantee issue and renewability; allow rating variation based only on age (limited to 2 to 1 ratio), premium rating area, and family enrollment.

Require plans participating in the Exchange to be state licensed, report data as required, implement affordability credits, meet network adequacy standards, provide culturally and linguistically appropriate services, contract with essential community providers and Indian health care providers, and participate in risk pooling. Require participating plans to offer one basic plan for each service area and permit them to offer additional plans. Require plans to provide information related to end-of-life planning to individuals and provide the option to establish advance directives and physician’s order for life-sustaining treatment.

Provide information to consumers and small employers to enable them to choose among plans in the Exchange, including establishing a telephone hotline and maintaining a website, and provide information on open enrollment periods and how to enroll.

Require private insurers that opt to provide a plan in the Exchange that covers abortions beyond those permitted by federal law (to save the life of the woman and in cases of rape and incest) to also offer an identical plan that does not cover abortions for which federal funding is prohibited. Private plans participating in the Exchange may offer supplemental coverage for abortions. Federal premium subsidies may not be used to purchase a plan or supplemental coverage that covers abortions beyond those permitted by federal law. Prohibit plans participating in the Exchange from discriminating against any provider because of an unwillingness to provide abortions.

Require risk adjustment of participating Exchange plans.

Allow states to operate state-based exchanges if they demonstrate the capacity to meet the requirements for administering the exchange.

Unless otherwise noted, provisions relating to the Health Insurance Exchange are effective January 1, 2013. Create state-based American Health Benefit Exchanges and Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) Exchanges, administered by a governmental agency or non-profit organization, through which individuals and small businesses with up to 100 employees can purchase qualified coverage. Permit states to allow businesses with more than 100 employees to purchase coverage in the SHOP Exchange beginning in 2017. States may form regional Exchanges or allow more than one Exchange to operate in a state as long as each Exchange serves a distinct geographic area. (Funding available to states to establish Exchanges within one year of enactment and until January 1, 2015)

Restrict access to coverage through the Exchanges to U.S. citizens and legal immigrants who are not incarcerated.

Require the Office of Personnel Management to contract with insurers to offer at least two multi-state plans in each Exchange. At least one plan must be offered by a non-profit entity and at least one plan must not provide coverage for abortions beyond those permitted by federal law. Each multi-state plan must be licensed in each state and must meet the qualifications of a qualified health plan. If a state has lower age rating requirements than 3:1, the state may require multi-state plans to meet the more protective age rating rules. These multi-state plans will be offered separately from the Federal Employees Health Benefit Program and will have a separate risk pool.

Create the Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan (CO-OP) program to foster the creation of non-profit, member-run health insurance companies in all 50 states