Kaiser Health Tracking Poll—June 2009

The June Kaiser Health Tracking Poll finds remarkable stability in public opinion on health reform as Congressional committees begin to hone in on the details of their health reform bills and debate intensifies. A solid majority of the American people continue to believe that health reform is more important than ever given the country’s economic problems.



A solid majority of the American people continue to believe that health reform is more important than ever given the country’s economic problems; sizeable majorities support key elements of reform currently being debated such as employer mandates, individual mandates, and a public plan option. However, as we have seen in previous polls less than half of the public say they are willing to pay more for health reform, with a similar number supporting changing the tax treatment of employer based health insurance, one of the major revenue raisers being discussed. Overall opinion remains highly moveable, with support for many elements of reform susceptible to arguments pro and con and often moving by as much as 40 percentage points when arguments are tested.



The June Kaiser Health Tracking Poll, the third in a series designed and analyzed by the Foundation’s public opinion survey research team, examines voters’ specific health care issue interests and experiences and perceptions about health care reform.

The June Kaiser Health Tracking Poll finds remarkable stability in public opinion on health reform as Congressional committees begin to hone in on the details of their health reform bills and debate intensifies. A solid majority of the American people continue to believe that health reform is more important than ever given the country’s economic problems.A solid majority of the American people continue to believe that health reform is more important than ever given the country’s economic problems; sizeable majorities support key elements of reform currently being debated such as employer mandates, individual mandates, and a public plan option. However, as we have seen in previous polls less than half of the public say they are willing to pay more for health reform, with a similar number supporting changing the tax treatment of employer based health insurance, one of the major revenue raisers being discussed. Overall opinion remains highly moveable, with support for many elements of reform susceptible to arguments pro and con and often moving by as much as 40 percentage points when arguments are tested.The June Kaiser Health Tracking Poll, the third in a series designed and analyzed by the Foundation’s public opinion survey research team, examines voters’ specific health care issue interests and experiences and perceptions about health care reform. News Release Key Findings

Chartpack

Toplines





Information provided by the Public Opinion and Survey Research Program

Publish Date: 2009-06-16