Kevin L. Jamison
Speaker and Instructor



Kevin frequently speaks on law, personal security, and firearms related issues. He has helped teach the Western Missouri Shooters Alliance (WMSA) personal protection course since its inception, primarily the legal instruction. He taught undergraduate courses in criminal law, law and society, and law and terrorism at Avila College (now Avila University). Kevin moderated the Missouri Bar’s class on Immigration law in June, 2001. Kevin has presented firearms Continuing Legal Education classes for the Missouri Bar Association and the Missouri Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.



Writer



Kevin has written a number of articles on various legal topics. His article, “Concealed Weapons and the Travelers’ Defense” was published in the March-April, 2000 Journal of the Missouri Bar. He wrote the WMSA “Stay Out of Jail Card” summarizing weapons and self-defense law. Kevin created the WMSA video “Missouri Weapons and Self-Defense Law”. He is the author of Missouri Weapons and Self-Defense Law. Kevin contributed a chapter, “Bowie Knife Law”, to Bowie Knives and Bayonets of the Ben Palmer Collection. A Special Forces (“Green Beret”) veteran, he reviews books on unconventional warfare, terrorism, prisoner of war, and third world affairs for the Army’s Military Review magazine. Kevin has created a DVD titled "Missouri Concealed Weapons and Self-Defense Law". He has a regular column in Concealed Carry Magazine titled "It Doesn't Have to Make Sense, It's Just the Law".



Activist



Kevin is a member of the Missouri Bar Association, the Clay County Bar Association, the Special Forces Association, the National Rifle Association, the Second Amendment Foundation, Western Missouri Shooters Alliance, and Missourians for Personal Safety.

Kevin helped to found the Western Missouri Shooters Alliance in 1989 and has been active on the Board of Directors since that time. He was Vice-President for one year, President for three years, Secretary for two years, and is currently Press Officer. He was a founder and the first chairman of the Missouri Legislative Issues Council (Now Missourians for Personal Safety) which has led the fight for a License To Carry law in Missouri since 1991.