KodiakDailyMirror.com :: Daily newspaper of Kodiak, Alaska
The tiny village of Ouzinkie and its $15 million airport project were profiled for a short while earlier this week in a CBS Evening News report and an investigative journalism article from ProPublica.org.

Though already reported by the Kodiak Daily Mirror and Associated Press earlier this year, the small, predominately Alutiiq village on Spruce Island was allotted $15 million in federal stimulus money to build a new airport. The planned facility is located about two miles north of Ouzinkie’s current airport. The project includes a new runway, taxiway, airport lights, snow removal equipment building and two miles of access road.

However, the national news sought to shed light on how and where the federal government is distributing stimulus money to airports nationwide. The CBS segment by Sharyl Attkisson — provocatively titled “Tiny Airports Get Big Cut of Stimulus Cash: Small, Rural Airports Get Big Payouts While Safety Violations at Major National Airports Get Little Attention” — featured Ouzinkie as an example of a small, remote airport receiving millions while larger international airports do not receive enough to meet their demands.

CBS reported, “Consider that Los Angeles International doesn’t have the money to install critical taxiway warning lights. And a third of the nation’s largest airports — 11 of the 30 biggest, handling over one-fourth of the nation’s passenger traffic — have substandard safety areas for when planes veer off the runway.”

The CBS segment did not mention, however, that airports in Los Angeles, New York City, Detroit, Washington, D.C., and Baltimore— like Ouzinkie — are slotted to receive $15 million, the maximum allowed under the federal stimulus package for airports.

Other large airports — Pittsburgh, Chicago, Boston and Austin, Texas — are also set to receive between $10 million and $14 million.

The New York City-based ProPublica.org reported that some “projects weren’t eligible if they had already received money from federal, state or local governments, or from private sources such as landing fees, and that ruled out many bigger, busier airports.”

Ouzinkie defense, responses

The CSB Evening News piece did not air responses from the Ouzinkie community as to why the village deserves the same amount of money as other American oft-used airports of international significance. Attkisson, however, interviewed U.S. Department of Transportation press secretary Sasha Johnson, who defended the stimulus spending.

Johnson said, “We were looking for projects that airports in areas around the country desperately needed to be done for safety and security concerns.”

When asked why small airports like Ouzinkie should have their costs supplemented by others, Johnson said, “The community can’t raise that kind of money. Rural airports deserve to be safe and kept up as much as other airports do.”

The ProPublica.org article by Michael Grabell, titled “Tiny Airports Take Off With Stimulus,” began with a lead on Ouzinkie.

“The village of Ouzinkie is one of the remotest outposts in the United States — home to a mere 165 people on an island off another island off the coast of Alaska. There are no stores, no gas stations and no stoplights.

“Yet, the village will soon be home to a new $15 million airport paid for by taxpayers under the federal stimulus package.”

The article later describes why Ouzinkie officials said they need stimulus money for a new airport: Villagers depend on flights for medevacs and supplies.

Grabell, in an e-mail to the Kodiak Daily Mirror, said he was able to notice Ouzinkie from among the other airports and chose it for his investigation.

“(I) took the database of FAA stimulus grants and matched it with the FAA database of operations (takeoffs and landings) per year,” Grabell wrote. “By comparing the amount of the grant to the number of flights per year, I was able to determine the outliers. Ouzinkie and some of the other airports stood out.”

Grabell wrote that it was important to him “that this story not be a general aviation vs. commercial airport story because some GA airports are extremely busy and are important economic engines for areas that otherwise aren’t served by the airline system. So I tried to focus on airports that comparatively aren’t used that much – those that receive less than one flight an hour on average.

“But data doesn’t always tell the whole story. So I tried to find out why these airports would be getting such large stimulus grants. I spoke to officials in Ouzinkie, Akiachak, Fort Yukon and Allakaket as well as project managers, Alaska transportation groups and the DOT&PF; to get a sense of the various needs.”

Grabell referred to the four of the seven Alaska airports — the others being in King Salmon, Anchorage and Kenai — that received portions of the millions in federal stimulus money allotted to Alaska for airport improvements. Like Ouzinkie, Akiachak and Fort Yukon received the maximum $15 million. Comparatively, Ted Stevens International Airport in Anchorage received $3 million toward improving its runway apron.

Grabell said there were discussions about ProPublica.org making the trek to the Last Frontier to see the town so prominently featured in the investigative story — before they realized just how remote it was.

“We had talked about it here, but realized that it was nearly a 24-hour flight each way, stopping in Seattle, Anchorage and Kodiak before getting to Ouzinkie,” Grabell wrote.

ProPublica.org quoted Roger Wetherell, spokesman for the Alaska Department of Transportation and Public Facilities (DOT). Wetherell said because 82 percent of Alaska towns are unserved by roads — communities termed the Bush in Alaska — places like Ouzinkie heavily rely on airports for food, mail and medical transport.

This statement was echoed by Tom Quick in an interview with the Kodiak Daily Mirror, Wednesday. Quick, who was also interviewed by ProPublica.org, has been a resident of Ouzinkie since 1980. He serves his town in a variety of functions, including vice mayor and city utility manager.

He called Ouzinkie’s plane reliance “essential air services.”

“I’m sorry the airport has to cost so much, but essential services are essential air services,” Quick said. “They are essential, whether you’re talking about five people or 5,000.”

He said Ouzinkie’s current airport was built in the mid 1980s, yet he can remember a time when the town was only accessible by boat or floatplane. In critical situations, however, when helicopters arrived for medical emergencies, pilots precariously moved above the water and sand. He said the pilots did like not their chopper blades churning up the water and sand — which could potentially harm the craft — especially during an emergency situation.

Quick also said planes have been much more convenient in transporting the dead, who otherwise were transported via skiff.

Then there was the mail.

“There would be times where we wouldn’t get mail in for a couple of weeks in the winter,” Quick said. “After Thanksgiving, you had a pretty dicey timeframe until March for wind and everything.”

Quick said even though Ouzinkie may be receiving some bad rep because of the stimulus money, the new airport is being built at the insistence of both Ouzinkie and the Federal Aviation Administration regulations. The current location is exposed to fierce winds and is too close to the community landfill. The new runway also will have an FAA-mandated runway length.

“We are a small community, but every community deserves what they can get,” said Jill Boskofsky, vice president of the Ouzinkie Tribal Council and environmental director. “Our crosswinds here are so bad on our runway that there are times that we can’t even get an airplane here. I feel this is very necessary in case somebody needs to get a medevac out. I feel it’s for the safety of our community.”

Media responses

At least two other media sources rushed to Ouzinkie’s defense this week after the CBS Evening News segment aired. One was from the alternative weekly Anchorage Press, and the second was a blog entry from the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA) Web site.

The Anchorage Press article, written by Krestia DeGeorge and titled “Quit picking on Ouzinkie,” was published Wednesday. It criticized the CBS report and praised ProPublica.org for its “journalistic heavy lifting.”

“The ProPublica version of the story is better and fairer; it goes into greater depth and lacks the sensationalizing language of the CBS piece,” DeGeorge wrote. “It asks and answers the question of why bigger airports didn’t get more money (most of their major safety projects were already funded through other sources when the stimulus plans were announced). And it explains why airports in Alaska are a more important part of the basic transportation system than they are elsewhere.”

DeGeorge concluded, “The point is that we should think carefully about what’s really involved before criticizing something. Good reporting is important and there’s not enough of it; but so is critical, creative thinking about one’s subject. There’s not enough of that either.

“We need more people involved in our public dialogue willing to imagine what facts really mean from multiple perspectives. Otherwise (things) such as Ouzinkie’s lifeline will continue to be someone else’s taxpayer waste …”

AOPA blog entry writer Steve Tupper — whose rebuttal to the CBS Evening News segment was linked on the Anchorage Daily News Web site — called the mentioning of Ouzinkie a “cheap shot.”

“I suppose $15 million to build roads wouldn’t have been a problem (it happens all the time elsewhere and benefits even smaller communities),” Tupper wrote. “But I wouldn’t expect CBS to understand that airports are the roads of Alaska. If you can’t get on board with putting money into airports in Alaska, you might as well give up that 49th star on the flag and abandon Alaska altogether. I’m not ready to do that. I’m pretty sure that the Alaskans aren’t either.”

Ouzinkie airport construction

For all the talk of Ouzinkie seemingly wasting taxpayer money or being an essential spending effort for a small community, Quick said the contractor has already began paving the way for the project.

The contractor — Anchorage-based Pruhs Construction Company, LLC — was awarded the $9,708,913.75 contract on June 16, by the Alaska DOT. Quick said the spot north of the existing airport has already undergone an extensive environmental review. Part of the planning now involves finding housing for workers and bringing in equipment.

Though Quick said the farther-away spot from town will likely be a little inconvenient, he said, “Am I in favor of an airport? Absolutely … the benefits (will) extend over an extreme period of time.”

Mirror writer Bradley Zint can be reached via e-mail at bzint@kodiakdailymirror.com.