About L.A. LIVE
WHAT IS L.A. LIVE?

L.A. LIVE is the sports and entertainment district that surrounds STAPLES Center and Microsoft Theater. The campus features sports and music venues, night clubs, restaurants, a bowling alley, museum and movie theaters. L.A. LIVE is the premier destination for live entertainment in Downtown Los Angeles. For more details on the attractions at L.A. LIVE, please visit the following links for restaurants, entertainment options, hotels and parking information.

WHEN DID L.A. LIVE OPEN?

The first of L.A. LIVE's three development phases was completed late 2007 / early 2008 when the doors opened at Microsoft Theater, a 7,100 seat concert and awards show venue. Microsoft Square, a 40,000 sq. ft. open air space, featuring six 75-foot-towers with LED and static signage along with 1,500 parking spaces also debuted in phase one.

The second phase began in late 2008 with Club Nokia, now The Novo by Microsoft (a 2,300 person venue), the Conga Room, Lucky Strike Lanes & Lounge, The GRAMMY Museum® and 2,000 more parking spaces. Restaurants opened throughout phase two, with all 13 eateries completed in 2009. Another notable phase two event was the first live broadcast from the ESPN West Coast Broadcast Center.

The last and final phase was completed in late 2009 with the grand opening of the 14-screen Regal Cinemas and in early 2010 with The Ritz-Carlton Hotel, Los Angeles, the JW Marriott Los Angeles L.A. LIVE and The Ritz-Carlton Residences at L.A. LIVE.

WHERE IS L.A. LIVE?

L.A. LIVE is located in downtown Los Angeles, across from STAPLES Center, at the intersection of Olympic Boulevard and Figueroa Street. Our physical address is: 800 W. Olympic Blvd., Los Angeles, CA 90015. Our mailing address is: 800 W. Olympic Blvd #200, Los Angeles, CA 90015.

Environment

L.A. LIVE is committed to reducing our environmental impact. We do so through ongoing efforts to save energy and water, recycle, purchase environmentally preferable products, and help raise awareness of environmental issues. Here are just a few of the projects we have implemented to minimize our environmental impact.