Warren County Elected Officials: Malinowskis Reckless Repeal Plan Jeopardizes Tax Incentives For Phillipsburg

Warren County Elected Officials: Malinowskis Reckless Repeal Plan Jeopardizes Tax Incentives For Phillipsburg

Tax Cheat Tom Malinowski (D-Washington, DC) spent Friday paying lip service to Warren County voters. While Malinowski speaks in glowing terms of "facilitating economic revitalization", he fails to tell voters he supports a full repeal of the 2017 tax law, which includes vital tax incentives to revitalize the city of Phillipsburg.

Phillipsburg was included in the Opportunity Zones program after being recommended by Gov. Phil Murphy. Enacted under the 2017 federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the Opportunity Zones program provides tax incentives meant to encourage long-term investors to support distressed communities. The New York Times called the Opportunity Zone program, "the first new substantial federal attempt to aid those communities in more than a decade."

Other 7th District municipalities that would be adversely affected by Malinowski's reckless repeal and replace tax law plan include Dover, Flemington, North Plainfield and Wharton.

"Tom Malinowski's liberal positions might make him popular with Nancy Pelosi and her crowd but the city of Phillipsburg will benefit greatly from the Opportunity Zones law. He wants to throw the baby out with the bath water and eliminate a program that is truly doing good for our community. Warren County voters cannot afford Tom Malinowski's out-of-touch and reckless progressive positions," said Phillipsburg Council President Robert Fulper.

"Tom Malinowski has spent the last 25 years living in Washington DC and now he cares about economic revitalization in Warren County?," said Freeholder Jason Sarnoski. "Guys like Malinowski, who vote in New Jersey but never pay New Jersey property taxes, hurt our economy. Our Congressman Leonard Lance has lived here his entire life. He knows and understands Warren County residents."

#####