MO Rev Stat ยง 191.724 (2012) :: Section 191.724 Discrimination based on religious beliefs or moral convictions prohibited, health plan coverage of abortion--no mandatory employee coverage of certain p
2012 Missouri Revised Statutes

TITLE XII PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE

Chapter 191 Health and Welfare

Section 191.724 Discrimination based on religious beliefs or moral convictions prohibited, health plan coverage of abortion--no mandatory employee coverage of certain procedures--attorney general to enforce--sterilization defined.

191.724. 1. The rights guaranteed under this section are in addition to the rights guaranteed under section 376.805, relating to health plan coverage of abortion, and section 376.1199, relating to health plan coverage of certain obstetrical and gynecological benefits and pharmaceutical coverage.

2. No employee, self-employed person, or any other person shall be compelled to obtain coverage for, or be discriminated against or penalized for declining or refusing coverage for, abortion, contraception, or sterilization in a health plan if such items or procedures are contrary to the religious beliefs or moral convictions of such employee or person.

3. No employer, health plan provider, health plan sponsor, health care provider, or any other person or entity shall be compelled to provide coverage for, or be discriminated against or penalized for declining or refusing coverage for, abortion, contraception, or sterilization in a health plan if such items or procedures are contrary to the religious beliefs or moral convictions of such employer, health plan provider, health plan sponsor, health care provider, person, or entity.

4. No governmental entity, public official, or entity acting in a governmental capacity shall discriminate against or penalize an employee, self-employed person, employer, health plan provider, health plan sponsor, health care provider, or any other person or entity because of such employee's, self-employed person's, employer's, health plan provider's, health plan sponsor's, health care provider's, or other person's or entity's unwillingness, based on religious beliefs or moral convictions, to obtain or provide coverage for, pay for, participate in, or refer for, abortion, contraception, or sterilization in a health plan.

5. Whenever the attorney general has a reasonable cause to believe that any person or entity or group of persons or entities is being, has been, or is threatened to be denied any of the rights granted by this section or other law that protects the religious beliefs or moral convictions of such persons or entities, and such denial raises an issue of general public importance, the attorney general may bring a civil action in any appropriate state or federal court. Such complaint shall set forth the facts and request such appropriate relief, including but not limited to an application for a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, mandamus, an order under the federal Administrative Procedure Act, Religious Freedom Restoration Act, or other federal law, an order under section 1.302 relating to free exercise of religion, or other order against the governmental entity, public official, or entity acting in a governmental capacity responsible for such denial or threatened denial of rights, as the attorney general deems necessary to ensure the full enjoyment of the rights granted by law. Nothing contained herein shall preclude a private cause of action against a governmental entity, public official, or entity acting in a governmental capacity by any person or entity or group of persons or entities aggrieved by a violation of this section or other law that protects the religious beliefs or moral convictions of such persons or entities, or be considered a limitation on any other remedy permitted by law. A court may order any appropriate relief, including recovery of damages, payment of reasonable attorney's fees, costs, and expenses.

6. For purposes of this section, "sterilization" shall mean any elective medical procedure for which the sole purpose is to make an individual incapable of reproduction.

(L. 2012 S.B. 749) *Effective 9-12-12. S.B. 749 was vetoed on July 12, 2012. The veto was overridden on September 12, 2012. *Revisor's Note: Article III, Sections 29 and 32 of the Missouri Constitution, and Sections 1.130 and 21.250, RSMo, do not specifically address the effective date of a section subject to an emergency clause which is overridden by the general assembly.