Faculty Profiles
Anne Joseph O'Connell

Title: George Johnson Professor of Law

Tel: 510-643-9393

Fax: 510-643-2673

Email Address: aoconnell@law.berkeley.edu



FSU Contact: Amanda Boone Tran

Anne Joseph O'Connell is George Johnson Professor of Law at the University of California, Berkeley. She has written on a number of topics, including political appointees, bureaucratic organization (and reorganization), agency decisions in emergencies, political changes in agency rulemaking, quasi-agencies, and congressional oversight of agencies. Her publications have appeared in leading law and political science journals. She has also written three empirical reports for the Center for American Progress and co-edited a book (with Daniel Farber), Research Handbook on Public Choice and Public Law. Since summer 2014, she has been a public member (by appointment) of the Administrative Conference of the United States, an independent federal agency dedicated to improving regulatory procedures.

O'Connell's research has received a number of awards. She is a two-time winner of the American Bar Association's Scholarship Award in Administrative Law for the best article or book published in the preceding year -- for her 2014 article "Bureaucracy at the Boundary" and her 2009 article "Vacant Offices: Delays in Staffing Top Agency Positions." The only other multiple winners since the Award began in 1986 are Jerry Mashaw, Thomas Merrill, and Cass Sunstein. Her co-authored article (with Farber), "The Lost World of Administrative Law," won the 2014 Richard D. Cudahy Writing Competition on Regulatory and Administrative Law from the American Constitution Society. Her article, "Political Cycles of Rulemaking," won the Association of American Law Schools' 2007-2008 Scholarly Papers Competition for faculty members with fewer than five years of law teaching. In addition, her research has been cited by Congress, the Supreme Court, and the D.C. Circuit, and has been featured prominently in the Washington Post.

Before joining the Berkeley Law faculty in 2004, O'Connell clerked for Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg of the U.S. Supreme Court during the October 2003 term. From 2001 to 2003, she was a trial attorney for the Federal Programs Branch of the U.S. Department of Justice's Civil Division. She clerked for Judge Stephen F. Williams of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit from 2000 to 2001. O'Connell is a member of the New York bar. At Berkeley, she teaches Administrative Law, Advanced Administrative Law, Civil Procedure, E-Discovery, and the Public Law and Policy Workshop. She has also taught a graduate seminar, "Politics, Economics, and Law of Administrative Agencies," in UC Berkeley's Department of Political Science. O'Connell received the University's Distinguished Teaching Award (the campus's most prestigious honor for teaching) in 2016 and Berkeley Law's Rutter Award for Teaching Distinction in 2012. In 2013-2014, she served as Co-President of the Society for Empirical Legal Studies (co-organizing the 2014 Conference on Empirical Legal Studies).

Education:

View other Faculty Profiles