49 U.S. Code § 47107 - Project grant application approval conditioned on assurances about airport operations
In subsection (a), before clause (1), the words “may approve a project grant application under this subchapter for an airport development project only if” are substituted for 49 App.:2208(b)(1)(E) (related to 49 App.:2210(a)) and the words “As a condition precedent to approval of an airport development project contained in a project grant application submitted under this chapter . . . shall” in 49 App.:2210(a) for clarity and to eliminate unnecessary words. In clause (1), the words “to which the project relates” and “fair and” are omitted as surplus. In clause (2), before subclause (A), the words “including the requirement that” are omitted as unnecessary because of the restatement. The words “air carriers making similar use of the airport” are substituted for “each air carrier using such airport (whether as a tenant, nontenant, or subtenant of another air carrier tenant) . . . all such air carriers which make similar use of such airport” to eliminate unnecessary words. The words “and which utilize similar facilities” are omitted because of the definition of “airport” in section 47102 of the revised title. The words “nondiscriminatory and” and “rates, fees, rentals, and other” are omitted as surplus. In subclause (B), before subclause (i), the words “except for differences based on” are substituted for “subject to” for clarity. In clause (3), the words “airport operator” are substituted for “airport” for clarity and consistency in this chapter. In clause (4), before subclause (A), the words “a right given to only one fixed-base operator to provide services at an airport” are substituted for “the providing of services at an airport by a single fixed-based operator” for clarity. In subclause (B), the words “the airport operator or owner” are substituted for “such airport” for clarity and consistency in this subchapter. Clause (5) is substituted for 49 App.:2210(a)(1)(B) for consistency and to eliminate unnecessary words. In clause (6), the words “allowed by the airport operator” are substituted for “authorized by the airport or permitted by the airport” for clarity and consistency in this chapter and to eliminate unnecessary words. In clause (9), the words “operations at” are added for clarity. The words “adequately”, “removing, lowering, relocating, marking, or lighting or otherwise”, and “the establishment or creation of” are omitted as surplus. In clause (10), the word “near” is substituted for “in the immediate vicinity of”, and the word “uses” is substituted for “activities and purposes”, to eliminate unnecessary words. The words “including landing and takeoff of aircraft” are omitted as surplus. In clause (12), the words “property interests of the sponsor in land or water areas or buildings” are substituted for “any areas of land or water, or estate therein, or rights in buildings of the sponsor” for consistency in the revised title and to eliminate unnecessary words. The words “necessary or” are omitted as surplus. The words “for, and that will be used for, constructing . . . facilities for carrying out activities related to air traffic control or navigation” are substituted for “for use in connection with any air traffic control or navigation activities, or weather-reporting and communication activities related to air traffic control . . . for construction . . . of space or facilities for such purposes” to eliminate unnecessary words. In clause (13), before subclause (A), the words “schedule of charges” are substituted for “fee and rental structure” for clarity and consistency in this chapter. In subclause (A), the word “particular” is omitted as surplus. The word “including” is substituted for “taking into account such factors as” to eliminate unnecessary words. In subclause (B), the words “fees, rates, and” are omitted as surplus. The words “airport development or airport planning” are omitted because of the definition of “project” in section 47102 of the revised title. In clause (16), before subclause (A), the words “maintain . . . current” are substituted for “keep up to date at all times” to eliminate unnecessary words. In subclause (B), the words “be submitted to, and” and “amendment” are omitted as surplus. In subclauses (C) and (D), the words “changes or” and “change or”, respectively, are omitted as surplus. In subclause (D)(ii), the words “was made” are added for clarity. In clause (17), the words “with respect to the project” are omitted as surplus. In clause (18), the words “duly authorized agent of” are omitted because of 49:322(b).

In subsection (b)(1), before clause (A), the words “may approve a project grant application under this subchapter for an airport development project only if” are substituted for 49 App.:2208(b)(1)(E) (related to 49 App.:2210(a)(12)) and “As a condition precedent to approval of an airport development project contained in a project grant application submitted under this chapter . . . shall” in 49 App.:2210(a) for clarity and to eliminate unnecessary words. In clause (C) the word “actual” is omitted as surplus.

In subsection (b)(2), the words “Paragraph (1) of this subsection does not apply” are substituted for “except that . . . then this limitation on the use of all other revenues generated by the airport . . . shall not apply” to eliminate unnecessary words. The word “law” is substituted for “provisions . . . in governing statutes” for consistency in the revised title and to eliminate unnecessary words.

In subsection (c)(1), before clause (A), the words “considered to be” are omitted as surplus. In clause (B), the words “department, agency, or instrumentality of the Government” are substituted for “Federal agency” for consistency in the revised title and with other titles of the United States Code.

In subsection (c)(2), before clause (A), the words “may approve an application under this subchapter for an airport development project grant only if” are substituted for 49 App.:2208(b)(1)(E) (related to 49 App.:2210(a)(13), (14)) and “As a condition precedent to approval of an airport development project contained in a project grant application submitted under this chapter” in 49 App.:2210(a) for clarity and to eliminate unnecessary words. The words “has received or will receive” are substituted for “before, on, or after ” and “before, on, or after ” because of the restatement. In clauses (A)(ii) and (B)(ii), the words “or right” and “only” are omitted as surplus. In clause (A)(iii), the words “at the discretion of the Secretary” in 49 App.:2210(a)(13)(C) are omitted as surplus. In clause (B)(iii), the words “under this subchapter” are substituted for “at that airport or within the national airport system” for clarity and to eliminate unnecessary words.

Subsection (c)(3) is added for clarity.

In subsection (d), the words “may approve an application under this subchapter for an airport development project grant . . . only if” are substituted for 49 App.:2208(b)(1)(E) (related to 49 App.:2204(b)(2)) and “No obligation shall be incurred by the Secretary for airport development . . . unless” in 49 App.:2204(b) for clarity and to eliminate unnecessary words.

In subsection (e)(1), the words “may approve a project grant application under this subchapter for an airport development project only if” are substituted for 49 App.:2208(b)(1)(E) (related to 49 App.:2210(a)(17)) and “As a condition precedent to approval of an airport development project contained in a project grant application submitted under this chapter . . . shall” for clarity and to eliminate unnecessary words. The words “food, beverages, printed materials, or other” and “ground transportation, baggage carts, automobile rentals, or other” are omitted as surplus.

In subsection (e)(2)–(5), the words “disadvantaged business enterprise” are substituted for “DBE” for clarity.

In subsection (e)(4), the words “(as defined by the Secretary by regulation)” and “(as defined under section 2204(d)(2)(B) of this title)” are omitted as unnecessary because of paragraph (1) of this subsection.

In subsection (f)(2)(A), the words “at the discretion of the Secretary” are omitted as surplus. The words “at primary airports and reliever airports” are omitted as surplus because 49 App.:2206(c)(2), restated in section 47115(c) of the revised title, involves only primary and reliever airports.

In subsection (g)(1)(A), the words “consistent with the terms of this chapter” are omitted as surplus.

In subsection (g)(1)(B), the words “Among other steps to insure such compliance” and “on behalf of the United States” are omitted as surplus.

In subsection (g)(2), the words “by or . . . the authority of” are omitted as surplus.

In subsection (h), before clause (1), the words “proposes to” are omitted as surplus. The word “subchapter” is substituted for “Act” in section 511(f) of the Airport and Airway Improvement Act of 1982, as added by section 109(k) of the Airport and Airway Safety and Capacity Expansion Act of 1987 (Public Law 100–223, 101 Stat. 1502), to correct a mistake.

In subsection (i), the words “a property interest in a land or water area or a building that the Secretary of Transportation uses to construct a facility” are substituted for “any area of land or water, or estate therein, or rights in buildings of the sponsor and constructs space or facilities thereon” for consistency in this section.

In subsection (j)(2), the words “the limitation on the use of revenues generated by airports contained in”, “located”, “of funds”, and “(including revenues generated by such airports from other sources, unrestricted cash on hand, and Federal funds made available under this chapter for expenditure at such airports)” are omitted as surplus.

In subsection (j)(3)(A), the words “amount that is greater than 150 percent as determined” are substituted for “amount of the excess determined” for clarity.

In subsection (j)(3)(B), the words “in the aggregate” are omitted as surplus.

In subsection (j)(4), the word “imposed” is substituted for “levied” for consistency in the revised title and with other titles of the Code. The words “for the use of airport facilities” and “a percentage which is” are omitted as surplus. The words “Secretary of Labor” are substituted for “Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor” because of 29:551 and 557.

In subsection (j)(5), the words “from fee increases” and “for approval” are omitted as surplus.