Committee Minutes
Search 21st Legislature(1999-2000)

Committee Minutes



HB 270 - SEXUAL ASSAULT & SEXUAL ABUSE

HOUSE HEALTH, EDUCATION & SOCIAL SERVICESNumber 1920CHAIRMAN DYSON announced the next order of business as SponsorSubstitute for House Bill No. 270, "An Act relating to sexualassault and sexual abuse and to payment for certain examinationsin cases of alleged sexual assault or sexual abuse." [Before thecommittee was CSSSHB 270(STA).]Number 1929REPRESENTATIVE ERIC CROFT, Alaska State Legislator, sponsor of HB270 came forward to present the bill. He explained that SSHB 270requires that the victims of sexual assault cannot be charged forthe costs of forensic exam. This is not a medical procedure, itis a procedure for the gathering of evidence. It should not becharged under a woman's medical insurance, and in the vastmajority of cases it is not. The reason he introduced this is toclarify in law for those rare cases that to charge a victim isnot appropriate.Number 2011REPRESENTATIVE BRICE asked Representative Croft why it waslimited to just adult victims.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT said that wasn't done at first, but he foundout that the program at Alaska Cares would be destroyed becausemany of their clients are Medicaid-eligible, and this wouldaffect that. There are difficult issues. It is usually not thechild that is consenting to this, it is the parent. When thereare issues of parents having more control about not investigatingsomething where they might be the suspect, it got troublesome.He tried to craft it around all that, but eventually just limitedit to adults.REPRESENTATIVE BRICE said he was very concerned about whatRepresentative Croft was saying. "Alaska Cares program soundslike what they're doing is charging Medicaid for forensic teststhat should be paid by the police department."Number 2091SAM SHEPHERD, Staff to Representative Eric Croft, Alaska StateLegislature, explained in the discussions with Diana Weber fromAlaska Cares, she said there was an agreement with the AnchoragePolice Department, whether the child may have a diaper rash orthere is a lot of reason to believe there is sexual abuse, notsexual assault, that there are considerations of sexual abuse,and the child can be brought to Alaska Cares without concernabout ability to pay. For whatever reason, Alaska Cares will beable to bill Medicaid. There are a lot of reasons why it shouldbe a police payment, but it is not. If children were included inthe bill, Alaska Cares would be out of business.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT noted he struggled with that a long time andit is an appropriate question to ask, but he was not able towrite it that way.REPRESENTATIVE BRICE said his concern is by explicitly stating anadult victim, in Fairbanks where there isn't an Alaska Cares, itis implied that the families of minors will have to pick it up,or that insurance companies will have to be charged for it.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT explained there were two differentapproaches and they chose the one. He said that Texas uses theapproach "who does pay." At least one version of the draft earlyon said police shall pay for this, and that is the appropriateplace to do it, but then there are fights about in which policejurisdiction it occurred. In Anchorage the municipality has agrant that goes to Providence Hospital where there is a specialroom and trained people. It is done for a set price: $100,000will cover all the accommodating, the room and collateral helpfor these exams. If the bill says police must pay, there is aquestion of how to deal with the situation where it is done by agrant or some other innovative way. "We kept coming back tosaying who should not rather than directing who should, though inthe vast majority of cases, it ought to be the police."CHAIRMAN DYSON noted that Representative Croft touched on some ofthe problem. Some of the children get flown in from some otherjurisdiction, and it would be confusing which police pays, andmany areas do not have police.REPRESENTATIVE BRICE suggested maybe it should just say thevictims of sexual assault under the statutes shall not pay andleave it at that. Then leave it up to whoever provides theservice to figure out who will and who won't pay.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT said that is the way it is said in thecurrent version, but the adult--that concept that it says who maynot, not that the police shall, is getting into the jurisdictionissue.DEL SMITH, Deputy Commissioner, Department of Public Safety, cameforward to testify. He reported that the department, lawenforcement statewide and the Alaska Police Chiefs Associationsupport this kind of legislation. In his experience, the policehave never thought it appropriate that a victim of a crime shouldpay for anything in the way of gathering forensic evidence tosupport the prosecution of that crime. The victim ought never tosee the charge on her insurance forms or be hassled in any way.MR. SMITH referred to Representative Brice's question. When thedepartment originally looked at the bill, he talked with DuaneUdland, Chief, Anchorage Police Department (APD), and he broughtup the point that costs were already being covered for youth, andit was not being billed to them. Mr. Udland didn't think itshould be switched to have the APD pay for an exam that wasalready being paid for.TAPE 00-34, SIDE BNumber 2361REPRESENTATIVE BRICE asked Mr. Smith where the money comes from.MR. SMITH said he asked the Violent Crimes Compensation Board ifthey knew of anybody who had been billed directly. He has notbeen able to find a circumstance where the bill actually went tothe victim. The cost of the exam is part of the cost of doingbusiness. The Department of Public Safety expended approximate$49,000 in the last fiscal year, and APD has paid ProvidenceHospital approximately $150,000 for sexual assault exams.CHAIRMAN DYSON asked Mr. Smith what happens when in a case ofsuspected child abuse, and an examination is done on the childlooking for signs of sexual abuse, in most of those cases therewon't be forensic evidence; as soon as there is reasonablepresumption that there has been a crime, then law enforcement iscontacted, and the team that meets includes a representative fromDFYS or a child advocate, somebody from law enforcement andforensically-trained people. He asked if it is true that theremay be some of the cases where there's a process that goes onbefore it is known there was a crime, and is this the area thatthe Alaska Cares folks are concerned about.MR. SMITH answered he would say yes, although he wouldn't want totry to answer for DFYS. A lot of the cases in DFYS do notinvolve the police; there is an examination, and if it isdetermined medically there is a problem, the DFYS brings in lawenforcement. He doesn't expect law enforcement to pay for anexamination when it was not involved in it initially. Ifsomebody, for example, said "I was sexually assaulted six monthsago and had an exam, now I would like you to pay for this," lawenforcement, in his view, would not or should not be obligated todo that. If evidence is going to be collected to prosecute acase, then law enforcement needs to be involved in the decisionand the process from the beginning.REPRESENTATIVE BRICE asked what about a 17-year-old girl who wasviolently raped. Implicitly she has to pay for this exam or herinsurance does under this bill.MR. SMITH said a violently, sexually assaulted person should notbe subjected to the bill. Any agency he has to do with is goingto pay for the collection of the evidence. He doesn't read thatthe way it says "adults" would necessarily imply that lawenforcement would bill someone under the age of 18.REPRESENTATIVE BRICE said ten years of working in this buildingtells him different. "When we say A, we mean A and don't meanB." He agrees it would be a heartless, sick thing to do, but heis just looking for some way in those instances to fix it.MR. SMITH said in discussions with the sponsor, he knows theyhave tried very hard to find a way to take care of the problem.Number 2104LAUREE HUGONIN, Director, Alaska Network on Domestic Violence andSexual Assault, came forward to testify. She clarified thatwhile it may be true that Deputy Commissioner Smith may not havefound an instance where law enforcement has forwarded a bill,hospitals have. It has happened in the Mat-Su Valley, on theKenai Peninsula, and in Southeast, and that is why the bill isbeing brought forward. It is important to keep the word"indirectly" in there or to state "not charge health insurance.""Unfortunately, Representative Brice, if you just say victim,there are still agencies who take it that means sending me thestatement. They don't consider my insurance as being thevictim." It is important to encapsulate that indirectly. Shereemphasized that often it is DFYS that is bringing childrenforward and billing Medicaid, and DFYS has that arrangement withMedicaid.MS. HUGONIN explained what it is like to undergo a rape exam. Itis graphic and hard to hear. If a woman is sexually assaultedand is taken to the hospital by police, a friend, or gets herselfthere, she goes into the emergency room most often. She will betriaged and may be in the waiting room for a few minutes orseveral hours. If she is in a community with an advocacyprogram, she will have someone wait with her and explain theprocess, but that doesn't always happen. In the examinationroom, she is the crime scene. First, she stands in the middle ofthe floor on a white sheet of paper and brushes down her clothes.She then takes off her clothes; if they are the clothes in whichshe was sexually assaulted, she doesn't get them back becausethey are evidence. She brushes down again to get any possiblehairs or fibers. She sits at the examination table. The clothesget folded up and placed aside.MS. HUGONIN continued explaining there is a packet which containsenvelopes and different pieces of paper. They are taken out, andone by one they are gone through. One packet may contain a swabto go underneath her fingernails to find and skin or hair thatshe might have been able to get from the perpetrator, and that isput in an envelope. Another one is taken out, and her hair iscombed through to see if there are any that are not hers to betested for DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid]. She is checked over forbruises or cuts or abrasions or broken bones. At that point, ifshe can tolerate going further, the exam is continued. Anotherpacket contains a little comb which is used to comb the pubichair to see if there are hairs that are not hers. Anotherenvelope will contain a tweezer to pluck pubic hairs to test herDNA and match it against the perpetrator's. There is agynecological exam to look for tears and abrasions, and picturesare taken in that position. A black light is shone in herorifices to see if there is any semen; there are swabs that arecollected and put it separate envelopes.MS. HUGONIN said that the sexual exam can take anywhere from 40minutes to three hours depending upon how traumatized she is.When the examination is finished, hopefully there are clothes forher to wear home from the hospital, and she can leave.MS. HUGONIN mentioned that in the best of circumstances theperpetrator is caught, evidence has been collected and used inthe prosecution to a good end, and the perpetrator is jailed.She indicated that as the victim recovers from this heinouscrime, at every point where the victim has to relive it, and shedoes relive it because it is not something that can be forgotten.She emphasized that it is incomprehensible that the victim shouldhave to relive the crime upon receiving a bill for the assaultexam from her insurance company. It puts her right back to whenit happened.MS. HUGONIN urged the committee to expedite the passage of thislegislation. She shares the concern about children, but itdoesn't seem that practically this year that can work out in away where the bill can get through both the House and the Senate.It is important to her that this stop as soon as possible for asmany people as possible, and if there are other areas to work onover the interim, her group would be interested in doing that.Number 1731TRISHA GENTLE, Executive Director, Council on Domestic Violenceand Sexual Assault, came forward to testify. She dittoed Ms.Hugonin's testimony and asked for the committee's support on HB270. It is a problem that has come up sporadically around thestate. She has been working with victims of sexual assault since1982, and it has been around since then. It is time to supportvictims and say this won't be allowed to happen to them.MS. GENTLE agreed the issue of children is important too. Shebelieves that during the interim they need to be able to look atexactly what the costs are, exactly what the system is, how it'sworking and what would be appropriate and helpful legislation oraddition to this and what might be harmful to centers thatalready exist.REPRESENTATIVE COGHILL asked for the difference between "an adultvictim" and "a victim."MS. GENTLE answered that it is an issue of clarity because itisn't known how it may or may not affect the children's programs,and this is happening with adult victims. She believes thediscrepancy may be in the "direct or indirect" issue. Indirectlypaying through Medicaid, through insurance, through grants orthings like that, happens with children. What is not wanted is avictim's insurance to be billed.REPRESENTATIVE BRICE said he believes it is possible to artfullycut out child advocacy centers to ensure that the process willcover juveniles.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT wants the committee to be comfortable withthis bill when it moves out of committee, and that it is theright fix for the situation. He suggested working on it thisweekend and hearing it next week.CHAIRMAN DYSON suspended the hearing on HB 270. [HB 270 washeard and held.]