Committee Minutes
Search 21st Legislature(1999-2000)

Committee Minutes



SSHB 270-SEXUAL ASSAULT & SEXUAL ABUSE

HOUSE STATE AFFAIRSNumber 0873CHAIR JAMES announced the next order of business is SPONSORSUBSTITUTE FOR HOUSE BILL NO. 270, "An Act relating to sexualassault and sexual abuse and to payment for certain examinationsin cases of alleged sexual assault or sexual abuse."REPRESENTATIVE ERIC CROFT, Alaska State Legislature, said thereis a proposed CS that makes minor changes and it should beadopted for discussion.Number 0903REPRESENTATIVE HUDSON made a motion to adopt the proposed CS forSSHB 270, version 1-LS1108\M, Luckhaupt, 2/25/00, as a workdraft. There being no objection, proposed CSHB 270 was beforethe committee.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT explained that the issue that brought theproposed CS to his attention is forensic examinations after asexual assault. He recognized that sexual assault examinationsare a delicate and troubling issue so it is all the moreimportant that the committee consider it. He observed thatsomeone who has been sexually assaulted has already beenvictimized once and the exam that is necessary to gather evidenceabout the crime is, in some ways, a second victimization. Hereiterated that the forensic exam is unpleasant anduncomfortable.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT said that he had heard of victims beingasked to pay for the forensic exam with his/her health insurance.He noted that it is not standard police practice [to requestpayment for forensic exams] and the committee will hear testimonyfrom police agencies to that effect. He explained that therequest to pay is only for isolated incidents but it isparticularly troubling because it seems to indicate third levelvictimization. He commented that if someone's house wasburglarized and the police came to investigate the crime, dustedfor fingerprints, and took pictures, the homeowner's insurancewould not be billed. Therefore, he added, charging a sexualassault victim for a forensic exam does not seem ethical.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT mentioned that the proposed CS makes verysmall changes, for example, it defines the crime morespecifically. He indicated that the reason there is both asponsor substitute and a proposed CS to HB 270 is because it wasdifficult to write the legislation even though the sponsor knewwhat he wanted to accomplish. He informed the committee that inthe first draft the sponsor had written "a law enforcement agencyshall pay for the [forensic exam]" and that applied to bothadult and juvenile sexual assault. He emphasized that thewriting became complicated because there are various waysagencies pay for sexual exams and for children there is acompassionate model, Alaska Cares, that uses Medicaid money.Therefore, he acknowledged, when the sponsor tried the approachthat told who would pay, some of these paying programs wereprecluded.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT remarked that juvenile victims wereproblematical because from whom did agencies ask permission toconduct a forensic exam. He reminded the committee that parentsmust give permission for a juvenile to be examined and parentssometimes are the prime suspect in juvenile sexual assault. Headded that parents can stop a sexual exam. He observed thatwriting HB 270 just became so difficult in the juvenile area thatthe sponsor left out the juvenile section and concentrated onwhat the sponsor knew he could write correctly.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT said that he is a member of the StandingTogether Against Rape (STAR) Board and that is where he heardabout some of these issues. He noted that there are many smallthings that people can do for victims of sexual assault, forexample, providing clothes for a victim to use after the forensicexam. He explained that when a victim goes to the hospital thevictim's clothes are seized as evidence. He commented thatproviding clothing for victims is a small step but necessarybecause otherwise the victim has to go home in a taxi dressed ina hospital gown or borrow someone else's clothes. He mentionedthat he had tried to bring before the committee concrete examplesof what victims go through and how they can be helped and thereason there are no direct witnesses is because it is difficultto talk about the issue. He indicated that the proposed CS asksall police agencies to conform to no charge for forensic exams.Number 1393CHAIR JAMES remarked that after hearing what sexual assaultvictims must go through she is not sure she would report a sexualassault because it sounds so awful and then to have to pay for[the forensic exam is the outside of enough]. She added that shesupports the proposed CS as a good move in the right direction.REPRESENTATIVE GREEN asked if the proposed CS only applies toadults.REPRESENTATIVE CROFT answered in the affirmative. He noted thatsexual assault crimes are generally perpetrated against adultswhile statutory rape is in the section regarding juveniles.However, he added, a juvenile sexual assault can fall under theproposed CS guidelines so the proposed CS had to read both adultvictims and crimes that are non-statutory rape. He reiteratedthat it had become very complicated to write a bill that appliedto juveniles which did not result in more harm than good,therefore, the proposed CS only applies to adult victims. Hesaid that one of the problems in writing a bill that applied tojuveniles was the funding mechanism that is used in juvenilecases and the other problem was who gives permission for thejuvenile to undergo a forensic exam.Number 1597REPRESENTATIVE GREEN said he understands from RepresentativeCroft that no one will be falling through the cracks if theproposed CS is adopted.DEL SMITH, Deputy Commissioner, Department of Public Safety,testified in support of HB 270. He noted that it has always beenthe position and practice of law enforcement to pay for thecollection of forensic evidence in support of a criminalprosecution. Under no circumstances, he explained, has he everthought it appropriate to bill a victim or even by extension billthe victim's insurance company. He commented that he does notthink that a victim ought to even see a bill related to sexualassault whether it is on their insurance form or not. Heemphasized that a police agency investigating a crime should paybecause that is the cost of doing business in the collection ofevidence no matter what the crime; he does not know of any policeagency that has requested payment. The Department of PublicSafety paid $48,659 in fiscal year (FY) 1999 for sexual assaultexams in the state, and so far in FY 2000 the department has paid$22,880. He indicated that paying for exams had never been anissue in the department or in the Anchorage Police Department.He reiterated Representative Croft's comment that Alaska Careshandles juvenile sexual assault exams, and the department ispleased with the proposed CS because it leaves payment ofjuvenile exams with Alaska Cares.Number 1750CHAIR JAMES asked if she understood correctly that Mr. Smith issaying that the department has never billed a victim for exams.MR. SMITH replied that the department might have been billed, buthe has not found any police agency that has ever billed a victim.CHAIR JAMES said she understood then that some other entitybilled victims and that the department did not think HB 270 wasnecessary for the department.MR. SMITH answered that he did not think HB 270 was necessary forthe Department of Public Safety under the current administration,but he would feel more comfortable if there were a law that wouldmake sure sexual exam billings were discontinued.Number 1789CHAIR JAMES asked Mr. Smith if he believes that requiring paymentfor the exams under the proposed CS will be not create a fiscalnote since the Department of Public Safety has been paying forthe exams already.Number 1793MR. SMITH replied that the proposed CS will not create a fiscalnote and he thinks the proposed CS is a good bill.REPRESENTATIVE GREEN said he had heard Mr. Smith agree with thesponsor who had presented a very convincing discussion about whythe proposed CS only deals with adults and that children wouldnot fall through the cracks. He asked what if "Maud" claims tohave been attacked, and the evidence does not trigger a policeagency authorized forensic exam. Nevertheless, "Maud" is stillconvinced and she wants to prove sexual assault so she goes aheadand has forensic evidence taken. In that case, he asked, wouldthe police agency still pay for the exam or would the individualpay. Further, he added, the exam showed that "Maud" was in factsexually assaulted.MR. SMITH answered that the agency should pay in all situationswhere police are involved in the investigation. He noted that ifsomeone had a sexual assault examination done and then contactedthe police agency, it would be problematic in deciding who pays.Number 1873REPRESENTATIVE GREEN said that his concern is not that a personwould come in after getting a sexual exam but that a person comesto the police first and claims to have been violated. He askedif the person is automatically examined then or is a decisionmade whether an examination is warranted.MR. SMITH expected that if a person reports that he/she has beensexually assaulted, unless there is some reason to believe thathe/she is making up a claim, the agency would agree to check tosee if in fact a sexual assault occurred since that is the pointof the examination. He believes that, as a police administrator,an examination needs to be done if there is an allegation.REPRESENTATIVE GREEN said that it sounds like the department iseffectively paying for exams now, as Chair James had observed.Therefore, the proposed CS re-establishes that the departmentwill do this.Number 1954MR. SMITH replied that it is basically a policy decision and itis current departmental practice.REPRESENTATIVE HUDSON remarked that the proposed CS is acompassionate statement, the cost is nothing, and it speaks wellto any woman who might be a victim. He said the proposed CS isgood legislation.REPRESENTATIVE OGAN inquired as to how many sexual assaultshappen in the state in a year and how does Alaska rank percapita.MR. SMITH answered that he believed that Anchorage received 300reports a year and he guesses that the number statewide might be600.Number 2058LAUREE HUGONIN, Director, Alaska Network on Domestic Violence andSexual Assault (ANDVSA), said that not everyone knows what isinvolved in a rape exam; it is not to be taken lightly. If aperson goes into the hospital for a rape exam right after theevent has happened, he/she still has the clothes on in which therape took place. She noted that the clothes will be taken fromthe person and kept for evidence. She commented that the personstands in the middle of the examining room on a white piece ofpaper and the first thing he/she does is take off his/herclothes. The clothes are laid on the paper, and the person isbrushed down because the person is the crime scene. The paper isfolded up, set aside, and becomes the beginning of a stack ofpapers for evidence. Next someone takes a fingernail file andgoes under each of the person's fingernails to find skin or hairidentifying the perpetrator. Then the person's hair is combed tolook for evidence and then the person is examined for bruises,scratch marks or cuts. A small comb is taken out of an envelope,and the nurse combs the person's pubic hair, again, looking forevidence. She observed that the person's body orifice isexamined for semen, and swabs are taken to collect evidence. Shestated that the person has to pluck his/her own pubic hairs inorder to identify that person's deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) tosee what is different from the perpetrator's DNA. A regulargynecological exam is also performed to ascertain if there aretears or injuries inside of the person.MS. HUGONIN said that the sexual exam can take anywhere from 40minutes to three hours depending upon the person's ability to beable to endure someone's touch and examination after thisterrible experience. Sometimes, she added, a person is notadmitted right away to the examining room so the person could bein the waiting room for three hours. Hopefully a person has thecompany of a sexual assault intervention program advocate to waitwith, but that is not always the case. The examination processcan last from one hour to eight hours. It is hoped that when theperson is able to leave [the hospital], the person is able towalk out and go home.MS. HUGONIN mentioned that in the best of circumstances theperpetrator is caught, evidence has been collected and used inthe prosecution to a good end, and the perpetrator is jailed.She indicated that as the victim recovers from this heinouscrime, at every point where the victim has to relive it, thevictim does relive it because it is not something that can beforgotten. She emphasized that it is incomprehensible that thevictim should have to relive the crime upon receiving a bill forthe assault exam from his/her insurance company. Just as Mr.Smith had testified, billings have not come from police agenciesbut have come from hospitals. She hopes everything can be doneto expedite the proposed CS because people must understand thatit is not acceptable for the system to re-victimize someone whohas gone through such a horrible experience.MS. HUGONIN reminded the committee that last year there were 325reported sexual assaults in Anchorage and 600 statewide. Sheobserved that in FY 99 her program saw 1000 victims of sexualassault. She stated that not everybody reports and not everybodygets exams done. Per capita, she added, Alaska ranks in the topfive for sexual assaults which is 2.2 times over the nationalaverage in the FBI Uniform Crime Report.Number 2408TRISHA GENTLE, Executive Director, Council on Domestic Violence &Sexual Assault, testified in support of HB 270. She said thatthe council believes that the proposed CS needs to be on therecord so that when those rare situations do arise, hospitals andpolice officers have clear direction not to charge sexual assaultvictims for the exam. She noted that in those cases when avictim wants an exam but the police do not think it is justified,the victim can get a medical exam. She explained that a forensicexam is a very specific process; in most parts of the state thereare sexual assault response teams available to cooperate withpolice. She explained that sexual assault response teams aremade up of trained nurses, examiners, and advocates who are ableto meet with a victim. She acknowledged that there are timeswhen a victim is not sure he/she wants to go through with aforensic exam, but he/she has health concerns so instead of goingthrough a forensic exam he/she chooses to go to a doctor for amedical exam.REPRESENTATIVE OGAN said he understood that a medical exam choiceon the part of a victim is a personal choice and would not beaffected by the proposed CS.Number 2568MS. GENTLE agreed with Representative Ogan's statement and addedthat the victim's exam would not be identified as a sexualassault exam.REPRESENTATIVE OGAN commented he is puzzled as to why hospitalsare sending bills to victims when the exam has obviously beenordered by a local police department.Number 2591MS. GENTLE answered that there have been changes in hospitalprotocol, and hospitals have chosen to separate some of the costsof sexual assault exams. Hospitals are adding sexuallytransmitted disease (STD) and blood tests to the cost of sexualassault exams, and the hospital makes a choice to bill the victimfor those charges. Police departments are willing to pay forsexual assault exams, but it is an internal decision on the partof the hospital as to who pays the hospital bill. She indicatedthat there is an issue of insensitivity.REPRESENTATIVE OGAN asked if Ms. Gentle planned to notify thepublic, hospitals, and organizations that HB 270 has passed andbecome law.MS. GENTLE replied that her organization has many ways toimplement public notice and does have a committee that has beenworking on sexual assault protocols.Number 2833REPRESENTATIVE GREEN inquired as to how many women refuse to gothrough the lengthy forensic process of proving sexual assault.MS. GENTLE answered that nationally about one in ten women chooseto report a rape, and surveys of general population reveal thatone in four women has been sexually abused in her lifetime. Sheemphasized how important the advocate's role is in helping womenrecover, and if a victim will call an advocate agency the victimwill get support. She remarked that advocate agencies help avictim see what options are available and what the real pictureis. She stated that the proposed CS helps make sexual assault asbearable as possible. She reiterated that a low percentage ofwomen report a sexual assault, even fewer go to trial, and evenfewer perpetrators are convicted.REPRESENTATIVE OGAN asked if it were true that most sexualassault victims knew the perpetrator.Number 2960MS. GENTLE replied in the affirmative but wanted to define what"known" means. There is a new term called "acquaintance rape,"and that could mean a best friend's husband or real relationshipswhere the man and woman know each other to an apartment buildingacquaintance. She noted that a distinct grooming behaviorpattern is enacted to get into someone's confidence, although sheacknowledged that intimate partner violence is one of the biggestcrimes against women.TAPE 00-19, SIDE BNumber 2967REPRESENTATIVE HUDSON asked if the proposed CS also applies to amale victim.MS. GENTLE replied absolutely.CHAIR JAMES noted that she had received information from an e-mail that listed ten things to protect against sexual assault.One of the protections was to be aware of what is happeningaround one, for example, not walking alone in a parking lot.Another protection is to keep the car and house locked, but thebest protection was to be aware.MS. GENTLE mentioned that women's shelters are trying to helppeople understand the importance of awareness. She indicatedthat perpetrators are looking for vulnerable people.Number 2687REPRESENTATIVE OGAN made a motion to move the proposed CS for HB270, version 1-LS1108\M, Luckhaupt, 2/25/00, from committee withindividual recommendations, the attached zero fiscal note, andask for unanimous consent. There being no objection, CSSSHB270(STA) moved from the House State Affairs Standing Committee.