Statutes & Constitution :View Statutes : Online Sunshine
F.S. 343.58 343.58 County funding for the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority. — (1) Each county served by the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority must dedicate and transfer not less than $2.67 million to the authority annually. The recurring annual $2.67 million must be dedicated by the governing body of each county before October 31 of each fiscal year. These funds may be used for capital, operations, and maintenance. (2) At least $45 million of a state-authorized, local option recurring funding source available to Broward, Miami-Dade, and Palm Beach counties is directed to the authority to fund its capital, operating, and maintenance expenses. The funding source shall be dedicated to the authority only if Broward, Miami-Dade, and Palm Beach counties impose the local option funding source. (3) In addition, each county shall continue to annually fund the operations of the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority in an amount not less than $1.565 million. Revenue raised pursuant to this subsection shall also be considered a dedicated funding source. (4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary and effective July 1, 2010, until as provided in paragraph (d), the department shall transfer annually from the State Transportation Trust Fund to the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority the amounts specified in subparagraph (a)1. or subparagraph (a)2. (a)1. If the authority becomes responsible for maintaining and dispatching the South Florida Rail Corridor: a. $15 million from the State Transportation Trust Fund to the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority for operations, maintenance, and dispatch; and b. An amount no less than the work program commitments equal to $27.1 million for fiscal year 2010-2011, as of July 1, 2009, for operating assistance to the authority and corridor track maintenance and contract maintenance for the South Florida Rail Corridor. 2. If the authority does not become responsible for maintaining and dispatching the South Florida Rail Corridor: a. $13.3 million from the State Transportation Trust Fund to the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority for operations; and b. An amount no less than the work program commitments equal to $17.3 million for fiscal year 2010-2011, as of July 1, 2009, for operating assistance to the authority. (b) Funding required by this subsection may not be provided from the funds dedicated to the Florida Rail Enterprise pursuant to s. 201.15 (4)(a)4. (c)1. Funds provided to the authority by the department under this subsection constitute state financial assistance provided to a nonstate entity to carry out a state project subject to ss. 215.97 and 215.971 . The department shall provide the funds in accordance with the terms of a written agreement to be entered into between the authority and the department, which shall provide for department review, approval, and audit of authority expenditure of such funds and shall include such other provisions as are required by applicable law. The department is specifically authorized to agree to advance the authority 25 percent of the total funds provided under this subsection for a state fiscal year at the beginning of each state fiscal year, with monthly payments over the fiscal year on a reimbursement basis as supported by invoices and such additional documentation and information as the department may reasonably require and a reconciliation of the advance against remaining invoices in the last quarter of the fiscal year. 2. To enable the department to evaluate the authority’s proposed uses of state funds, the authority shall annually provide the department with its proposed budget for the following authority fiscal year and shall promptly provide the department with any additional documentation or information required by the department for its evaluation of the proposed uses of the state funds. (d) Funding required by this subsection shall cease upon commencement of an alternate dedicated local funding source sufficient for the authority to meet its responsibilities for operating, maintaining, and dispatching the South Florida Rail Corridor. The authority and the department shall cooperate in the effort to identify and implement such an alternate dedicated local funding source before July 1, 2019. Upon commencement of the alternate dedicated local funding source, the department shall convey to the authority a perpetual commuter rail easement in the South Florida Rail Corridor and all of the department’s right, title, and interest in rolling stock, equipment, tracks, and other personal property owned and used by the department for the operation and maintenance of the commuter rail operations in the South Florida Rail Corridor. (5) The current funding obligations under subsections (1), (3), and (4) shall cease upon commencement of the collection of funding from the funding source under subsection (2). If the funding under subsection (2) is discontinued for any reason, the funding obligations under subsections (1) and (3) shall resume when collection from the funding source under subsection (2) ceases. Payment by the counties shall be on a pro rata basis the first year following cessation of the funding under subsection (2). The authority shall refund a pro rata share of the payments for the current fiscal year made pursuant to the current funding obligations under subsections (1) and (3) as soon as reasonably practicable after it begins to receive funds under subsection (2). If, by December 31, 2015, the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority has not received federal matching funds based upon the dedication of funds under subsection (1), subsection (1) shall be repealed. (6) Before the authority undertakes any new capital projects or transit system improvements not approved by the authority board, and not identified in the authority’s 5-year capital program, on or before July 1, 2012, the authority shall ensure that the funding available to the authority under this section, together with any revenues available to the authority, are currently, and are anticipated to continue to be, sufficient for the authority to meet its obligations under any agreement through which federal funds have been or are anticipated to be received by the authority. History. — s. 10, ch. 2003-159; s. 3, ch. 2007-255; s. 4, ch. 2009-271; s. 67, ch. 2012-174; s. 32, ch. 2015-229; s. 13, ch. 2017-42; s. 6, ch. 2017-138.