Donald Trump: "Planned Parenthood Should Absolutely be De-Funded"
During an interview with Chris Wallace of Fox News, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump repeated his assertion that the Planned Parenthood abortion business should be de-funded. Planned Parenthood has been caught in a series of 10 videos selling aborted babies and their body parts.

SIGN THE PETITION! Congress Must De-Fund Planned Parenthood Immediately

Below is the transcript of Trump’s remarks and video footage:

WALLACE: “Would you be willing to shut down the government in order to defend Planned Parenthood or to put some other key policy goals?”

TRUMP: “I do not want to say that because I want to show unpredictability. You have to. You can’t just go around and say that. But Planned Parenthood should absolutely be defunded. I mean if you look at what’s going on with that, it’s terrible. And many of the things should be defunded and many things should be cut.”

As LifeNews previously reported, in July, Trump told The Blaze that Planned Parenthood should be de-funded in light of recent revelations about their organ harvesting business. He said, “It’s disgusting. And absolutely they should be defunded. I thought it was so cavalier, so horrible.”

In August, Trump compared the Planned Parenthood abortion business to an automobile dealership, saying it is an “abortion factory” that sells the body parts of aborted babies like a dealership sells cars.

Trump made the comments on the Laura Ingraham show, according to a Daily Caller report:

Laura Ingraham: Yesterday, Planned Parenthood was exposed again in an eighth video released by the Center for Medical Progress. Do you still believe there are two Planned Parenthoods or is it time to defund this organization? Donald Trump: Well, you should defund anyway because they are doing the abortions. It is like an abortion factory, which is terrible. So you should defund anyway. But those videos are horrible. Every time you see them, they get worse and worse. And it’s not only that, the messengers are so bad. There always, I mean these people, what they say and the way they, it’s like you are selling parts to an automobile or something. It’s a terrible situation going on with Planned Parenthood. There’s no question about it.

In an interview with CNN before that, Trump called the abortion giant an “abortion factory” and said government shouldn’t be funding it.

“The problem that I have with Planned Parenthood is the abortion situation. It is like an abortion factory, frankly,” Trump said. “And you can’t have it. And you just shouldn’t be funding it. That should not be funded by the government, and I feel strongly about that.”

SIGN THE PETITION! Congress Must Investigate Planned Parenthood for Selling Aborted Baby Parts

When asked about the smaller non-abortion component of what Planned Parenthood does, Trump appeared to be alright with taxpayer funding.

“What I would do when the time came, I’d look at the individual things they do, and maybe some of the individual things they do are good. I know a lot of the things are bad. But certainly the abortion aspect of it should not be funded by government, absolutely,” he said.