Blistering Ad Exposes New Jersey Candidate Cory Booker's Pro-Abortion Record
American Commitment Action Fund (AC Action Fund) and Susan B. Anthony List (SBA List) are jointly releasing a new ad today targeting Newark Mayor Cory Booker’s radical record on abortion. The ad blasts Cory Booker’s record of promoting abortion with no restrictions-including his significant role as Co-Chair of the Democratic National Convention’s Platform Committee. Booker is the Democratic candidate for U.S. Senate in the special election to succeed Frank Lautenberg.

“Cory Booker was instrumental in driving Democrats to make abortion the centerpiece of the party’s platform,” said Marjorie Dannenfelser, President of SBA List. “His extreme pro-abortion stance flies in the face of the majority of Americans, especially women, who oppose late-term abortion.”

“You cannot get any more extreme on abortion than Cory Booker,” said Phil Kerpen, Founder of AC Action Fund. “We’re honored to partner with SBA List to bring this shocking information to New Jersey voters.”

The new online ad, titled “Too Extreme,” begins: “Democrats used to call for abortion to be safe, legal, and rare. But not Cory Booker.”

The ad cuts to Booker speaking at a Planned Parenthood rally: “I was the Co-Chair of our DNC Platform. We affirmed a woman’s right to choose.”

It then transitions to Cory Booker being confronted regarding his record by journalist Cokie Roberts on ABC’s This Week: “You took out language from previous platforms that said it should be safe, legal, and rare. And I think this Democratic convention was really over the top in terms of abortion.”

“Cory Booker’s platform supports abortion regardless of ability to pay. That means taxpayer funded.”

“And Booker opposes any restrictions. He supports late-term and partial-birth abortion. And opposes safety regulations.”

“Cory Booker even told Twitter he is proud and inspired by efforts to allow late term abortions in unregulated clinics.”

“Cory Booker on abortion?: not safe, not rare, and taxpayer funded up to the day of delivery.”

“Too extreme.”

The campaign is using the hashtag #BookerFAIL on Twitter, and the ad can be viewed online at: https://youtu.be/l-WTVegrKqw or at www.BookerFAIL.com.