Jordan said challenging Obamacare implementation is his top priority
LIMA — U.S. Rep. Jim Jordan has a lot on his mind and most of it centers on Obamacare.

Jordan, Ohio’s 4th District congressman, said the future of the country is at stake when it comes to Obamacare. He said the only option is to delay implementation of any policies stemming from the overhaul of health insurance through the federal government.

Jordan also said the next step is to prevent any of Obamacare from being implemented.

“Obamacare is a mess. We hear that at every district we go to. The American people get it and business owners get it,” he said.

In just a few months, part of the health care changes dubbed Obamacare will go into effect. President Barack Obama has delayed some provisions. Jordan said the system is not ready for Obamacare and it could bankrupt the country. He also said many Democrats are criticizing it.

“Delay it is the best thing we can do for the country right now,” he said.

Support to delay it is building on both sides of the aisle but ultimately that is up to the president, he said.

Jordan would like to see lawmakers repeal Obamacare but said Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid won’t even allow the issue to be debated.

When asked what solutions he had for fixing the skyrocking cost of health insurance, Jordan said plans that allow businesses to come together to purchase plans with bigger numbers of people in the plans to lower cost. He also said that would increase competition among the insurance companies driving down cost.

Jordan also wants people to be able to take their insurance with them from one job to another instead of being required to apply for health insurance with a new company and accepting a plan that may leave the person worse off.

“You allow the policy to go with them,” he said.

On the issue of national security, Jordan said he doesn’t support National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden but said the cat is out of the bag. He said something needs to be done. He said the government is violating people’s constitutional rights by collecting data on when people make calls, the numbers they call, the dates, times and length of calls.

Jordan agreed it started before Obama was in office and during the George W. Bush presidency but said it needs to be fixed.

Jordan said there are too many issues out there linked to Obama such as the Benghazi embassy killings and cover-up, The Associated Press phone logs scandal and the IRS scandal. He said Obama’s people are thwarting the release of information to prevent Congress from getting to the bottom of what happened.

“The president saying it’s phony, that’s just ridiculous,” Jordan said.

When asked about a recent poll that said 81 percent of Americans disapprove with the job being done by Congress, Jordan said being a congressman is never going to be popular but going to Congress and doing what he said he would do, if elected, is doing his job.

“That’s how you can potentially improve the standing of Congress, to do what you’re supposed to do and do what you said you would do,” Jordan said.