Flare-up over Planned Parenthood hits Senate race in Loudoun

Amid a growing chorus from Virginia Republicans about the tendentious Planned Parenthood videos, local Democratic state senate candidate Jill McCabe said she continues to welcome support from the nonprofit group.



McCabe, a pediatric doctor and vice president of medical staff at Inova Loudoun hospital, has highlighted support from Planned Parenthood and other women's health organizations in this her first run for public office.



The recently released, heavily-edited videos from anti-abortion activists show Planned Parenthood officials discussing the transfer of fetal organ tissue for research. Conservatives have been in an uproar since the first video's release, calling for all public funding of Planned Parenthood to be stripped and for Democrats to reject the group's support.



During a July 17 interview, after the first video was released, McCabe said she believes in the practices of Planned Parenthood, an organization she says provides much-needed health care offerings to women.



“I'm a doctor, and I take care of patients, including women,” McCabe said when asked whether she still welcomes Planned Parenthood's support. “Women need health care choices and Planned Parenthood provides that. That's kind of the end of it for me.”



McCabe is in one of the most closely-watched Virginia legislature races in the state against incumbent Sen. Dick Black (R) in the Senate's 13th District, based in Loudoun County. Black is a staunch, pro-life conservative.



On Tuesday, Republican Party of Virginia Chairman John Whitbeck, a Loudoun resident, issued a statement directed at McCabe: "Last week and earlier this week, Planned Parenthood was caught on video discussing the sale of body parts from children who died in abortion procedures," said Whitbeck. "After viewing these videos, I felt compelled to join calls for an investigation of Planned Parenthood to hold them accountable for these barbaric practices.”



Whitbeck went to say he hopes McCabe “does the right and ethical thing by renouncing Planned Parenthood's endorsement and joining our calls for an investigation."



The videos, taken secretly, do not appear to show anything illegal from Planned Parenthood’s operations. The first video was released last week, followed by a second one Tuesday. While selling fetal tissue is illegal, Planned Parenthood is by law allowed to be reimbursed for transfer costs.



The Planned Parenthood official addresses the issue in the video, saying, "nobody should be ‘selling’ tissue. That’s just not the goal here."



In addition to the call for McCabe and other candidates across the state to renounce support from Planned Parenthood, Whitbeck and conservative activists have pressed Gov. Terry McAuliffe and Attorney General Mark Herring to investigate the women’s health group.



“Governor McAuliffe was disturbed by the content of the video in question, but does not believe it should be fodder for political attacks on women’s access to health care,” McAuliffe spokesman Brian Coy said in a statement. “Every Virginia women’s health center is licensed and regulated by the Virginia Department of Health and subject to regular and thorough inspections to ensure that they are in full compliance with all federal and state laws and regulations. The governor is confident that any violation of those laws and regulations will be reported and appropriate action taken.”



Comments

Post a comment

Commenting is not available in this channel entry.

Comments express only the views of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of this website or any associated person or entity. Any user who believes a message is objectionable can contact us at ltmeditor@loudountimes.com.



More News