On Second Amendment and Clinton, Trump is playing with fire
Although the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution broadly protects the freedom of speech, its protections are not absolute.

As Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes famously wrote in 1919, “[t]he most stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theater and causing a panic.” In other words, the Constitution does not protect dangerous speech — words likely to cause harm. The Supreme Court refined this concept in 1969, announcing the test that still applies today: words can be punished when they are “directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and…likely to incite or produce such action.”

The Court’s test makes clear that context is essential to understanding what speech means.

Under this test, Donald Trump’s remarks about the Second Amendment and Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton do not subject him to criminal prosecution. The context of his address makes clear that Trump was not calling for immediate action; he was speaking about possible events that could happen in the future.

But the context also makes clear that Trump’s attempt to explain his comments, as well as explanations offered by his supporters, are an insult to our intelligence, and that what the Republican presidential nominee said is disturbing and dangerous.

Trump declared yesterday that “Hillary wants to abolish — essentially abolish — the Second Amendment. By the way, if she gets to pick, if she gets to pick her judges, nothing you can do, folks. Although the Second Amendment people, maybe there is, I don’t know.”

Trump’s words were ambiguous. But the context of his remarks helps us understand how listeners could interpret what he said, and shows why attempts to defend Trump’s comments don’t hold water.

Trump was quite clearly talking about what could happen after the November election. He was discussing the prospect of Clinton selecting judges — something she could only do, of course, after the election is over, if she wins.

Trump and some of his supporters are implausibly insisting the candidate was simply talking about mobilizing people to vote — in fact, Trump claims that “there can be no other interpretation” of what he said. Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani says that Trump meant that “you have the power to vote against [Clinton].. You have the power to campaign against her. You have the power to speak against her.” Trump tweeted that ”I said pro-2A citizens must organize and get out vote to save our Constitution!”

Nonsense. Trump was projecting a post-election world in which Clinton selects judges opposed to gun rights. At this point, with the election over, Trump said there would be nothing anyone could do — apart from perhaps “the Second Amendment people.”

Given the context, it’s not unreasonable to conclude that Trump was suggesting the possibility of violence. Even one of Trump’s closest supporters understands this. Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.) declared that ”you absolutely shouldn’t joke about [killing Clinton]. It’s contrary to everything we believe in.” Conservative commentator John Podhoretz tweeted that Trump “not only implied assassination, he implied that 2nd-Amendment supporters are all potential assassins.” Ben Shapiro, a conservative columnist and like Podhoretz not a Trump supporter, observed that “[it’s] [g]onna be pretty hilarious when the Secret Service has to talk to one of the candidates.”

Shapiro may be right about that. One former top Secret Service official said that Trump’s comments could be seen as a “veiled threat” against Clinton. The official observed that if he or she was still with the Secret Service, the agency would contact Trump’s campaign staff to make sure the candidate understood the consequences of his remarks, adding that “this guy [Trump] is coming pretty close to the edge [of legality] here…you don’t know what you’re encouraging other people to do.”

That’s what is most disturbing about Trump’s remarks — how they could be understood by his followers. “That’s why the Second Amendment was created, so we can defend ourselves against a tyrannical government,” one Trump supporter said.

That too is nonsense. As historians have pointed out, the Constitution’s framers were influenced by Shays’s Rebellion, which took place in Massachusetts a few months before the constitutional convention, when they assigned Congress authority to put down rebellions. Historians argue that the framers did not intend for the Constitution to protect a “popular right to insurrection.” Of course, some Americans believe such a right exists.

Trump’s words must be understood in this context. When Trump speaks of “Second Amendment people” moving to stop Hillary Clinton after the election, he may not be shouting “fire,” but he certainly is playing with it.

Chris Edelson is an assistant professor of government in American University’s School of Public Affairs. His latest book is Power Without Constraint: The Post 9/11 Presidency and National Security (University of Wisconsin Press).