Exercise, Counseling, and DHA May Slow Cognitive Lapse
Action Points Note that this study was published as an abstract and presented at a conference. These data and conclusions should be considered to be preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

A combination of exercise, nutrition, and cognitive counseling along with omega-3 fatty acid supplementation slowed cognitive decline in older adults with memory impairment, researchers found.

In the MAPT trial, the combination of supplements and "multidomain" training -- as well as multidomain training alone -- was significantly more effective at stalling cognitive decline than supplements alone or placebo, reported Bruno Vellas, MD, PhD, of the University of Toulouse in France, and colleagues at the International Conference on Clinical Trials for Alzheimer's Disease in Barcelona.

These treatments seemed to be most helpful to ApoE4 carriers, who were already at increased risk for Alzheimer's disease, as well as those who had more severe cognitive impairment at baseline, Vellas said in a statement.

The Multidomain Alzheimer's Preventive Trial (MAPT) set out to assess the impact of a multidomain program of nutritional counseling, exercise, and cognitive and social stimulation -- with or without supplementation of an omega-3 fatty acid, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) -- on preserving cognitive function in older patients.

Vellas and colleagues randomized 1,680 patients, ages 70 and up, who had subjective memory complaints (40% had mild cognitive impairment) to one of four groups:

Placebo

Placebo plus multidomain intervention

DHA plus multidomain intervention

DHA alone

They used a dose of 800 mg DHA daily, and chose this fatty acid for its anti-inflammatory effects and some evidence that it may lower the risk of Alzheimer's disease.

The multidomain training was done in 12 sessions that were 2 hours long in groups totaling six to eight participants, over a 2-month period. Training then switched to hour-long sessions every month.

During these sessions, patients were counselled on three areas: nutrition, exercise, and cognition. Patients were given nutritional advice, instructed to do 150 minutes of moderate exercise each week by walking 30 minutes a day, and cognitive training focused on improved memory.

The primary endpoint was the change in cognitive function at 3 years as measured by a composite cognitive battery involving episodic memory, spatial orientation, executive function, and verbal fluency.

Vellas and colleagues found a significant effect for the multidomain groups, with or without DHA supplementation, leading to significantly better outcomes than DHA supplementation alone or placebo, they reported.

Vellas added that the largest effect was seen in the group that had the combination of DHA and multidomain counseling.

In prespecified analyses, those with worse cognitive function benefitted more from the combination of DHA and counseling, as did those with lower levels of DHA at baseline.

And patients who were ApoE4 positive garnered the most benefit from the combination, Vellas reported.

The researchers also conducted ancillary imaging studies, which revealed that the multidomain intervention plus DHA was associated with a significant improvement in brain metabolism as shown on FDG-PET scans compared with controls.

Vellas explained that his team will continue to follow the participants for another 2 years to assess long-term benefits.

Vellas disclosed no relevant relationships with industry.

2015-10-11T00:00:00-0400