South Bay eager to shape high-speed rail connecting Bay Area to Los Angeles
The long-running debate over which route a high-speed bullet train system would take into the Bay Area is reaching a critical junction.

After more than 10 years of planning and studies on the massive proposal, which envisions trains whizzing at 220 mph between Los Angeles and the Bay Area, the California High-Speed Rail Authority is holding a series of public hearings – including one in San Jose this afternoon – to tackle the question of where to lay the tracks.

“The decisions made based on these hearings will affect the Bay Area for the next 100 years, not unlike the way the transcontinental railroad affected Sacramento,” said Rod Diridon, a former Santa Clara County supervisor who sits on the authority board.

The authority, a state agency, is expected to choose a preferred Bay Area route by the end of October. Meanwhile, questions about how to pay for the $37 billion project loom.

San Jose leaders, including Silicon Valley business interests, have argued for several years that the train should make a southern approach from the Central Valley through Los Banos to Gilroy and up through San Jose en route to San Francisco. That would ensure every train stops at San Jose, rather than only some of them.

“Silicon Valley is the economic engine that drives Northern California,” said Carl Guardino, president of the Silicon Valley Leadership Group, which counts most of the area’s largest high-tech companies among its members. “It’s hard to imagine that Northern California’s biggest city and biggest economic hub would be a spur and not a direct part of the line.”

But East Bay leaders and several of the state’s largest environmental organizations and rail advocacy groups want the trains to come into the Bay Area on a northern route, through the Altamont Pass. They argue that tens of thousands of commuters who live in Tracy, Stockton and Manteca would be able to leave their cars behind, reducing traffic and smog, and that building it along Pacheco Pass could increase sprawl in the Los Banos-Merced area.

“We love high-speed rail,” said Melissa Hippard, director of the Sierra Club’s Loma Prieta chapter in Palo Alto. “But in terms of the two route issues, this is another opportunity to help shape how we grow. Tracy-to-Oakland needs a lot more attention than the area out in Los Banos.”

S.F.’s Newsom onboard

On Thursday, the South Bay route received a boost when San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom endorsed it at a public hearing in his city.

“To me, it’s a proverbial no-brainer,” Newsom said later in an interview.

He said the Pacheco route would more effectively fit in with Caltrain and other existing infrastructure. Several options for the Altamont route call for construction of either a second transbay tunnel or a new bridge near the Dumbarton – an issue that could be mired in lawsuits for years.

“Putting a boat in the bay is problematic,” Newsom said. “Driving piles and building new structures would be extraordinarily challenging.”

Hippard, of the Sierra Club, said she supports a route over the Altamont Pass that would go around the bay without requiring a new bridge built through the Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge.

But going around the bay from Altamont would increase ridership time to San Francisco, Newsom said, adding that he’d like to see more statewide leaders embrace high-speed rail.

“There’s not enough freeway space to accommodate for the future growth of the state. We absolutely need this,” he said. “There’s a lot of rhetoric about how green we are in California. Here’s an opportunity to demonstrate it in a significant way.”

The rail authority approved the final 700-mile route for the rest of the state in 2005. The agency projects building the system would cost $37 billion, funded by state money, federal money and fares. But because of the Altamont-Pacheco debate, the authority decided to fund a detailed environmental impact report on the Bay Area options.

That draft report, which came out last month, showed that each route essentially costs about the same. A system that comes up through Pacheco Pass and has hubs in San Jose, Oakland and San Francisco would cost $16 billion and have 85 million riders a year by 2030, according to the study.

A system that came over the Altamont Pass with hubs in those three cities would cost $15 billion and have the same number of riders.

Each of the two systems would have either 10 or 11 Bay Area stations. Each would cost $1.1 billion a year to operate and would generate $2.7 billion in annual revenue by 2030, according to the environmental study.

“My view is that it is pretty much a wash,” said Mehdi Morshed, executive director of the California High-Speed Rail Authority.

Morshed said he thought quality of life and environmental issues probably will be the deciding factor for his nine-member board.

“We’re supposed to take the least environmentally damaging option,” he said. “The focus has to be on the noise, the neighborhood disruption, the amount of wetlands affected, those kinds of things. That’s what’s going to swing the deal.”

Public hearings

Following the public hearings – with San Jose set for tonight, Oakland on Tuesday, Gilroy on Wednesday and Merced on Thursday – the rail authority should choose a preferred alternative by the end of October, Morshed said. One more round of public hearings will follow that, and the rail authority will certify the final environmental report by the end of the year.

Regardless of the route, one big question mark hanging over the project is money.

Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger has promised to cut $700 million from the state budget approved by lawmakers this week. He has given mixed signals on high-speed rail in the past, and as part of his proposed budget this spring, he suggested only $5 million for the state High-Speed Rail Authority. The authority said it needed $104 million to finish engineering studies and acquire rights of way. In a compromise, the Legislature gave it $20 million.

If Schwarzenegger cuts that, the authority, with six employees, would have to dial back its work.

“In the next few days, we will know if we are going forward or if we are closing down,” Morshed said.

A $9.95 billion bond measure to pay the first part of the project is approved for the November 2008 ballot. But it has been moved by state lawmakers twice before, in 2004 and 2006, to put highways, schools, and flood control projects on the ballot instead.

Alicia Trost, a spokeswoman for state Senate leader Don Perata, D-Oakland, said Perata supports leaving the rail bond on the 2008 ballot.

“We are supportive of the project,” she said. “He hasn’t made a decision about which approach is best.”

IF YOU’RE INTERESTED

Today’s meeting begins at 4 p.m. in the council chambers of San Jose City Hall, 200 E. Santa Clara St. To learn more, go to www.cahighspeedrail.ca.gov and click on “Bay Area to Central 2Valley.”