Definition of Conspiracy by Merriam-Webster
The CIA uncovered a conspiracy against the government. They were accused of conspiracy to commit murder.

Recent Examples on the Web

Long-time Manafort partner Rick Gates faced similar charges, but pleaded guilty to false statement and conspiracy charges. David Jackson, USA TODAY, "Donald Trump and lawyers blast Robert Mueller at one-year anniversary," 17 May 2018

After the crash, conspiracy theorists claim, the Olympic was an economic disaster. David Grossman, Popular Mechanics, "The Wild Conspiracy That the Titanic Never Sank," 27 Feb. 2019

On August 6, Facebook banned right-wing conspiracy theorist Alex Jones; on August 13, the federal government filed charges saying that Facebook had violated the Fair Housing Act by allowing ads to discriminate against certain groups. Emily Stewart, Vox, "Facebook’s very bad year, explained," 21 Dec. 2018

And conspiracy theorists on the right have taken this skepticism a step further, insisting that the migrants must be being funded and organized by people who oppose Trump. Liliana Frankel, Teen Vogue, "A Day in the Life of the Migrant Caravan," 16 Nov. 2018

Jones, a conspiracy theorist, has made many defamatory remarks about the families of the 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. Eileen Reslen, Town & Country, "Megyn Kelly's Most Controversial Moments Ever," 26 Oct. 2018

An old interview has surfaced with Arizona senate candidate Kyrsten Sinema, in which she co-hosted a show with a conspiracy theorists who blames 9/11 on the US. Fox News, "Video from 2011 creates headaches for Sinema," 12 Oct. 2018

Here, ruining people is considered sport.’’ An initial investigation declared Foster’s death a suicide, but conspiracy theorists speculated the Clintons were somehow connected to his death. Michael Kranish And Ann E. Marimow, BostonGlobe.com, "From Clinton to Trump: How Brett Kavanaugh navigated through some of Washington’s biggest scandals," 10 July 2018

But YouTube, which is owned by Google parent company Alphabet, has also endured criticism for its algorithms that promote conspiracy theorist and extremist videos. Brittany Shoot, Fortune, "YouTube Invests $25 Million to Promote 'Authoritative' News Ahead of U.S. Midterm Elections," 9 July 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'conspiracy.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.