Miami-Dade County
(Miami-Dade County, FL) -- Miami's lavish European estate on Biscayne Bay, described as "America's greatest Gilded Age estate," is one of the most recent beneficiaries of the National Park Service-administered Save America's Treasures grant program. Vizcaya, a spectacular 34-room mansion built between 1912 and 1916 by industrialist James Deering, is a National Historic Landmark operated today as a museum by Miami-Dade County. It is one of a series of grand estates built by wealthy families such as the Rockefellers, Vanderbilts, and Carnegies around the turn of the 20th century when fortunes were being made in oil, manufacturing, and railroads. Vizcaya is one of the most intact remaining examples of what is known as the American Renaissance, a period when the wealthy built estates fashioned after the European example. While grand estates like Vizcaya may strike some observers as "conspicuous consumption," Vizcaya is very much an expression of Gilded Age aesthetics.

Architect F. Burrall Hoffman, Jr., designed the mansion and Colombian landscape architect Diego Suarez designed the grounds. The focus of the grant-a $300,000 award to be matched from other sources-is Vizcaya's outdoor sculpture. When the estate earned its National Historic Landmark designation in 1994, the statuary was cited as a major contributing factor, part of "the finest Italianate gardens in the United States." There are some 150 statues, 93 urns, and 21 fountains. The objects range from a 2nd century Roman ceremonial altar to commissioned works by modernist sculptor Gaston LaChaise. Deering and his designers probably could not have foreseen the toll taken by the salty, damp, subtropical climate. According to the museum's grant application, the collection is in a state of "severe deterioration," with limestone, marble, terracotta, and lead artifacts all suffering. Early repairs in some cases made things worse: metal pins intended to hold items together have corroded, expanded, and caused yet more damage. Mold, mildew, and other growth thrive here, accelerating deterioration. A series of hurricanes dating back to 1926-including Katrina-has also caused damage. The grant will help repair and clean the statuary, with metal pins reinforced or replaced with titanium or stainless steel. Some of the statues will be relocated to keep them out of harm's way in the event of hurricanes. The Federal Save America's Treasures Grants is administered by the National Park Service (NPS) in partnership with the National Endowment for the Arts, the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Institute of Museum and Library Services, and the President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities. Save America's Treasures grants are available for preservation and conservation work on nationally significant historic properties and collections. Grants are awarded through a competitive process and require a dollar-for-dollar, non-Federal match.

About Vizcaya Museum & Gardens

Built by agricultural industrialist James Deering in 1916, Vizcaya Museum & Gardens, a National Historic Landmark, features a main house, ten acres of formal gardens, a hardwood hammock, and soon-to-be-restored historic village that will provide additional venues for programs and community outreach. Vizcaya Museum & Gardens, located at 3251 South Miami Avenue, is open daily from 9:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. For more information, visit www.vizcayamuseum.org or call 305-250-9133.