Michelle Nunn Highlights David Perdue's Washington Hypocrisy On Farm Bill



Over The Weekend, Perdue Called Georgia's Ag Industry The "Heart Of Our Local Economy" But Opposed Farmers' Number One Priority



Perdue Opposed Farm Bill Endorsed By The Georgia Chamber, the American Farm Bureau, Senators Chambliss and Isakson and Congressman Kingston



Senator Chambliss On Farm Bill Perdue Opposed: "There is no single piece of legislation that impacts as many people in my state as this one."



Perdue's Farm Bill Failure Would Have Raised Prices On Georgia Families, Devastated Georgia Farmers



ATLANTA, GA -- Michelle Nunn today highlighted David Perdue's hypocrisy on agricultural issues. Over the weekend, Perdue called the agricultural industry "the heart of the local economy" and claimed he would support Georgia farmers even though he opposed their number one priority -- the bipartisan Farm Bill endorsed by Georgia's Senators, the Georgia Chamber, the American Farm Bureau and farmers across Georgia.



Perdue even campaigned with Georgia Agricultural Commissioner Gary Black who had ripped Washington's failure to pass the legislation and warned of the consequences for Georgia farmers.



"Yet again, David Perdue is proving he would be part of the problem in Washington," said Michelle Nunn. "While the Farm Bureau, the Georgia Chamber, both Georgia Senators and Congressman Jack Kingston all endorsed the long-overdue bipartisan farm bill, Perdue said he would have stood with those who tried to block its passage in the Senate. Now, he is hypocritically claiming he would stand with Georgia farmers -- even though he opposed their number one priority."



Perdue opposed the legislation, even though Congress’ failure to pass the Farm Bill would have meant steep increases in food prices for Georgia families and more uncertainty for Georgia families.



While Perdue opposed the legislation, Georgia leaders from across the political spectrum endorsed it and warned of the major implications if it hadn’t passed :



Senator Chambliss: “I believe this legislation is vitally important to the farmers, ranchers and consumers of Georgia, as well as those across this great nation, and there is no single piece of legislation that impacts as many people in my state as this one.” [Chambliss Floor Statement, 2/4/2014]



Senator Isakson: “This bipartisan farm bill is very important to Georgia agriculture, which is our state’s number one industry,” Isakson said in a statement. “The bill contains food stamp reforms, conservation provisions, forestry provisions and safety nets that will ensure that we continue meeting the needs of farmers in Georgia and the Southeast.” [AJC, 2/4/2014]



GA Chamber of Commerce: “Wednesday, the Georgia Chamber welcomed congressional approval of H.R. 2642, the Farm Bill. The bill provides a comprehensive approach to addressing the needs of the agriculture industry and gives farmers the certainty they need to plan for the future. Agriculture remains one of Georgia's largest and most significant industries - contributing more than $70 billion annually to our state's economy.” [GA Chamber, 02/07]



American Farm Bureau: “It’s been a bumpy road for the farm bill over the past several years, with many twists and turns, but farmers never gave up nor lost momentum in working toward its passage,” American Farm Bureau Federation President Bob Stallman said. “Farm Bureau believes this farm bill will give farmers and ranchers a measure of business certainty for this and coming years, allowing them to better manage risk while carrying out the important business of providing food and jobs for America.” [Farm Bureau Website, 02/14]



Georgia Agriculture Commissioner Gary Black: “Georgia's Agriculture Commissioner is airing his frustration over Washington's inability to pass a new version of the Farm Bill. 'If this one expires, we would go back to 1949 law which quite frankly, the cost escalators involved in that, this country could not afford," said Georgia Ag commissioner Gary Black.'" [WALB News, 7/13/2013]



Congress’ failure to pass Farm Bill would have hurt Georgia families and farmers:



If The Farm Bill Hadn’t Passed Or Been Extended, The USDA Would Have Had To Revert To The 1949 Law, Increasing Food Prices. “Because reverting to permanent law would re-introduce a radically different farm program, one with much higher support prices (through nonrecourse loans instead of payments) that would require much smaller crop production and much higher consumer prices.” [Washington Post, 6/28/2013]



Milk Prices, In Particular Would Soar. “Among the worst impacts under this scenario, Vilsack said milk prices would skyrocket under the 1949 law. The National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition estimated in a report last year that the cost would double compared to market prices at the time.” [Washington Post, 6/28/2013]



Without Farm Bill Passage, Georgia Sugar And Peanut Farmers Would No Longer Have Mandatory Coverage. “Reverting to the 1949 law would also leave out any mandatory coverage for soybeans and other oilseeds as well as peanuts and sugar.” [National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition,9/28/12]



Georgia Farmers Produce Half The Nations Peanuts And The Peanut Industry Contributes $2 Billion To Georgia’s Economy. “In 2012, Georgia farmers produced more than half of the U.S. peanut crop, up from 45 percent.” “At the farm level, peanuts are worth just under a half-billion dollars. By the time that moves through the economy, the value exceeds $2 billion to our state.” [AJC, 2/19/2014]



If The Farm Bill Had Expired, Land Grant Universities Like the University Of Georgia And Fort Valley State Would Have Lost Some Funding For Research. “The secretary said allowing the existing farm bill to expire would mean less support for research at land-grant universities” [Washington Post, 6/28/2013]



Georgia Agriculture Commissioner Gary Black Warned That Failing To Pass The Farm Bill Would Have Serious Consequences For Georgia And Georgia Universities."Without a farm bill we have serious consequences at our institution of higher learning and other consumer protection areas," Black said. It would ultimately slash federal Ag science funding to schools like ABAC and UGA's Tifton campus. Money in the bill also funds meat inspection.” [WALB News, 7/13/2013]