North Korea's only car maker unveils new range of 'luxury' motors that look remarkably similar to West's models
Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

North Korean despot Kim Jong-un is taking on the might of Mercedes and BMW - with a range of ‘luxury’ cars.

The hermit nation ’s only car maker has unveiled snaps of a new sports utility vehicle that is a rip-off of the £61,000 Mercedes GL.

The 4 x 4 has a top speed of just 99 mph - and costs £19,000. It is one for North Korea’s elite alone - the average citizen gets by on a wage of around £1.50 a day.

Next in the line-up is the Hwiparam II sedan which is meant to look like a BMW 3-series.

(Image: Handout)

(Image: AFP)

But the motor is a vast improvement over the previous generation - which was based on a Fiat Siena - and is equipped with a 1.8-litre unit which produces a thundering 110 bhp.

The Junma is almost identical to a Mercedes E-class from the mid-1990’s and has a 197 bhp, engine, the most powerful in Pyeonghwa’s range. The other 21 models are copies of cars produced by VW and Kia, and are only available in a solitary dealership in the capital in Pyongyang.

In 2010, it was estimated there were less than 30,000 vehicles on the road serving a population of 24 million. Kim’s car makers are producing just 1,600 vehicles a year.

But experts have told sites like NK News how the home made motors make up a sizable minority of vehicles on the country’s roads, where imports are more commonly seen.

Pyeonghwa Motors - Korean for peace - is turning out the cars in the north west port city of Nampo. Up to 20 per cent of vehicles in Pyongyang were reckoned to be Pyeonghwa vehicles last year.

The number is reduced once you leave the capital. While billboards praising the car firm are among the only advertisements in the communist state, most North Koreans can only dream of actually owning a car.

The regime heavily restricts private car ownership to a select few.

Even though visitors to the capital say traffic in Pyongyang has increased considerably in recent years, vehicles still remain few and far between throughout the country.

Kim Jong-un spent £14million on importing new cars - including £33,000 on models from Germany - last year. But the vast majority - around 98 per cent - came from China.

North Korea’s most infamous trade debt to the West is bizarre even by the standards of the secretive regime. Kim’s dad Kim Il-sung persuaded Sweden to send him 1,000 Volvo 144 sedans in 1974.

The Swedes still await payment, and have had to calculate the interest on the £229million debt every year since. “North Korea expected to pay their foreign debts with deliveries of copper and zinc,” the Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter wrote in 1976.

“But their economists had been too optimistic in their calculations and international market price for ores dropped catastrophically.