Flint's built-in water rate increase of 6 percent won't fly, say some on City Council
FLINT, MI -- Several City Council members said this week that higher water prices will not fly in Flint given the anger among residents, who already pay some of the highest rates in Michigan.

The city's adopted budget says water rates will rise 6 percent in the fiscal year that starts July 1.

Those high bills, which average nearly $150 monthly, haven't produced the highest-quality water for city residents, who received notices last month that Flint is in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act because of high levels of total trihalomethanes (TTHM) in water samples taken last year.

Since the city stopped purchasing pre-treated Lake Huron water from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, there have been scattered boil water advisories and residents have complained about the color, smell and taste of water that is now drawn from the Flint River.

City officials have said hundreds of water main breaks in the past 12 months have contributed to discolored water that has raised further questions about water quality.

"Until we get our act together on the water, I don't see how we can raise rates on residents," said City Council President Josh Freeman.

The newest council members -- Herbert Winfrey and Kerry Nelson -- also said this week that a built-in rate increase in the coming fiscal year can't be allowed to take effect.

The development of a two-year budget this year could give them the chance to make their case.

Budget discussions in coming months promise to give more local say-so than there has been in Flint since Gov. Rick Snyder declared a financial emergency here in 2011.

Although emergency manager Darnell Earley set water rates for 2015-2016 as a part of last year's budget-making process and an emergency manager remains in charge of the city's purse strings, Flint is starting the process of transition back to home rule.

Emergency manager Jerry Ambrose remains in charge but he has said he expects to leave his assignment in April, putting Flint in the hands of Mayor Dayne Walling, the council, City Administrator Natasha Henderson and a Transition Advisory Board.

Walling said in an email to MLive-The Flint Journal that officials "have to continue to seek assistance to address this long-standing problem (of the city water system) so that Flint can be competitive for families, students and businesses."

"Infrastructure improvements are necessary but they can also be covered through federal and state grants or loan forgiveness," Walling wrote, "and I believe the city's customers are more than deserving of such support given that they are already paying some of the highest rates in the state."

Ambrose released a statement to The Journal, leaving the door open to changes in the planned 6 percent price increase.

"As recommended by the Raftelis study last year, there are rate increases in the adopted FY 16 budget of approximately 6 percent," Ambrose wrote. "However, during the month of March, we will be reviewing all aspects of the FY 16 budget, including the necessity of raising rates, and the budget which will presented to the council in the first week in April will address that issue.

"We are well aware of the many concerns regarding water rates, and would prefer not to see them raised," Ambrose's statement says. "But we are also aware of the significant need to make repairs to our system, and to keep the system financially solvent."

Flint residents such as Akil Eberechuku said city water customers deserve better than they've been given recently.

"We have a bad product that's being supplied. Under any traditional circumstance, people expect some adjustment -- some consideration -- (but) rates have continued to rise," Eberechuku said. "That is outrageous. A bad product, no adjustment and continued rate increases."