Alabama Senate: Provisional, overseas ballots well short of Jones margin

CLOSE Unedited video of Roy Moore's speech to his supporters after his opponent, Doug Jones, declared victory. Wochit

The Alabama Secretary of State’s office said Wednesday it received a total of 5,333 overseas and provisional ballots for the Dec. 12 Alabama Senate election.

Buy Photo Senator elect Doug Jones exits with hisfamily after holding a day after election press conference in Birmingham, Ala. on Wednesday December 13, 2017. (Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)

The numbers will deal a blow to Republican Senate nominee Roy Moore, who refused to concede Dec. 12 in part because he wanted those ballots counted. Even in the unlikely event every verified ballot went to Moore, it would not be enough to erase a 20,715 lead from Democratic nominee and election winner Doug Jones.

Nor would the new totals trigger an automatic recount: In that scenario, Jones’ margin of victory — currently 1.5 percent — would fall to 1.1 percent. State law mandates automatic recounts at margins of 0.5 percent or lower.

An email seeking comment was sent to the Moore campaign Wednesday morning. In a statement, Jones spokesman Sebastian Kitchen wrote, "This election has been over since Dec. 12."

"These numbers only further indicate it is time to move on, come together as a state, and begin addressing the serious issues facing the people, like improving education and wages and addressing the looming deadline when more than 150,000 Alabama children begin losing their health care," the statement said.

Moore campaign chairman Bill Armistead said at the candidate's party on Dec. 12 they hoped to see military ballots change the outcome.

“A lot of votes are in, but they’re not all in yet,” he said. “There’s a law in Alabama that requires a recount if the vote is one half of one percent.”

The Secretary of State’s office said in its release Wednesday that 485 ballots had been transmitted under the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act, with 366 returned “at this time.” The office said 4,967 provisional ballots had been received, with 2,888 ballots verified as of Wednesday morning.

“No additional ballots are eligible to be received at this time,” the statement said. The ballots will go into the county totals where they were cast. Officials will certify the results between Dec. 26 and Jan. 3.

A little under 23,000 write-in ballots — about 1.7 percent of the total — were cast on Dec. 12. Individual write-in ballots are being counted in the counties because the totals were larger than the margin of victory. Montgomery’s write-in break down was not immediately available Wednesday morning, but some counties have begun sending theirs in.

Morgan County, just south of Huntsville, reported 215 of 671 write-ins going to outgoing U.S. Sen. Luther Strange, with 152 going to write-in candidate Lee Busby and 72 going to U.S. Rep. Mo Brooks. Votes were also cast for Nick Saban, Bugs Bunny, Buddy the Elf and Bozo “The Clown.”

Buy Photo Roy Moore announces that he will be pursuing a recount of election results that have Doug Jones winning the Alabama Senate race during the Roy Moore Election Night Party on Tuesday, Dec. 12, 2017, in Montgomery, Ala. (Photo: Albert Cesare / Advertiser)

Moore had not conceded the race as of Wednesday morning, and last week began soliciting money for a legal fund. But most state and national officials accepted Jones’ win the night of Dec. 12. Alabama Republican Party chair Terry Lathan in a statement that evening all but conceded the race, and Jones has said in a number of public statements it was time for Moore to move on.

It is not clear if Moore could request a recount above the 0.5 percent threshold. State law does allow losing candidates to make such a request — if they are willing to pay the costs — but the code sections only appear to apply to state offices, not federal ones like U.S. Senate.

More than 1.3 million Alabamians, about 40 percent of the total electorate, cast a ballot on Dec. 12, shattering most turnout expectations.

Read or Share this story: http://www.montgomeryadvertiser.com/story/news/politics/southunionstreet/2017/12/20/alabama-senate-provisional-overseas-ballots-well-short-jones-margin/969381001/