Board upholds VA's firing of Talton
Buy Photo James Talton (Photo: MONTGOMERY ADVERTISER / Lloyd Gallman/Advertiser)Buy Photo

The firing of the former director of the Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System was upheld, according to a 32-page decision issued Wednesday.

The U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board, an independent entity that reviews the appeals of federal merit system employees and guards them from political influence, denied James Talton's appeal.

Talton was the first to be fired under a new law that holds high-level VA officials accountable for poor performance and misconduct. VA Deputy Secretary Sloan Gibson removed Talton from his position in October, nearly two months after Talton was placed on paid administrative leave in August.

At issue were two instances of employee misconduct that Talton failed to take timely disciplinary action for, according to Thomas J. Lanphear, the chief administrative judge for the board.

The decision cited two cases the Montgomery Advertiser reported using leaked documents from VA employees — one in which an employee took a patient enrolled in the Tuskegee facility's drug treatment program to a crack house, and another that involved an employee who misused government resources, crashed a federal vehicle he was using for personal business and lied to cover it up.

The board found that Talton, who waived the right to a hearing but submitted a written appeal, was guilty of neglect of duty and failing to report information to his supervisor, Lanphear wrote.

In his defense, Talton said he didn't know the facts of the case involving Joe Kennedy, who in addition to leaving a patient at a crack house, borrowed money from a patient, misused government property for personal gain and submitted false overtime statements.

Both incidents happened in the first part of 2013.

Talton's "inattention" to the Kennedy case became the basis for his removal, the decision said.

In his appeal, Talton wrote that if he had been aware of all the facts in the Kennedy case, he would have "elevated the case to a more urgent status and would have addressed the matter expeditiously."

But the decision said Cedric Thomas, the investigating VA police officer, gave Talton and then-Chief-of-Staff Cliff Robinson three or four updates about the status of the case, and noted that action hadn't yet been taken against Kennedy.

Employees in the human resources and quality management department found that there was sufficient evidence to take action against Kennedy, but no action was taken in 2013, the decision said.

Lanphear wrote that it wasn't until after the Advertiser published a story about Kennedy that Talton showed a "heightened interest" in the case.

Kennedy wasn't removed from his position until October 2014, about 19 months after the incident, the decision said.

In the case involving Daniel Brooks, who caused $5,800 in damage to a government vehicle and then fabricated evidence to cover it up, the decision said Talton, Robinson and human resources staff "shuffled" the case around for much of 2013.

A VA police investigation into the Brooks case said he violated state law by not reporting the accident, violated multiple policies by not properly reporting the accident to the VA, made false statements to investigators, misused government resources and property for personal gain and damaged government property.

Talton requested information on removing Brooks, and asked if Brooks would be required to pay for the damage. He asked Robinson and human resources staff to talk with Thomas to determine a course of action.

But the case sat dormant until August 2014, even though Thomas continued to tell Talton that no action had been taken. Brooks' removal was proposed on Oct. 15, 2014.

An Administrative Investigative Board that convened in August to look into Talton and Robinson's inactions found that they, along with human resources employees, had neglected their duties and mismanaged the situations.

The report found that although Talton was made aware of both instances of employee misconduct, he failed to ensure that appropriate and timely action was taken.

Talton's defense in his appeal was that the decision was a "harmful error," violated the merit system principles, violated due process and that the official who made the decision lacked the authority to "effectuate" his removal.

But the decision said Talton's appeal didn't meet the burden to prove his defense.

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1qZ6g6p