Star Wars: Episode VIII – The Last Jedi casting calls
Walt Disney Studios and Lucasfilm in association with Kasdan Pictures and Genre Films are in production on “Star Wars: Episode VIII – The Last Jedi”. The casting team is registering talent to work on the film as fully paid extras, featured background performers, photo-doubles, and stand-ins. In addition to the extras being cast, day player speaking roles are also being cast. People who are 16 years of age through seniors are being registered, as long as they have legal eligibility to work in the entertainment industry in London and in the United Kingdom. Details below. Filming is taking place at the Pinewood Studios in London, England and surrounding areas. This film is using the secret working title “Space Bear”.

Returning to reprise their roles in “Star Wars: Episode VIII – The Last Jedi” is Golden Globe Award nominee Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron; Daisy Ridley as Rey; Black Reel Awards nominee John Boyega as Finn; two-time Primetime Emmy Award nominee Carrie Fisher as Leia; three-time Primetime Emmy Award nominee Adam Driver as Kylo Ren; two-time British Independent Film Awards nominee Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux; Anthony Daniels as the voice of C-3PO; three-time Screen Actors Guild Awards nominee Gwendoline Christie as Captain Phasma; Academy Award winner Lupita Nyong’o as Maz Kanata; and BAFTA Award winner Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker. Also joining the cast of “Star Wars: Episode VIII – The Last Jedi” is BAFTA Award nominee Gugu Mbatha-Raw, two-time Academy Award nominee Laura Dern, Academy Award winner Benicio Del Toro who will play the role of a villain, and newcomer Kelly Marie Tran in an undisclosed role.

Directors Guild of America DGA Award winner Rian Johnson has taken over directorial duties for “Star Wars: Episode VIII – The Last Jedi”. Johnson also wrote the original screenplay based on characters by George Lucas. Eight-time Academy Award nominee Kathleen Kennedy is overseeing production for Lucasfilm, while four-time Academy Award nominee Lawrence Kasdan is producing under the banner of his production company Kasdan Pictures. Simon Kinberg is producing for Genre Films. Ram Bergman also serves as producer. “Star Wars: Episode VIII” is scheduled to hit theaters on December 15, 2017.

Star Wars: Episode VIII – The Last Jedi Casting Calls

All extras, stand-ins, photo-doubles, and actors are required to be legally eligible to work in the entertainment industry in London and in the United Kingdom, including having a National Insurance Number. The 2016 London Actors Resource Guide eBook contains the information and documents for adults, minors, and foreign talent who would like to work as an extra or actor on film and television productions in London and the United Kingdom. All Actors Resource Guide eBooks are available here.

To be considered to work on Star Wars: Episode VIII – The Last Jedi as an extra, featured background performer, photo double, or stand-in, fill out the following online form:

Star Wars: Episode VIII Extras Casting

Open casting call dates and locations will be posted here if they are scheduled.

Submission Information for Speaking Roles

United Kingdom:

Star Wars: Episode VIII

Nina Gold Casting

117 Chevening Road

London NW6 6DU

UK

United States:

Star Wars: Episode VIII

Mary Vernieu

Betty Mae Casting

13375 Beach Ave.

Marina Del Rey, CA 90292

NOTE:

Speaking roles are mainly being cast through talent agents in Los Angeles and London. You can find comprehensive listings and submission addresses for talent agents here. However, if you are not signed with an agent and wish to self-submit, I highly recommend that your 8×10 color headshot and resume along with the cover letter be sent in a 9 x 12 Clear Full Face Window Envelope with the photo visible in the window.

Click Here to purchase 9 x 12 Clear Full Face Window Envelopes.

Click Here to purchase the best resume and cover letter paper.

Crew Members & Production Staff

Experienced film crew members and production staff who are available to work in London can submit resumes to the following:

resumes@lucasfilm.com

ABSOLUTELY NO ACTOR OR EXTRAS SUBMISSIONS TO THIS EMAIL ADDRESS.

Production Companies:

Do NOT send photos and resumes to the production companies, as they will most likely end up being thrown away. They do not cast the films, rather they hire casting directors who sort through the thousands of submissions.

Spacebear Industries, LTD

Pinewood Road

Iver Heath

Buckinghamshire SL0 0NH

Lucasfilm

5858 Lucas Valley Road

Nicasio, CA 94946-9703

Genre Films

10201 West Pico Bnvd.

Building 49

Los Angeles, CA 90035

Kasdan Pictures

PO Box 17578

Beverly Hills, CA 90209

Ram Bergman Productions

5656 Lemona Avenue

Van Nuys, CA 91411

Truenorth

Holmaslod 8

101 Reykjavik

Iceland

The Walt Disney Studios

500 S. Buena Vista Street

Burbank, CA 91521-0001

Producers:

Kathleen Kennedy

Ram Bergman

Lawrence Kasdan

Simon Kinberg

Writer/Director:

Rian Johnson

Director of Photography:

Steve Yedlin

Line Producer:

Tom Karnowski

Production Manager:

Elena Zokas

Production Designer:

Rick Heinrichs

Starring:

Daisy Ridley – Rey

Oscar Isaac – Poe Dameron

John Boyega – Finn

Carrie Fisher – Leia

Adam Driver as Kylo Ren

Lupita Nyong’o – Maz Kanata

Domhnall Gleeson – General Hux

Gwendoline Christie – Captain Phasma

Gugu Mbatha-Raw – TBA

Mark Hamill – Luke Skywalker

Benicio Del Toro – Villain

Kelly Marie Tran – Actress

Laura Dern – Actress

Story:

A continuation of the saga created by George Lucas set after Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens.