Another solution in search of a problem

Here's what Miguel of San Antonio risks if he tries to vote.

He has been in this country for 15 years. He has four children, three of them U.S. citizens. He wants to stay. Legally. That's in the works.

But if he votes and is caught, any path to legal residency goes kablooey. That's on top of jail, a hefty fine and, after deportation, leaving his family or uprooting them.

Vote? “Practically speaking, no,” said Miguel, who is, of course, undocumented and didn't want his real name used. He knows of no one in his situation who would risk voting.

And yet Texas Secretary of State Hope Andrade recently joined several other states in asking the federal government for access to a Homeland Security database that the states hope will help them bar noncitizens from voting. But the cost-to-benefit ratio is questionable here.

Sparking this drive around the country has been fear of people like Miguel, undocumented immigrants, and legal residents ineligible to vote.

Here's a census snapshot: There are 192,741 San Antonio residents who are foreign-born, 14.4 percent of the city's population. In Bexar County, make that 221,256, or 12.6 percent; in Texas, 4.1 million, or about 16 percent.

The database to which the secretary of state wants access is also a snapshot. It's called SAVE, or the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements program at the Department of Homeland Security. It's used to determine if people are eligible for government benefits. At least 12 other states also want access.

Some people on this list will be listed as undocumented but will be lawful residents now. And there will be lawful residents who are now citizens, eligible to vote.

Andrade wrote that she understands that this list should not be “relied on as the sole source of confirmation of an individual's citizenship status.” And this is wise. There is no foolproof list.

Secretary of state spokesman Richard Parsons said the office has not yet determined how to best use this database. He noted that noncitizens are flagged now if they have at some point self-identified as such to get off jury duty. He said the database will not be used as a “purge tool.”

But here's what we should all realize about noncitizens voting: It is rare.

Undocumented immigrants work hard to stay under the radar. Voting is potentially that radar “ping.” And legal residents are not likely to risk deportation.

A 2007 national report showed an average of eight noncitizen voting episodes per year between 2002 and 2005. And Major Forrest Mitchell of the Texas attorney general's law enforcement division testified in the voter ID case in federal court recently that he knew of no cases of noncitizens voting in Texas referred to his office.

State Rep. Trey Martinez Fischer of San Antonio, chairman of the Mexican American Legislative Caucus, after the request for the Homeland Security database said the state is hypocritical for now seeking database matches after criticizing the matching process in voter ID testimony last week.

The National Immigration Law Center and the Advancement Project, two groups interested in the topic, note that the database is unproven for this purpose and that the federal government should place restrictions on its use as a result.

Miguel, meanwhile, simply observes that he wants papers and that voting could mean never getting them.

In a column Wednesday, I suggested that the GOP's U.S. Senate nominee Ted Cruz might be talked about as a veep candidate in 2016. He may very well be, but not credibly. He was born in Canada.

o.ricardo.pimentel@express-news.net