Senate Finance boss shares ideas on tax laws
State Senate Finance Committee Chairman Steve Ogden, R-Bryan, has one of the Legislature's most powerful jobs as Texas faces the prospect of a multibillion-dollar budget gap in the next two years. If Ogden fends off a challenge by Democrat Stephen Wyman in November, he's expected to continue to influence spending and government services. He spoke recently with Austin Bureau Chief Peggy Fikac.

Q: You have called the state tax system “rickety.” What is the biggest problem with it?

A: It's rickety in the sense that the sales tax laws are very confusing, and there are more exemptions than there are items subject to the sales tax, and we would do ourselves some good if we went in there and cleaned up that statute. ... I personally think if we had a broader-base, lower-rate sales tax it would improve things in Texas. But there's a key in there. I mean if you broaden the base, you can lower the rate. I'm not trying to raise taxes.

Q: How much more money do you think that could bring in, or should it bring in?

A: I would want it to initially be revenue neutral, but I would argue that over time ... as the economy grows, a broader-base, lower-rate tax would raise more money over the long haul than the one we have.

Q: On the budget, lawmakers face a minimum $11 billion shortfall in the next session.

A: No, I disagree. ... I don't think you can define it yet because you don't know — when you say shortfall, you imply some sort of mandatory spending level and some sort of predetermined revenue level, neither of which we have. There's no shortfall if you don't spend it. And we don't know yet what our revenue projections are.

Q: State agencies were asked to identify possible budget cuts to help with the shortfall. Some have asked for exemptions, including the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, which suggested cuts would affect public safety. Do you think they or any other additional agencies should get exemptions?

A: We're looking at that on a case-by-case basis. ... But the best way to cut a budget is the best way to have a sales tax. It needs to be a broad-based, low-percentage cut. And the more people you exempt, the more difficult it is on the remaining. ... So, at least my argument is, if our target is going to be a billion-dollar reduction in 2011, make it as broad a base as possible.

Q: On another financial challenge you've already been looking at, four in 10 Texas school districts are using reserve funds to help balance their current budgets. Public school enrollment is growing, with most of that growth coming from low-income families. Another school-finance lawsuit may be filed to force changes. Do you think the Legislature will change the school funding system in 2011 to give school districts access to more money to educate the growing population?