Bouldin Creek neighbors unhappy about smoke from Terry Black’s...
Some neighbors want Terry Black’s to add an air filtration system or to smoke its meat off-site.

Restaurant owner Mike Black says he has adjusted cooking times, modified the BBQ pit and cut back on wood use.

Neighbors who live on a hill above the barbecue restaurant say the smoke blows into their backyards.

To many people, having a barbecue restaurant in their backyard would be a dream come true.

But for Guy Watts, and a few of his Bouldin Creek neighbors, that scenario isn’t all it’s cracked up to be.

The problem, Watts says, is the smoke from the barbecue pit at Terry Black’s Barbecue on Barton Springs Road, which is located behind his house on Daniel Drive.

“Any time I want to go out on my patio right now, if I opened up my patio door, my house would smell like a campfire,” Watts said.

It’s a strange situation for the neighborhood because they enjoy the barbecue restaurant and are supportive of having locally owned businesses in the area, said Kevin Lewis, president of the Bouldin Creek Neighborhood Association.

+ Ralph Barrera Some residents in the Bouldin Creek neighborhood have objected to the smoke from Terry Black’s Barbecue restaurant on Barton Springs Road. Ralph Barrera ×

And, neighbors agree, the issue is one that the restaurant’s owners couldn’t have foreseen because the smoke stench from the pit only wafts into neighbors’ homes, which are on a small hill behind the restaurant, on days when the wind is coming in strongly from the north.

Still, immediate neighbors, like Watts, are being affected.

“If our house was next door, then the smoke would go over our house,” Watts said. “But because we’re up on a hill, the (smoke) drifts directly into our backyards, driveways and into our homes. … Every day over the last 30 days, we’ve had smoke coming over our properties.”

+ Linda Scott How smoke from Terry Black’s Barbecue drifts toward homes. Linda Scott ×

And because the restaurant operates from 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. seven days a week, the smoke seems to be omnipresent in the neighbors’ lives.

A couple of neighbors believe the smoke has contributed to their respiratory problems. Richard Malley, who lives directly behind the barbecue pit, said he’s had to go to the doctor for an inhaler. Watt said his 7-year-old son’s allergies have hit harder since the barbecue restaurant moved into the neighborhood last summer.

“Nobody is prepared to say it was Terry Black’s,” Watts said. “But last winter my son did not have (such trouble).”

Malley said he’s bought an air filter, which has helped him breathe more comfortably, but added that he still can’t open the windows of the house unless he wants the smoke and smell inside his house. He said the filter, which he expects to have to change every three months, will cost him $340 a year to maintain.

“Until we can work something out with the Blacks and hopefully reach a solution, I’ll have to spend whatever I have to spend to enable us to carry on some semblance of a normal life,” Malley said.

In an emailed statement to the American-Statesman, Mike Black, the restaurant owner, said he has met with the concerned neighbors multiple times and is working to address the issue, despite the fact that Terry Black’s isn’t violating any state or local regulation.

“Our interest is to work with the neighbors as a matter of courtesy to resolve any issues and not because we are forced by any rule or regulation to do so,” Black said in the statement.

He added that he has spent thousands of dollars modifying the barbecue pit and adjusting cooking times to try to appease neighbors. He has voluntarily reduced wood consumption by about 25 percent over the past two months, he estimated, and said he expects further reduction of wood use as the weather warms.

Malley said he hasn’t seen any difference, and neighbors are calling for more action from Black, asking him to install an air filtration system to help avoid the buildup of smoke going toward the neighbors or to smoke his meat off site.

Still, both sides seem hopeful for an amicable resolution.

Watts said Black has been “receptive” and “a good neighbor,” and Black said he will “continue to evaluate reasonable and financially viable options … for reasonable accommodations.”

“To tell you the truth, I don’t know how this will get resolved,” Malley said. “I just feel confident that we want to be good neighbors, and they want to be good neighbors to us for decades to come. And we expect this problem to get resolved.”