School officials back funding boost, but mum on plan behind it
Superintendents and school trustees from across the state showed up at the Capitol Wednesday to voice support for a $3 billion boost to public education funding included in the Texas House’s two-year budget proposal.

But the officials declined to back the plan behind that funding increase — designed to ease funding inequities among the state’s school districts, which is one of the reasons a state district court judge deemed the system unconstitutional last August.

+ State District Court Judge John Dietz, who ruled in favor of more than 600 school districts last year in a still-pending ... read more ×

The $3 billion school finance fix is contained in House Bill 1759 by state Rep. Jimmie Don Aycock, R-Killeen, which the House could debate as soon as this week. (The legislation calls for an additional $800 million for public schools on top of an additional $2.2 billion included in the House’s 2016-17 budget plan).

Under the bill, most school districts would see a per-student funding boost over the next two years and none would see a decrease. But at a public hearing last month, many school leaders took issue with the methodology behind it while saying they would appreciate the extra money.

On Wednesday, multiple officials described the $3 billion as a “conservative investment” and “within reach,” but declined to endorse its proposed use — a signal that not all districts are on board with the plan, although many have come out in support of it.

“It’s early. All these plans are in flux, so we are not here to support or oppose any specific legislation or legislator,” said Gina Hinojosa, president of the Austin school board, in an interview after a Capitol news conference.

“We are just here united for the $3 billion and the reason we picked the $3 billion is because it’s been identified as available by the House so we know it’s there … Secret’s out and we need it. We need it for our schools.”

Hinojosa previously has expressed support for Aycock’s plan.

Asked how she thinks the $3 billion should be invested, Hinojosa mentioned boosting teacher pay. She said teacher pay in the Austin district is the lowest among large urban and Central Texas-area school districts.

Aycock, the chairman of the House Public Education Committee, told reporters recently that he believes his bill has enough votes to pass the House, but he acknowledged it faces an uncertain fate in the Senate.

The budget proposal the upper chamber approved last month gives schools $1.5 billion on top of what’s required to fund enrollment growth — half of what the House is proposing. Some of that sum would go to improving equity, according to Senate Education Committee Chairman Larry Taylor, R-Friendswood, but it is not premised on an overhaul of the state’s school finance system.

Taylor, Aycock’s counterpart in the Senate, recently expressed hesitancy to make any big changes until after the state Supreme Court rules in a pending school finance lawsuit. The Legislature typically has waited to act until after a court ruling with past, similar legal challenges.

The Wednesday news conference came as a select group of House and Senate lawmakers are working to smooth the differences between the two chambers’ budget proposals.