Beto O’Rourke surpasses Ted Cruz in latest Senate fundraising report
O’Rourke, little known outside his district, raised most of his money in small-dollar donations.

U.S. Rep. Beto O’Rourke, the El Paso Democrat who remains largely unknown on the state or national scene, surpassed U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, the man he hopes to upset in 2018, in fundraising the second quarter of 2017.

In a Facebook post and video Thursday, O’Rourke said that he raised $2.1 million in April, May and June. He said that the money came in 46,574 individual donations with an average contribution of $44, and that 81 percent of the money came from Texas. In a rarity, O’Rourke doesn’t take any money from political action committees.

The Cruz campaign reported it had raised $1.6 million in the same period, leaving him with $5.7 million cash on hand at the end of June.

RELATED: Bipartisan road trip gives Beto O’Rourke head start in Senate race.

O’Rourke, who announced his candidacy at the end of March, raised a little more than $200,000 the first quarter of the year.

His campaign spent $720,000 in the second quarter and finished with almost $1.9 million in cash at the end of June.

O’Rourke is the only announced Democratic candidate for the U.S. Senate seat.

“I think it was an adequate haul for the first quarter of serious fundraising,” said University of Houston political scientist Brandon Rottinghaus. “It will only get him a part of the way down the trail, and it’s a long trail to the end.”

“But the way it was raised was more impressive than what was raised,” Rottinghaus said. “My sense is that the race will cost $35 (million) to $40 million, that Cruz will put that much in or slightly more.”

But, he said, O’Rourke’s success with small-dollar, grass-roots fundraising may presage a campaign in which O’Rourke doesn’t find himself confined to a “windowless room dialing for dollars” from big donors when he needs to be out introducing himself to voters.

Despite outdistancing Cruz this quarter, O’Rourke is unlikely to be able to match Cruz dollar for dollar, quarter after quarter.

LIKE US ON FACEBOOK: Our Lone Star Politics page brings Capitol news to your Facebook feed

Cruz proved a skilled fundraiser during his failed bid for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination.

For Texas Democrats, the best news coming out of O’Rourke’s second quarter numbers might be how much of it came from Texas donors. In Greg Abbott’s successful campaign for governor in 2014, the Republican made great sport of how much of rival Wendy Davis’ money came from the East and West coasts.

In the spring, Cruz raised money off news that Rosie O’Donnell had contributed to O’Rourke’s campaign.

Cruz had an easy general election win in 2012 after vanquishing front-runner Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst in a primary runoff.

In the June University of Texas/Texas Tribune poll, 18 percent of voters had a positive opinion and 15 percent a negative opinion of O’Rourke, but 13 percent were neutral and 55 percent had no opinion of the third-term congressman.

The poll found 37 percent of respondents had a favorable opinion of Cruz and 45 percent had an unfavorable opinion. Twelve percent were neutral and 6 percent didn’t have an opinion.