DEP revokes Hughes' Collier Hogan well permit
NAPLES, Fla. - The Florida Department of Environmental Protection has revoked the permits of the Dan A. Hughes Co., including the disputed Collier-Hogan well south of Lake Trafford.

It’s also filing suit in Collier County asking for enforcement of a consent order that the Hughes Co. agreed to in April, and for civil penalties and injunctive relief of $100,000.

DEP Secretary Herschel Vinyard Jr. said in a statement Friday: “As Dan A. Hughes Co. continues to publicly denounce the efforts of the department moving forward in a transparent manner, revocation of their permits is the only option that offers the assurance that Hughes will not cause damage to our treasured natural resources. We committed to taking any and all regulatory and enforcement action available to us, and today’s actions are proof that DEP honors its commitments.”

DEP said the Hughes Co. so far hasn’t met the requirements of the consent order and didn’t respond adequately to nine demands made later, with a deadline of July 15. Permanently revoking the permits is in the public’s best interest, DEP said.

“As Hughes’ timeline to meet the department’s demands came to an end, it announced it would stop activity in Florida. The reality, however, is that it could go back to production whenever it wants. By revoking these permits, Hughes officially loses all authority to operate in Florida, ensuring we protect area families,” a DEP statement said.

David Blackmon, spokesman for the Hughes Co., told the Daily News that the company hadn’t heard from DEP for several weeks, and that was “unfortunate.”

“Thus far, the costs related to the drilling and completion of the Collier Hogan 20-3H well are around $25 million,” he added. “Hughes’ total investment in its Southwest Florida operations, including leasehold expense, is around $50 million.”

In a statement, the company said: “Compliance with the law is Dan A. Hughes Co.’s core operating principle. This well was drilled more than a year ago, and during the intervening time the company has repeatedly requested that the DEP properly notify it of any alleged regulatory violations. It is important to note that today is the first time any such allegation has been made.”

Blackmon said the company also filed two legal actions in Florida courts Friday.

One asks a judge to compel the DEP to show why it failed to rule on the challenge to the consent order filed by Collier County commissioners July 1. Hughes said the law required DEP either to accept the challenge or refer it to the Division of Administrative Hearings by July 16, and missed the deadline.

The second legal action is to make DEP respond to a records request the Hughes Co. filed on June 26, asking for a list of questions Vinyard said the company failed to respond to in late December, before the company began its injection operation.

Vinyard made the statement on a June 25 televised Daily News show.

Blackmon said Hughes Co. has no record of ever receiving the questions.

But even as attorneys for the DEP and Dan A. Hughes Co. prepared for battle, local activists cheered the pulling of the Hughes Co.’s permits.

“This is wonderful news,” said Karen Dwyer of the citizens group Stonecrab Alliance, which plans to host a celebratory party Saturday. “Now we’ll really have something to celebrate.”

Others, such as Cape Coral attorney Ralf Brookes, who represented citizens group Preserve our Paradise and local resident Thomas Mosher in the fight against the Hughes Co.’s now-scuttled well near Golden Gate Estates, also weighed in Friday. Each noted that DEP’s lawsuit and revocation notice contains many violations the public hadn’t been aware of previously, including oil spilled into canals leading to surface waters and destruction of evidence.

“We agree with revocation of these permits and we are still very concerned about the impacts of other companies who may come to Florida to drill for oil using extreme drilling in the future. Extreme drilling techniques have changed the landscape in many states around the country and we don’t want to see that happen in Florida,” Brookes said.

Jennifer Hecker, director of Natural Resources for the Conservancy of Southwest Florida, said that while this is a positive development, the DEP must immediately undertake remediation outlined in the county and Conservancy’s petition.

She also expressed concern that without better rules on extreme extraction, the property could be leased out to other drillers, and “this could happen again and again.”

Without these laws, “we remain vulnerable,” Hecker said, particularly since Southwest Florida has unique hydrology, geology and wildlife.

“The current laws are ambiguous,” she said, adding that the Conservancy is drafting legislation to address these concerns and is looking for a state sponsor.

“This is just a beginning,” she said.