U.S. Sen. Nelson of Florida helps keep Gulf of Mexico oil drilling bill from floor vote
Sen. Bill Nelson, D-FL, speaks Tuesday during a news conference on Capitol Hill where bipartisan members of Florida's congressional delegation urged passage of legislation to fund anti-zika efforts. Behind him are Rep. Curt Clawson, R-Bonita Springs, (left) and Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Jupiter. (Photo: Ledyard King, USA TODAY)

WASHINGTON — A bill that would have given states along the Gulf Coast and south Atlantic a greater share of royalties from offshore oil and gas drilling failed to make it to the Senate floor for a vote Thursday.

Supporters needed 60 votes to end a filibuster on the measure but were able to get only 51.

Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., voted to keep blocking the bill, while Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., voted to move it to the floor, where it would have stood a good chance of getting the 60 votes needed for passage.

Florida, which has an offshore drilling ban already in place, would not have been affected directly by the bill.

However, Nelson led the opposition, fearing the lure of royalties might pressure state leaders to open up energy exploration that could harm the environment and the beaches that generate billions for Florida’s economy each year.

In addition, he said, encouraging neighboring states to open more water for drilling poses its own threat to Florida, which still remembers the environmental and economic damage from the 2010 Deepwater Horizon disaster that released almost 5 million barrels of oil across the Gulf Coast.

“We have watched the tar balls wash up on the beaches,” Nelson said Wednesday on the Senate floor. “We've seen the sugary white sands of Pensacola Beach be completely black, covered from oil.

"We saw the harm that was done not only to the local businesses that catered to tourists, such as the hotels, the restaurants, the attractions, all the ancillary businesses (such) as the dry cleaners, the real estate firms.”

Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., the bill’s chief sponsor, said the measure would have created up to 280,000 jobs by 2035 and $194 billion in new capital investment that would generate billions for cash-strapped governments.

“And let’s be honest,” he said on the Senate floor Thursday before the vote. “If America does not develop our natural resources, the vacuum will be filled with the likes of Iran, Venezuela, Russia and Cuba – Cuba, which would like to drill off their coastline.”

The bill would have steered extra royalties to Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas.

Those states now receive 37.5 percent of the revenue generated by offshore oil and gas drilling, but the amount is capped at $500 million a year. Cassidy’s bill would have raised the cap to $835 million by 2027, among other provisions.

Florida bans offshore drilling in the Gulf within 125 miles. Part of that ban, which will expire in 2022, is in place to protect offshore military maneuvers conducted from bases in the Panhandle.

Cassidy’s bill, the American Energy and Conservation Act of 2016, also would have created new revenue-sharing opportunities for four South Atlantic states — Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Virginia — adding more pressure to open up drilling off Florida’s Atlantic coast, Nelson said.

Cassidy said it’s an issue of fairness.

“One-fourth of our nation’s energy supply depends on the support facilities in south Louisiana,” he said in a news release touting the measure. “Our coastline is vital to supporting these facilities and protecting families from storm surge. Revenue sharing allows our state to rebuild and maintain a healthy coast, and in turn, support American energy security.”

Nelson had thwarted a similar measure from being attached to an energy bill the Senate passed overwhelmingly this spring.

But Senate Republican leaders assured Cassidy he would get a chance to introduce it as a stand-alone measure later in the year.

The issue could be revived next year. President-elect Donald Trump promoted during his campaign a plan to “unleash America’s $50 trillion in untapped shale, oil, and natural gas reserves.”

Read or Share this story: http://nplsne.ws/2fB1LTX