Abortion :: NARAL Pro-Choice Virginia
We trust Virginia women to know what is best for themselves and their families when it comes to pregnancy – not politicians. Deciding whether and when to become a parent or have another child is a personal decision that should be left to each woman with her family and her health care provider – not to politicians who don't know her or her life.

When a woman has decided that having an abortion is the right decision for her and her family, we believe she should be able to access quality, affordable abortion care in her community – with support and without shaming, stigma, or government-imposed barriers.

That's why we fight to ensure that every Virginian can access safe, legal abortion care if she chooses. We also work to make sure that Virginians have access to contraception, accurate information, and the full range of reproductive health services they need to take charge of their and their families' health.



Some facts you may not know, via the Guttmacher Institute: [1]

Women who have abortions come from all races, religions, socioeconomic levels, and life situations. Nearly one in three American women will have had an abortion by the time she reaches the age of 45.

59% of women having an abortion already have at least one child.



A majority of abortion patients are in their 20s.



49% percent of abortion patients in 2014 had incomes below the federal poverty level and a further 26% had incomes between 100%-199% of the federal poverty level.



Performed legally by a trained provider, abortion is one of the safest common outpatient medical procedures in the United States. Less than 0.05% of first-trimester abortions in the U.S. result in major complications that might need hospital care.



A first-trimester abortion can cost as much as $480 or more. Because of restrictions on insurance coverage and other obstacles, 53% of abortion patients paid out of pocket for their procedure in 2014.



The Problem:

Anti-choice extremists in Virginia and across the country have successfully eroded women’s access to safe, legal abortion. Unable to outlaw abortion outright, these anti-choice politicians will stop at nothing to make accessing abortion as difficult, complicated and expensive as possible. They come at choice from all angles – shaming women who seek abortion care, closing comprehensive reproductive health centers, banning health insurance coverage, and even targeting the doctors that legally provide abortion care. Today, over 92% of Virginia counties have no abortion provider.

This is the current situation for a woman in Virginia who has decided to have an abortion [2]: