NASDPTS
National Stop Arm Violation Count

While school buses remain the safest way for students to get to and from school, students who ride in buses are most vulnerable when they are outside the bus in the "danger zone." In 2010, NASDPTS passed a resolution initiating the first national survey to determine the prevalence of illegal passing of school buses. Using that data as a starting point, NASDPTS encourages improved safety countermeasures at the state or national level. Here is the NASDPTS Resolution directing the effort.

2019 Survey Instructions

Annually, NASDPTS requests that each state choose a single day on which to have school bus operators (public and contracted) observe and report any instances of motorists illegally passing their school buses. It is recommended that the survey be conducted on a state-designated, representative school day from March 1 to May 31. State directors are encouraged to enlist assistance from their state associations as needed.

Click HERE for 2019 Survey Methodology and Instructions

Public Awareness and Training

The following video, captured from an on-board school bus camera in West Virginia, shows the seriousness of stop arm violations. Fortunately this one is categorized as a "near miss" rather than a fatality.

Near Miss Video

The following video was developed by WNCN in Raleigh, North Carolina, as a public service, in conjunction with the NC Department of Public Instruction:

#Brake4Buses Public Service Announcement (.MPG, 50 MB)

#Brake4Buses Public Service Announcement (YouTube)

The following video, made by students from Mountain Home High School in Arkansas, illustrates the potentially tragic consequences of not stopping for the bus:

STOP for School Bus Stop Signs (YouTube)

Results

Select a school year below to see results of the annual Stop Arm Violation Counts.

Select Year: 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011

State Laws Regarding Passing Stopped School Buses

NASDPTS Survey - Stop Arm Laws, Penalties and Video Evidence

2018 Survey Results



Stop Law Narrative

Compiled by School Training Solutions, 2012