Bragdon goes on offense in offering defense
Former House Speaker Bill O’Brien, R-Mont Vernon, came rushing to the aid of his onetime majority leader, Peter Silva, who is locked in a tough special election with Democratic nominee Latha Mangipudi in Ward 8 in Nashua.

The story Friday from my colleague Dean Shalhoup regarding Silva’s statements about Mangipudi’s Indian heritage caused a stir last week in what had already been shaping up as a tight race next month, and one that could be a bellwether for 2014. ...

Please sign up for as low as 36 cents per day to continue viewing our website.

Former House Speaker Bill O’Brien, R-Mont Vernon, came rushing to the aid of his onetime majority leader, Peter Silva, who is locked in a tough special election with Democratic nominee Latha Mangipudi in Ward 8 in Nashua.

The story Friday from my colleague Dean Shalhoup regarding Silva’s statements about Mangipudi’s Indian heritage caused a stir last week in what had already been shaping up as a tight race next month, and one that could be a bellwether for 2014.

Silva referred to a large turnout of Indian voters in the Sept. 17 primary for Democratic nominee Mangipudi, saying, “I thought we were in New Delhi.”

O’Brien posted on his Facebook page, “Many of you might be aware that a conservative, Pete Silva, is running for re-election in the Nashua special state representative election being held on November 5. What you might not know is two other things:

“The first is that Democrats have turned their tried and true Alinskyite demonization campaign on Pete. No surprise there. But, the second thing? In likewise tried and true fashion, the Republican state party is threatening to withdraw support from Pete. They want him to validate the Dems’ libelous narrative by running from his beliefs and, it seems to me, apologize for having offended the liberals.”

O’Brien said he has written a $500 check to Silva’s campaign and invited his supporters to chip in, as well.

“Do this as much for yourself, your family and your state as for Pete,” O’Brien said. “But please, do it.”

Republican State Chairwoman Jennifer Horn told WSMN-AM radio on Friday that she wouldn’t defend the comment, but that Silva was making a point about the importance of turnout in a meeting with the Nashua Republican City Committee.

“I reject the comment; I reject the idea of defining by any one group or organization that they might belong to,” Horn said.

“Mr. Silva, you know, is quoted in that story and has explained his comment. What I would like to see us talking about in this special election is, as we are going around to our neighbors in Nashua, is that under the previous Republican leadership, we had a budget that was balanced, that increased no new taxes and fees, and left us with a $34 million surplus.

“Those are the kinds of things I would like us to be talking about.”

GOP State Executive Director Matt Slater struck a similar tone and went on to debunk the idea that GOP leaders would abandon Silva.

“The New Hampshire Republican Party supports our nominee in every race,” Slater said in a statement.

“While we don’t believe that Pete intended to upset anybody with his comments, we still regret that they have offended members of our community. This race is about Pete’s support for pro-growth policies that will create jobs and have already resulted in a $76 million budget surplus.”

Democratic Party Executive Director Harrell Kirstein seized on O’Brien’s plea.

“That is different than what Jennifer had to say on the radio this morning when she admitted, albeit very, very weakly, that Mr. Silva shouldn’t have said what he said,” Kirstein said, referring to Slater’s statement.

“Clearly, Ms. Horn saw Bill O’Brien’s Facebook posting and is afraid of alienating the radical GOP base. It is truly shameful that in the year 2013, the NHGOP continues to support profoundly bigoted political attacks from out-of-touch candidates.”

O’Brien has never been one to shy away from a partisan scrap, so he made this controversy a call to arms against Democratic Party Chairman Raymond Buckley.

“There is something we can do now,” O’Brien write, “We can show the Ray Buckley’s and other of that ilk that we are here, we will remain here, and we stand behind our own.

“We can show the state party that what is truly alive and vibrant in this party are its conservative activists and not the vestigial Country Club dinosaurs. We can support Pete.”

Mangipudi decided to speak about the matter later Friday.

“It saddens me to see this,” Mangipudi said in response to The Telegraph story. “Ward 8 is not ‘New Delhi’ – this is 21st-century America. I have worked in all the community organizations here, and it’s an integrated community celebrating diversity.”

It took a woman’s touch

New Hampshire’s two state senators received plenty of Beltway publicity for their role in bringing the federal government shutdown to a close.

For both, it couldn’t have come at a better time.

Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., had already emerged out the other side after a rough couple of months, first for her opposition to expanded background checks at gun shows and then for her support of comprehensive immigration reform.

Ayotte’s private and public tongue-lashing of tea party favorite Ted Cruz, R-Texas, surely angered some of her most conservative base, but among independent and moderate voters, it’s just what New Hampshire wants to see out of its elected officials in Washington.

What made Sen. John E. Sununu, R-N.H., such a force here and in Washington, D.C., wasn’t just his name or his IQ, but a growing reputation as someone whose vote couldn’t be taken for granted by the party elite.

His opposition to Real ID and refusal to vote every single time just the way the Pro-Israeli lobby demanded only cemented his image as an up-and-comer prior to his sudden defeat in 2008.

Ayotte may have been doing the bidding of the D.C. establishment by opposing the strategy of linking the repeal of the Affordable Care Act to the funding of the federal government.

But she’s able to pull it off and look like a reformer precisely because she has 100 percent credibility against more federal spending and the Affordable Care Act when those issues have come before her on the merits.

Then there’s Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H., who may not be the safest Democrat on Capitol Hill entering her 2014 re-election, but she’s probably the safest one to come from a purple state.

Time magazine wrote last week about the role the four Republican and 16 Democratic female senators played in bringing the shutdown to a close.

During a particularly tense point in the shutdown negotiations on Oct. 7, Shaheen hosted a dinner meeting in her office of pizza, salad and wine with most of those 20 female senators.

For Shaheen, the female bonding has to be a deja vu experience, since it was New Hampshire Gov. Shaheen who was able to broker tough budget and policy deals with state House Speaker Donna Sytek, R-Salem, and then Senate President Beverly Hollingworth, D-Hampton.

Shaheen isn’t one to get out in front of a controversial topic often, but has had success throughout her political career by carving out issues over which she has crossed party lines to try to get results.

As governor, it ranged from a state holiday honoring Martin Luther King to making New Hampshire the last state to require access to public kindergarten.

Most recently, it has been working with Ohio GOP Sen. Rob Portman on an energy efficiency strategy for public buildings and with Georgia GOP Sen. Johnny Isakson on a two-year federal budget.

‘Lack of leadership’

Republican congressional candidate Gary Lambert, of Nashua, said he would have sided with Speaker John Boehner and backed the end to the federal government shutdown.

But Lambert couldn’t resist taking a shot at 2nd District Congresswoman Annie Kuster, D-N.H., at the same time.

“The lack of leadership in Washington is why we are in this debacle in the first place,” Lambert said. “Congresswoman Kuster has sat idly by during this shutdown and refused to offer any solutions to address our spending and debt.

“I have strongly advocated that both sides must work together to open the government, and it appears this deal will do that, and am glad we can put this shutdown behind us. This is why we need bold new leaders, not career politicians, in Washington who are willing to tackle the problems facing the middle class.”

No common ground

When it comes to education reform, there’s a rift among New Hampshire Republicans that has parallels to the splinter of the national GOP in Washington.

When it ultimately came down to whether to accept the deal to end the shutdown, the national chambers of commerce urged members to vote for it, while the big-business Club for Growth strongly opposed it.

Meanwhile in New Hampshire, the state chapters of Cornerstone Action and Americans for Prosperity have taken dead aim at the federal Common Core standards as a violation of local control.

Yet last week, the Business and Industry Association announced it was endorsing Common Core and signaled it would be a prominent part of an economic agenda strategy it intends to offer later this fall.

What you could have next spring is all of these groups choosing any Common Core legislation as a way to grade lawmakers in an election year.

Now, that could be interesting.

Bragdon’s influence

This week should give us a good glimpse of what life is like after you give up the gavel.

Former Senate President Peter Bragdon, R-Milford, had two pet projects on which he logged long and hard hours during the 2013 session, and despite long odds, he was able to advance both of them.

Bragdon convinced the Senate to pass a measure eliminating one ramp toll in Merrimack off the F.E. Everett Turnpike.

Likewise, the upper chamber went along with his unprecedented bid to set up a victim’s relief fund for those who were caught in the Financial Resources Mortgage scandal.

The House Public Works and Highways Committee is set to issue its recommendation on the Merrimack toll bill Wednesday.

A day earlier, the House Commerce Committee will pass its udgment on the FRM relief measure.

Odds for the toll relief bill are longer than for FRM, although both are by no means a slam dunk.

House Public Works Chairman David Campbell, D-Nashua, has been straight with Bragdon from the get-go that the only way this should be done is via the 10-year highway program process.

In other words, the net loss of revenue by closing the Exit 12 toll ramp at Bedford Road should have to compete with all of the requests for highway construction work.

When Bragdon was boss of the Senate, he had some leverage, since Campbell was lobbying furiously for his bill to raise the state’s gasoline tax by 12 cents a gallon.

Ultimately, the Senate killed that option but Campbell, kept his end of the bargain by allowing his House committee to review the Merrimack toll measure.

Meanwhile, the proposal for FRM has gone even further with some members of the House Commerce Committee than many had expected.

The notion of having those that come under financial services regulation – banks, insurers, investment counselors – pay for a victim’s fund hasn’t been popular.

Perhaps more distressing to some lawmakers is the slippery slope in creating a fund to repay victims of one failure of state government, which could lead to a stampede of similar requests in the future.

This bill has a long way to go in any form. Even if House Commerce were to give it a thumbs-up, prospects for success are much longer in the House Finance Committee, where this inevitably would have to proceed before exiting the lower chamber.

Even though he’s no longer in charge, Bragdon retains quality relations with senior members of both parties in the House, where he used to serve before going over to the “dark side.”

All that can’t hurt his causes going forward.

Kevin Landrigan can reached at 321-7040 or klandrigan@nashua

telegraph.com.