Marco Rubio's Book Has a New Immigration Plan, But He Won't Apologize for His Old One.
Marco Rubio won't apologize for attempting to pass a comprehensive immigration bill that included a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants. But he will, in the run-up to a potential presidential campaign, offer a new, pared-down, conservative-friendly approach to immigration reform.

Rubio spent a sizable chunk of his first term in Congress working to craft a massive immigration bill. Those efforts earned him the ire of the conservative base, and scorn from the same tea-party activists who fueled his upset Senate victory in 2010. Now, as he weighs a run for the White House in 2016, the Florida Republican admits that a comprehensive plan for immigration reform is "not realistic"—and he is instead prescribing a "piecemeal" approach.

In his new book, American Dreams, Rubio focuses on modernizing policies and institutions to make America more competitive in the 21st century. National Journal obtained a copy of American Dreams, which is to be released on Jan. 13, and found that immigration reform remains a top priority for Rubio.

Here are some key passages from Rubio's book pertaining to immigration.

The system is broken—and Americans are feeling "taken advantage of" by illegal immigrants. "Our immigration system, designed primarily to reunite families, is an outdated relic of the last century. ... No nation on earth is more generous when it comes to immigration than America. Each year about one million people permanently immigrate here legally. But when people hear that we have over twelve million people here illegally, they feel as if we are being taken advantage of. They see how hard it is to find and keep a steady and well-paying job, and they worry that more people will mean more competition for already scarce work. That's not nativism. That's human nature."

ADVERTISEMENT

Illegal immigration must be stemmed before the system can be reformed. "A significant percentage of Americans simply don't trust either party in Washington to address other aspects of immigration reform before illegal immigration has been brought under control, and for good reason. The immigration reform law of 1986 legalized more than three million people who were here illegally, but the enforcement measures were never fully implemented. For years President Obama, his allies in Congress and many immigration reform supporters have told us that the border was "as secure as ever." This fallacy was dramatically exposed when portions of our southern border were essentially overrun in the early part of 2014. Then there are the numerous examples of President Obama simply ignoring, suspending, rewriting and violating the law through executive action. ... The result is a stalemate on an issue of critical importance."

The stalemate won't be resolved with a comprehensive immigration bill. "We must begin by acknowledging that, considering our recent experience with massive pieces of legislation, achieving comprehensive reform of anything in a single bill is simply not realistic. Having tried that approach, I know this to be true firsthand. The fear that such massive pieces of legislation include some clever loophole or unintended consequence makes it even harder to achieve. The only way we are going to be able to break this impasse and make progress on this issue is in a sequential and piecemeal way, with a series of bills that build upon one another until ultimately we have put in place the kind of immigration system our nation needs."

A piecemeal approach: border security, interior enforcement, and new visa policies. "The first step must be enforcement measures that are effective and verifiable. Such measures would include securing the most vulnerable and most trafficked sectors of the southern border, mandatory E‑Verify and the full implementation of an entry-exit tracking system. The second step is to modernize our legal immigration system toward a merit-based one. That would mean reassigning existing visas away from family-based immigration and toward work- and skill-based immigration, passing reforms for high-tech visas, as well as creating a limited guest-worker program for seasonal workers[.] ... Once both of these reforms have been passed, then I believe the conditions will be in place to address the most politically sensitive aspect of immigration reform: what to do with more than twelve million people currently here illegally."

How to handle the "dilemma" of twelve million illegal immigrants who are already here: "On the one hand, calls to grant amnesty to twelve million people are unrealistic and quite frankly irresponsible. On the other hand, not a single opponent of the Senate bill I helped author proposed that we try to round up and deport twelve million human beings. So how do we deal with this dilemma? I believe that if the enforcement measures are in place, there exists a path forward that would obtain a significant majority in Congress and the support of a majority of Americans across the political spectrum. It consists of three parts."

A plan for dealing with the "twelve million." (Hint: There's no mention of a "path to citizenship.") "First, those here illegally must come forward and be registered. If they have committed serious crimes or have not been here long enough, they will have to leave. ... Second, those who qualify would be allowed to apply for a temporary nonimmigrant visa. To obtain it they will have to pay an application fee and a fine, undergo a background check and learn English. Once they receive this work permit, they would be allowed to work legally and travel. To keep it, they will have to pay taxes. They would not qualify for government programs like Obamacare, welfare or food stamps. And if they commit a crime while in this status, they would lose their permit. Third and finally, those who qualify for a nonimmigrant visa will have to remain in this status for at least a decade. After that, they would be allowed to apply for permanent residency if they so choose. ... [T]hose who choose to seek permanent residency would have to do it the way anyone else would, not through any special pathway."

Opponents will emerge from both sides, but there's a sweet spot to be found. "This three-step plan is not only the best way to reform our immigration system, it is, in my opinion, the only approach that has any chance of success. An overwhelming majority of Americans in both parties would support this sort of incremental approach. Of course, there will be detractors. Some will continue to call for less immigration and more deportations. On the left, some will continue to demand an all-at-once-or-nothing-at-all approach."