The 1 Easy Way Donald Trump Could Have Been Even Richer: Doing Nothing
S.V. Dáte

As “really rich” as Donald Trump is today, he might have been even richer if, instead of dabbling in skyscrapers and casinos, he’d simply taken his eight-figure inheritance decades ago and sunk it into the stock market. Had the celebrity businessman and Republican presidential candidate invested his eventual share of his father’s real-estate company into a mutual fund of S&P 500 stocks in 1974, it would be worth nearly $3 billion today, thanks to the market’s performance over the past four decades. If he’d invested the $200 million that Forbes magazine determined he was worth in 1982 into that index fund, it would have grown to more than $8 billion today. Even the smaller figure exceeds the lower range of his possible net worth as reported to the Federal Election Commission, while the larger number exceeds by billions recent estimates of Trump’s worth by financial publications. And it would have come without the high-drama, roller-coaster career that has included four corporate bankruptcies. That a purely unmanaged index fund’s return could outperform Trump’s hands-on wheeling and dealing calls into question one of Trump’s chief selling points on the campaign trail: his business acumen.

Among those dropping dried corn kernels into Trump’s jar at the Iowa State Fair last month, many cited Trump’s business experience as a top reason he’d make a good president—a notion that supporters in New Hampshire also share. “He’s a good businessman,” said Bedford, New Hampshire, retiree Frank Savino. “He creates a lot of jobs.” Trump’s campaign did not respond to National Journal queries about his story. Trump himself frequently speaks of his great wealth—he claims it exceeds $10 billion—as proof of his skill as a negotiator, which he says current American officials lack in their dealings with other countries. “Who would you rather have negotiating against China, against Iran?” he asked a Dubuque, Iowa, audience last week. “Jeb Bush, Hillary Clinton, or Trump?” *** “I’m proud of my net worth,” Trump said during his June announcement speech. “I’ve done an amazing job.” Trump has spent decades making sure that the public believes he’s extremely rich. In 1982, as Forbes magazine put together the first of its annual list of the wealthiest Americans, Trump argued to editors that he was worth $400 million, not the $200 million the magazine assigned him. It was only the first of many such lobbying efforts. “Every year, Trump shares a lot of information with us that helps us get to the figures we publish. But he also consistently pushes for a higher net worth—especially when it comes to the value of his personal brand,” Forbes reporter Erin Carlyle wrote this June, explaining the magazine’s assessment that Trump was worth $4.1 billion, less than half of his claimed net worth. A subsequent review by Bloomberg found he was worth $2.9 billion. While many Trump supporters believe he is a self-made man, it was actually his father, Fred Trump, who built the real-estate empire that Donald Trump took over in 1974. It was worth about $200 million at the time, which Trump and his four siblings ultimately inherited after enjoying sizable trust funds for years. (Coincidentally, there was a self-made businessman who was also worth about $40 million in 1974: Warren Buffett. Had Trump allowed Buffett to manage his fortune, too, Trump might also be worth what Buffett is today: about $67 billion—or about 22 times better than what the stock market would have produced.) Because Trump’s businesses are privately held concerns, they’re not required to file Securities and Exchange Commission reports, as publicly traded companies must do. Even the financial disclosure Trump had to file after starting his presidential campaign offers only limited guidance because it asks for values in broad ranges, with a top category of “over $50 million.” A National Journal review of that 92-page document found assets totaling at least $1.37 billion and liabilities totaling at least $265 million. But Trump claims 22 assets he says are worth more than $50 million each and four loans also exceeding $50 million. Which means that based solely on that document, Trump could theoretically be worth $100 billion—or be $100 billion in debt.