Rauner Tells Republicans 'Revolution' is Coming: Sources
Governor Bruce Rauner met with Republicans in the legislature Thursday, and encouraged them to stick with him in the face of possible defections in a battle over school funding. NBC 5's Mary Ann Ahern has all the details about the meeting. (Published Thursday, July 27, 2017)

Rauner Presses Republican Lawmakers to Stay With Him

Day two of the Special Session in Springfield has Gov. Bruce Rauner Rauner meeting with his Republican caucus Thursday urging them to stick together in opposing the school funding bill.

Senate Bill One is not yet on Rauner's desk, but, with schools opening in the next few weeks, many districts are anxiously awaiting the state's financial aid.

So what happened at Thursday's closed door caucus meeting?

Sources tell NBC 5 Rauner said a "revolution" is coming.

He also told Republicans SB1 is evil and a Chicago bailout.

"We are a united group, we are united with the governor," said House Minority Leader Jim Durkin. "Republicans are united on many issues, SB1 and also economic development in this state."

Senate President John Cullerton has not yet delivered SB1 to the governor. Chicago House Democrats Kelly Cassidy and Ann Williams turned to a new school Thursday, Senn High School, on Chicago's North Side, cleaning rather than as they put waste their time in Springfield.

"You passed the bill to fund our schools two months ago, but you’re hiding it," Rauner said.

Democrats are likely lobbying Republicans to desert Rauner and vote to over-ride his expected veto. The longer they wait to deliver the bill to the governor, the closer schools get to opening day.

"The governor will fix the problems of senate bill one and schools will be able to receive their funding and open on time," said Republican State Sen. Jason Barickman.

Fixing, according to the Republicans, means removing $215 million for Chicago Public School pensions.

The governor offered his views, but would not take questions.

Also released Thursday was a new poll by the Democratic Governor's Association showing Rauner's disapproval ratings at 63 percent.

This poll also asked how did the governor handle the budget crisis: 65 percent responded negatively.

"Gov. Rauner isn't focused on partisan polls," said GOP spokesman Aaron DeGroot. "Gov. Rauner is focused on making sure schools open on time and that school funding is fair to both suburban and Chicago schools."