Oil and Gas Severance Taxes: States Work to Alleviate Fiscal Pressures Amid the Natural Gas Boom
Alaska House Bill 17 - pending Provides for different rates for the Oil and Gas Production Tax based on the average production tax value of oil and gas produced during a calendar year. Relates to the tax credit for a carried forward annual loss applicable to the tax on oil and gas production.

House Bill 66 - pending Makes the tax of the production of natural gas used in the state applicable to fuel or feedstock in producing a manufactured end product.

Senate Bill 49 - pending Relates to the oil and gas production tax rate and monthly installment payments of estimated oil and gas production tax. Also relates to oil and gas production tax credits for expenditures such as qualified capital credits for exploration, development, and production.

Senate Bill 112 - pending Relates to a credit against the oil and gas production tax for drilling certain exploration wells using a jack-up rig in the Cook Inlet sedimentary basin.

House Bill 110 - pending Relates to the oil and gas production tax rate and monthly installment payments of estimated oil and gas production tax. Also relates to oil and gas production tax credits for expenditures such as qualified capital credits for exploration, development, an

House Bill 231 - pending Relates to tax credits applicable to the oil and gas production tax based on capital expenditures, including those incurred for a production facility for new oil and gas production.

Senate Bill 124 - pending Provides a tax credit applicable to the oil and gas production tax based on the cost of building a year-round road to access an area of oil and gas exploration and development.

House Bill 276 and Senate Bill 145 - pending Provides for a credit against the oil and gas production tax for costs incurred in drilling certain oil or natural gas exploration wells in the Nenana Basin.

House Bill 280 and Senate Bill 164 - pending Provides for a credit against the oil and gas production tax for costs incurred in drilling certain oil and gas wells in the Kotzebue Basin or the Selawik Basin.

Senate Bill 167 - pending Provides for an increase in the rate of tax on the production of gas as the average production tax value on a BTU equivalent barrel basis of gas produced outside of the Cook Inlet sedimentary basin.

House Bill 306 - pending Provides for a specified tax rate for the production of oil and increases the rate of tax on the production of gas.

Senate Bill 192 - pending Proposes changes to the oil and gas production tax.

Florida Senate Bill 1188 - pending Defines the term "mature field recovery oil" and the tiered severance tax rates applicable to tertiary oil to mature field recovery oil.

House Bill 87 - pending Provides exemptions from tax on severance and production to certain wells that produce oil or gas on or after a specified date. Limits the duration of the exemptions.

Idaho House Bill 379 - pending Changes the oil and gas conservation tax to 2.5 percent of the market value of the oil or gas produced at the site of production and repeals provisions that establish a tax not to exceed five mills per barrel of oil or per 50,000 cubic feet of gas.

Maryland Senate Bill 768 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of 2.5 percent of the wholesale market value on the date the gas is produced at the wellhead.

House Bill 907 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of 15 percent of the wholesale market value on the date the gas is produced at the wellhead.

Mississippi Senate Bill 2282 - pending Revises the manner in which oil severance taxes are distributed.

North Carolina House Bill 242 - enacted June 2011 Directs the Department of Environment and Natural Resources to study oil and gas exploration in the state, including the potential economic impacts and taxes

New Jersey Senate Concurrent Resolution 80 - pending Memorializes the President and the U.S. Congress to enact legislation that would eliminate preferential tax treatment for oil and natural gas companies.

New Mexico House Bill 142 - pending Adjusts the rates of certain severance and natural resources taxes.

House Bill 174 - pending Reduces certain deductions, credits, and rate differentials by ten percent for oil, natural gas and mineral taxes.

Ohio House Concurrent Resolution 12 - pending Urges the President to reconsider proposals to increase taxes on producers of coal, natural gas, and petroleum and instead commit to adopting policies that encourage domestic production of these resources.

Oklahoma Senate Bill 587 - enacted May 2011 Relates to the excise tax on oil and gas and extends the termination date of the gross production tax and certain other taxes on barrels of petroleum and natural and casinghead gas.

Senate Bill 885 - enacted Provides for application of a tax rate on certain horizontally-drilled wells.

House Bill 1488 - enacted Extends the duration of certain incentives for tertiary and secondary recovery projects, production enhancement projects and other certain wells.

Pennsylvania Senate Bill 352 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of five percent tax on the gross value of units severed at the wellhead, plus 4.6 cents per unit severed.

House Bill 33 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of five percent tax on the gross value of units severed at the wellhead, plus 4.6 cents per unit severed.

House Bill 833 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of 30 cents per unit severed at the wellhead and provides for an annual adjustment.

Senate Bill 680 - pending Establishes a natural gas severance tax of 24 cents per unit severed at the wellhead and provides for an annual adjustment.

Senate Bill 905 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of 2 percent of the gross value of units severed at the wellhead for the first three years of production. If the well has been in production for more than three years on or after July 1, 2011, the tax rate will be 5 percent of the gross value of the units severed at the wellhead during a reporting period.

The tax rate is 2 percent of the gross value of the units severed at the wellhead if the rate of production from the well is less than 150,000 cubic feet of natural gas per day and more than 60,000 cubic feet of natural gas per day.

House Bill 1406 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of 1.5 percent of the gross value of units severed at the wellhead for the first 60 months of production and five percent of the gross value of units severed at the wellhead thereafter.

House Bill 1671 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of three percent of the gross value of units severed at the wellhead for the first 24 months of production and five percent of the gross value of units severed at the wellhead thereafter.

House Bill 1705 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of 1.5 percent of the gross value of units severed at the wellhead for the first 60 months of production and five percent of the gross value of units severed at the wellhead thereafter.

Senate Bill 1176 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of three percent of the gross value of the units severed at the wellhead of an unconventional well.

House Bill 1800 - pending Establishes a natural gas severance tax of 30 cents per unit severed at the wellhead and provides for an annual adjustment

House Bill 1804 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of five percent tax on the gross value of units severed at the wellhead, plus 4.6 cents per unit severed.

Senate Bill 1286 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of 29 cents per unit severed at the wellhead and provides for an annual adjustment.

House Bill 1863 - pending Imposes a natural gas severance tax of 4.9 percent of the gross value of units severed at the wellhead.

House Bill 1950 - enacted Allows counties to choose whether or not to enact a severance tax.

Virginia Senate Bill 658 - pending Requires counties and cities that imposed or are imposing local severance taxes for the 2008 license year or thereafter to amend their local ordinances to adopt or include local license tax uniform ordinance provisions, and to make it retroactive to the 2008 license year.

House Bill 1233 - pending Requires counties and cities that imposed or are imposing local severance taxes for the 2008 license year or thereafter to amend their local ordinances to adopt or include local license tax uniform ordinance provisions, and to make it retroactive to the 2008 license year.

Wisconsin Senate Joint Resolution 31 - pending Memorializes Congress to reintroduce and pass the Oil Industry Tax Break Repeal Act