Restrictions on Use of Public Assistance Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) Cards
A t least 37 states issue Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) cash benefits through electronic benefit transfer (EBT) cards.

Generally speaking, the EBT cards are used to distribute welfare cash benefits function like any other debit card.

They can be used at any retail establishment that accepts debit cards and can withdraw cash. More recently, states have been curtailing the use of the cards and expressly prohibiting their use in certain locations, mostly casinos, liquor stores or other gaming establishments.

In 2012, the federal government mandated restrictions be put in place to prohibit EBT card use in liquor stores, gaming or gambling establishments or adult entertainment venues. States can face financial penalties if they are not in compliance. All states issue Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) formerly known as food stamps, through EBT cards. SNAP benefits can only be used to purchase food items and cannot be used to withdraw cash.

At least 25 states have laws placing restrictions or prohibitions on the use of EBT cards. The table below lists the states and their prohibitions by topic (not all states prohibit the same purchases or specify the same products or services). The Texas statute does not specifically prohibit certain purchases but requires that benefits only be used for goods and services necessary for the welfare of the family, such as food, clothing, housing, utilities, child care, transportation and medicine/medical supplies. In addition, Massachusetts and Missouri require that the EBT card include the person’s photo.

It is important to note that the federal mandate does not require that the policy be put in state law. It can be incorporated into the state’s TANF plan or administrative rules and program policies. For example, Connecticut and Rhode Island have their restrictions in the TANF plan and Program Rule.

NCSL has additional information on the federal mandate. New EBT Mandate in Extension of TANF Block Grant Through FY 2012; State Penalty Risk for Non-Compliance.

The box allows you to conduct a full text search or use the dropdown menu option to select a state.

*Note: This document only captures those states that have addressed this issue legislatively. The Federal mandate to restrict use in liquor stores, casinos/gaming establishments and adult entertainment venues does not require the policy to be in state statute, but can be in the state’s TANF plan and/or rules/policies. For example, Connecticut and Rhode Island have their restrictions in the TANF plan and Program Rule.

Additional Resources