Redistricting Criteria
Mark your calendars to join NCSL in Providence, R.I., for our first Get Ready to Redistrict seminar, June 20-23.

When redistricting, state legislatures or redistricting commissions are provided certain criteria with which to draw the lines. These criteria are intended to make the districts easy to identify and understand, and to ensure fairness and consistency.

All states must comply with the federal constitutional requirements related to population and anti-discrimination. For congressional redistricting, the Apportionment Clause of Article I, Section 2, of the U.S. Constitution requires that all districts be as nearly equal in population as practicable, which essentially means exactly equal. For state legislative districts, the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution requires that districts be substantially equal. Some say that 10 percent deviation in population from one district to the next is a safe standard. However, that has not proven to be a guaranteed protection from court scrutiny or revision. Several states have provided for their own deviation standard. For instance, Colorado prohibits districts from having a population deviation above 5 percent (Colo. Const. Art. V, § 46).

In addition to population equality, Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 prohibits plans that intentionally or inadvertently discriminate on the basis of race, which could dilute the minority vote.

In addition to these mandatory standards set out by the U.S Constitution and the Voting Rights Act, states are allowed to adopt their own redistricting criteria, or principles, for drawing the plans. Principles, or criteria, may be found in state constitutions or statutes or be adopted by a legislature, chamber, or committee, or by a court that is called upon to draw a plan when the legislative process fails.

These traditional districting principles (or criteria) have been adopted by many states:

Compactness : Having the minimum distance between all the parts of a constituency (a circle, square or a hexagon is the most compact district).

: Having the minimum distance between all the parts of a constituency (a circle, square or a hexagon is the most compact district). Contiguity : All parts of a district being connected at some point with the rest of the district.

: All parts of a district being connected at some point with the rest of the district. Preservation of counties and other political subdivisions : This refers to not crossing county, city, or town, boundaries when drawing districts.

: This refers to not crossing county, city, or town, boundaries when drawing districts. Preservation of communities of interest : Geographical areas, such as neighborhoods of a city or regions of a state, where the residents have common political interests that do not necessarily coincide with the boundaries of a political subdivision, such as a city or county.

: Geographical areas, such as neighborhoods of a city or regions of a state, where the residents have common political interests that do not necessarily coincide with the boundaries of a political subdivision, such as a city or county. Preservation of cores of prior districts : This refers to maintaining districts as previously drawn, to the extent possible. This leads to continuity of representation.

: This refers to maintaining districts as previously drawn, to the extent possible. This leads to continuity of representation. Avoiding pairing incumbents: This refers to avoiding districts that would create contests between incumbents.

These emerging criteria have been considered and adopted in a few states since 2000:

Prohibition on favoring or disfavoring an incumbent, candidate or party. The prohibition in a given state may be broader, covering any person or group, or it may be limited to intentionally or unduly favoring a person or group. Details on these prohibitions are included in the state descriptions below.

The prohibition in a given state may be broader, covering any person or group, or it may be limited to intentionally or unduly favoring a person or group. Details on these prohibitions are included in the state descriptions below. Prohibition on using partisan data : Line drawers, whether they be commissioners (California and Montana), nonpartisan staff (Iowa), or legislators (Nebraska), are prohibited from using incumbent residences, election results, party registration, or other socio-economic data as an input when redrawing districts.

: Line drawers, whether they be commissioners (California and Montana), nonpartisan staff (Iowa), or legislators (Nebraska), are prohibited from using incumbent residences, election results, party registration, or other socio-economic data as an input when redrawing districts. Competitiveness : Districts having relatively even partisan balance, making competition between the two major parties more intense. This criterion typically seeks to avoid the creation of “safe” districts for a particular party. For instance, the Arizona constitution (cited below) states that “to the extent practicable, competitive districts should be favored where to do so would create no significant detriment to the other goals.”

: Districts having relatively even partisan balance, making competition between the two major parties more intense. This criterion typically seeks to avoid the creation of “safe” districts for a particular party. For instance, the Arizona constitution (cited below) states that “to the extent practicable, competitive districts should be favored where to do so would create no significant detriment to the other goals.” Preservation of partisan advantage: A North Carolina congressional redistricting committee required plan drafters to "make reasonable efforts to construct districts n the 2016 Contingent Congressional Plan to maintain the current partisan makeup of North Carolina's congressional delegation."

This future criterion has been adopted by Ohio for legislative districts beginning in 2021:

Proportionality: The statewide proportion of districts whose voters, based on statewide state and federal partisan general election results during the last ten years, favor each political party shall correspond closely to the statewide preferences of the voters.



For details on state-specific criteria relating to who may drawing plans, what data may be used and the review process, other than districting principles, see this chart.

Another approach to Districting Principles for 2010 and beyond, please click here.

The box allows you to conduct a full text search or use the dropdown menu option to select a state.

Note: Information on the districting principles, or criteria, used by each state as it redrew legislative and congressional districts for the 2010 Census and beyond is available at Districting Principles for 2010 and Beyond.

About This NCSL Project

Redistricting is the process of redrawing state legislative and congressional district boundaries every 10 years by state legislatures following the decennial U.S. Census. NCSL helps prepare legislatures and others for the redistricting cycle with comprehensive information on redistricting law, technology and process. NCSL collects data and information on new legislative and congressional districts.

For more information, contact Wendy Underhill.

Additional Resources