Intensive Care for Extreme Prematurity — Moving beyond Gestational Age
Eligibility Criteria

We assessed infants born in 19 centers of the Neonatal Research Network at 22 to 25 completed weeks17 of gestation (25 completed weeks are equivalent to 25 weeks 0 days to 25 weeks 6 days of postmenstrual age) between January 1, 1998, and December 31, 2003. We excluded infants with a major anomaly, a birth weight greater than 1000 g or the 97th percentile for gestational age (suggesting that the gestational age was underestimated9,12), or a birth weight of less than 401 g (below which few infants receive intensive care). Because we adopted the perspective of a physician deciding whether to initiate mechanical ventilation for infants considered very likely to die otherwise, we excluded the 31 infants who survived without mechanical ventilation (described below).

Risk Factors

We recorded the type of delivery, whether the birth was single or multiple, the child's sex, exposure or nonexposure to antenatal corticosteroid treatment within 7 days before delivery, race or ethnic group assigned by maternal report (black [not Hispanic], white [not Hispanic], Hispanic, or other), and birth weight. On the basis of previous findings,13 the best obstetrical estimate based on the last menstrual period, early ultrasonographic examination, or other important prenatal findings was used to calculate gestational age, except in unusual circumstances when only an estimate by the pediatrician18 was available. Details about the mother's menstrual history and ultrasonographic findings were not collected. We considered intensive care to have been provided if mechanical ventilation was initiated. (Nasal continuous positive airway pressure was unlikely to be administered or successfully used to avoid mechanical ventilation at 22 to 25 weeks' gestation.19)

Outcome Assessments

Research nurses using standardized definitions collected data before discharge. Standardized neurodevelopmental assessments were performed at a corrected age of 18 to 22 months by certified examiners trained in a 2-day hands-on workshop.20 Neurodevelopmental impairment was defined as a score of 70 or below on either the Psychomotor Developmental Index or the Mental Developmental Index of the Bayley Scales of Infant Development, second edition (on a scale of 50 to 150, with 150 indicating the most advanced development), moderate or severe cerebral palsy,20 bilateral blindness, or bilateral hearing loss requiring amplification. Profound impairment was defined as a Bayley score below 50 (untestable) or a level of 5 for gross motor function according to the modified criteria of Palisano et al.21 (on a scale of 0 to 5, with 5 indicating that adult assistance is required to move).20

Benefits of Intensive Care

We assessed the percentage of infants with the following prespecified primary outcomes: survival, survival without impairment, and survival without profound impairment. To avoid underestimating the potential benefits of intensive care, the maximum potential percentage of infants with favorable outcomes, had all infants received intensive care, was estimated. This estimation was calculated with the assumption that the percentage of infants with a potentially favorable outcome among those who had died without undergoing mechanical ventilation would be the same as the percentage of infants in the same risk category who had a favorable outcome and who underwent mechanical ventilation. Because infants who did not undergo ventilation tended to be smaller, sicker, and less mature than infants in the same risk category who underwent ventilation (data not shown), this approach provides an optimistic estimate. This estimate can be considered the upper bound for the maximum potential percentage of study infants with a favorable outcome. These estimates were not intended to indicate the best outcomes achievable under ideal or future circumstances.

Burdens of Intensive Care

We divided the total number of hospital days or ventilator days before death or discharge home by the number of survivors in order to calculate an index of the infant distress, resource use, and costs22 incurred per survivor. Similar calculations were performed to express the burdens of intensive care per survivor without profound impairment.

We estimated the number of additional hospital or ventilator days that would have been required if all study infants had been given intensive care, assuming that the additional survivors would require no fewer mean days per survivor than infants in the same risk category who were given intensive care. We regard this estimate as being conservative because the infants who died without receiving intensive care tended to be quite small and immature and might well have required more resources per survivor. The additional number of hospital or ventilator days per additional survivor without profound impairment was estimated in a similar manner.

Statistical Analysis

Each outcome for infants who received intensive care was analyzed with the use of a logistic mixed model23,24 performed with the GLIMMIX procedure in SAS software, version 9.1.2 (SAS Institute). Gestational age, birth weight, sex, exposure or nonexposure to antenatal corticosteroids, and single or multiple birth were selected a priori as predictor variables on the basis of previous studies of extremely premature infants.6,25-27 Race or ethnic group as described above was unrelated to the three outcomes in bivariable and multivariable analyses and was not included. The type of delivery was also unrelated to death or to either impairment or profound impairment. The center entered the model as a random intercept to adjust for center differences while providing parameter estimates to permit center-free predictions.21,22 Each completed week of gestation was entered as a categorical variable rather than a continuous variable because the latter resulted in inaccurate estimates of the outcome at 22 and 23 weeks' gestation. A comparison of observed parameter estimates with distributions derived from a bootstrap procedure involving 10,000 resamples provided support for the validity of the final model coefficients. For models of the three main outcomes, the variable estimates were within 0.4 to 2.3% of the median of the bootstrap estimates.

There were no significant interactions between gestational age and other risk factors. Data on infants not examined at 18 to 22 months were excluded from the denominator in analyses including neurodevelopmental impairment but were not excluded in analyses of death alone.

In assessing differences among centers, the expected proportion of infants who underwent ventilation with an adverse outcome was estimated for each center by applying our regression models to the population of infants who underwent ventilation in that center. The ratio of the observed to the expected rate was then calculated for each center.

To compare prognostic assessments based on multiple factors with those based on gestational age alone, we categorized all infants who underwent ventilation into 24 risk groups according to birth weight (≤25th, 26th to 75th, and >75th percentile for gestational age), sex, exposure or nonexposure to antenatal corticosteroids, and single or multiple birth. For each group, the percentage of infants with an unfavorable outcome was predicted with the use of gestational age alone and according to gestational age, birth weight, sex, exposure or nonexposure to antenatal corticosteroids, and single or multiple birth. The observed and estimated rates were then compared. No adjustment for multiple comparisons was performed. Two-sided P values of less than 0.05 were considered to indicate statistical significance. We used our models to develop a simple Web-based tool to estimate the likelihood of a favorable outcome.