Boyd proposes new plan for Sallie Mae employees
LYNN HAVEN — Rep. Allen Boyd met with independent BP Deepwater Horizon victim claims administrator Kenneth Feinberg and Sallie Mae officials last week, a meeting the Monticello congressman described as an effort to place workers from the closing Lynn Haven facility in oil spill-related damage claim processing jobs.

The company announced in April it would close its Lynn Haven facility by the end of the year, a move that would affect more than 500 permanent Bay County employees.

Sallie Mae also had hired about 160 temporary employees at the facility in previous peak seasons, something the company declined to do this year.

Boyd said Tuesday he was pleased with the initial meeting and said he was “cautiously optimistic” about Feinberg eventually hiring some or all of the affected local Sallie Mae employees to process damage claims caused by BP’s oil spill.

“For the short-term, this is probably the best solution,” Boyd said.

He said the idea proposed to Feinberg didn’t preclude other options for the 133,000-square-foot facility, including the possibility of Sallie Mae and the U.S. Department of Education working together on transitioning employees to a different type of loan servicing, something Boyd has promoted since the company’s Lynn Haven closure announcement.

Feinberg was named by the White House in June to independently oversee the $20 billion escrow fund set up to pay out BP oil spill-related damage claims along the Gulf Coast.

Boyd said Sallie Mae Vice Chairman and Chief Financial Officer Jack Remondi and Senior Vice President Renee Mang attended the meeting with Feinberg.

He said he had also talked with Feinberg on the phone a few days prior to the meeting about the idea of using the Bay County facility and its soon-to-be unemployed workers.

Sallie Mae corporate spokesman Conwey Casillas said the Lynn Haven facility’s first round of layoffs began last week, with about 50 local positions eliminated by the company.

Casillas said the closure timetable remained the same, with Sallie Mae expected to close the Lynn Haven facility by the end of 2010.

Boyd said Feinberg did not bring up a specific number of claims processors he needed, or indicate whether any displaced Sallie Mae workers hired by the administrator would process claims at the Lynn Haven facility or another Bay County location.

The congressman said Sallie Mae and Feinberg would need to negotiate those details in future meetings.

“Mr. Feinberg made it very clear that he wanted local folks down on the coast involved in the claims process,” Boyd said.

Boyd’s office provided copies of letters sent by the congressman and Remondi to Feinberg regarding the possibility of Sallie Mae employees filling claim processing positions.

In his July 15 letter, Remondi told Feinberg about the legislative changes to federal student loan originations that will force the facility’s 500 employees to look for work in a region that, already facing high unemployment numbers, likely would see more job losses as a result of the oil spill.

Remondi said the average tenure of the Bay County staff was nine years, and added that the Lynn Haven employees process nearly 6.5 million applications, which resulted in more than 11 million disbursements totaling $27 billion in 2009.

He said 80 percent of that processing occurred during a three-month peak processing period.

The Sallie Mae CFO also talked about the technology available at the facility to process damage claims and a highly trained workforce.

“We would welcome the opportunity to put these resources back to work helping our neighbors in the gulf community,” Remondi said in the letter.