Sen. Nelson ‘tempted’ to run for governor, doesn’t agree with state’s direction
Despite assurances that he’s not planning to run for governor, Democratic U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson told a group of local business leaders Wednesday he’s tempted to run because he doesn’t like where Florida is headed.

In remarks to the Daytona Regional Chamber of Commerce, the 71-year-old, three-term senator blasted Republican Gov. Rick Scott and state GOP leaders for turning down federal dollars to establish high-speed rail between Tampa and Orlando and provide health care to 1.2 million low-income Floridians.

The decision not to expand Medicaid, a joint state-federal program, means the state is losing $51 billion in federal money over the next decade that could help the uninsured.

“I think it’s not only a shame,” Nelson said during a luncheon at the Ocean Center in Daytona Beach, “I think it’s a moral abscess.”

Speculation has mounted that Nelson might enter the governor’s race if Republican-turned-Democrat Charlie Crist stumbles in challenging Scott.

On several occasions, Nelson has said he has no plans to enter the race.

State Sen. John Thrasher, R-St. Augustine, who chairs Scott’s re-election campaign, defended the incumbent governor’s record, saying Scott’s leadership has led to lower unemployment rates. Nelson would offer flawed “big government” solutions that could be better handled with “market-based” approaches, Thrasher said.

“His solutions are federally based solutions — not Florida-based solutions,” he said.

President Barack Obama’s health care overhaul has already made a mark in the gubernatorial race, becoming the subject of campaign ads linking Crist to the controversial law. Washington has pledged to pay most of the cost of expanding coverage, but Republican lawmakers in Florida haven’t embraced the funds because of concerns that expanding Medicaid could burden the state budget. The state would have to pick up $3.5 billion to fund the expansion.

In an effort to revive the issue, Nelson has proposed taking existing local tax dollars used to pay for indigent medical care and using that money to offset the state’s portion. In Volusia County alone, three hospital taxing districts collect a combined $44.2 million in property taxes to support local hospitals. Thirty-one other counties in Florida already use local tax dollars to boost their hospitals’ Medicaid funding.

Halifax Health CEO Jeff Feasel, who leads the area’s 678-bed public, safety-net hospital system, said he’d support such a plan. Even though the hospital would give up local tax dollars, it would receive more money back because uninsured patients who typically are seen in the emergency room would have coverage, he said.

It’s essential lawmakers work together to find a way to cover the uninsured, said Daryl Tol, regional CEO for Florida Hospital in Volusia and Flagler counties. He said he hasn’t reviewed Nelson’s plan in detail, but he supports efforts to expand coverage.

“There are approaches, regardless of your politics, to get these people covered, and I think the state needs to do that,” he said. “Some questions are too big to fight over.”

Implementing Nelson’s plan would require approval from Tallahassee.

Florida Senate President Don Gaetz, R-Niceville, wrote in an email to senators that “Nelson’s plan does not appear to address the problems associated with traditional Medicaid.” In an April 17 letter to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, he wrote that Florida has not been given the flexibility to implement a partial expansion or require beneficiaries to pay some of the cost based on their income.

“This flexibility might have served as the basis for constructive dialogue with the House and Governor Scott during the 2014 Legislative Session,” he wrote.

In response, Nelson wrote an expansion “must not impose unreasonable costs” on low-income Floridians, and the federal government has been open to working with Florida to expand coverage. He plans to continue to push for an expansion, saying he might “bang the drum” for a special legislative session to address the issue.