NY legislator pay hikes in jeopardy; panel running out of time
ALBANY, N.Y. - The commission weighing a pay increase for legislators has failed to reach a consensus, and the deadline is near.

The New York State Commission on Legislative, Judicial and Executive Compensation cancelled its meeting Thursday, and a commissioner told Syracuse.com Friday that it was because they couldn't reach an agreement on whether to recommend the increases.

The commission first convened in February to provide an independent recommendation on whether state legislators, who haven't had a raise since 1999, deserve more money. The seven-member commission is composed of appointments from both chambers of the Legislature and the executive branch.

One commissioner has recommended a pay increase from legislators' current base salary of $79,500 to $116,900 a year. Most legislators also receive extra money for sitting on committees.

To make a pay-raise recommendation, at least one commissioner from each of the three authorities - the governor's office, the Assembly and the Senate - has to vote in favor of it. That doesn't look like it will happen at the moment, said Fran Reiter, one of the three governor's appointees.

"As of right now, I think I can speak for my colleagues among the governor's appointees," Reiter said in a phone interview Friday. "There is nobody prepared right now to vote for a raise."

If the commission is going to recommend a pay increase, it has to do so quickly. The statute that governs the commission requires such a recommendation by Nov. 15, next Tuesday. That's the date the commission rescheduled its meeting to after canceling Thursday.

Reiter said the holdup, at least for her, is that a pay increase should be tied to ethics reform. Some reform proposals that have come forward are to strip pensions of officials convicted of corruption, establishing an ethics commission and preventing limited liability corporations from donating anonymously to campaigns.

"I've made it absolutely clear that I can't support a raise without ethics reform," she said. "And 10 months later, no ethics reform."

The Tuesday meeting will happen at 11 a.m. Tuesday in New York City. Past meetings have been broadcast live, and transcripts are available at the commission's website.

The pay raise debate is occurring as the vast majority of New York Legislature incumbents are returning for duty at the upcoming legislative session. Just one incumbent of 199 up for re-election on Tuesday was ousted from his seat. The rest were re-elected.

Government watchdog groups and others have been calling for ethics reform after. the leaders of the Assembly and Senate were convicted this year of bribery. Federal prosecutors have also brought corruption charges against two former administration aides, a lobbyist and Syracuse and Buffalo business executives involved in Gov. Andrew Cuomo's economic development projects.

Reporter Patrick Lohmann covers New York state government and other topics. He can be reached any time: Email | Twitter | (315)766-6670