VIDEO: McAuliffe Tells NFIB He Supports Right-to-Work, Regulatory Reform

RICHMOND, Jan. 22, 2013--Democratic gubernatorial candidate Terry McAuliffe told small-business owners today that he's a veteran entrepreneur who believes in regulatory reform and preserving Virginia's status as a right-to-work state. Click here to watch the video.

McAuliffe spoke at the 2013 Business Day at the Capitol. The event, held at the Richmond Marriott, sponsored by the National Federation of Independent Business, the Virginia Hospitality and Travel Association and the Virginia Retail Merchants Association. Platinum sponsors of this year's event are Dominion, Kings Dominion and Walmart.

Other speakers included the Republican candidate for governor, Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli and Lt. Gov. Bill Bolling, who said he hadn't decided whether to run in this year's gubernatorial election.

Business Day marked the first meeting of McAuliffe and Cuccinelli. They chatted for about a minute in the hallway outside the hotel ballroom after McAuliffe spoke.

During his remarks, McAuliffe:

Said he would like to appoint Bolling, a Republican, to a position in his administration.

Spoke about his background as a small-business owner and entrepreneur. "I'm proud to say that, over my career, I have started nearly 33 companies," beginning with a driveway sealing business when he was 14. "We need more people in government who've actually sweated out a couple of payrolls, who understand what that is all about," he said.

Stated his support Virginia's status as a right-to-work state. "A lot of things I disagree with my party on," he said. "We are a great right-to-work state. We should never change that. It helps us do what we need to do to grow our businesses here in Virginia."

Offered no specifics but said he supports regulatory reform. "I talk about efficiencies. We've got to streamline our government," he said. " We've got a lot of regulations. I don't think we need all the regulations. We got to streamline those. We've got to make it easier for you to do business."

NFIB/Virginia is the commonwealth's leading small-business association, with about 5,500 dues-paying members statewide.

RELATED: Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli at 2013 Business Day