To add jobs, give everyone in N.J. an income tax cut
By BettyLou DeCroce

Special to South Jersey Sunday

People often ask why we supporters of Gov. Chris Christie’s proposed income-tax cut are so focused on cutting this tax. The answer is simple.

It’s the same reason you send your children to school every morning — because it will improve their opportunity for success and lead to a better future.

Our economy has improved, but we’ve got a long way to go to rebuild the economy and create jobs after one of the worst economic times in our generation.

The best way to get there is by reducing the tax burden for everyone in a state that is consistently ranked as having one of the worst, if not the worst, tax burdens in the nation. Unlike other proposals floating around Trenton these days, the income tax cut is the only one that is fair, proportionate and applied to the broadest segment of the state.

There’s no doubt New Jersey’s high taxes are out of line with the rest of the country, and that has hindered our progress in getting our friends and neighbors back to work.

New Jersey lost 156,000 jobs last decade when Trenton Democrats raised taxes and fees 115 times. In just two years since Christie and Republican legislators pried Trenton’s hand from your pockets, New Jersey has added nearly 75,000 private-sector jobs, including job growth in the last six months.

I’m encouraged that common sense conservative fiscal policies have begun to revive the economy. We need to build momentum with an across-the-board tax cut to boost the recovery and give New Jersey a competitive advantage in attracting new jobs to our state.

While the country’s economy was battered, nine states with no income tax actually grew jobs from 2001 to 2010. If states without an income tax added jobs during the Great Recession, imagine how many more jobs New Jersey can grow by reducing taxes during the recovery. The next job created could be yours.

The governor’s proposed income-tax cut is fair, lets hard-working families and small businesses keep more of their own money and fits within a responsible budget. It is a simple: If you pay income taxes, you will pay 10 percent less.

The income-tax cut has another inherent benefit — it is permanent and will force government to spend less. New Jersey government has long been a beast with an insatiable appetite. This tax cut would put our government on a diet and make it be more efficient with your money.

The reforms accomplished over the past two years that have made it easier for local officials to control costs and save you money. The most important reforms have been the property tax cap and the pension and benefit reform that will save $120 billion.

Thanks to these reforms, New Jersey had the smallest average property tax increase in nearly 20 years. We have begun to push back against the things that have caused New Jersey to have the highest property taxes in the country and, we’re working to do more.

My experiences in local and state government have taught me that although Trenton cannot cut property taxes, it can enact reforms that allow local officials to control spending and property taxes.

In my former position at the state Department of Community Affairs, I helped develop the Best Practices for Municipalities checklist which makes sure towns are taking appropriate measures to control costs for property taxpayers, such as keeping pay increases within the 2 percent cap, posting budgets online and exploring shared service agreements.

In the Legislature, I’m working hard to enact legislation that will relieve property taxes, such as eliminating cash payouts for public employees’ unused time and reforming Civil Service laws that prevent towns from merging or sharing services to reduce costs.

Cutting taxes while forcing government to live within its means will accelerate the job growth New Jersey has experienced and make our state more affordable for families and businesses.

If someone asks you whether New Jersey should cut the income tax, tell them it’s like a setting up a college savings plan for your child. It’s a sound investment, like your child’s education, which will bring a better and more productive future.

Assemblywoman BettyLou DeCroce is a Republican representing the 26th District in Morris, Essex and Passaic counties, and previously served as deputy commissioner of the state Department of Community Affairs.