After wild 6-way race, N.J.'s first Sikh mayor humbled by win
HOBOKEN -- The endorsement of Hoboken's outgoing mayor, Dawn Zimmer, was among the factors cited in Tuesday's election of Ravi Bhalla, whose win made him New Jersey's first Sikh mayor and one of the first in the country.

"The support of Mayor Zimmer had the biggest impact on his election because of Mayor Zimmer's incredible popularity and approval rating from all the polls that we took during the race," said Pablo Fonseca, a veteran Hudson County political strategist who ran the campaign of Freeholder Anthony Romano, one of Bhalla's five rivals in Tuesday's mayoral race.

"If Mayor Zimmer had decided to run for mayor, I think she would have won in a landslide," added Fonseca, who declined to make his poll numbers for Zimmer public.

Bhalla, an at-large city councilman whose second 4-year term will expire in January, received 4,678 votes, or 32.4% of the 14,399 votes cast for mayor, according to preliminary results from the Hoboken City Clerk's Office.

That was 3 percentage points better than his closest competitor, Councilman Michael DeFusco. DeFusco had sought to be Hoboken's first openly gay mayor, but fell more than 400 votes short, with 4,247, or 29.4 percent, the clerk's office reported.

DeFusco blamed the outcome on "outside forces," namely organized labor and real estate developers who contributed heavily to the Bhalla campaign.

Bhalla, a 43-year-old lawyer who is married with two children, attributed his electoral success to an "army of volunteers."

"We knocked on approximately 30,000 doors during the course of the campaign," the mayor-elect said in an interview Wednesday. "The campaign with a ground game has the best chance of winning."

The four other candidates were: Romano, who finished third with 18.5% of the vote; Council President Jennifer Giattino, with 16.6%; local restaurateur Karen Nason, with 1.5%; and cycling advocate Juan Bautista, with 1.4%.

Turnout was relatively high for Hoboken's officially non-partisan mayor and council contest, which coincided with Tuesday's general election for governor, lieutenant governor, state Senate and Assembly seats, and for county freeholder, said Deputy City Clerk Jerry Lore.

At 38.6%, the turnout was well above the 32.3% figure from 2013, the last time there was a simultaneous mayoral and gubernatorial race in town, Lore said.

Zimmer threw the mayoral race wide open in June, when she said she would not seek a third 4-year term and instead threw her support behind Bhalla, a consistent ally during his 8-year tenure on the council.

Zimmer said Wednesday that her backing likely helped Bhalla, who has pledged to follow-through on several Zimmer initiatives, including a $230 federally-funded storm surge barrier along the Hudson River waterfront, as well as acquisition of additional park space, through the use of eminent domain if necessary.

"I think that people in Hoboken are happy with the direction that our city is moving in," Zimmer said. "I think people understood that Ravi's been with me from the beginning."

Bhalla said he was "humbled" by his election, which had implications well beyond Hoboken.

"I'm the first Sikh elected mayor in the United States," said Bhalla, an Indian-American born in New Jersey, who wears a turban customary for Sikh adults. "I'm very humbled and honored to serve the city and the country."

Referring to Bhalla's assertion, a spokesman for the Manhattan-based Sikh Coalition, said certainly Bhalla was one of the nation's first Sikh mayors.

The spokesman, Mark Reading-Smith, said there have been others to hold the title of "mayor," including Satyendra Huja, who in 2012 was named by fellow city council members in Charlottesville, Va. to head the ruling body, with the title of mayor. In California in 2009, Kashmir Gill was elected to the first of two non-consecutive terms as mayor of Yuba City. Gill does not wear a turban, a distinction made by the Sikh Coalition's interim executive director, Narinder Singh, in a statement recognizing Bhalla's achievement.

"In addition to inspiring the next generation of Sikh leaders to recognize that public office is possible, his election reminds all Americans that diversity remains our nation's greatest strength," Singh stated.

Sikhism was founded in the 15th Century on the Indian subcontinent by Guru Nanak, who was born into a Hindu family. It is a monotheistic religion that stresses egalitarianism and public service.

Bhalla's religion -- or, more precisely, a misinterpretation of it, deliberate or otherwise -- became an issue in the campaign Friday night, fliers were placed on doorsteps and car windshields with the message, "Don't let TERRORISM take over our town!" above a picture of Bhalla.

The fliers appear to have been a modified version of an earlier mailer from the DeFusco campaign claiming Bhalla had an alleged conflict of interest involving his law firm and the city's water utility, Suez Water. DeFusco denounced the modified flier, and said it amounted to an attack on him as well as Bhalla.

The Hoboken Police Department and the Hudson County Prosecutor's Office are investigating the incident as a possible bias crime, and even as a possible case of "wrongful impersonation," with DeFusco as the victim, said Chief Kenneth Ferrante.

"But we won't know until we find out who the responsible parties were," Ferrante said. "Remember, you had six camps, as well as the possibility of outside individuals who were just hateful toward Bhalla's nationality."

Romano, who lost the mayor race but was re-elected to his freeholder seat after a judge ruled he could run for both offices, said he was proud that his neighbors had rejected the politics of hate.

"The good thing about it was that the citizens of Hoboken looked at the person and what he had accomplish, and what his platform is, that's the important thing," Romano said of the flier's failure to prevent Bhalla's election. "And he obviously resonated with the Dawn Zimmer people."

Steve Strunsky may be reached at sstrunsky@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @SteveStrunsky. Find NJ.com on Facebook.