N.J. Gov. Chris Christie proposes sacrifices to close $10.7B deficit
TRENTON -- Gov. Chris Christie today challenged lawmakers to help him transform New Jersey government in a hard-times budget speech today that portrayed a state on the brink of fiscal ruin.

Speaking in passionate and sometimes scolding tones, the governor called on all Jerseyans — from state and local officials to cops, teachers, firefighters and janitors — to embrace an era of sacrifice. After decades of excessive spending, as well as reckless pay and benefit increases to public employees, only a sea change would bring the state out of its current financial crisis, he said.

"There is no question: This has been an incredibly difficult period for our state and its people," Christie said. "And the choices I am asking you to make now will not be easy. But they are the first step on the path to a brighter future."

Those choices marked a reversal from the priorities of his Democratic predecessors and, in some instances, his own campaign promises.

He proposed slashing property tax rebate checks in favor of a tax credit next spring, but even then residents would get only a quarter of what they got last year. He would short the school funding formula by more than $1 billion, using math that hurts districts in the suburbs as well as the cities. He would charge seniors more for prescription drugs and drop childless adults from welfare.

Christie said such moves are better than piling more taxes on the nation’s "most over-taxed" people.

"Ladies and gentlemen, if you tax them, they will leave," Christie told a joint session of the Democrat-controlled Legislature.

The 48-minute address wove together Christie trademarks: joking asides, preempting opponents’ arguments and life-or-death rhetoric.

"Everyone comes to the center of the room," the Republican said. "We jump off the cliff together to stave off certain fiscal death for the hope of economic salvation tomorrow."

Top Democrats who must strike a budget deal with Christie by July 1 reacted coolly to the speech. They said they would not dismiss the governor’s proposals out of hand. But they rebuked Christie for backtracking on campaign vows — such as a promise to increase rebates — and they took aim at his refusal to renew an income tax increase on the wealthy that could have raised $1 billion.

They said some changes, like reducing the Earned Income Tax Credit for the working poor, amount to a tax increase while drops in state aid could mean property tax hikes.

"For anyone to think we’re just going to say no to everything and blow everything up, they’re wrong," said Senate President Stephen Sweeney (D-Gloucester). "We need to change, I agree with him. There’s been mistakes over 20 years, I agree with him. But what this is doing is putting it squarely on the middle class and the poor. One billion dollars doesn’t solve the problem, but it can soften a lot of areas that are going to cause a great deal of pain."

Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver (D-Essex) summed up the proposal as "broken promises and disaster for middle-class families."

Sweeney said Democrats would work with Christie on a proposed constitutional amendment to cap annual property tax increases at 2.5 percent and a series of "tools" for local governments to cut costs, mainly by reining in employee salaries, pensions and benefits.

Christie on state spending Christie on state spending and cutting programs

Local school and municipal officials said the changes to negotiating rules were not just welcome, but necessary to make up for shrinking state aid. But they were anxious to see how aid would be divided and whether the tools would be implemented right away.

Public employee unions, a favorite Christie target, suffered more carnage in his speech, which was interrupted 29 times for applause.

Without ever mentioning it by name, Christie singled out the New Jersey Education Association for scorn, chiding the 200,000-member teachers’ union for "nonsensical and self-serving" positions that perpetuate an "unfair system" in which school employees don’t pay enough for their health insurance.

What’s going on with property tax rebates?

No more checks. Instead, rebates would be applied quarterly to property tax bills, starting in May 2011. And when that happens, rebates would being sliced by 75 percent. A resident who expected a $1,000 check in September, for example, would see a $250 credit on a property tax bill in May 2011. Instead of getting one big rebate check, the average person would make smaller installments toward their property taxes throughout the year. Seniors, the disabled and people making under $75,000 would be eligible. No more checks. Instead, rebates would be applied quarterly to property tax bills, starting in May 2011. And when that happens, rebates would being sliced by 75 percent. A resident who expected a $1,000 check in September, for example, would see a $250 credit on a property tax bill in May 2011. Instead of getting one big rebate check, the average person would make smaller installments toward their property taxes throughout the year. Seniors, the disabled and people making under $75,000 would be eligible. Why is Christie doing this?

The governor called the practice of sending checks a political "gimmick" that cost the state millions. Every year, the state borrows money in the beginning of the year to finance the rebate checks - at a cost of $10 million to the state. Plus, printing and mailing the checks costs the state more than $300,000. How much will be spent on rebates?

The budget proposal includes $275 million for rebates, down from $1.1 billion this year. That means the average eligible homeowner would get a $258 rebate, while the average renter would get $172 - but not until May 2011. Last September, the average check was $1,035 for homeowners and $688 for renters. How will the state do this?

The idea is for the state to send money to municipalities on a quarterly basis. The municipalities would then apply the rebate to the amount of a property tax bill. The average property tax bill in the state was $7,281 last year.

NJEA president Barbara Keshishian said it was the governor, not the union, who is guilty of "bullying."

"He can twist the facts and demonize all he wants, but the fact remains: He’s cutting an additional billion dollars out of education while giving a billion dollar tax break to people earning over $400,000 a year," she said.

While most of the biggest steps to close a $10.7 billion deficit — $3 billion from scheduled pension payments, $445 million from municipal aid, $173 million from public colleges — had dribbled out in advance, some elements of Christie’s $29.3 billion spending plan became public for the first time yesterday.

He would save $50 million from privatizing government functions like state parks operations, food service, facilities maintenance, vocational education, state parking lots, and public television station New Jersey Network, which would become a nonprofit organization.

He would save $8.8 million by cutting 1,300 state workers — including union and nonunion employees.

Some Motor Vehicle Commission agencies would close on Mondays, but expand Saturday hours. Four would be closed altogether.

He would establish a $350 annual deductible for Medicaid and increase brand name drug co-pays from $7 to $15 for the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and Disabled program, while reducing generic co-pays from $6 to $5.

"There are 150,000 low-income elderly folks who depend on PAAD for these drugs, and often these are life-saving drugs," said Jim Dieterle, senior state director for AARP.

But the loudest cries were heard over the biggest slice of the budget: state aid to public schools. Districts will not receive their aid figures from the state until today or tomorrow, but an aid reduction equaling up to 5 percent of the districts’ budgets could mean some communities receive no state aid. That had school officials predicting staff and program cuts.

"It would have a devastating impact," said Hunterdon Central Regional High School District Business Administrator Ray Krov. He said the district’s "upper loss" would be about $3 million — or roughly half of the total $6 million the district receives in state aid. The budget is about $60 million at Hunterdon Central.

By Claire Heininger and Lisa Fleisher/Statehouse Bureau

Staff writers Susan K. Livio, Chris Megerian, Matt Friedman, Kristen Alloway and Jeanette Rundquist contributed to this report.

Sen. Stephen Sweeney talks about Christie's budget address Sen. Stephen Sweeney talks about Christie's budget address

Assemblyman Joseph Cryan reacts to Christies budget address Assemblyman Joseph Cryan reacts to Christies budget address

Christie on state program spending, pension reform and tax rebates Christie on state program spending, pension reform and tax rebates