Gov. Christie, N.Y. Gov. Cuomo say OK to scaled-back toll hikes
403 Forbidden

403 Forbidden

NEW YORK — Softening a proposal for unprecedented increases on Port Authority bridges and tunnels, the governors of New Jersey and New York have signed off on an agreement to raise tolls $1.50 next month, followed by additional hikes of 75 cents per year through 2015.



The total increase of $4.50 for EZPass customers is less than the $6 increase the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey asked for two weeks ago. That proposal included an initial $4 increase, followed by another $2 hike in 2014.

Under the agreement, cash-paying commuters will face a $2 surcharge on top of the $4.50 increase. But that, too, is less than the original $3 surcharge that would have increased to $5 in 2014.

Thursday’s agreement also calls for truckers to pay $2 more per axle beginning next month, followed by $2 per axle increases each year between 2012 and 2015. Cash-paying truckers will be hit with a $3 per-axle surcharge.

After an initial increase to $9.50 next month, commuters using E-ZPass would pay $12.50 by 2015, when cash customers will be charged $14.50.

“We did not want to see any toll increase,” Gov. Chris Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said in a joint letter to the Port Authority’s chairman and vice chairman. But, the letter acknowledges, “given the crisis facing the Port Authority and its finances, and the potential safety and economic risks to commuters and businesses, an increase cannot be avoided.”



The toll hikes affect the Lincoln and Holland tunnels, the Outerbridge Crossing and the Goethals, Bayonne and George Washington bridges.

In addition to the toll hikes, the $1.75 fare to ride PATH trains would increase 25 cents a year for four years, instead of $1 right away.

The Port Authority’s board of commissioners is scheduled to vote on the increases this morning.

The governors’ agreement caps a stormy two weeks of sticker shock, an outpouring of support from labor unions that would benefit from projects financed by the toll hikes, and public hearings on Tuesday crowded with supporters and opponents of the proposed hikes.

In unveiling its original proposal Aug. 5, the Port Authority said it needed the nearly $1 billion a year the increases would generated to help pay for a 10-year, $33 billion capital plan, after revenues had declined due to the lagging economy.

In their letter yesterday, Christie and Cuomo said they had directed Port Authority commissioners to look for ways to reduce expenses in order to soften the toll hike.

“As directed, those commissioners conducted a review of the current financial situation as well as the obligations under the proposed longterm capital plan and have informed our administration that those reviews have identified $5 billion in savings that can be immediately achieved within the capital plan,” said the letter, which did not identify specific cuts.



The letter, released through Christie’s office, also said the agreement is contingent upon the Port Authority board’s approving an audit of the agency’s finances.

That contingency follows two recent reports by the New York State Comptroller’s Office criticizing the bistate agency for wasting millions of dollars on staff overtime and consultants contracts.

A report issued Wednesday by Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli found the agency paid $85.7 million in overtime last year to 5,360 of its 6,977 employees.

Most were police or PATH workers, who accounted for 66 percent of the $459.2 million in total overtime paid out from 2006 to 2010, the audit found.

In a report last month, DiNapoli’s office said the Port Authority failed to justify hundreds of millions of dollars it paid to private contractors, and that a failure to periodically review those contracts may have cost the agency millions of dollars.

Christie and Cuomo, who have veto power over all Port Authority decisions, questioned the original proposal.

But some observers have suggested the initial announcement and the governors’ responses, including yesterday’s agreement, were part of an orchestrated effort to give them political cover from commuters’ anger while still providing additional revenue to the Port Authority to help pay for projects the governors support.

Port Authority Chairman David Samson and Deputy Executive Director Bill Baroni are Christie appointees and confidantes.

“The deal sounds like better news, compared with $4, but we are still looking at $9.50,” said Assemblywoman Valerie Vainieri Huttle (D-Bergen). “I still think it’s an insult for commuters to be expected to believe that it was going to be $4, and now it's down to $1.50. Those numbers were probably fantasy to start with.”

Staff writer Ginger Gibson contributed to this report.