Judge says Christie's school budget cuts violated constitution, fell heavily on high-risk districts
403 Forbidden

403 Forbidden

TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie’s cutbacks in school funding violate the state’s mandate to provide children "a thorough and efficient" education, a court-appointed Special Master declared today in a finding that could force the governor to come up with millions more for schools.

The opinion by Superior Court Judge Peter Doyne, who was appointed by the state Supreme Court in January, will now be considered by the state’s highest court, potentially setting the stage for another historic confrontation on an issue that has been litigated for more than 40 years.

"The difficulty in addressing New Jersey’s fiscal crisis and its constitutionally mandated obligation to educate our children requires an exquisite balance not easily attained," Doyne wrote. "Despite the state’s best efforts, the reductions fell more heavily upon our high risk districts and the children educated within those districts."

The Supreme Court appointed Doyne as Special Master in January after the Education Law Center, a Newark-based school advocacy group, filed a motion last year arguing that cuts in spending violated the state constitution.

The court heard oral arguments on the case, then asked Doyne to determine "the constitutionality of the current funding levels," and submit his findings and conclusions of law to the Supreme Court. His 96-page opinion was issued today.

Asked about the ruling on his "Ask the Governor" radio show this evening, Christie said, "It’s crazy, just crazy."

A spokesman for the governor’s office said Doyne acknowledged the Supreme Court limited his inquiry by excluding consideration of the impact of the state’s unprecedented budget crisis, and noted that despite the fact New Jersey meets or exceeds all other states in spending for "at-risk" students, many of those students continue to fail to meet basic educational proficiency.

"The Supreme Court should at last abandon the failed assumption of the last three decades that more money equals better education, and stop treating our state’s fiscal condition as an inconvenient afterthought," the spokesman, Michael Drewniak, said. "The court’s legal mandates on the legislative and executive branches of government have incontrovertibly contributed to our current fiscal crisis without uniformly improving education."

David Sciarra, executive director of the Education Law Center, said Doyne’s findings provide a "sobering analysis" of the effect of aid cuts on the state’s schools.

"The judge concluded that based on the evidence, the reduction in aid has significantly impaired the ability of districts to deliver the standards to their children," Sciarra said. "If (the Supreme Court) accepts his conclusions that the state has not met its burden of proof, and the funding reduction has had a deleterious impact on students ... then the question becomes what to do about that?"

The ELC will now make the case that Doyne’s findings should be sustained, and that the state’s funding formula should be properly implemented, according to a statement released by the center.

Both sides have until mid-April to write briefs in the case. The high court may schedule oral arguments, and can accept, modify or reject Doyne’s findings.

The original school aid cut last year was about $1 billion, a shortfall that grew to $1.6 billion because the state did not provide additional funds that would have been generated by the state’s School Funding Reform Act formula.

The eight-day "remand" hearing in Doyne’s courtroom in Bergen County included testimony from a half-dozen superintendents, the state’s director of education data and a nationally known expert on school finance.

In reference to the superintendents’ testimony, Doyne said, "despite the best efforts of the superintendents, the core curriculum content standards are not being met at existing funding levels."

The state’s content standards are a collection of grade-by-grade level material, from mathematics to social studies, that all children are expected to learn.

Paul Tractenberg, a Rutgers University law professor and co-founder of the Education Law Center, said he believes it is unlikely the Supreme Court would reject Doyne’s findings.

Among the issues looming, he said, is that if the court upholds Doyne’s findings, what would the remedy be?

Audio: Gov. Christie's School Budget Presser

"He (Christie) could stop short of going for the jugular now, or he could kind of up the ante by threatening what will happen if the court adopts Judge Doyne’s opinion," Tractenberg said.

Assembly Budget Committee Chairman Louis D. Greenwald (D-Camden) said Doyne’s findings "re-emphasize how the governor’s budget both overburdened property taxpayers and endangered education.

"The fact that the greatest impact of the governor’s cut was felt by at-risk students is, unfortunately, more evidence his budget did not include his oft-touted shared sacrifice," Greenwald said in a statement.

Assembly Republican Budget Officer Declan O’Scanlon (R-Monmouth) said "everyone who pays property taxes or cares about education in New Jersey should brace themselves for another potential blow from the New Jersey Supreme Court," however.

Several superintendents said they welcomed the possibility their districts would end up with more resources.

Edison Superintendent Richard O’Malley said his district was handed a $9.78 million budget cut last year, equal to 55.8 percent of the state aid Edison received the previous year. The district, the largest in Middlesex County, cut 131 education positions, full-day kindergarten, elementary world language instruction, middle school athletics, after-school busing and money for new textbooks and technology.

"The district suffered a tremendous academic setback with the loss of this amount of money in one year with no time to plan," O’Malley said. "Those effects have been felt this year and will be felt in years to come. What is not stated in these numbers is what’s lost on the future education of our children."

By Jeanette Rundquist and Jessica Calefati/The Star-Ledger