New Year gift from the N.J. Turnpike Authority: Higher tolls
For the drivers who make 600 million trips a year on the Parkway and Turnpike, the New Year brings one thing that is unlikely to make any of them happy: A toll hike.

As of today, there will be a 53 percent toll hike on the Turnpike and 50 percent increase on the Parkway.

Beginning at 6:30 a.m., the average passenger vehicle toll will rise from $2.20 to $3.30 on the Turnpike and 70 cents to $1.05 on the Parkway. The average truck toll will increase from $7.95 to $12.15 on the Turnpike and $1.40 to $2.15 on the Parkway.

A passenger vehicle trip from Turnpike Exit 14 in Newark to Exit 9 in East Brunswick will jump from $2.85 to $4.35.

The hike is the second part of a two-phase toll increase adopted by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority under Gov. Jon Corzine in October 2008.

The first phase brought increases of 43 percent on the Parkway and 40 percent on the Turnpike, so in a short time, tolls have almost doubled.

Cathleen Lewis, director of public affairs for AAA New Jersey Automobile Club, said the money from the toll hikes is necessary for road and bridge repairs, but New Jersey needs to create a sustainable solution for its perennially cash-strapped Transportation Trust Fund. The fund, which pays for road and bridge repairs and transit projects, had been raided over the years to help balance the state budget.

Meanwhile, New Jersey’s gas tax, third lowest in America at 10.5 cents a gallon, has remained untouched.

In a statement, Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D-N.J.) blasted Gov. Chris Christie, asking why the toll increases were implemented despite the governor's decision in 2010 to cancel the ARC tunnel.

"It's shameful that New Jersey commuters are paying more without getting more in return," Lautenberg said. "The governor was quick to cancel the badly needed tunnel, but flat-out refused to cancel the associated toll increase."

Related coverage:

• Parkway, Turnpike commuters brace for 50 percent increases

• Toll hike hearings in New York and New Jersey draw supporters and opponents

• A $65 Turnpike Toll?: Questioning Corzine's Toll Hike Plan