Rand Paul says he and Christie should share a beer to 'kiss and make up'
TRENTON — U.S. Sen. Rand Paul says it's time for he and Gov. Chris Christie to sit down, share a beer, and put an end to their recent feud.

The popular Republicans — and possible 2016 presidential candidates — have been embroiled in a spat the last week over national security and government spending.

But during a television interview on Fox News today, Paul called for a truce.

"With Gov. Christie, it's gotten a little too personal, so we're ready to kiss and makeup," the Kentucky senator told Fox's Neil Cavuto. "I think it's time to dial it down. I think we've got enough Democrats to attack and maybe Republicans can quit attacking Republicans."

Cavuto questioned whether there's a chance of a Christie-Paul ticket in the next presidential election, the senator smiled.

"We're going to have to patch things up," he said. "If we can sit down. I'm inviting him for a beer. Anytime he would like to come down and sit down at the pub right around the corner from the Senate and have a beer. We'll formalize it, we'll put it in writing but I think we could sit down and have a beer and mend things."

It's likely Christie will address the quarrel during his radio show tonight on 101.5-FM.

Political experts have said the feud could be a preview of the 2016 Republican presidential primary race — and also an example of the growing rift in the GOP between libertarians like Paul and more traditional Republicans like Christie.

Paul also called for a truce during a radio interview on the show "New Hampshire Today" this afternoon.

"I didn't pick this recent fight with the governor down in New Jersey, but I think the party does better if we have less infighting," he said. "So I would suggest if he wants to ratchet it down, I’m more than happy to."

RELATED COVERAGE

• Christie vs. Paul: Feud between popular Republicans heightens over spending

• Rand Paul blasts Christie as national security spat continues

• Chris Christie, Rand Paul trade words over national security

• More Politics