Chris Christie says 'Bridgegate' nothing more than partisan politics
I heard Senator Baroni's testimony. I don't assume people are lying, especially not people like Senator Baroni who I have known for a very long time.

Gov. Chris Christie today downplayed the recent flap over September lane closures at the George Washington Bridge, despite investigations under way at the state and federal level.

The lane closures have become a national story as well as a thorn in the governor's side and have resulted in the resignations of two high-ranking Port Authority of New York and New Jersey officials. National Democrats have seized on the issue in an attempt to embarrass Christie, considered among the front-runners for the 2016 GOP presidential nomination.

Officials at the agency said the lane closures at the Fort Lee side of the bridge were done to gauge the impact on traffic if the lanes, currently used for local commuters were diverted for use by highway traffic.

No traffic study has yet been produced but Christie said today he has no reason to doubt the explanation given by Deputy Executive Director Bill Baroni during testimony before the Assembly Transportation Committee.

"I heard Senator Baroni's testimony, he said. "I don't assume people are lying, especially not people like Senator Baroni who I have known for a very long time. I believe Senator Baroni when he tells me that and there has been no evidence presented to the contrary."

The governor was asked if he believes the investigations underway by state and federal lawmakers as well as the Port Authority's Office of the Inspector General were the result of partisan politics.

He stopped short of accusing U.S. Sen. Jay Rockefeller - the chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee who earlier this week sent a letter to Port Authority officials seeking answers about the incident – or the OIG of playing politics, however he said there is no question that state Democrats are guilty.

"Inside the statehouse there is no doubt that there is," Christie said referring to legislative Democrats.

Democrats charge that the lane closures were designed as political payback for Fort Lee Mayor Mark Sokolich's failure to endorse Christie during his reelection campaign. Christie has denied the claim, saying he doesn't remember ever meeting Sokolich, never mind seeking his endorsement.

"I don't ever remember even meeting the mayor of Fort Lee and I certainly don't remember getting any briefings at any time from campaign staff that this was someone who was on our radar screen as a potential endorser," Christie said. "That's why none of this makes any sense to me and I think in the end what it will be shown to be is rank speculation from folks who want to play political games."

The governor singled out the Wall Street Journal, the paper that broke the initial stories on Sokolich's displeasure with the lane closure, saying that when all is said and done, the newspaper will owe Baroni and Director of Interstate Capital Projects David Wildstein, the other executive who resigned, an apology.