Trump eminent domain comment rekindles his 1990s Atlantic City property battle
ATLANTIC CITY -- It was an epic property battle that pitted casino owner Donald Trump against an elderly Atlantic City widow in the mid-1990s.

Now, two decades later, memories of the years-long standoff have suddenly resurfaced as Trump continues to seek the Republican presidential nomination.

The billionaire businessman received some blowback Tuesday when he said during an interview with Fox News that eminent domain -- which allows the government to seize private property for development -- is "wonderful."

"When it comes to jobs, roads, the public good, I think it's a wonderful thing," said the real estate mogul, who is leading his 14 rivals for the 2016 GOP nomination -- including New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie -- in the polls. "I fully understand the conservative approach, but I don't think it was explained to most conservatives."

RELATED: Trump's time in Atlantic City comes under fire in GOP debate

His comments go against many conservative and libertarian-leaning Republicans, who argue that eminent domain permits the government to overreach its bounds and snatch land away from citizens unfairly.

Trump argued Tuesday that the government often uses the process for public projects like new roadways or for private projects that will help improve an area and create jobs. He added that the government is required to offer compensation for the land and that owners are often given more than their property is worth.

"Most of the time, they just want money," Trump said. "It's very rarely they say, 'I love my house, I love my house, it's the greatest thing ever.' Because these people could buy a house now, that's five times bigger, in a better location."

The issue, however, has caused Trump to once again field questions about his fight with Vera Coking 20 years ago -- an era when the businessman owned three Atlantic City casinos.

Coking had been the owner of a three-story boarding home on Columbia Place, at the mouth of the Atlantic City Expressway, since 1961. In the early 1980s, Penthouse founder Bob Guccione offered her $1 million for the land so he could build a casino there. But she refused.

So, Guiccione began building his casino around the house, with its skeleton beams towering over her roof. The project, however, went bust.

Trump soon erected his own casino in the neighborhood: Trump Plaza, which opened in 1984.

And in the early 1990s, Trump reportedly made Coking a similar $1 million offer with the hopes of expanding the land around the Plaza to include a park, a parking lot, and a waiting area for limousines. Coking refused again.

That's when the New Jersey Casino Reinvestment Development Authority stepped in, filing a lawsuit using eminent domain to condemn Coking's property and offer her $251,000 for it. Coking refused yet again -- and sued.

Jim Whelan, a frequent Trump critic who served as Atlantic City's mayor at the time, told NJ Advance Media that this was one area where he actually agreed with the casino tycoon.

"That property was a dump," Whelan recalled this past week. "It was in the middle of the block where Trump Plaza was surrounding it on two, almost three, sides. The property was in disrepair. It was a blight on the city."

But in 1998, a state Superior Court judge threw out the case, saying there was no guarantee for how Trump would use the land -- that he possibly could use it to expand casino floor space.

"The primary interest served here is a private rather than a public one and, as such, the actions cannot be justified under the law," Judge Robert Williams said.

In an interview with the New York Daily News at the time, Coking called Trump a "maggot, a cockroach, and a crumb."

Coking moved into a retirement community in California in 2011, and her home sold to a mystery bidder last year for $530,000 -- almost half of what Guccione and Trump reportedly offered.

The bidder was later revealed to be Carl Icahn, the billionaire who had taken over the Trump Taj Mahal last year. The house was demolished in November, shortly after Trump Plaza closed. It is unclear what Icahn plans to do with the tract.

Asked about the case during the Fox News interview Tuesday, Trump said Coking "made a terrible mistake" by holding onto the land.

"I was going to expand a hotel, put in thousands of rooms," said the businessman, who no longer owns any casinos in Atlantic City. "I had the one house in the way. We would have had, probably, 1,400 employees getting jobs."

In the end, though, Trump said Coking "saved me a fortune."

"I should send her a letter," he quipped.

Eminent domain became easier for the government in 2005, when when the U.S. Supreme Court delivered what is now known as the Kelo decision. The ruling said the government can seize land for private use as long as the new owner paid more in taxes than the previous one.

At the time, Trump said he agreed with the decision "100 percent."

Earlier this year, when conservative anti-tax group Club For Growth launched a $1 million advertising campaign against Trump's presidential candidacy, one of the commercials criticized him for his support of eminent domain.

"He can make millions while we lose our property rights," the ad said.

In August, the most libertarian-leaning of Trump's rivals for the Republican nod, U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, also called the businessman out on the issue, saying he has "really shown no consideration for small private property owners."

And in the wake of Trump's comments supporting eminent domain this week, U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida -- one of his closest competitors for the nomination -- said Trump is "wrong about that."

"One of the most important rights that Americans have is private property," Rubio told reporters in New Hampshire, according to a report by CNN.

In an interview with conservative website Breitbart News on Thursday, Trump said "it would have been easy to say I'm totally against eminent domain."

"But that is not a fair thing to say because without it, states couldn't function," he said.

Trump did note that he is against using the process for private gain.

"If you were going it to rip down a house and build another house, no way," he said. "But if you're going to build a factory that's going to have 5,000 jobs, that's entirely different."

Brent Johnson may be reached at bjohnson@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @johnsb01. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.