Ask the Governor: Terry McAuliffe Aug. 26
by Amanda Iacone , wtop.com Gov. McAuliffe answers a question during "Ask the Governor" Aug. 26, 2015. (WTOP/Amanda Iacone)





WASHINGTON — Gov. Terry McAuliffe said that Wednesday's triple shooting in Franklin County demonstrates why tougher gun restrictions are needed in Virginia and the country.





"There's too much gun violence in this nation. We wake up every single day, in some part of this great nation, someone has been innocently gunned down," McAuliffe said following WTOP's "Ask the Governor" program that aired after a gunman shot and killed a TV reporter and cameraman and injured the woman they had been interviewing.





He called the shooting unimaginable.





"A young woman 24, a young man of 27, in the prime of their lives. Their lives are over today. Somebody needs to be held accountable for that. We need to stop it," he said.





Virginia is no stranger to headline-grabbing gun violence. In 2007, 32 people were killed at Virginia Tech by a single gunman.





During the program, McAuliffe said he's twice asked the General Assembly to rein in guns in the state and twice lawmakers' rebuffed his efforts .





"It never sees the light of day," he said of his legislation, reforms that he campaigned on as a candidate for governor.





During the legislative session last winter, McAuliffe wanted to reinstate a limit on how many handguns an individual can buy a month to just one. He also wanted to prevent convicted domestic abusers and those subject to a protective order from carrying a handgun. And he wanted to ensure that individuals undergo a background check when they make purchases at guns shows .





McAuliffe says when he's bought his hunting rifles he had to go through a background check, a process that took just a few minutes. He says everyone should have to go through a similar process.





"There are certain people who should not be entitled to own a firearm," he said. He pledged to continue pushing for gun legislation despite the lack of interest from lawmakers who instead have passed bills that allowed Virginians to carry loaded shotguns in their vehicles and on public roads and dealing with the acquisition of machine guns — bills that he vetoed.





"It's just tragic that this kind of legislation cannot be passed and signed into law," he said.





McAuliffe said that the General Assembly's stance on gun laws is a result of elections. "People need to vote," he said.