Consultant tapped for state solar study too close to fossil fuels industry, companies say
A coalition of Louisiana solar companies is urging the Public Service Commission to fire the consultant it hired to study how electricity rates should be set for solar customers statewide and reopen the bidding process for the contract. The companies say the consultant's close ties to the oil and gas and utility industry pose a direct conflict of interest.

In a letter Tuesday (July 1) to PSC staff, the Gulf States Renewable Energy Industries Association and 14 solar companies, including Joule Energy, PosiGen and Solar Alternatives of New Orleans, pointed to Acadian Consulting Group's history of conducting economic studies for oil and gas and utility customers.

The letter also says the firm's principal, David Dismukes, has publicly criticized renewable energy subsidies, while praising those for fossil fuels.

The PSC selected Dismukes and his firm in May to conduct a study of the costs and benefits linked to increased solar use, specifically, what rates customers who have solar panels should be paid when they sell the power they don't use back to the power company, a practice known as "net metering."

C. Tucker Crawford, president of the Gulf States Renewable Energy Industries Association, said the solar industry wants to see a fair, unbiased study of the costs and benefits of net metering.

But he said Dismukes and his firm are not cut out for the job. They have no experience in solar policy and a clear bias against renewable energy in general, he said.

"What we have now is not fair and it is not impartial," Crawford said.

PSC Spokesman Colby Cook said in an email Tuesday morning the commission had yet to receive the complaint, but said it "has a fair and impartial process for hiring outside consultants."

Dimukes said in an email that he could not comment on the complaint.

The companies' complaint comes as the debate over the growing use of solar and its impact on how customers statewide use and pay for electricity grows increasingly heated.

Solar installations are on the rise as homeowners take advantage of lucrative state and federal tax credits.

Because solar panels generate electricity during the day -- when most people are at school or at work -- many solar customers wind up selling that electricity back to their utility in exchange for credits to offset the power they buy from the utility at night.

Critics say the credits solar customers get on their monthly bills for the electricity they produce are too high and unfairly shift the burden of paying for repairs and upgrades to power lines and other infrastructure to non-solar customers. They have suggested raising rates on homeowners with solar panels.

The solar industry has called for an informed and measured approach to changing the rates solar users get for the power their panels produce.

The PSC last year imposed a hard cap on the amount of power solar users can export to a single utility as it studies how net metering changes will impact customers.

Solar companies are worried that some utilities may soon hit that cap, which sits at 0.5 percent of all power delivered.

Commission Chairman Eric Skrmetta, who made the motion for the commission to do a net metering study earlier this year, said he and fellow commissioners need more economic data before they can consider lifting that cap.

Skrmetta said he is confused as to why the solar industry wants to delay that effort.

He said Acadian Consulting Group was selected as the best consultant for the job after a fair and impartial vetting process.

He noted two other consultants bid on the contract. One was disqualified because it was testifying against the PSC on another matter. The other was disqualified for poor past performance, although the specific reasons are confidential, he said.

Skrmetta said he has reviewed the solar industry's concerns, but doesn't think Dismuke's past work or his personal opinion on solar energy is relevant. He said the study is asking what rate structure is best for solar and non-solar customers, not whether solar should exist.

"All I'm trying to do is find out what works financially," Skrmetta said. "The rest of it on a philosophical basis is not really an issue."

But Crawford said there are red flags the solar industry can't ignore.

He noted Acadian Consulting Group has received direct funding from industry groups on several research projects, including $20,000 from the America's Natural Gas Alliance for a report that was critical of federal wind energy subsidies.

As Louisiana State Unversity's The Daily Reveille first reported in March, Dismukes' 2012 research on the impact of oil and gas legacy lawsuits on Louisiana's oil and gas industry came under fire after public records requests showed he used data provided by ExxonMobil and concealed oil companies' involvement in his research.

The newspaper also reported Dismukes in March 2012 crashed his car into the car of a process server who said Dismukes was attempting to avoid being served a subpoena related to the 2012 study.

The incident is highlighted in the solar companies' complaint.

"We'd like to see a company that shows evidence that they can be fair and impartial," Crawford said. "With Acadian we don't see that evidence."

Forest Bradley-Wright, utility policy director for the Alliance for Affordable Energy, said the solar companies' complaint raise a number of valid concerns.

Bradley-Wright said the net metering issue has been on the PSC's agenda for the better part of two years, and the commission's handling of the matter has been increasingly fraught with problems.

He said the first consultant the commission selected to produce a report on net metering in early 2013 had no prior solar policy experience.

Earlier this year, the PSC issued its first request for proposals for a broader net metering cost-benefit study, but the request was confusing and unclear and was later retracted, Bradley-Wright said.

The PSC issued a revised request, but only gave bidders 15 days to respond, well below the 25 the PSC's own rules require, he said.

The PSC rejected those bids amid criticism and issued a second request for proposals, though, this time, the commission said it would not publicly release the bids, he said.

Bradley-Wright said it's not surprising that interested parties have complaints about the process.

"The commission needs to recognize that the way it's been handling this issue is inconsistent with good public process," Bradley-Wright said. "It's time that they provide leadership and show that they're going to be fair arbiters of this process and create extra space for these conversations to happen. They need to go back to the drawing board."

The PSC did not immediately respond to a request for comment on how the commission will handle the complaint moving forward.

Skrmetta said it's unlikely the commission will be able to consider the compliant before August.

Acadian Consulting Group is due to complete its analysis by November.