Entergy rates rising for customers outside New Orleans
Entergy Louisiana customers will see their monthly electricity bill go up by an average of 47 cents starting Monday, the result of a rate hike approved by utility regulators a year ago. Altogether, rates are going up by $10 million per year.

The Louisiana Public Service Commission endorsed the three-year agreement in December 2013 as part of a regular, continuing analysis of base electricity rates statewide. The increase affects Entergy Louisiana customers in Jefferson, Plaquemines and St. Bernard parishes, as well as the River Parishes and a small part of St. Tammany Parish.

Rates for Entergy Louisiana customers in Algiers and Entergy New Orleans customers in New Orleans are not affected. Those areas are regulated separately by the New Orleans City Council.

Starting Monday, the typical Entergy Louisiana customer, using 1,000 kilowatt-hours of power per month, will pay an extra 47 cents per month, according to figures provided by the utility. The rate increase will generate $30 million in additional revenue for Entergy Louisiana over the three-year agreement.

Entergy Louisiana had originally requested a $44 million increase. The Public Service Commission reduced the increase to $10 million per year over three years and approved the settlement in a 3-2 vote.

Under a separate agreement, the commission approved a plan to hold off rate increases for Entergy Gulf States customers until 2016 at the earliest. Entergy Gulf States serves customers in parts of central and south Louisiana, including East Baton Rouge Parish.

Entergy Louisiana and Entergy Gulf States also agreed to lower the authorized rate of profit they are allowed to earn on investments. Under state law, Entergy and its subsidiaries are allowed to earn a certain, set amount of profit on investments in Louisiana. That rate was lowered from 10.4 percent to 9.95 percent under the December 2013 agreement.

In addition to Entergy and state regulators, organizations including AARP, Walmart, and the Alliance for Affordable Energy, a New Orleans-based consumer advocacy group, were involved in hammering out the details of the settlement.

Entergy Louisiana and Entergy Gulf States serve more than 1 million customers in 58 parishes.