Bill Cassidy a key architect of flood insurance legislation, Grimm says: Letter
Recently, the House of Representatives and the Senate passed my legislation, the "Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2014," by an overwhelming margin. This legislation will provide immediate, long-term relief from the draconian rate increases that homeowners across Louisiana would have faced under the Biggert-Waters Act of 2012. The process to bring this critical legislation across the finish line was by no means easy and would not have been possible without the hard work and leadership of Rep. Bill Cassidy of Baton Rouge.

Dr. Cassidy was an early, passionate voice of the urgent need to reform Biggert-Waters. In May 2013, he formed the Congressional Home Protection Caucus in order to bring to light the looming threat that Biggert-Waters posed to homeowners in flood plains throughout the country. This effort was undertaken at a time when no one thought it would be possible to do anything to help flood-prone residents avoid devastating premium hikes and foreclosures.

However, in June 2013, Dr. Cassidy, along with myself and Rep. Steven Palazzo, successfully added the Cassidy/Grimm/Palazzo Amendment to the 2014 Homeland Security Appropriations bill. This amendment delayed FEMA from implementing Section 207, which would have ended grandfathering. This amendment represented the first successful legislative attempt at stopping the unintended consequences of Biggert-Waters.

Dr. Cassidy continued to work side-by-side with me in educating our fellow members of the pressing need to make substantial changes to Biggert-Waters. Because of his persistent efforts, we found ourselves in the position, which most thought impossible, of being able to improve our legislation and provide even more relief than the Senate bill, which passed on Jan. 30. Working with Majority Leader Eric Cantor, rather than just delay the most onerous parts of Biggert-Waters, we repealed them. These changes, known as the Grimm-Cassidy Substitute Amendment, restored grandfathering, repealed the devastating home sale trigger, lowered the cap on annual rate increases and refunded excessive premiums paid because of Biggert-Waters. This bill is also paid for by small assessments on all National Flood Insurance Program policies and will actually reduce the federal deficit by $165 million over the next five years.

I am extremely grateful to Dr. Cassidy for being such a dedicated partner in our efforts to protect homeowners throughout the country. Without his contributions, the House's ability to forestall the catastrophic effects of Biggert-Waters and pass a far-reaching relief bill for the hard-working folks from the Big Apple to the Big Easy may never have been realized at all.

Rep. Michael G. Grimm

11th Congressional District

Staten Island, New York