Belleville senior housing, Christie under scrutiny

STAFF WRITER

Belleville Times

More than six months after public officials broke ground, the long-awaited, $18 million senior housing project at Mill Street and Franklin Avenue in Belleville seems to have stalled, at least outwardly.

DALE MINCEY/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Buy or license this photo Following a May press conference, officials, including New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, ceremonially break ground on a new senior housing development to be built in Belleville, near the senior center on Mill Street. The project has come under fire for funds being used toward the building.

The town council was part of a contingent that broke ground on the Franklin Manor project site in May 2013 with ceremonial shovels. The group included Belleville Mayor Ray Kimble, along with Gov. Chris Christie, Sen. Teresa Ruiz, and Essex County Executive Joe DiVincenzo, Jr.

According to the Associated Press last month, however, Christie allegedly diverted $6 million to the project from Hurricane Sandy relief funds, even though Belleville wasn’t hit as hard as some other areas of the state by the late October 2012 superstorm, particularly the Jersey shore.

Just a couple weeks later, Kimble, a Democrat, joined other local officials in endorsing Christie for reelection.

The AP article said that Kimble told The Star-Ledger that his endorsement of the governor had nothing to do with Christie's releasing the funds, and that it was the developer of Franklin Manor who applied for the money and not the township.

Kimble did not return a call last week seeking comment.

The Christie administration said in the article that the Belleville project could provide homes in relatively short order for individuals who were displaced by Sandy, and that the project scored well on criteria used in judging funding requests. It was also said to be one of 20 similar projects funded with federal money that the state controlled.

Christie has been under fire recently for the role his staffers seemed to have played in fashioning delays on the George Washington Bridge for political reasons. The governor was roundly booed in New York City on Saturday at a hand-off event of the Super Bowl from the metropolitan area to Arizona, where next year’s NFL championship game will take place. He subsequently a kept low profile at Sunday’s game at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford.

Belleville Second Ward Councilman Steven Rovell said it was his understanding that Franklin Manor was an age-restricted complex for individuals ages 55 and older who had fixed, low to moderate incomes.

"It’s something to keep people in Belleville, and allow them to continue to live in the town they love," said Rovell.