NJ Senate to investigate MVC computer crash

Wednesday, July 13, 2011 Last updated: Wednesday July 13, 2011, 7:25 AM

The computer crash that crippled Motor Vehicle Commission offices Monday has prompted lawmakers to investigate how to improve the state's mainframe system — and the agency that has kept motorists waiting in long lines for months.

CHRIS MONROE / SPECIAL TO THE RECORD The Motor Vehicle Commissions office in Lodi early Monday, July 11, 2011.

Calling the four-hour breakdown a "flash point," state Sen. Robert Gordon, D-Fair Lawn, said Tuesday that Senate Democrats have agreed to a budget committee hearing, preferably in Lodi, "to determine exactly what happened at motor vehicle offices there and elsewhere and how it relates to budget considerations and weaknesses in our information technology system."

"We need to bring in everybody involved and ask why this systemic breakdown occurred and what can be done to keep agencies like the MVC running smoothly," Gordon said.

Questions to be answered, he said, include: Is an upgrade needed? Is the system flexible enough? Should it be farmed out to experts? And was the breakdown related to austerity constraints?

Gordon's queries matched the thoughts expressed by some motorists standing in long MVC lines on Monday, Tuesday and on previous occasions:

"Why do they lie to us?" asked Ed Gallagher.

He was turned away from the Oakland office after the crash on Monday with his daughter, Allison, who was given a "pass" designed to send her to the front of the line on Tuesday morning.

"But when we returned today [Tuesday], the officer at the door said they couldn't honor the pass because it would 'create a riot' since too many passes had been issued."

The Norwood pair was luckier than most. Gallagher said they were given a number and allowed to sit inside — for 2 1/2 hours. Waits were even longer for those without passes who stood on a long line outside.

Monday's computer crash recalled a similar one on June 28 when, according to Anthony Pasquinucci, he and scores of others walked off the Oakland line after an MVC supervisor advised them to "go home and don't bother going to another office because they're all down across the state."

"This system is a waste of people's time and taxpayer money," said the Glen Rock man. "There is something really, really wrong for those systems not to be reliable and available on the first day of the week."

Until this week, Tuesdays marked the beginning of the MVC's five-day workweek — a break from the traditional six-day week, which ended last August when the Christie administration inaugurated an austerity program designed to save $4 million. Long lines started at many of the 39 offices within months of the five-day week, which coincided with the closing of several offices, including locations in Franklin Lakes and Wyckoff.

MVC Chief Administrator Raymond Martinez returned Mondays to the schedule this week, but computers crashed just before 9 a.m., about an hour into the day.

MVC officials declined to comment Tuesday, but on Monday, Martinez offered no apology for the closings that had led to the long lines. Instead, he insisted that returning Monday to the schedule would not cause his operation to lose the $4 million saved last year "because we're merely rearranging staff hours to cover six days instead of five."

Couldn't the six-day plan now in place have produced the same savings without creating long lines?

"We were responding to a budget crisis at the time," he said, noting that Mondays drew the fewest customers. "But we listened to our customers and gave them back what they wanted. We're a service agency. We listen."

Meanwhile, a spokeswoman for the state Office of Information Technology said Monday's crash, which also affected the New Jersey State Police and the Department of Labor and Workforce Management, had been traced to "a mainframe problem."

"The backup tape of our hard drive got log-jammed," said Shelley Bates. "We don't yet know the cause of it. We're still investigating."

Bates called such breakdowns unusual, "not periodic," but "we have a great deal of information that goes through our equipment."

Gordon, co-chairman of the Senate's state government committee, called Trenton's mainframe system "a dinosaur" that needs updating.