Opinion: Give New Jersey’s working class a break

BY LORETTA WEINBERG

The Record

OK, GOVERNOR, you and your $290,000-a-year man at the Port Authority – the one with the tollpayer-funded car and the generous housing allowance – had your “Gotcha!” moment with Sen. Frank Lautenberg over his claiming a toll perk as a former commissioner of the Port Authority. Bravo. The tone of political discourse is certainly all the richer for this latest bit of character assassination in the U.S. Capitol.

Now that we’ve gone through that bit of political theater of the absurd, can we get back to the important issues affecting the people that we all represent?

Can we finally get an accounting of why tolls are so high at the crossings between New Jersey and New York? Can we find a way to bring down some of the planned increases in those tolls? Can we, for once, cut the middle-class drivers commuting to and from work a break from politics, and a break from back-breaking tolls?

These continue to be serious issues, and people expect answers. Instead, they’re met with more political gamesmanship. And unfortunately, the latest dust-up over lavish Port Authority perks and burdensome toll hikes isn’t the first time – nor will it likely be the last – that Governor Christie and his administration attempted to paper over legitimate concerns with partisan sleight-of-hand.

When we attempted to reauthorize funding for women’s health care programs in New Jersey – funding that would have brought in far more federal dollars than we were seeking from the state – Christie claimed that we couldn’t afford it.

The truer motive wasn’t that we didn’t have the funds, it was that rejecting funds for women’s health care plays well with the conservative base that the governor is courting so that he can one day run for federal office.

Helicopter travel

Since Christie took office, the state has paid $217,700 for his liberal use of a helicopter to travel to and from public appearances – and in some cases political events. Just think how many tolls $217,700 could have paid for. And how many tolls did the governor avoid paying by flying over the toll booths?

The governor would, I’m sure, defend his use of the helicopter as the cost of doing the people’s business. Certainly, there are times when the state’s chief executive has to get somewhere quickly, and there are times when a helicopter is a safer alternative than driving to your destination.

But given the number of days he’s spent on national politics rather than New Jersey public business, I think the taxpayers of the state should expect to get something for their troubles.