Christie expects tax deal soon : page all
Competing plans

Governor Christie's call for a 10 percent income-tax cut is one of three competing tax-relief proposals up for debate in Trenton right now. The governor and lawmakers have until July 1 to adopt a balanced budget, with negotiations on tax-relief plans put forward by Christie, Senate President Steve Sweeney and Assembly Democrats expected to heat up next week.

What is Christie's plan?

Back in January, the governor rolled out a 10 percent, across-the-board income-tax cut that he wants phased in over three calendar years beginning in 2013. Christie's tax cut would be applied to the state's income-tax rates, meaning that everyone in all tax brackets would simply pay less in income taxes. And since it's an across-the-board percentage cut, the biggest savings would be realized by taxpayers with the largest incomes. The governor estimates the first phase would cost $183 million in lost revenue in the new budget year, which begins on July 1, and an estimated $1 billion by the final year after all three phases were enacted.

What is Sweeney's plan?

The Senate president proposed a new income-tax credit for middle-class homeowners in March as a counter to Christie's plan. Homeowners making up to $250,000 annually could apply for the credit — which would equal up to 10 percent of the first $10,000 paid in property taxes after a four-year phase-in — on their state income-tax returns. This plan would cost the state about the same as Christie's in the new budget year. But since the tax credit would be directly linked to property taxes, it would end up costing nearly $1.4 billion by 2015 because of assumed growth.

What is the Assembly Democrats' plan?

Also put forward in March, the proposal spearheaded by Assembly Majority Leader Lou Greenwald, D-Camden, is much like Sweeney's plan, with two differences: The income-tax credit would equal 20 percent of the first $10,000 paid in property taxes by those earning up to $250,000. And it would boost the income-tax rate paid by millionaires from 8.97 percent to 10.75 percent. Once fully phased in, the plan would cost more than $2 billion a year.

What does the state already offer as a property-tax credit?

Christie and the Democrats scrapped the Homestead Rebate checks of prior years to help solve budget problems in 2010, opting instead to create a more modest direct credit on local property tax bills issued by municipalities. That credit, now called the Homestead Benefit, is offered to homeowners earning up to $75,000 annually and to senior and disabled homeowners earning up to $150,000 annually. Qualified applicants would still receive the Homestead credits, which average $408 and $516, respectively, with or without any new tax-cut or tax-credit deal.