Governor helps announce plans for first-ever senior housing complex in Belleville : page 2
Governor helps announce plans for first-ever senior housing complex in Belleville

STAFF WRITER

Belleville Times

"I'm so happy," said Bowie, who sold her home several years ago and now lives in an apartment. "I'm so happy it's coming true."

Kimble spoke about how the building would be constructed on unused Northern Suffolk railroad property, and how the project had made use of community block grants. He also mentioned the partnership that had taken place between the county executive, the governor, and the Mill Street Urban Renewal LLC, which is currently working on creating applications and the application process for Franklin Manor.

"We have advanced a mere proposal to reality, so seniors can remain in the town where they belong," finished Kimble, who added that he was grateful to Christie for his support.

Details for the application process for Franklin Manor were not definitively pointed out, although it may entail a lottery of some kind.

"The conversation has been going for over 40 years, why doesn't Belleville have a senior building? ... (Belleville) is no longer a stepchild," said DiVincenzo.

Christie, who had spent Tuesday with President Obama at the recuperating Jersey Shore, called the new senior housing building a worthy project that was long overdue. He also reiterated the notion that people who grew up in town and raised their children here shouldn't have to leave simply to obtain affordable housing in their later years.

Belleville officials said they were committed to making sure that Belleville residents were kept in the loop regarding applications, and would work to also give them first preference in obtaining senior housing. Belleville Interim Township Manager Kevin Esposito said that the developer would meet with the senior club presidents, an idea that was proposed at the previous night's township council meeting.

"It's an amazing accomplishment," said Belleville Deputy Mayor Vincent Cozzarelli. "It was different levels of government working together."

Councilman Michael Nicosia said that two previous Belleville senior housing proposal rejections by Housing and Urban Development had proven frustrating, but had also forced town officials to stay focused.

"It's for a good cause, and is sorely needed," he said. "We found a way to get it done."

Email: uschak@northjersey.com