Smokefree Cars
Cigarettes Can Saturate Car's Interior with Toxins, Endangering Health of Children

The News Wheel - April 27, 2017



The dangers of smoking have been well-documented, and even the dangers of secondhand smoke have been widely explained and accepted. But, have you heard about third-hand smoke exposure and the serious complications and illnesses it can cause? According to Naveed Saleh, M.D., M.S., and writer for PsychologyToday.com, “research suggests that smoking in the closed environment of a car seriously pollutes the interior with nicotine and other smoke pollutants. Such nicotine pollution constitutes third-hand exposure.” Saleh noted that “because the average American spends more than an hour a day driving in a car, exposure to pollutants covering car surfaces add up. Moreover, total smoke pollution can linger in a car’s interior for days, weeks, or months.” ...



Is it illegal to smoke in a car around children? Yes...and no

AL.com - July 26, 2016



Virginia is the latest state to make it illegal to smoke in a car if children are present. The state's ban, which went into effect July 1, prohibits smoking around ...

Thank you for not smoking with minors in car

Thegardenisland.com - July 21, 2016



Supporters of the bill said it protects children from secondhand smoke by ... Kaneshiro questioned how banning smoking in a car is protecting a child when the ...



Smoking ban in cars with children on Gov. McAuliffe's desk

WWBT NBC12 News - March 17, 2016



"I don't see the point. No more laws," said smoker, Shirley Moore, who has smoked for over 40 years and switched to vaping within the last few years. When her ...

Virginia Smoking Ban in Car With Children

Delmarva Public Radio - March 15, 2016



(AP) - Smoking cigarettes in a vehicle in the presence of young children may soon ... the bill awaiting the governor's signature would make it illegal to smoke in a ...



Virginia bill would fine drivers $100 for smoking in cars with young kids

Mashable - March 15, 2016



Virginia bill would fine drivers $100 for smoking in cars with young kids ... member of a group of states with laws that restrict smoking while driving with children

Diabetes Risk Increases By Cigarette Smoke Lingering In Homes, Cars

Health Aim - March 4, 2016



Diabetes risk is found to increase with cigarette smoke lingering in homes, cars and even clothes, according to a new study. Third hand smoke, as it's called, ...

Virginia Senate passes bill to penalize smoking while children are in car

Bristol Herald Courier (press release) (blog) - March 3, 2016



So it might have been a little unusual to see Chafin, now a conservative Republican state senator from Russell, stand up on the Senate floor Thursday to support of legislation that, in effect, restricts smoking. To Chafin, however, House Bill 1348 protects something more important than the right to consume some of a dwindling Virginia cash crop in a private setting. Our children deserve to be protected, he told colleagues in asking support for the legislation, which would prohibit smoking in vehicles when children under 8 years old are present. Violating the law would bring a $100 civil fine. We have all kinds of laws that protect our youth, he said. Automobiles are dangerous...and they are dangerous because they are also a confined space. Chafin pointed to studies that say concentration of exposure to secondhand smoke is 27 times greater in a confined space like a car. The science is there, he added, saying the legislation, sponsored by Del. Todd E. Pillion, R-Washington, is a bill that has come of time.



An old tobacco state moves to ban smoking in cars with kids on board

Washington Post - March 3, 2016



With no debate, the Senate voted 27 to 12 to prohibit smoking in a car carrying someone under 8. The House ... More than a half-dozen states have similar bans.

Health Professionals Back Ban On Smoking In Cars With Kids

Hartford Courant - March 2, 2016



Health Professionals Back Ban On Smoking In Cars With Kids ... seven states and Puerto Rico have laws banning smoking in vehicles with children present.



Getting There: By taking aim at smokers in cars, lawmakers may be ...

Fredericksburg.com - February 15, 2016



Proposed House Bill 1348, which would allow police to slap a $100 fine on anyone caught smoking in a car with a child, is the tip of the iceberg here.

Virginia Seeks To Pass Anti-Smoking Law for Children [VIDEO]

WBOC TV 16 - February 11, 2016



Only seven states currently have smoke free laws, according to the non-profit Americans for Non-Smokers' Rights. None are on Delamrva. State lawmakers in ...

Kerry Dougherty: First, smoking in the car. What's next: Smoking in your own home?

Virginian-Pilot - February 11, 2016



If theres one thing we know about Virginias General Assembly, its that bad ideas never die there. Besides, once a law is passed to prohibit smoking in cars, could a ban on smoking ... Pillion's pro

Smoking in a car with a young child could soon bring $100 fine

The Daily Progress - February 11, 2016



People caught smoking in a car with a child younger than 8 years old would face a $100 fine under legislation advancing in the House of Delegates. The bill would apply to any lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe, but not vapor-emitting electronic cigarettes, according to Pillion. Pillion has said he chose the age ...

Connecticut task force recommends banning smoking in cars with kids [VIDEO]

HLNtv.com - January 28, 2016



A legislative task force in Connecticut is recommending to lawmakers that they ban smoking in vehicles with children inside, CNN affiliate WFSB reports. The task force recommends banning smoking in cars with a passenger who is 18 years old or younger. First offense for breaking the proposed ban would be a warning. The second offense would warrant a $100 fine with the option to take an online education course instead, according to the recommendations of the task force.

VIDEO: Task force to decide on law banning smoking in cars with kids

WTNH-DT Channel 8 (New Haven, CT) - January 27, 2016



A task force is meeting today to discuss making it illegal to smoke in a car if there's a child in it. This follows years of unsuccessful tries to change smoking laws, but the co-chair of the task force tells News8, there's a real chance this time.

State task force to decide on law banning smoking in cars

Waterbury Republican American - January 25, 2016



HARTFORD (AP) A legislative task force is expected to decide whether to recommend that Connecticut lawmakers vote to ban smoking in vehicles when a child is inside.

Nanny State of the Week: Connecticut may outlaw smoking in many cars

Watchdog.org - January 11, 2016



With the habit already banned in most public spaces, private spaces are now coming ... Legislation in the state General Assembly would ban anyone from smoking ... Eight other states and Puerto Rico already have similar bans on the books, ...



Connecticut considering ban on smoking in cars with kids [VIDEO]

wwlp.com - January 11, 2016



(WWLP) Connecticut lawmakers are proposing a ban on smoking in cars with ... Smoking inside restaurants has been banned for years in Massachusetts and ...

EDITORIAL: Smoking ban in cars: When sharing isn't caring

Irish Times - December 21, 2015



...there are more toxic emissions from a single cigarette in a car than comes out of its exhaust. Who would deliberately add to the health risks facing children? ...



Legislators Study Ban On Smoking in Cars Carrying Children

Hartford Courant - December 1, 2015



Legislators Study Ban On Smoking in Cars Carrying Children ... Several states, including Maine, California and Arkansas, have passed similar bans. But at a ...

VIDEO: Lawmaker wants ban on smoking in car with child

Channel 3000/WISC-TV Ch. 3 (Madison, WI) - November 23, 2015



Smoking in a car with a child would be prohibited under a bill being circulated at the state Capitol .

Editorial: Connecticut lawmakers should leave car smoking ban to parents

Middletown Press - November 14, 2015



The proposed measure would ban smoking in a vehicle in which a child is present and heap fines on mothers and fathers, grandparents and anyone else who ...

Ban on smoking in vehicles carrying minors considered

West Hartford News - November 6, 2015



HARTFORD >> A bipartisan task force examining the issue of smoking in vehicles with minors present learned this week that theres no direct causality between secondhand smoke and asthma rates. Dr. Michelle Cloutier, director of the Asthma Center at Connecticut Childrens Medical Center, told the group theres a strong association between secondhand smoke and asthma, but no direct causality.

Ban on smoking in vehicles carrying minors considered

West Hartford News - November 5, 2015



HARTFORD >> A bipartisan task force examining the issue of smoking in vehicles with minors present learned this week that there's no direct causality between ...

Lawmakers to discuss smoking in cars with children present

WFSB - October 27, 2015



Lawmakers plan to look at the dangers of smoking in a vehicle with children ... last session calling for a ban on smoking in vehicles while minors are present.

Connecticut task force tackles issue of smoking in cars with minors ...

Torrington Register Citizen - October 27, 2015



"I think all smoking is bad. All secondhand smoke is bad," Cloutier said. "I just can't say based on the data that it causes asthma in any group or that it causes ...

What Other Vehicular Activities Do Statists Intend To Ban?

WEBCommentary - October 23, 2015



The Maryland legislature considered a proposal that would have outlawed smoking in a car with a child under eight years of age. Such measures raise a ...

Is it illegal to smoke in cars?

The Loquitur (Cabrini College) - October 21, 2015



The states that already have the law are: Ark. (14 and younger); Calif. (18 and younger); La. (13 and younger); Maine (16 and younger); Ore. (18 and younger); Utah (15 and younger) and Vt. (8 and under.) Numerous cities, including Bangor, Maine; Rockland...



Smoking in car leads to Facebook debate

The Sudbury Star - October 20, 2015



The Smoke-Free Ontario Act, which prohibits an occupant of a motor vehicle from smoking or having a lit cigarette inside while accompanied by another person ...



Italy to ban smoking in cars with pregnant women

Tobacco Reporter - October 19, 2015



Italy's cabinet last week approved the introduction of a ban on tobacco smoking in cars in the presence of children or pregnant women, according to an ANSA story. Other measures to be introduced include a ban on smoking in the vicinity of paediatric

Protect kids from second-hand smoke

Rochester Democrat and Chronicle - October 14, 2015



The New York State Senate is debating whether to make smoking illegal in a vehicle in which children younger than 14 are riding. As a pediatrician, I see ...

Italy bans smoking in cars carrying children

The Local.it - October 13, 2015



A report in April by the Smoke Free Partnership (SFP) concluded that 90 percent of people obey smoking laws in Italy, with only around three percent of ...



Scottish Parliament backs ban on smoking in cars with children

BBC News - October 8, 2015



A bill to ban smoking in cars carrying children has passed its first hurdle in the Scottish Parliament. MSPs voted unanimously in favour of the ...



Car smoking ban: Can you vape at the wheel with a child passenger

Gloucester Citizen - October 5, 2015



But where do you stand with e-cigarettes or vaping? The law does not currently cover the devices and using them is not an offence. It is also not illegal for a ...



Car Smoking Ban Takes Effect in the U.K.

U.S. News & World Report - October 1, 2015



The law, which affects England and Wales, bans smoking in cars while children younger than 18 are present, according to BBC News. According to the site, the ...



England bans smoking in cars with children inside

CBS News - October 1, 2015



The activist group Americans for Nonsmokers' Rights says seven states have laws prohibiting smoking in cars when children are present. The age limits range ...

Tempe smoking ban protects children in cars

Mesa Legend - September 27, 2015



For many years, people have been discussing the topic of smoking and its associated health risks. Doctors state that second-hand smoke causes more harm ...

Heard about new law making it illegal to smoke in a car around children?

AL.com - August 24, 2015



You've probably seen something on social media about a new law that prohibits people from smoking in a car when children are present. There is such a law, but it won't affect people in the U.S. ...



Proposed ban on smoking in some vehicles sparks controversy

19 Action News - August 18, 2015



"Senate Bill 89 would prohibit smoking in the car with a child that is 6 or under," she ... Tavares successfully pushed for a ban on smoking in public places in ...

Download: Should smoking in cars with children be illegal in Ohio?

fox8.com - August 17, 2015



It will soon be illegal to smoke in a vehicle that's carrying anyone under the age of ... starts Oct. 1 and is meant to protect young people from secondhand smoke.

NJ panel OKs bill banning smoking in vehicles when kids present

WPVI-TV Channel 6 (Philadelphia, PA) - June 15, 2015



The Health, Human Services and Senior Citizens committee passed the measure in an 8-0 vote Monday. Sen. Robert Gordon abstained from the vote, citing concerns that the measure encroached on drivers' privacy rights.

Bill would fine drivers for smoking in vehicles with minors

WWMT-TV - June 15, 2015



A bill has been introduced in the Michigan state House that would make it illegal to smoke in a vehicle while a minor is present. House Bill 4672 would pose a $500 fine to anyone who possessed a lit tobacco product in a motor vehicle if an individual under 18 was inside.

Drivers react to proposed east coast smoking bill [VIDEO]

WQOW TV News 18 - June 5, 2015



New Jersey lawmakers are debating a bill that would allow officers to ticket drivers for smoking with children in the car. That violation would cost $100. Drivers in our area weighed in on the proposed bill and told News 18 whether a similar measure should come to Wisconsin. We used to go on long trips, and he would smoke the whole time we were in the car. And, about a third of the time, it made me car sick. ... with said they would like to see more awareness about how second-hand smoke can affect children.

Lawmaker seeks to ban smoking in car with kids

Press of Atlantic City - June 6, 2015



Joseph Vitale said the measure he introduced last month would protect children from being exposed to tobacco products and electronic cigarettes in confined ...

N.J. bill introduced to ticket drivers smoking with children in vehicle

ABC Action News - June 4, 2015



A bill was recently introduced into the New Jersey state senate that would allow police to ticket drivers smoking with children passengers in their vehicles. The fine would reportedly be $100.

N.J. drivers who smoke with kids in car could face fines

NJ.com - June 2, 2015



... lawmaker wants to expand the list of banned activities while driving to include smoking if ... With the risks of second-hand smoke well-documented, it's time to stop ... have had ordinances banning drivers from smoking in cars with kids since 2007, ... State legislation to ban the practice in New Jersey was first introduced in ...

Editorial: Where there's smoke there's fine

Kdminer - May 24, 2015



Councilman Mark Abram summed it up nicely. "I feel it's sad we have to legislate stupidity," Abram said at Tuesday night's City Council meeting. The topic was a proposal to ban smoking in vehicles that are occupied by minors. "I'm conflicted ... at what point do we stop parents from giving their kids five Mountain Dews a day?" I'll help the Council member out here. The answer is "never." I won't question the good intentions of the four members of the Council who supported the new ordinance.

Tempe approves fines for smoking in cars with kids [VIDEO]

azcentral.com - May 22, 2015



Smokers will need to crush their cigarette butts before driving in Tempe with a kid in the backseat if they want to avoid a fine. Tempe's City Council unanimously passed an ordinance Thursday night that would fine drivers $50 for a first offense and $100 for subsequent violations if they smoke while a child is in the car. Matt Morales, executive director of the National Association of Vaping Businesses, said lumping e-cigarettes with tobacco damages the reputation of a safer alternative for those with a smoking habit.



Kingman bans smoking with kids in car

TriValley Central - May 22, 2015



Kingman drivers will have to put out their cigarettes if they have kids in the car under a new smoking ban that takes effect this summer. Council members narrowly approved the ban with a 4-3 vote Tuesday, making it a secondary offense to smoke in a car with people under the age of 18 present, the Kingman Daily Miner reported. However, Kingman Police cant pull over a suspected smoker unless that person commits a traffic offense that warrants a stop. E-cigarettes also are covered under the ban.



Rogue towns outlaw our right to give kids lung disease

azcentral.com - May 22, 2015



We've long known about the dangers of second-hand smoke. The bans include e-cigarettes. As Tempe Councilman David Schapira said, "Children are among ...

Kingman Passes Ban On Smoking With Kids In Car

KJZZ - May 21, 2015



KINGMAN, Ariz. - Kingman drivers will have to put out their cigarettes if they have kids in the car under a new smoking ban that takes effect this summer.

Bill Regulating In-Car Smoking in Illinois Fails

CBS Local - May 4, 2015



Smoke em if you got em, except in your own car? A bill trying to make the air inside cars cleaner for children has failed. Ira Silverstein (D-Chicago) sponsored a bill he said intended to protect children from second-hand smoke. The bill would have outlawed smoking in a vehicle ...

Tempe Could Be First AZ City to Ban Smoking with Kids in Car

Public News Service - May 1, 2015



Tempe could become Arizona's first city to ban smoking with children in the car.

Smoking in cars ban fails in Senate

Peoria Public Radio - April 29, 2015



Some skeptics, like Republican Senator Dave Syverson from Rockford, wondered how much good it would do for children whose parents smoke. "These children are going to be in the same home with these parents 24 hours a day, so that little bit of time in the vehicle, is it--does it really have that kind of an impact than what--than what's happening with their lives anyways?" The Illinois African-American Family Commission spoke out against the bill. The group is concerned it would lead to racial profiling.

Tempe weighs ban on smoking while children are in car [VIDEO]

azcentral.com - April 27, 2015



The Tempe City Council continued to consider a proposed ordinance that would fine drivers $50 for a first offense and $100 for subsequent violations if they smoke while a child is in the car. Smokers of all types, including e-cigarette smokers, could be punished under the proposed ordinance.

Latest anti-smoking bill has support, but some worry about practicality

Norwich Bulletin - April 19, 2015



It may be time to think twice before smoking in a car when a small child is a passenger. Connecticut is following in the footsteps of several other states that have enacted similar smoke-free car laws, including Arkansas, Louisiana, California, Maine, Oregon, Vermont, Nevada and Utah, according to the American for Non-smokers Rights Organizations website. If the bill turns into a law, first-time violators would receive a warning and subsequent violators would receive a fine.

Editorial: Where there's smoke ...

Kdminer - April 19, 2015



Kingman Youth Coalition Beating Up Teen Tobacco deserves kudos for its anti-smoking and anti-litter campaign for Kingman's parks, and for being civically active. When I was in high school, I didn't even know where my town's City Hall was; the idea of meeting with council members or a police chief to pursue a policy goal never entered my mind. But the group's latest proposal, while well intentioned, goes too far. They plan to ask the Kingman City Council for a new ordinance that would make it a finable offense to smoke in a vehicle with minors in it. The prohibition would include traditional tobacco products and e-cigarettes, and it would be a secondary offense - that is, one could only be cited for it if pulled over for another reason first.

Anti-smoking group's goal: Don't smoke in the car

Kdminer - April 17, 2015



That's what the Kingman Youth Coalition Beating Up Teen Tobacco (KYCBUTT) will be pursuing at the next City Council meeting on Tuesday. The group is asking the council to enact an ordinance that would make smoking in a vehicle with a minor a secondary offense. ...

Measure Would Ban Smoking In Cars With Children

Peoria Public Radio - April 8, 2015



Illinois has been "smoke free" since 2008, when a state law banned anyone from lighting up within 15 feet of public places and businesses. Now legislators are ...

Car Smoking Ban Is Unenforceable Overreach

Hartford Courant - April 8, 2015



I have no problem with protecting our children, especially when they are young and have no control over situations. In theory, I agree with the proposal to limit ...

Connecticut moving to ban smoking in cars with children inside

WABC-TV - April 1, 2015



A bill that would bar people from smoking inside a vehicle when there's a child inside has cleared the public health committee of the Connecticut General ...

Bill banning smoking in car with kids moves forward

WPTV.com - April 1, 2015



The legislation approved by the Health Policy Committee Tuesday would make it illegal for anyone in a car with a child under 13 present to smoke tobacco ...

A little too much

Hartford Courant - March 31, 2015



I wholeheartedly agree that secondhand smoke in automobiles is dangerous to children [March 31, Connecticut, "Bills Seek To Restrict Smoking In Cars, ...



Connecticut bills would ban smoking in cars with young children, restrict vaporized cigarettes

Daily Journal - March 30, 2015



A bill that would bar people from smoking inside a vehicle when there's a child inside is progressing through the Connecticut legislative process. Lawmakers are also moving along legislation that would prohibit people from smoking electronic or vapor cigarettes in certain places, including restaurants, bars and retail food stores.

Bill would prevent smoking in cars with children

WKRC TV Cincinnati - March 30, 2015



CARSON CITY, Nev. (AP) A Nevada Assembly member is bringing forward legislation making it a crime to smoke tobacco in a car with a minor present.



Smoking in cars with kids could be fined in Tempe

azcentral.com - March 30, 2015



Drivers who smoke with a child in the car could soon be subject to a fine if their vehicle is pulled over in Tempe. The city is considering a law that would fine a person for smoking while driving with a child.

Health officials favor Nevada bill to ban smoking in cars with children

Las Vegas Review-Journal - March 26, 2015



The documented ill health effects from inhaling secondhand smoke were squared off against individual rights at a hearing Thursday on a bill that would ban smoking in cars while children are present. Assembly Bill 322 by Mike Sprinkle, D-Sparks, was supported in the Judiciary Committee hearing by health advocates who argued that children should not be exposed to an adult who is smoking in a confined space such as a vehicle.

Illinois bill proposes fines for drivers who smoke with kids in the car [VIDEO]

WGEM - March 26, 2015



QUINCY, Ill. (WGEM) - Illinois may soon ban drivers from smoking in their cars with ... "I think secondhand smoke has been proven to be very harmful and I don't ...

Bill Would Ban Smoking in Cars With Children Present

KOLO - March 26, 2015



CARSON CITY, Nev. (AP) - A Nevada Assembly member is bringing forward legislation making it a crime to smoke tobacco in a car with a minor present.

Bill would bar drivers from smoking in cars with minors

Champaign/Urbana News-Gazette - March 24, 2015



SPRINGFIELD - Motorists would not be allowed to smoke while operating a ... Supporters of the bill said that studies have shown that second-hand smoke in ...

International Support Given For Smoking Ban In Cars With Children

Newswire (press release) - March 18, 2015



With legislators in London recently authorizing a ban on smoking cigarettes in cars ... Maine also passed a similar law in 2008, banning smoking in a car where ...

Smoking in Cars with Kids Could Cost You

WJBF-TV - March 17, 2015



Senate Bill 130 prohibits smoking in a car when a child is present. ... You have to realize that there is still that third hand smoke and that can trigger an asthma ...



Bill to stop smoking while kids in cars passes Senate

Online Athens - March 16, 2015



The state Senate passed the bill Friday, Crossover Day, by a 37-3 vote. It now rests with the state House. Bills must move from chamber of the General Assembly to the other by Crossover Day to remain in consideration for passage.

Smoking ban bill safeguards kids

Albuquerque Journal - March 16, 2015



... of secondhand smoke on minors by fining adults who choose to smoke or use e-cigarettes with children in the car, whether the windows are up or down.

Lawmakers mull ban on smoking in cars with children

Waterbury Republican American - March 13, 2015



HARTFORD (AP) -- Connecticut lawmakers are again considering a bill that would prevent people from smoking in a motor vehicle when there's a young child ...

Smoke-free cars act heads to Senate floor

Cherokee Tribune - March 13, 2015



ATLANTA - A bill by state Sen. Bruce Thompson (R-White) that restricts the places a person can smoke is expected to receive a vote on the Senate floor today. Smokefree Cars for Children Act, Senate Bill 130, would prohibit people from smoking in a car while a person under the age of 15 is in the vehicle.

State Police Will Be Good Soldiers if New Anti-Smoking Law Passes

WTNH-DT Channel 8 (New Haven, CT) - March 12, 2015



Now cops have to check if everyone has seatbelts on; if drivers are talking on their cell phones, free of any hands-free device; if a driver is texting; and soon, perhaps, if an adult is smoking in a car with a little kid along for the ride.



ALTSCHILLER: Smoking and choking go hand in hand for kids in cars

Foster's Democrat - March 11, 2015



In New Hampshire we're proud of our motto "Live Free Or Die." If smokers want to die that's their business. It's the state's business to help children under the age of 18 live free from involuntarily inhaling the cancer causing poisons contained in ...

CT lawmakers considering a smoking ban in cars

wwlp.com - March 11, 2015



CHICOPEE, Mass. (WWLP) - Connecticut lawmakers are looking to protect the littlest lungs in their state. They're working on a bill that would ban drivers from ...

Florida Sen. Jeff Clemens wants to ban smoking in vehicles with ...

Local 10 - March 11, 2015



A state senator from South Florida wants to ban the use of tobacco products in vehicles with children under the age of 13. Sen. Jeff Clemens, D-Lake Worth, filed ...

Illinois To Hold Hearing Prohibiting Smoking In Car With Minors

The Cigar Authority - March 9, 2015



Last week we reported on a proposal to ban smoking in a motor vehicle with those under the age of 18 in the state of New Hampshire. In Illinois bill S.B. 729 was ...

Thompson: Smokefree Cars for Children Act Has Bipartisan Support

Patch.org - March 9, 2015



One of the bills I have authored this session Senate Bill 130, called the Smokefree Cars for Children Act, has passed the Senate Health and Human Services committee with bipartisan support after our long legislative day Thursday. The bill protects children in development stages of life from entrapment with secondhand smoke. Childrens Healthcare of Atlanta helped extensively with this measure, and I thank them for their assistance.

New Hampshire Bill Would Ban Car Smoking With ...

The Cigar Authority - March 3, 2015



So much for living free. The New Hampshire state motto is in jeopardy this week as lawmakers will hear arguments later today on a bill that would ban smoking ...

Secondhand smoke affects nonsmokers in vehicles

Zee News - November 16, 2014



Washington: A new study has revealed that secondhand smoke in motor vehicles poses a potential threat especially to nonsmokers sitting along a smoker.



Non-smokers in cars are exposed to significant amounts of second-hand smoke

OnMedica - November 14, 2014



Non-smokers who spend an hour in a car with a smoker have significantly increased levels of carcinogens and other toxins in their urine, research* published in Cancer, Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention has found.



Riding with smokers in cars

KGNS.tv - November 14, 2014



New research suggests just riding in the car with a smoker could pose a significant health risk. For the study, 14 non-smokers sat in the back seat of a parked car while the driver smoked three cigarettes in an hour. Even with the windows slightly open, the non-smokers showed much higher levels of tobacco-related toxins in their urine than before they got in the car.



Exposure to tobacco smoke, roadway air pollution can contribute to ...

News-Medical.net - November 14, 2014



New research from Keck Medicine of the University of Southern California (USC) bolsters evidence that exposure to tobacco smoke and near-roadway air ...



Travelling in a smoker's car for just ONE HOUR can damage your health

The Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday November 14, 2014



...for one hour had increased levels of carcinogens and other toxins in their urine / Groundbreaking study highlights grave dangers of secondhand smoke / Toxic chemicals identified are 'most important' among thousands in tobacco that cause smoking-related ...



Julie Ann Hounchell: Smoking, cars and children

vtdigger.org - July 13, 2014



This law bans smoking in vehicles with children required to sit in a car or booster ... No amount of ventilation in the car appears to be helpful as shown in the ...

Smoking Banned in Cars with Little Kids

My Champlain Valley FOX44 & ABC22 - June 16, 2014



WILLISTON, Vt.- A widespread ban which passed the legislature this year will go into affect July 1st. It, in part, prohibits smoking in cars with kids.

Senator cites highlights of the 2014 legislative session

Stowe Today - June 5, 2014



Cell phone ban: Bans the use of cell phones while operating a motor vehicle. ... Smoking: Bans smoking in an automobile when a young child is present.



American Lung Association's Fight for Air Climb at Bennington ...

vtdigger.org - June 4, 2014



Patti Komline of Dorset for her leadership to pass legislation this year to ban smoking in vehicles in the presence of children. When: Saturday, June 7, 2014.

Research shows exposure to smoke in cars may worsen asthma

The Standard Digital News - June 2, 2014



U.S : People with asthma may face increased risk from secondhand smoke ... and suggest drivers and passengers voluntarily ban smoking in their cars.

Madison students craft bill to limit smoking in cars in Connecticut

New Haven Register - April 27, 2014



Earlier this month, the class started to put together a bill that would ban smoking in a car with children who fall under the car seat threshold less than 6 years old or under 60 pounds. The students are essentially melding an existing law in Oregon and proposed legislation in Connecticut that wasnt brought to a vote.

Bill banning smoking in cars with kids clears latest hurdle

The State Journal-Register - March 5, 2014



A bill that would make smoking in a car with a minor present a petty offense is one step closer to becoming law.



Ban on smoking in cars with kids moves forward in Illinois

STLtoday.com - March 5, 2014



SPRINGFIELD, Ill. - A proposal to ban drivers from smoking with children in the ... The measure would make it a crime to smoke in an enclosed vehicle while a ...

House bill bans smoking with kids in car, considers raising tobacco ...

Bennington Banner - March 4, 2014



The Vermont House passed a bill Friday that expands smoking bans to all hotel and motel rooms, outside state buildings and in cars carrying children. The bill, H.217, would also prevent people from smoking within 25 feet of a state building or its property. The ban prohibits smoking on public school grounds and at child care facilities.

Ill. bill would ban smoking with children in car

WGEM - February 18, 2014



SPRINGFIELD, Ill. (AP) - An Illinois lawmaker wants to make it illegal for motorists to smoke in cars with children. State Sen. Ira Silverstein says second-hand ...

MPs back smoking ban in cars

expressandstar.com - February 10, 2014



Hundreds of thousands of children could be saved from being exposed to second-hand smoke in cars after MPs paved the way for legislation which could see an end to the practice.

Smoke ban in cars is a waste of time

Daytona Beach News-Journal - February 7, 2014



The campaign to stop adults from smoking in cars with children present is a cause of Americans for Nonsmokers' Rights. They and like-minded ...

Lawmakers look to limit smoking in cars

Daytona Beach News-Journal - February 4, 2014



Bean and some of his colleagues in the Legislature want to make it illegal to smoke in a car when minors are present. It would be considered a secondary offense, meaning police could not cite someone unless they were also committing a primary traffic violation, such as speeding or running a red light. Violators would be required to pay a fine up to $30. Arkansas, Louisiana, Maine, Oregon and Utah have similar laws on the books, and 14 states, including Florida, are considering bills that would restrict smoking in cars, according to the Americans for Nonsmokers' Rights. "The main objective of smoke-free car laws isn't to ticket every person who smokes in a car, but instead to raise awareness and educate the public about the hazards of secondhand smoke," said Liz Williams, a project manager for Berkeley, Calif.,-based Americans for Nonsmokers' Rights. "Florida is in good company by examining this issue and debating whether it is a good tool to protect public health in the state," she said. "The goal is to educate - not punish."...

Illinois lawmaker wants ban on smoking in cars with kids

WREX-TV - January 23, 2014



Six other states currently have similar bans. A resolution passed in Illinois last year encouraged people against the practice, but didn't ban it outright.



Smoking ban considered for drivers with child passengers

Quad City Times - January 23, 2014



SPRINGFIELD Illinois drivers who smoke while kids are in their car could get slapped with fines under a proposal pending in the Illinois Senate. The measure ...

Florida House Bill Would Ban Smoking In Vehicle If Kids Are Present

WBFS - November 24, 2013



Florida House Bill Would Ban Smoking In Vehicle If Kids Are Present ... For the past decade Florida has banned smoking in enclosed workplaces, with ...

Car smoking ban next?

Western Courier (subscription) - October 28, 2013



Some of the people reading this are smokers, and some of them abstain. Some of you dont mind smoking in your midst, while others would be offended. For the most part, we are adults and free to make our own choices. But what about the times and places when our actions impact those of a younger age? ...

Ban smoking with kids in the car in NJ: Editorial

The Star-Ledger - NJ.com (blog) - October 26, 2013



Sen. Jim Beach (D-Camden) wants to expand New Jerseys Smoke-Free Air Act to include $100 fines for anyone who smokes in a car with children 16 or younger. Put that in the category of laws that shouldnt be necessary, but are. Its an idea no compassionate person parents or not should oppose. ...



Bill targets smoking in vehicle with young kids

Columbus Dispatch - October 16, 2013



Worried about the effects of secondhand smoke on children, state Sen. Charleta Tavares is pushing a bill for the second time in two years that would ban smoking in a car with a young child.

US adults support smoking ban in cars with kids

WSFA - July 23, 2013



TUESDAY, July 23 (HealthDay News) -- Eighty-two percent of American adults support banning smoking in cars when children younger than 13 are in the vehicle, according to a new survey.



Bans on smoking in cars with kids deemed a success

CBC.ca - July 12, 2013



Provincial bans against smoking in cars transporting children have worked to reduce exposure to secondhand smoke, according to a new report. The Cancer Advocacy Coalition of Canada released its annual report on Thursday.



Maine ban on smoking in cars with kids largely unenforced

Lewiston Sun Journal - July 11, 2013



On Jan. 8, 2007, Bangor became the first Maine community to prohibit smoking in vehicles containing children. In 2008, this became state law. Since then, however, several police agencies in Maine say theyve cited or only even warned a handful of smokers for indulging their habit with kids in the car. The purpose of these laws is not to punish people but to educate them about the dangers of secondhand smoke, said Liz Williams, project manager for Americans for Nonsmokers Rights. The idea is to educate people so they become self-enforcing.



Oregon bans smoking in cars with kids

KUIK - June 12, 2013

Oregon drivers caught smoking in cars with kids may face hefty fines under a new state law. Gov. John Kitzhaber signed into law on Tuesday a bill that prohibits ...

Ore. House OKs ban on smoking in cars with kids

Herald and News - June 5, 2013



The Oregon Legislature has voted to make it a crime to smoke in a car with kids.

The House approved the bill in a 43-15 vote on Monday. It now goes to Gov. John Kitzhaber, and a spokeswoman says he intends to sign it.

Ban on smoking in cars with kids heads to Oregon governor

DigitalJournal.com - June 5, 2013



Smokers in Oregon will have to think twice before lighting up in their cars. That's because the state legislature has approved a bill that would make it a crime to smoke in a car with kids.

Oregon Lawmakers Vote To Ban Smoking In Cars With Children Present

OPB News - June 3, 2013



Oregon lawmakers signed off Monday on a measure that makes it illegal to smoke in a car when there are children present. Drivers could only be ticketed for the offense if they've already been pulled over for something else. Supporters include Republican representative Jim Thompson. He told colleagues that the bill seeks to protect children from an obvious harm. "Because of secondhand smoke, we've already banned smoking in restaurants and bars, public buildings, trains, planes, buses, taxis, many parks. And the list goes on, including the chamber that we're now sitting in. It is, however, legal to strap your kids in the back seat of your car and smoke them like bacon." ...

Large majority of adults have smoke-free rules in homes, vehicles

Centers for Disease Control (CDC) - May 16, 2013



Four out of five U.S. adults report having voluntary smoke-free rules in their homes and three out of four report having voluntary smoke-free rules in their vehicles, according to a study published in the journal Preventing Chronic Disease, a publication ...

Smoking recommendation approved by House, but ban lacks movement

Quad City Times - May 3, 2013



Lawmakers are encouraging Illinois motorists not to light up while driving with children. The House adopted a resolution Thursday that asks all drivers to not smoke with children under 13 in the car as a way to prevent children's contact with secondhand smoke. The measure, however, is not a requirement. State Rep. Marcus Evans, Jr., D-Chicago, sponsored the recommendation. Evans also introduced a proposal that would ban drivers from smoking with children under 13 in the car, but he said it will not be voted on this spring.

Senate OKs Ban on Smoking in Cars With Young Kids

WBOC TV 16-March 20, 2013



ANNAPOLIS, Md. (AP) - The Maryland Senate has approved a ban on smoking in vehicles if a child under eight is a passenger. The Senate passed the measure ...

Oregon Senate Passes Bill To Prohibit Smoking In Cars With Minors

Albany Tribune - March 13, 2013



The Oregon Senate passed Wednesday on a bipartisan 19-10 vote a bill that would make smoking in a motor vehicle with a driver or passenger under 18 a traffic violation. Senate Bill 444 will now go to the Oregon House of Representatives for consideration.

Ban on smoking in cars with kids headed to governor

Salt Lake Tribune - March 2, 2013



A bill that would outlaw parents smoking in cars when children are present narrowly passed the Senate on Friday and is headed to the governor, after passionate debate pitting child welfare against individual liberty. ...

Amid opposition, bill prohibiting smoking in car with kids passes house

ksl.com - March 2, 2013



SALT LAKE CITY ­ A Utah pediatrician believes smoking in a car with a child present is similar to child abuse. ...

Car smoking ban clears committee

StandardNet - February 28, 2013



SALT LAKE CITY ­ A local lawmaker, who describes himself as a strong advocate of personal rights, thinks parents cross the line when they smoke in a vehicle ...



Smoking in cars bill advances with opposition building

Deseret News - February 27, 2013



The dangers of cigarette smoking are well documented, yet people still do it. The dangers to children exposed to second-hand tobacco smoke are well ...

LETTER: Supports Bill Banning Smoking In Cars With Kids

Hartford Courant - February 26, 2013



The American Lung Association supports legislation that would protect Connecticut children from being exposed to secondhand smoke while they are riding in vehicles [Feb. 21, CTNow, "Teen Pushing New Smoking Ban Bill"]. Laws prohibiting smoking in vehicles when children are present have already been enacted in states like Arkansas, Maine and California.



Elizabeth Hovde: Should we fine smoking drivers or just butt out?

The Oregonian - February 23, 2013



There are a dozen good reasons not to like a current legislative proposal banning smoking in cars with kids. But there is one really good reason to like it, so the proposal keeps nagging me. If you agree with mountains of research that secondhand smoke is a legitimate health concern, allow me to try to make you similarly torn, as misery loves company.

EDITORIAL: Smoking In Cars With Kids? Can't Outlaw Stupidity

Hartford (CT) Courant - February 22, 2013



Should people smoke around kids ­ in a car, or anywhere? In fact, should they smoke at all? Any sensible person would say no. Unfortunately, you can't always legislate common sense.



Parents who smoke around young kids are ignorant but not criminals

Hartford Courant - February 21, 2013



Should adults be allowed to smoke in a car carrying young children? No, said many of those who spoke at a state Capitol hearing recently on a bill that would make it a crime. Not all stupid behavior can be outlawed, however. Adults who expose children to secondhand smoke are ignorant and irresponsible, but whether they should also be criminals is doubtful.

Smoking ban proposed for drivers with kids

Northwest Cable News - February 21, 2013



State Senator Elizabeth Steiner-Hayward is proposing smoking in a car with kids as a secondary offense, meaning you'd have to first be pulled over for ...

Smoking Ban? Here's Where Cigarettes Are Still Allowed

Daily Beast - February 21, 2013



As Connecticut threatens to ban in-vehicle smoking, the already small pool of places where cigarettes are allowed is shrinking fast. From a rebellious Washington sports bar to a sophisticated Paris hotel, here is a guide to smoking freedom



Smoking ban for vehicles carrying kids finds support from Mansfield youth

Middletown Press-by Christine Stuart - February 21, 2013



Henry Genga's bill to ban smoking in vehicles with children. “It would prevent fatal injury to the lungs and body, as well as greatly increase road safety,” Abdullah ...



Danbury Readers Mixed On Proposed Ban On Smoking In Cars

The Daily Voice - February 21, 2013



Danbury residents have mixed feelings about a proposed smoking ban for drivers with ... Smoking could soon be added to the list of banned activities for drivers with ... “I support banning smoking in cars that I am in,” Debra Oria commented.



Potential Conn. vehicular smoking ban raises debate

NECN - February 20, 2013



Potential Conn. vehicular smoking ban raises debate ... Kvadas believes that, unlike those other bans, this one is about the health of the ...

Weighing in on Proposed Smoking Ban

WKBW-TV-February 20, 2013



Albany, N.Y. (WKBW) - A proposal to ban smoking in a car if a child is riding in the vehicle is something that may happen in the near future. Some people said it ...

Smoking ban proposed for drivers with kids

kgw.com - February 20, 2013



State Senator who’s also a doctor and a mom wants to make it illegal for parents to smoke while kids are riding in the car. State Senator Elizabeth Steiner-Hayward is proposing smoking in a car with kids as a secondary offense, meaning you’d have to first be pulled over for something else like speeding.

Connecticut lawmaker mulls smoking ban in cars with children

New York Daily News - February 19, 2013



A Connecticut lawmaker is focusing on a law that would ban in-car smoking, even with the windows down, for drivers with underage passengers. New York Assemblyman David Weprin previously introduced a similar bill that would have instated a $100 fine for smoking in cars with passengers under 14 years of age.



Conn. Lawmakers Consider Car Smoking Ban

NBC Bay Area - February 19, 2013



Smoking is already banned in restaurants and businesses in Connecticut and some parents welcome broadening the ban to protect children in cars. "We want ...



Connecticut to consider smoking ban in cars with kids

7Online.com - February 19, 2013



HARTFORD (WABC) -- Should Connecticut ban smoking in cars that contain small children? That's the question state lawmakers will take up later this week in ...

Ban on smoking in cars dies

Chatham Star Tribune - February 18, 2013



RICHMOND – A Senate bill that would have banned smoking in cars carrying children under age 15 was tabled Friday by a House committee.

WA. Senate Bill would ban smoking in vehicle with underage passengers

KLEW-TV Channel 3 (Lewiston ID) - Feb 14, 2013



Senate Bill 5230 would make it illegal to smoke in your vehicle if anyone under 18, is inside. That means pipes, cigars and cigarettes. It was introduced by Democrat Senator Paull Shin of Edmonds and would be considered a secondary offense.



House OKs bill that bans smoking in cars with kids present

Daily Herald - February 12, 2013



SALT LAKE CITY -- A proposal to make it illegal to smoke in a car when a child age 15 years or younger is present is one step closer to becoming law.On Monday morning Utah's House of Representatives narrowly approved a bill in a 41-30 vote that would ask police to issue warnings to those caught smoking with a minor present in their car for the first year of enactment of the bill. Following the first year officers may issue a fine up to $45 if they catch a person with a lit cigarette and a child in the same car. The bill was amended before it passed through the House to allow for a person driving a convertible to still be able to light up as long as they had the top down.



Ban on smoking in cars dies in house

Tidewater News - February 11, 2013



RICHMOND­A Senate bill that would have banned smoking in cars carrying children under age 15 was tabled Friday by a House committee. Proposed by Sen.



Senate passes ban on smoking with kids in car

WWBT - February 1, 2013



RICHMOND, Va. (AP) - The Virginia Senate has passed legislation making it illegal for adults to smoke with kids in the car. The vote on Sen. Ralph Northam's bill was 30-10. It now goes to the House of Delegates, which historically is less receptive to such restrictions.



Senate bans smoking in cars with kids

Rappahannock News - February 1, 2013



RICHMOND – The Senate today passed a bill to prohibit smoking in a vehicle when a child under 15 is present.



Petersen, Howell Vote for Ban on Smoking in Car With Kids

Vienna (VA) Patch.com – January 31, 2013



Northam's bill is one of three smoking bans still making their way through the ... succeeded in banning smoking under bus shelters, but extending that ban to ...

Bills Would Ban Smoking in Cars with Kids

Capital News Service, emporianews.com – January 21, 2013



A bill to forbid smoking in cars carrying children is dead in the House, but a similar proposal remains alive in the Senate It’s not uncommon for states to ban smoking in cars carrying children. Arkansas, Louisiana, California, Maine and Puerto Rico all have such laws. The age of the minor varies from state to state. Anti-smoking advocates would like to see Virginia join that list. “Virginia is far behind what other states have,” said Bronson Frick, an assistant director of Americans for Nonsmokers’ Rights, a national advocacy group. Virginia does ban smoking in restaurants, but the state law doesn’t cover other areas. “It’d help Virginia be a part of a trend with most of the United States,” Frick said. Most states that have outlawed smoking in the car with a child present, Frick said, usually take an educational approach, too: They have a campaign to inform the public about the health risks of second-hand smoke.

EDITORIAL: In our opinion: A bill against smoking in the car unlikely to result in fewer incidents

Deseret News - January 7, 2013



The dangers of cigarette smoking are well documented, yet people still do it. The dangers to children exposed to second-hand tobacco smoke are well documented, yet some parents still light up in the presence of their kids ­ and because they do, a Utah legislator thinks there ought to be a law.

Can car-smoking ban pass this time around?

Salt Lake Tribune - December 28, 2012



Rep. Patrice Arent, D-Millcreek, will try anew to pass an often-defeated bill to ban smoking in cars while children are present. ...

Connecticut lawmakers may consider ban on smoking in cars with children

Middletown (CT) Press - December 27, 2012



Lawmakers may be considering re-introducing a bill next year that would ban smoking in a vehicle in the presence of a child. A lawmaker recently asked the Office of Legislative Research for a description of laws in other states banning smoking in vehicles when children are present.

Secondhand Smoke Exposure Common In Cars

Personal Liberty Digest - November 27, 2012



Almost half of parents who smoke and have motor vehicles said they smoked while children were in their vehicle, U.S. researchers said. Emara Nabi-Burza, Susan Regan and Nancy Rigotti of the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, and colleagues at the American Academy of Pediatrics and the University of Rochester Medical Center, said the study involved 981 smoking parents, of whom 83 percent had a car,



Doctors Ask Parents To Keep A Smoke-Free Car

CBS Local - November 27, 2012



GRAND RAPIDS (WWJ) – A new study in the journal Pediatrics focuses on parents smoking in cars with their children present. Researchers say tobacco smoke ...



Just ten minutes in a car with a smoker boosts harmful pollutants by up to thirty percent

ScienceDaily – November 21, 2012



Just 10 minutes spent in the back seat of a car with a smoker in the front, boosts a child's daily exposure to harmful pollutants by up to 30%, reveals research published online in

Lawmakers making another attempt at prohibiting smoking in cars ...

Deseret News - September 19, 2012



He encouraged lawmakers to support legislation that would prohibit adults from smoking in a vehicle when a child under age 15 is present.



Should Utah ban smoking in cars?

Salt Lake Tribune – September 19, 2012



An unlikely pair of lawmakers ­ a Democrat from Salt Lake and Republican from Juab County ­ are seeking to snuff out smoking in cars.

RI bill would ban smoking when kids are in cars

The Westerly Sun - May 10, 2012



A Rhode Island state senator wants to add to the list of places people can’t smoke ­ in cars when children are present. South Kingstown Democrat V. Susan Sosnowski says the goal is to protect children from harmful second-hand smoke.



Bill would ban smoking in cars with children

WPRO - May 10, 2012



The Senate Health and Human Services Committee approved a bill on Wednesday that would make it illegal to smoke in a car when children are present.

Bills to restrict smoking nearly snuffed out in Md.

WTOP - March 27, 2012



Proposed smoking restrictions aren't catching fire in Annapolis as the Maryland General Assembly reaches the final weeks of a 90-day session. A bill to keep adults from smoking with children in the car went nowhere. Another that would declare smoking a nuisance in condos, townhomes and apartment buildings -- effectively banning smoking if a resident made a complaint -- also ran into trouble. Another that would declare smoking a nuisance in condos, townhomes and apartment buildings -- effectively banning smoking if a resident made a complaint

Smoking ban in vehicles with children passes Senate

Maryland Reporter - March 15, 2012



A controversial bill that would ban smoking in any vehicle with a passenger younger than 8 passed the state Senate 27-19 on Wednesday after debate that centered largely over the role of government.

Md. legislator wants to ban smoking in cars carrying children

Washington Post (blog) - March 2, 2012



Arkansas bans smoking in cars when children under 14 are present. Louisiana, Puerto Rico, California and Maine also have similar laws. Jennie Forehand, a Democrat from Montgomery County, who has worked to ban smoking in public places, tried last year to pass a law banning smoking in cars ...

Bill would ban smoking in car with child under 8

Baltimore Sun (blog) - March 2, 2012



By Michael Dresser, The Baltimore Sun A bill has emerged from a Senate committee that would prohibit a driver from smoking or allowing a passenger to smoke ...

Queens Legislators Call for Smoking Ban in Cars with Minors

Douglaston (NY) Patch.com - February 14, 2012



Toby Stavisky, D-Whitestone, and state Assemblyman David Weprin, D-Little Neck, are calling for the state to prohibit smoking in vehicles in which minors ...

Smoking ban going back to the Augusta Commission with potential tweaks

The Augusta (GA) Chronicle - February 13, 2012

... The proposed ordinance would also ban smoking in a vehicle with children 14 and younger, as Arkansas and California do. ...



Bill proposed to ban smoking

Hattiesburg (MS) American - Feb 5, 2012



The proposed bill, currently sitting in a Senate committee, would not ban adults from smoking in vehicles where no children are present, Frazier said.



Bill would restrict smoking in cars

Columbus (OH) Dispatch, 2012-02-02

Arguing that a child has no way to escape the harmful effects of secondhand smoke, a Columbus Democrat told a Senate committee yesterday that it's time for Ohio to ban smoking in vehicles with passengers younger than 6. ...

South Carolina considers smoking ban in cars with kids

ABC15.com (KNXV-TV) - Shawn Martin -September 3, 2011

Specifically, they had a lot to type about a smoking ban bill being brought up for a second time in South Carolina. If passed, the bill would make it a

Leduc smoking ban in effect July 2

Canadian Television (CTV), 2011-07-01

It's a first for a city in Alberta: soon drivers in Leduc won't be allowed to smoke in a car while children are inside. ...



Assemblyman David Weprin pushes to ban smoking in car with kids

New York Daily News, 2011-06-13

Lillian Rizzo DAILY NEWS WRITER



Lighting up with a kid in the car could soon cost you $100. ...



New South Carolina bill aims to ban smoking in car with kids

TheDigitel - May 16, 2011



A new bill being debated in the SC House would make it illegal for people to smoke in their car while a child is present. This bill proposed (Senate version ...



Children held captive in smoky vehicles

EurekAlert (press release) - April 30, 2011

Parents who smoked were asked if they had a car, whether they had smoking rules in their car, their child's age and if their pediatrician advised them to have a smoke-free car. Parents were considered to have a strictly enforced carsmoking ban if they ..

Research Highlights Need For Smoke-Free Car Laws, Public Health Campaigns To Protect Youngsters From Toxins

Medical News TODAY(UK), 2011-05-01

It is absolutely unacceptable to subject children to any tobacco smoke exposure in cars, according to the authors of an abstract to be presented Sunday, May 1, at the Pediatric Academic Societies (PAS) annual meeting in Denver.

Jackson’s car-smoking bill falls short

The State (SC), April 7, 2011



Sen. Darrell Jackson has introduced a bill to protect children by prohibiting smoking in a vehicle occupied by a child younger than 6 years old. True, these children have no choice but to breathe second-hand smoke. But why would Sen. Jackson not want to include any young people who are unable to drive themselves, who also have no choice in breathing second-hand smoke? Or adults who are unable to have a driver’s license, for that matter?



SC lawmakers stop bill barring smoking around kids

Associated Press (AP), 2011-04-05



A South Carolina proposal to fine drivers or passengers who puff away with a child under 6 in the car is going nowhere.



Smoke Free Cars Law now helps more minors

Today's THV - Lauren Clark - March 31, 2011



LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (KTHV) -- Governor Beebe signed into law Wednesday an amendment to the 2006 Smoke Free Cars law. The former law required a child to be older than 6 years old to be in a vehicle if someone was smoking. Now that age has been raised to ...

S.C. bill would ban smoking in cars with kids

Aiken Standard, March 31, 2011



COLUMBIA -- Drivers or passengers who puff away with a child younger than 6 in the car could be fined in South Carolina under a legislative proposal. Proponents said it's about protecting children from the dangers of second-hand smoke, including i ...



Banning smoking in cars ‘only way to protect children’

WalesOnline (uk), 2011-03-28

Madeleine Brindley, Western Mail



STARTLING research today reveals children are still breathing in harmful particles in cigarette smoke in a car even when adults aren't smoking.

A Welsh study reveals high levels of particulate matter (PM) from tobacco smoke is present in the back seat of cars for up to two hours after a cigarette has been smoked. ...

OUR VIEW Smoking in cars is toxic for kids

Delmarva Now - March 17, 2011



Smoking was once ubiquitous; today, it is banned inside most buildings and a growing number of outdoor spaces as well. Many people do not tolerate smoking inside their own homes. This bill would impose a $50 fine on anyone caught smoking in a car with ...

Law on smoking in car with children could change

KTHV-DT CBS (Little Rock, AR), 2011-03-16

Written by B.J. Steed



Senate Bill 1004 to go before House Wednesday afternoon that wants to change the law regarding smoking in cars with children. ...



New York Lawmakers Propose Car Smoking Ban

NACS Online - March 11, 2011

NEW YORK — Two New York legislators are proposing a bill that would ban smoking in a car when a minor is present, NBC New York reports.

Introduced in Nassau County, the ban would make it illegal to smoke in a car if someone under the age of 18 is present, with violators subject to a $1,000 fine ...



House OKs bill that would make it illegal to smoke in cars with kids present

Deseret News, 2011-03-08

Amanda Verzello, Deseret News



The House passed a bill late Monday evening that would make it illegal for adults to smoke in cars when children are present. ...



Bill takes another run at banning smoking with kids in the car

Bismarck Tribune, January 13, 2011



BISMARCK -- Students are the catalyst behind a bill that would ban smoking with children in the car. ...Police officers are supposed to stop everybody that ’s smoking in case there ’s a kid in the car. ...

Stumbo's bill would target smokers in cars with children

Lexington Herald-Leader, January 12, 2011

Smoking in a vehicle where a child under 17 is present would be illegal under a bill filed by House Speaker Greg Stumbo.

A person in a vehicle with a child could not smoke "cigars, cigarettes or other tobacco in any form" under House Bill 216. ...

Bill would ban smoking in cars around kids

Seattle (WA) Post-Intelligencer, 2011-01-10

VANESSA HO SEATTLEPI.COM STAFF

After being banished from bars, doorways and a growing number of smoke-free apartment buildings, smokers may find one of their last refuges -- their car -- off-limits too.

A bill (SB5106) introduced by Sen. Scott White, D-Seattle, would prohibit smoking in a parked or moving car if children are present. The act would be considered a secondary traffic violation, enforced only when a driver has been stopped for another offense. The infraction would not go on a driver's record.

The Legislature considered similar measures in 2008, but did not pass them into law. ...



Smoking in cars with kids will soon be illegal

Regina (Sas) Leader-Post (ca), 2010-09-17

ANGELA HALL, Leader-Post

People who smoke in cars that have kids as passengers will be breaking Saskatchewan law as of Oct. 1, as provisions under The Tobacco Control Amendment Act take effect.

The new rule is meant to protect children under 16 from second-hand smoke in vehicles, the provincial government said.

"Children specifically are much more vulnerable to exposure to tobacco smoke than adults because they are still physically developing, so we're just trying to protect our youngest citizens from that exposure," said Nicole Nieminen, senior policy analyst with the Ministry of Health.

The ministry on Friday issued a reminder that the month of October will also usher in other new tobacco control rules, including: ...



Residual tobacco smoke in used cars: futile efforts and persistent pollutants

Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 2010-08-30

Methods: Surface wipe, air, and dust samples were collected in used cars sold by nonsmokers (n = 40) and smokers (n = 87) and analyzed for nicotine. . . .

Discussion: Findings suggest that smokers can prevent their cars from becoming contaminated with residual TSP by reducing or ceasing smoking; however, commonly used cleaning and ventilation methods did not successfully decrease contamination levels. Disclosure requirements and smoke-free certifications could help protect buyers of used cars and empower them to request nonsmoking environments or a discount on cars that have been smoked in previously.

Canadians, Americans, Britons support tobacco crackdowns

Toronto Sun - 8 August 18, 2010



The Angus Reid Public Opinion poll found that most respondents supported the laws that ban smoking indoors, in a vehicle that has a child present and in ...

A qualitative case study of policy maker views about the protection of children from smoking in cars

George Thomson, Sheena Hudson, Nick Wilson, and Richard Edwards

Nicotine & Tobacco Research published 9 August 2010



City council mulling smoking-in-vehicle ban

Record Herald - Lance Cranmer - June 24, 2010

What began as an idea proposed by a Washington High School government class could become a reality in the very near future.

Washington C.H. City Council discussed the possibility of a city-wide ban on smoking in cars where small children are present during Wednesday's meeting.

"It's a worthwhile thing," said council chairman Dale Lynch. "And the fact that this is something students came up with - it shows that people can initiate things."

The proposal was first brought up by a group of Washington students from Jon Creamer's AP Government class when they spoke before council on May 12.

The students presented information on similar laws already in place in Arkansas, California, Louisiana and Maine. Currently there are no similar laws - in either state or individual city governments - in the state of Ohio.

Washington C.H. City Council recently took on a controversial topic in a different way last month when it approved a resolution to support a statewide texting while driving ban. In that case, though, state leaders were already crafting a bill - which later passed - to ban texting while driving. ...

Arkansas motorists who smoke with young kids in their vehicle could ...

KFSM - May 6, 2010

LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) — Arkansas law enforcement says motorists who smoke while driving with a young child can now be pulled over and given a ticket.

The state Health Department and police said Thursday that smoking while driving with a child younger than 6 or weighing less than 60 pounds can generate a $25 ticket.

Most law enforcement agencies will take a month to warn motorists about the law and the dangers of secondhand smoke. ...

Ban near on smoking in cars

Honolulu Advertiser - Jason Armstrong - April 22, 2010

Motorists should not subject children to second-hand tobacco smoke, Hawai'i County Council members decided Tuesday by voting 5-3 to outlaw the practice.

Smoking would be illegal in any motor vehicle occupied by someone less than 18 years old, according to the bill from Puna Councilwoman Emily Naeole-Beason.

The ban is to protect kids, said Naeole-Beason, who has often credited her children for helping her quit smoking.

The measure now goes to Mayor Billy Kenoi, who may choose to sign it into law, allow it to take effect without his approval or veto it.

Kenoi told the Tribune-Herald that he supports the bill's intent of protecting children's health and safety.

"I will look very favorably on it," he said by phone following the council's action. ...



Tampa Bay students arguing for anti-smoking bill

ABC Action News - Sean O'Reilly - April 7, 2010

TALLAHASSEE, FL -- Eight Tampa Bay high school students are in Tallahassee today to present an anti-smoking bill they wrote before Florida lawmakers.

The students from Tampa Bay Tech, Durant High School and Bloomingdale High School go before the Senate Transportation Committee to argue their bill that would outlaw smoking in vehicles when children are present.

The students hope to gain enough support that the bill will advance to the full Senate and pass in a vote. ...



Smoking would be banned in all cars, parks and play areas under new proposals

Smoking in all private cars and outdoor spaces where children gather should be banned, the Royal College of Physicians has proposed.

Electronic Telegraph (uk), 2010-03-24

Heidi Blake

Passive smoking doubles the risk of cot death in babies and toddlers, the Royal College of Physicians said.

Parks, play areas, outdoor swimming pools and all vehicles should be covered by an extension of the existing smoking ban, England's oldest medical institution said.

The proposals, which have won the backing of Sir Liam Donaldson, the Government's Chief Medical Officer, are outlined in a report showing the impact of passive smoking on children's health.

Doctors reported 20,500 cases of lower respiratory tract infections such as bronchitis in children caused directly by passive smoking, the report said. . . .

The report was timed to influence the Government's July review of existing smoking legislation, which came into force in 2007.

The proposals, which were welcomed by the Department of Health, include a call for smoking to be outlawed in all vehicles, rather than just those which contain children, to make the ban easier to enforce. ...

Smoking In The Car Could Cost You

Central Florida News 13 ( Orlando, FL), 2010-03-17

Reported by Troy Kinsey



The federal government finds developing kids exposed to second-hand smoke are at high risk of having weaker lungs or life-threatening illnesses.

That's why lawmakers could move to slap a $100 fine on drivers caught puffing with a kid under 16 years old in the car.

Smoking is already banned in schools and on playgrounds. Logic follows the family car ought to be off limits too.

But tell that to critics, who complain the bill is tantamount to throwing a wet blanket over the flickering flame of freedom.

“This is going to be a very controversial, hot issue,” said Sen. Victor Crist.

The Tampa Republican is backing the bill in the Senate.

By his own admission, the opposition will be tough. But he argues the facts are tougher....

Big Island bill to ban smoking while kids are in car advances

Honolulu Advertiser, 2010-03-17

Jason Armstrong Hawaii Tribune-Herald



A bill that would outlaw smoking in any motorized vehicle occupied by a child or young adult was advanced yesterday by a 6-3 vote of a Hawaii County Council committee.

The Human Services and Economic Development Committee's supportive recommendation sends Bill 216 to the full council for the first of two votes required for its passage.

If approved as law, the ban would take effect 90 days later.

Puna Councilwoman Emily Naeole-Beason, the bill's author and a former smoker, said some people have been unfairly critical of her proposal. ...

Minn. bill would ban smoking in cars with kids

KSAX - 2010-03-17

ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) - A proposal to ban smoking in cars with kids is back.

The bill from Democratic Rep. Nora Slawik of Maplewood gets a hearing - but not a vote - in a House health panel on Wednesday.

The legislation would prohibit smoking in vehicles where children under 18 years old are present. But law enforcement officers couldn't ticket for violations unless they pulled the car over for another reason. ...



House backs ban on smoking in car with young children

Salt Lake Tribune, 2010-02-24

Brandon Loomis The Salt Lake Tribune



Utah lawmakers on Tuesday passed a proposed ban on smoking in a vehicle in which children are riding.

HB82, sponsored by Rep. Jay Seegmiller, D-Sandy, would bar smoking in the vehicle when a child younger than 8 and requiring a restraining device is present. The proposed penalty is a $45 ticket.

Several lawmakers argued passionately for keeping children from breathing various chemicals in cigarette smoke, and Seegmiller said the children have no other protection.

"This is a tremendously important bill to protect the rights of children who can't speak for themselves," he said. . . .

The bill passed 40-31 and now goes to the Senate. ...

Hundreds fined for smoking in cars since new laws

News Interactive Network/News Limited/News.com (au), 2009-11-08

ELISSA DOHERTY, HEALTH REPORTER

MORE than 400 people have been cautioned or fined for smoking in cars with children in South Australia since the controversial law was introduced.

The state led the nation by introducing a law prohibiting smoking in vehicles in the presence of people under 16 in May 2007, in a bid to protect children from passive smoking.

Since then, police have fined 317 people and cautioned 85.

Offenders can be issued with an on-the-spot fine of $75 and if it proceeds to court, the maximum penalty is $200.

A woman was recently convicted for the offence in NSW just three months after that state brought in the new laws.

Qld bans smoking in cars carrying kids

The Age - October 29, 2009

Queensland motorists who smoke while children are in their cars will be fined from next year.

From January 1, Queensland police will enforce a $200 on-the-spot fine to drivers who smoke with children under 16 in their cars.

Premier Anna Bligh said the laws would protect children from the dangers of passive smoke.

"It is important we protect children who have no choice but to travel in cars with adults and their parents and family members ... where those people don't make the right choices about smoking around them," Ms Bligh told reporters.

She made no apologies for the crackdown. ...

Ban on smoking in vehicles with children

Lakes District News - October 28, 2009

Anyone caught in B.C. smoking in a vehicle with a child present will have to pay a $109 fine.

April of this year, the B.C. Government passed the legislation to enforce a ban on smoking in vehicles when a child under the age of 16 is present last spring under the Motor Vehicle Act.

Healthy living and sport minister Mary Pollack said in a statement regarding the ban, "Any level of second-hand smoke has harmful effects on a child's health, so it's important that we protect vulnerable children who are confined in a vehicle." ...

AAP Calls For Tobacco-Free Environments For All Children

Medical News Today (press release) - October 20, 2009



A life free of tobacco means smoke-free homes and apartment buildings, cars, schools, restaurants, parks, beaches, sidewalks and sporting events ...

Government Stubs Out Car Smoking Ban Laws

Sky News - October 20, 2009

The Government has ditched plans to ban smoking in cars when children are passengers, Sky News Online can reveal. ...

Britain was considering moves to introduce similar legislation next year as part of its review of 'smoke-free laws' introduced three years ago.

But a spokeswoman for the Department of Health told Sky this has now changed.

"The Government does not have any plans at this point in time to introduce legislation to prohibit smoking in private cars," she said. ...

$100 fine proposed for drivers who smoke with kids in car

Boston Herald - October 1, 2009

Drivers smoking with children in the car would face $100 fines for each child under legislation that got a push in committee Thursday. Rep. Denis Guyer’s bill (H 3233) imposes fines of at least $100 for each child.

Drivers could duck the fine by performing five hours of community service or taking tobacco education or cessation courses.

Children, who breathe more quickly than adults, are particularly at risk of suffering second-hand smoke side effects, said Dr. Mona Sharifi, a pediatrician at Children’s Hospital. A child sitting in a car for roughly 10 minutes breathes in the equivalent of what a firefighter breathes during hours battling wildfires, she said. “It’s the one environmental exposure that stands out above the rest,” Sharifi said. ...

Smoking in vehicles brings higher nicotine exposure

The researchers said their findings pointed to a need for a campaign to discourage smoking in cars.

Richmond (VA) Times-Dispatch, 2009-09-17

David Ress



Sharing a ride with a smoker will give you a much heftier dose of nicotine than having a meal in a restaurant that allows smoking or hanging out at a smoky bar, according to new research.

Even opening the window or switching on the air-conditioner when a smoker lights up leaves significant amounts of nicotine in the air, according to the study by four researchers at Johns Hopkins University.

In fact smokers who put their windows down all the way averaged more nicotine in the air, perhaps because they tended to be heavier smokers or perhaps because the air whipping around inside their cars distributed smoke and nicotine more widely, said Dr. Ana Navas-Acien, one of the researchers and an assistant professor at Johns Hopkins' School of Public Health.

"In any case it is clear that ventilation is insufficient to eliminate tobacco smoke," she said.

Nicotine, which is toxic, is the addictive substance in tobacco.

The Hopkins team believes its research, using air samplers placed in 22 drivers' cars last summer, is the first to measure nicotine concentrations in actual driving conditions rather than in laboratory simulations. Their results were published in the medical journal Tobacco Control. . . .

A handful of states, including Arkansas, California and Louisiana, ban smoking in cars when children are passengers. So does Puerto Rico. Beginning next month, Avis Budget Group Inc. will ban smoking in all of its rental cars, citing customers' complaints about tobacco odors and residues.

The Hopkins researchers said their findings were generally in line with recent studies suggesting that smoking two cigarettes a day inside a car leaves the air with about 20 percent more particulate matter than the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's ceiling for what it considers unpolluted air.

They said the drivers they studied all agreed that smoking posed a health risk to passengers, and that 15 percent would only smoke when they had no passengers in their cars. ...

Passive smoking in cars linked to hayfever and wheezing in children

Eur Resp J 2009; 34: 629–633

MedWire News (uk), 2009-09-15

Mark Cowen



Children who are regularly exposed to second-hand tobacco smoke when traveling by car have significantly higher rates of hayfever and wheezing than those without such exposure, results of an Irish study show.

Writing in the European Respiratory Journal, Luke Clancy, from the Tobacco Free Research Institute in Dublin, and team explain: “Children may be more vulnerable to second-hand smoke-induced respiratory diseases due to smaller airways and greater oxygen demand, as well as a less-mature immune system.”

But they add that “there is no evidence quantifying second-hand smoke-induced respiratory health effects in children exposed to second-hand smoke in cars.”

To address this, the team studied 2809 children, aged 13–14 years, selected randomly from schools throughout Ireland. ...

Finland To Restrict Smoking In Private Cars

Bernama - September 15, 2009

HELSINKI, Sept 15 (Bernama) -- Finland will soon ban smoking in private vehicles if a child under 18 years old is a passenger in that car, local media reported on Tuesday.

A proposal on the issue will be handed to Finland's Parliament within two weeks. The legislation, which is expected to pass, would make Finland the only European country to regulate smoking in private cars, according to Xinhua news agency's report, citing the local media.

However, no punishments are planned for smokers who break the rule for the time being. That means smokers can be urged, but not forced, to stop smoking if a child is in the car. ...



Smoking ban in cars closer

ABC Online - September 10, 2009

A bill banning smoking in cars carrying children has passed the upper house of the West Australian parliament.

The bill was introduced earlier this year by the Independent Mp Janet Woollard.

It will also ban retailers from being able to display tobacco products and prohibits people from smoking in certain parts of alfresco dining areas. ...

Experts support crackdown on bad habits

Sydney Morning Herald - Danny Rose - September 1, 2009



The Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP) welcomed the further recommendation to introduce Australia-wide legislation to ban smoking in all motor ...

New smoking ban - No smoking in car

Sowetan - September 1, 2009

ALTHOUGH it may prove impossible to stop people with children from smoking in their homes, it is now officially illegal to smoke in your car if you are travelling with a child under the age of 12.

Enjoying a smoke at a restaurant in the company of your children is now also illegal, even if you are in a smoking area. Children under 18 years are not even allowed to enter a designated smoking area. ...



Smokers' Cars Loaded With Nicotine

Levels twice those found in places that permit smoking, study suggests

HealthDay [HealthScout], 2009-08-24

Steven Reinberg HealthDay Reporter



Passengers riding in the cars of smokers are exposed to nicotine levels nearly twice those found in restaurants and bars that permit smoking, a new study suggests.

The dangers of exposure to secondhand smoke are well known, including the risk for heart and respiratory disease, and have led to laws banning smoking in many public places. Many anti-smoking advocates believe the next frontier in the fight against secondhand smoke is in cars.

"These levels of exposure are unacceptable for nonsmoking passengers, particularly children, who are at increased risk for secondhand smoke-related health problems," said study co-author Patrick Breysse, director of the Division of Environmental Health Engineering at the Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health.

Breysse and his co-author Dr. Ana Navas-Acien, an assistant professor of occupational and environmental health at Hopkins, believe that smoking should be banned in cars as it has been in other places.



Secondhand tobacco smoke concentrations in motor vehicles

Miranda R Jones, Ana Navas-Acien, Jie Yuan, Patrick N Breysse

Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, United States

Tobacco Control [Epub ahead of print], August 25, 2009





Context: Motor vehicles represent important microenvironments for exposure to secondhand smoke (SHS). While some countries and cities have banned smoking in cars with children present, more data are needed to develop the evidence-base on SHS exposure levels in motor vehicles to inform policy and education practices aimed at supporting smoke-free motor vehicles when passengers are present.

Objective: To assess exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke in motor vehicles using passive airborne nicotine samplers.



Methods: Seventeen smokers and five non-smokers who commute to and from work in their own vehicle participated. Two passive airborne nicotine samplers were placed in each vehicle for a 24-hour period, one at the front passenger seat headrest and the other in the backseat behind the driver. At the end of the sampling period, airborne nicotine was analyzed by gas chromatography.



Results: Median (IQR) air nicotine concentrations in smokers' vehicles were 9.6 µg/m3 (5.3-25.5) compared to non-detectable concentrations in non-smokers' vehicles. After adjustment for vehicle size, window opening, air conditioning, and sampling time, there was a 1.96-fold increase (95% CI 1.43, 2.67) in air nicotine concentrations per cigarette smoked.



Conclusions: Air nicotine concentrations in motor vehicles were much higher than air nicotine concentrations generally measured in public or private indoor places, and even higher than concentrations measured in restaurants and bars. These high levels of exposure to SHS support the need for education measures and legislation that regulate smoking in motor vehicles when passengers, especially children, are present.



MK considers bill to bar smoking in vehicles with kids

Jerusalem Post, 2009-08-25

JUDY SIEGEL-ITZKOVICH



After Johns Hopkins University researchers have proven that the amount of harmful nicotine in air-conditioned cars with smokers is much higher than in pubs and restaurants that allow smoking, an MK is considering initiating a bill to bar smoking in vehicles with children as passengers.

Israel Beiteinu MK Robert Ilatov, whose colleague MK Yuri Shtern proposed such legislation three weeks before his death from brain cancer in 2007, told The Jerusalem Post on Monday after learning of the Baltimore study that such a bill would be a fitting memorial to Shtern. He asked to read the study, which was published on Tuesday in the journal Tobacco Control.

Health Ministry associate director-general Dr. Boaz Lev said he personally was very much opposed to smoking in cars containing minors, but that he had not discussed the proposal with Deputy Health Minister Ya'acov Litzman (United Torah Judaism), who decides policy. ...

Smokers support ban in cars carrying young children

Radio New Zealand - August 6, 2009

A study suggests strong support from smokers for a ban on lighting up in cars carrying pre-school children.

The University of Otago study of more than than 1,300 adult smokers found 96% favoured a smoking ban in cars carrying young children.

Lead author Dr George Thompson says support for the ban was consistent across all ethnicities and income-levels.

He says with Parliament currently looking at legislationon the use of cellphones in cars, it's a good opportunity to also consider banning smoking while behind the wheel. ...

Motorists call for total ban on smoking in cars

Easier (press release) - July 13, 2009

Nearly two thirds of motorists would like to see smoking in cars completely banned according to a new survey by Motorpoint.

The poll by the car supermarket giant found 67% of drivers wanted smokers to extinguish their cigarettes before getting behind the wheel. Some 2,028 people took part in the week-long online study.

Smoking in cars is currently the subject of hot debate after Professor Terence Stephenson, the new president of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, called for a complete end to smoking in cars with children. ...

Smoking to be banned while under-18s are in the car

News Interactive Network/News Limited/News.com (au), 2009-06-26