Extra Round Providence mayoral debate
Innovate Newport Groundbreaking CeremonyReed to Cut Ribbon on New Business Tech Center in Newport That is Designed to Help More Local Marine-Tech Firms Win U.S. Navy WorkNEWPORT, RI – In an effort to help local small businesses grow, partner with the Naval Undersea Warfare Center (NUWC), and win a bigger share of work with the U.S. Navy, U.S. Senator Jack Reed will help cut the ribbon on Innovate Newport Monday, June 3 at 10 a.m. Innovate Newport is a new nearly 34,000-square-foot co-work space and office complex that will serve as a business incubator for local firms.Reed, the Ranking Member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, and a senior member of the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, helped secure nearly $1.7 million in federal funding for the project.The new facility is the result of $8 million renovations to the almost century-old Sheffield Elementary School and was a collaboration between the City of Newport, the Newport Chamber of Commerce, and the Economic Development Council of Rhode Island. The facility will host numerous tenants and events and serve as a hub for start-ups and businesses across the region.Senator Reed has led efforts to encourage more Rhode Island companies to partner with the Navy and NUWC to compete for opportunities in fields ranging from surface and undersea marine technology to cyber and renewable energy, as well as other sectors.In 2016, Newport officials and NUWC formalized an agreement to identify technology that can be commercialized by private-sector firms without compromising security. Some of those firms could operate out of Innovate Newport or other locations on Aquidneck Island.“My goal is to help Rhode Island businesses compete, succeed, and thrive. Innovate Newport could become a force multiplier for local businesses that offers them an affordable space to operate and opportunities to collaborate and get mentoring and assistance with things like commercializing technology, raising capital, and contracting with the Navy or other large entities,” said Senator Reed. “Innovate Newport will further cement Aquidneck Island as a key hub for research, development, technology, and innovation. It will be a resource for local businesses and the community and help harness some of the high wattage institutional brain power we have in the area -- from Naval Station Newport, to NUWC, to URI. I commend the City of Newport and the Newport County Development Council and their partners for making this project a reality.”Current tenants include: Drupal Connect; INSPIRE Environmental; the Newport County Chamber of Commerce; Towerhill Associates; VizSafe; and smaller firms using the co-working space.