Area rep. says lawmakers have 'awareness' of rural hospitals' critical needs
Lawmakers look to meet rural hospital needs, have finite resources

AUSTIN — Former Lubbock County Judge Don McBeath has been trying to get the attention of key state legislators with one simple but critical reminder: The Texas Legislature has yet to restore the Medicaid funding cuts the lawmakers made in the 2011 session, when they tackled a $27 billion shortfall.

As a result, 10 of 185 rural hospitals in the state, or 5 percent of the total, have closed within the last two years.

“Rural hospitals have always operated on a very narrow financial margin and have been hit with a series of payment cuts from Medicaid and Medicare in the past four years,” said McBeath, now director of government relations at the Texas Organization of Rural and Community Hospitals, or TORCH.

Medicaid is the joint federal and state program that helps low-income and uninsured people pay for medical and custodial care.

Though none of the 10 rural hospitals closed were in West Texas, that remains a possibility, McBeath warned.

“The 10 closures have been in East Texas where some rural hospitals appear to be in a weaker financial state, and many of the closed hospitals received little or no local tax support,” he said. “There have been no recent closures in the Panhandle or South Plains region because most of those hospitals are financially stronger and many receive some level of local tax support.

“But, if some of the cuts are not restored by Congress for Medicare or the Texas Legislature for Medicaid, it is very possible that some rural hospitals in West Texas could close in the future.”

Such a possibility is at a critical juncture because “we really haven’t faced this since the 1980s,” McBeath said in reference to the energy bust of three decades ago when the Texas economy was heavily dependent on oil and gas.

Fortunately, it appears that faced with the possibility of more closures of rural hospitals, the Legislature is now responding to such concerns, and not a moment too soon, he said — right before the lawmakers start considering the state budget for the next two fiscal years.

Rep. Four Price, a member of the budget-writing House Appropriations Committee, agreed with McBeath.

“I believe there is an awareness (of) how critical the issue is,” said Price, R-Amarillo, chairman of an Appropriations subcommittee that deals with health care funding.

“It is not an easy issue because there are finite resources and everybody has to make tough decisions regarding how those resources are allocated,” Price explained. “But I think there is a growing awareness that with 5 percent of the rural hospitals having closed over the course of the past 24 months ... funding them differently and adequately is important.

“It is a priority for me, and in the House we have taken steps to secure their reimbursements for the next biennium,” he said.

However, there are other factors contributing to the demise of some rural hospitals, said Rep. Dan Flynn, whose rural district in East Texas saw the closing of one of its medical facilities in 2013.

One of those factors is the shortage of doctors Texas and the rest of the nation face, particularly in rural areas.

“Every time something happens we want to blame it on funding; that is certainly part of the equation,” Flynn, R-Van, said. “But also, part of the equation is young doctors not coming to work in rural areas; that’s a real challenge.

“A lot of our doctors are starting to retire and when they start retiring no one comes to replace them,” he said. “It is a real challenge. We’ve been trying to work with the Texas Medical Association because we recognize that we need to have good health care in rural areas.”

TMA President Austin King sees it the same way.

“We have a shortage of doctors in rural Texas,” King said in a recent interview. “It is difficult to attract doctors to rural areas and you look at huge distances in West Texas.”

“In the small towns like Hamlin they need family practitioners,” said King, who lives in Abilene.

“You go to slighter larger communities, they need obstetricians and then you go to even larger communities, they need surgeons and orthopedic surgeons and maybe eye doctors and those basic things,” he said.

McBeath said he is glad Price and other key legislators are concerned about the well-being of rural hospitals because the facilities play a key role in all of Texas, not just in rural areas.

“It’s a very positive sign,” McBeath said. “It shows that at least in the budget-building process in the House side they have recognized we have a crisis in Texas.

“And while money is tight and there are certainly a lot of other Medicaid issues that are very politicized, they realize that they need to adjust the rates for the rural hospitals to help stop these closures,” McBeath added. “So, it’s a very positive sign.

“But that’s only halfway there” he stressed. “We have to deal with the Senate side (but) hopefully they will exercise the same wisdom that the House is exercising.”

enrique.rangel@morris.com

• (512) 673-7553

Source: Texas Organization of Rural and Community Hospitals