Virginia State Vaccine Requirements – National Vaccine Information Center
TAKE ACTION TODAY! - Multiple bills have been introduced into state legislatures that could affect vaccine exemptions. Visit www.NVICadvocacy.org to learn about what is happening in your state and what you can do to help. Thank you for standing up for freedom!





Quick Facts and Resources for Virginia Residents

Quick Fact: No certificate of immunization is required for admission if student or his parent submits an affidavit to the admitting official stating that the administration of immunizing agents conflicts with the student's religious tenets or practices. Additionally, because the human papillomavirus is not communicable in a school setting, a parent or guardian, at the parent's or guardian's sole discretion, may elect for the parent's or guardian's child not to receive the human papillomavirus vaccine, after having reviewed materials describing the link between the human papillomavirus and cervical cancer approved for such use by the Board. Medical exemptions are also allowed.

Other Resources: Many vaccination and exemption information links are date specific. If the links below have expired, click on the state's department of health, or immunization program link provided below, as they are likely to provide links to updated information. The General Information link leads to the overview page provided by the state at the time of this webpage's update and may also be helpful. Please email NVIC with broken link information.

K-12 School Information

General Information

Vaccination Requirements

Exemption Information, Religious Waiver, to obtain medical exemption students must present a statement from a licensed physician which states that his physical condition is such that administration of one or more of the required immunizing agents would be detrimental to his health.

The information contained on NVIC's web pages is for educational purposes only and is not intended to be medical or legal advice. Those seeking medical or legal advice should obtain the services of a competent attorney, physician or qualified health care professional. Although NVIC continually updates our website, state laws and rules change frequently and consumers are ultimately responsible for verifying their state's vaccination and exemption laws and requirements.

TITLE 22.1 EDUCATION

CHAPTER 14. PUPILS

VCA § 22.1-271.1 Definitions.

For the purpose of § 22.1-271.2:

"Admit" or "admission" means the official enrollment or reenrollment for attendance at any grade level, whether full-time or part-time, of any student by any school. "Admitting official" means the school principal or his designated representative if a public school; if a nonpublic school or child-care center, the principal, headmaster or director of the school or center. "Documentary proof" means written certification that a student has been immunized, such certificate to be on a form provided by the State Department of Health and signed by the licensed immunizing physician or an employee of the immunizing local health department. "Student" means any person who seeks admission to a school, or for whom admission to a school is sought by a parent or guardian, and who will not have attained the age of 20 years by the start of the school term for which admission is sought. "Immunized" or "immunization" means initial immunization and any boosters or reimmunizations required by § 32.1-46. "School" means (i) any public school from kindergarten through grade 12 operated under the authority of any locality within the Commonwealth,

(ii) any private or religious school that offers instruction at any level or grade from kindergarten through grade twelve, and

(iii) any private or religious nursery school or preschool, or any private or religious child-care center required to be licensed by the Commonwealth.

VCA § 22.1-271.2. Immunization requirements

G. The Board of Health shall promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation of this section in congruence with rules and regulations of the Board of Health promulgated under § 32.1-46 and in cooperation with the Board of Education.

A. No student shall be admitted by a school unless at the time of admission the student or his parent submits documentary proof of immunization to the admitting official of the school or unless the student is exempted from immunization pursuant to subsection C or is a homeless child or youth as defined in subdivision A 6 of § 22.1-3 . If a student does not have documentary proof of immunization, the school shall notify the student or his parent (i) that it has no documentary proof of immunization for the student; (ii) that it may not admit the student without proof unless the student is exempted pursuant to subsection C, including any homeless child or youth as defined in subdivision A 6 of § 22.1-3 ; (iii) that the student may be immunized and receive certification by a licensed physician, licensed nurse practitioner, registered nurse or an employee of a local health department; and (iv) how to contact the local health department to learn where and when it performs these services. Neither this Commonwealth nor any school or admitting official shall be liable in damages to any person for complying with this section.Any physician, nurse practitioner, registered nurse or local health department employee performing immunizations shall provide to any person who has been immunized or to his parent, upon request, documentary proof of immunizations conforming with the requirements of this section.B. Any student whose immunizations are incomplete may be admitted conditionally if that student provides documentary proof at the time of enrollment of having received at least one dose of the required immunizations accompanied by a schedule for completion of the required doses within 90 days.The immunization record of each student admitted conditionally shall be reviewed periodically until the required immunizations have been received.Any student admitted conditionally and who fails to comply with his schedule for completion of the required immunizations shall be excluded from school until his immunizations are resumed.C. No certificate of immunization shall be required for the admission to school of any student if (i) the student or his parent submits an affidavit to the admitting official stating that the administration of immunizing agents conflicts with the student's religious tenets or practices; or (ii) the school has written certification from a licensed physician, licensed nurse practitioner, or local health department that one or more of the required immunizations may be detrimental to the student's health, indicating the specific nature and probable duration of the medical condition or circumstance that contraindicates immunization.However, if a student is a homeless child or youth as defined in subdivision A 6 of § 22.1-3 and (a) does not have documentary proof of necessary immunizations or has incomplete immunizations and (b) is not exempted from immunization pursuant to clauses (i) or (ii) of this subsection, the school division shall immediately admit such student and shall immediately refer the student to the local school division liaison, as described in the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Education Assistance Improvements Act of 2001, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 11431 et seq.) (the Act), who shall assist in obtaining the documentary proof of, or completing, immunization and other services required by such Act.D. The admitting official of a school shall exclude from the school any student for whom he does not have documentary proof of immunization or notice of exemption pursuant to subsection C, including notice that such student is a homeless child or youth as defined in subdivision A 6 of § 22.1-3 E. Every school shall record each student's immunizations on the school immunization record. The school immunization record shall be a standardized form provided by the State Department of Health, which shall be a part of the mandatory permanent student record. Such record shall be open to inspection by officials of the State Department of Health and the local health departments.The school immunization record shall be transferred by the school whenever the school transfers any student's permanent academic or scholastic records.Within 30 calendar days after the beginning of each school year or entrance of a student, each admitting official shall file a report with the local health department. The report shall be filed on forms prepared by the State Department of Health and shall state the number of students admitted to school with documentary proof of immunization, the number of students who have been admitted with a medical or religious exemption and the number of students who have been conditionally admitted, including those students who are homeless children or youths as defined in subdivision A 6 of § 22.1-3 F. The requirement for Haemophilus Influenzae Type b immunization as provided in § 32.1-46 shall not apply to any child admitted to any grade level, kindergarten through grade 12.



VCA § 22.1-271.4. Health requirements for home-instructed, exempted, and excused children.

In addition to compliance with the requirements of subsection B, D, or I of § 22.1-254 or § 22.1-254.1 , any parent, guardian or other person having control or charge of a child being home instructed, exempted or excused from school attendance shall comply with the immunization requirements provided in § 32.1-46 in the same manner and to the same extent as if the child has been enrolled in and is attending school.



Upon request by the division superintendent, the parent shall submit to such division superintendent documentary proof of immunization in compliance with § Upon request by the division superintendent, the parent shall submit to such division superintendent documentary proof of immunization in compliance with § 32.1-46



No proof of immunization shall be required of any child upon submission of (i) an affidavit to the division superintendent stating that the administration of immunizing agents conflicts with the parent's or guardian's religious tenets or practices or (ii) a written certification from a licensed physician, licensed nurse practitioner, or local health department that one or more of the required immunizations may be detrimental to the child's health, indicating the specific nature of the medical condition or circumstance that contraindicates immunization.



TITLE 32.1. HEALTH

CHAPTER 2. DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL

ARTICLE 3. DISEASE CONTROL MEASURES

VCA § 32.1-46. Immunization of patients against certain diseases.

A. The parent, guardian or person standing in loco parentis of each child within this Commonwealth shall cause such child to be immunized in accordance with the Immunization Schedule developed and published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP). The required immunizations for attendance at a public or private elementary, middle or secondary school, child care center, nursery school, family day care home or developmental center shall be those set forth in the State Board of Health Regulations for the Immunization of School Children. The Board's regulations shall at a minimum require:



1. A minimum of three properly spaced doses of hepatitis B vaccine (HepB).



2. A minimum of three or more properly spaced doses of diphtheria toxoid. One dose shall be administered on or after the fourth birthday. A booster dose shall be administered prior to entering the sixth grade if at least five years have passed since the last dose of diphtheria toxoid.

3. A minimum of three or more properly spaced doses of tetanus toxoid. One dose shall be administered on or after the fourth birthday. A booster dose of Tdap vaccine shall be administered prior to entering the sixth grade if at least five years have passed since the last dose of tetanus toxoid.

4. A minimum of three or more properly spaced doses of acellular pertussis vaccine. One dose shall be administered on or after the fourth birthday. A booster dose shall be administered prior to entry into the sixth grade if at least five years have passed since the last dose of pertussis vaccine.

5. Two or three primary doses of Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccine, depending on the manufacturer, for children up to 60 months of age.

6. Two properly spaced doses of live attenuated measles (rubeola) vaccine. The first dose shall be administered at age 12 months or older.

7. One dose of live attenuated rubella vaccine shall be administered at age 12 months or older.

8. One dose of live attenuated mumps vaccine shall be administered at age 12 months or older.

9. All susceptible children born on and after January 1, 1997, shall be required to have one dose of varicella vaccine on or after 12 months.

10. Three or more properly spaced doses of oral polio vaccine (OPV) or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV). One dose shall be administered on or after the fourth birthday. A fourth dose shall be required if the three dose primary series consisted of a combination of OPV and IPV.

11. Two to four doses, dependent on age at first dose, of properly spaced pneumococcal 7-valent conjugate (PVC) vaccine for children less than two years of age.

12. Three doses of properly spaced human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine for females. The first dose shall be administered before the child enters the sixth grade. The parent, guardian or person standing in loco parentis may have such child immunized by a physician or registered nurse or may present the child to the appropriate local health department, which shall administer the vaccines required by the State Board of Health Regulations for the Immunization of School Children without charge.



B. A physician, registered nurse or local health department administering a vaccine required by this section shall provide to the person who presents the child for immunizations a certificate that shall state the diseases for which the child has been immunized, the numbers of doses given, the dates when administered and any further immunizations indicated.



C. The vaccines required by this section shall meet the standards prescribed in, and be administered in accordance with, regulations of the Board.



D. The provisions of this section shall not apply if:

1. The parent or guardian of the child objects thereto on the grounds that the administration of immunizing agents conflicts with his religious tenets or practices, unless an emergency or epidemic of disease has been declared by the Board;

2. The parent or guardian presents a statement from a physician licensed to practice medicine in Virginia, a licensed nurse practitioner, or a local health department that states that the physical condition of the child is such that the administration of one or more of the required immunizing agents would be detrimental to the health of the child; or

3. Because the human papillomavirus is not communicable in a school setting, a parent or guardian, at the parent's or guardian's sole discretion, may elect for the parent's or guardian's child not to receive the human papillomavirus vaccine, after having reviewed materials describing the link between the human papillomavirus and cervical cancer approved for such use by the Board.



E. For the purpose of protecting the public health by ensuring that each child receives age-appropriate immunizations, any physician, physician assistant, nurse practitioner, licensed institutional health care provider, local or district health department, the Virginia Immunization Information System, and the Department of Health may share immunization and patient locator information without parental authorization, including, but not limited to, the month, day, and year of each administered immunization; the patient's name, address, telephone number, birth date, and social security number; and the parents' names. The immunization information; the patient's name, address, telephone number, birth date, and social security number; and the parents' names shall be confidential and shall only be shared for the purposes set out in this subsection.



F. The State Board of Health shall review this section annually and make recommendations for revision by September 1 to the Governor, the General Assembly, and the Joint Commission on Health Care.



TITLE 23. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS

CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

VCA § 23.1-800. (Effective October 1, 2016) Health histories and immunizations required; exemptions.

A. No full-time student who enrolls for the first time in any baccalaureate public institution of higher education is eligible to register for his second semester or quarter unless he (i) has furnished, before the beginning of the second semester or quarter of enrollment, a health history consistent with guidelines adopted by each institution's board of visitors that includes documented evidence, provided by a licensed health professional or health facility, of the diseases for which the student has been immunized, the numbers of doses given, the date on which the immunization was administered, and any further immunizations indicated or (ii) objects to such health history requirement on religious grounds, in which case he is exempt from such requirement.

B. Prior to enrollment for the first time in any baccalaureate public institution of higher education, each student shall be immunized by vaccine against diphtheria, tetanus, poliomyelitis, measles (rubeola), German measles (rubella), and mumps according to the guidelines of the American College Health Association.

C. Prior to enrollment for the first time in any baccalaureate public institution of higher education, each full-time student shall be vaccinated against meningococcal disease and hepatitis B unless the student or, if the student is a minor, the student's parent or legal guardian signs a written waiver stating that he has received and reviewed detailed information on the risks associated with meningococcal disease and hepatitis B and the availability and effectiveness of any vaccine and has chosen not to be or not to have the student vaccinated.

D. Any student is exempt from the immunization requirements set forth in subsections B and C who (i) objects on the grounds that administration of immunizing agents conflicts with his religious tenets or practices, unless the Board of Health has declared an emergency or epidemic of disease, or (ii) presents a statement from a licensed physician that states that his physical condition is such that administration of one or more of the required immunizing agents would be detrimental to his health.

E. The Board and Commissioner of Health shall cooperate with any board of visitors seeking assistance in the implementation of this section.

F. The Council shall, in cooperation with the Board and Commissioner of Health, encourage private institutions of higher education to develop a procedure for providing information about the risks associated with meningococcal disease and hepatitis B and the availability and effectiveness of any vaccine against meningococcal disease and hepatitis B.

TITLE 22. SOCIAL SERVICES

AGENCY NO. 40. DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES

CHAPTER 185. STANDARDS FOR LICENSED CHILD DAY CENTERS

22 VAC 40-185-130. Immunizations for Children.

A. The center shall obtain documentation that each child has received the immunizations required by the State Board of Health before the child can attend the center.

Exemptions (subsection C of § 22.1-271.2 of the Code of Virginia and 12 VAC 5-110-110 of the Regulations for the Immunizations of School Children): Documentation of immunizations is not required for any child whose

(i) parent submits an affidavit to the center, on the form entitled "Certification of Religious Exemption," stating that the administration of immunizing agents conflicts with the parent's or child's religious tenets or practices, or

(ii) physician or a local health department states on a MCH 213B or MCH 213C, or other Department of Health-approved formthat one or more of the required immunizations may be detrimental to the child's health.

B. The center shall obtain documentation of additional immunizations once every six months for children under the age of two years.

C. The center shall obtain documentation of additional immunizations once between each child's fourth and sixth birthdays.



TITLE 12. HEALTH

AGENCY NO. 5. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL

CHAPTER 110. REGULATIONS FOR THE IMMUNIZATION OF SCHOOL CHILDREN

PART III. IMMUNIZATION REQUIREMENTS

12 VAC 5-110-30 Administration.

A. The Board of Health has the responsibility for promulgating regulations pertaining to the implementation of the school immunization law and standards of immunization by which a child attending any school may be judged to be adequately immunized.



B. The State Health Commissioner is the executive officer for the State Board of Health with the authority of the board when it is not in session, subject to the rules and regulations of the board.



C. The local health director is responsible for providing assistance in implementing this chapter to the school divisions in his jurisdiction and for providing immunizations to children determined not to be adequately immunized, who present themselves to the local health department for immunization.



D. The school principals of public schools and the principals, headmasters and directors of nonpublic schools shall require each student attending their institutions to provide documentary proof of immunization against the diseases listed in

D. The school principals of public schools and the principals, headmasters and directors of nonpublic schools shall require each student attending their institutions to provide documentary proof of immunization against the diseases listed in 12VAC5-110-70

12 VAC 5-110-70 Immunization requirements.

Every student enrolling in a school shall provide documentary proof of adequate immunization with the prescribed number of doses of each of the vaccines and toxoids listed in the following subdivisions, as appropriate for his age according to the immunization schedule. Spacing, minimum ages, and minimum intervals shall be in accordance with the immunization schedule. A copy of every student's immunization record shall be on file in his school record.



1. Diphtheria Toxoid. A minimum of four properly spaced doses of diphtheria toxoid. One dose shall be administered on or after the fourth birthday. A booster dose shall be administered prior to entering the sixth grade if at least five years have passed since the last dose of diphtheria toxoid.

2. Tetanus Toxoid. A minimum of four properly spaced doses of tetanus toxoid. One dose shall be administered on or after the fourth birthday. A booster dose shall be administered prior to entering the sixth grade if at least five years have passed since the last dose of tetanus toxoid.

3. Acellular Pertussis Vaccine. A minimum of four properly spaced doses of acellular pertussis vaccine. One dose shall be administered on or after the fourth birthday. A booster dose shall be administered prior to entering the sixth grade if at least five years have passed since the last dose of pertussis vaccine.

4. Poliomyelitis Vaccine. A minimum of four doses of poliomyelitis vaccine with one dose administered on or after the fourth birthday.

5. Measles (Rubeola) Vaccine. One dose of live measles vaccine administered at age 12 months or older, and a second dose administered prior to entering kindergarten.

6. Rubella Vaccine. A minimum of one dose of rubella virus vaccine administered at age 12 months or older.

7. Mumps Vaccine. One dose of mumps virus vaccine administered at age 12 months or older and a second dose administered prior to entering kindergarten.

8. Haemophilus Influenzae Type b (Hib) Vaccine. A complete series of Hib vaccine i.e., up to a maximum of four doses of vaccine as appropriate for the age of the child and the age at which the immunization series was initiated. The number of doses administered shall be in accordance with current immunization schedule recommendations. Attestation by the physician or his designee, registered nurse, or an official of a local health department on that portion of Form MCH 213F pertaining to Hib vaccine shall mean that the child has satisfied the requirements of this section. This section shall not apply to children older than 60 months of age or for admission to any grade level, kindergarten through grade 12.



9. Hepatitis B Vaccine. A minimum of three doses of hepatitis B vaccine for all children. The FDA has approved a two-dose schedule only for adolescents 11 through 15 years of age and only when the Merck brand (RECOMBIVAX HB) Adult Formulation Hepatitis B vaccine is used. The two RECOMBIVAX HB adult doses must be separated by a minimum of four months. The two dose schedule using the adult formulation must be clearly documented in the Hepatitis B section on Form MCH 213F.

10. Varicella (Chickenpox) Vaccine. All susceptible children born on and after January 1, 1997, shall be required to have one dose of chickenpox vaccine on or after 12 months of age and a second dose administered prior to entering kindergarten.

11. Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (PCV). A complete series of PCV, i.e., up to a maximum of four doses of vaccine as appropriate for the age of the child and the age at which the immunization series was initiated. The number of doses administered shall be in accordance with current immunization schedule recommendations. Attestation by the physician or his designee, registered nurse, or an official of a local health department on that portion of Form MCH 213F pertaining to PCV vaccine shall mean that the child has satisfied the requirements of this section. This section shall not apply to children older than 24 months of age.

12. Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccine. Three doses of properly spaced HPV vaccine for females, effective October 1, 2008. The first dose shall be administered before the child enters the sixth grade.

12 VAC 5-110-80 Exemptions from immunization requirements.

A. Religious and medical exemptions. No certificate of immunization shall be required of any student for admission to school if:

1. The student or his parent or guardian submits a Certificate of Religious Exemption (Form CRE 1), to the admitting official of the school to which the student is seeking admission. Form CRE 1 is an affidavit stating that the administration of immunizing agents conflicts with the student's religious tenets or practices. The form is available on the Division of Immunization website at http://www.vdh.virginia.gov//Epidemiology/Immunization/requirements.htm; or

2. The school has written certification on either of the documents specified under "documentary proof" in 2. The school has written certification on either of the documents specified under "documentary proof" in 12VAC5-110-10 from a physician, registered nurse, or a local health department that one or more of the required immunizations may be detrimental to the student's health. Such certification of medical exemption shall specify the nature and probable duration of the medical condition or circumstance that contraindicates immunization.

3. Upon the identification of an outbreak, potential epidemic, or epidemic of a vaccine-preventable disease in a public or private school, the commissioner has the authority to require the exclusion from such school of all children who are not immunized against that disease.





C. HPV vaccine. Because the human papillomavirus is not communicable in a school setting, a parent or guardian, at the parent's or guardian's sole discretion, may elect for the parent's or guardian's child not to receive the HPV vaccine, after having reviewed materials describing the link between the human papillomavirus and cervical cancer approved for such use by the board.

B. Demonstration of existing immunity. The demonstration in a student of antibodies against rubeola, rubella, or varicella in sufficient quantity to ensure protection of that student against that disease, shall render that student exempt from the immunization requirements contained in 12VAC5-110-70 for the disease in question. Such protection should be demonstrated by means of a serological testing method appropriate for measuring protective antibodies against rubeola, rubella, or varicella respectively. Reliable history of chickenpox disease diagnosed or verified by a health care provider shall render students exempt from varicella requirements.



12 VAC 5-90-110 Dosage and age requirements for immunizations; obtaining immunizations.

A. Every person in Virginia less than 18 years of age shall be immunized in accordance with the most recent Immunization Schedule developed and published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP). Requirements for school and day care attendance are addressed in 12VAC5-110



B. The required immunizations may be obtained from a physician licensed to practice medicine or from the local health department.