Cigarette Taxes In NYC
INDEX Position Statement Bloomberg's Hypocrisy On The Record Cigarette Tax Facts & Calculations "We Told You So" Tax Backlash News Anti-Tax Support Related Reading Material NYC Dept of Finance Campaign To Collect Back Cigarette Taxes ANALYSIS UPDATE: 2/23/05 - NY State Gets in the Act. The analysis applies to the state as well now. NYC residents to be hit a second time. UPDATE: 2/23/06 - Judge Dismisses New York's Suit Against Internet Cigarette Sellers UPDATE: 12/7/06 - Judge Dismisses suit brought by NYS Convenience Store Assoc. to have tax collection law enforced. Lack of standing cited. UPDATE: 12/5/07 - Judge Dismisses most of suit brought by NYS Convenience Store interest charging Indian retailers with unfair competition.



**THIS EDITORIAL IS A KEEPER** Don't pay this tax

NY Daily News Editorial - April 5, 2005 It's tax season again, and millions of New Yorkers are preparing to be scofflaws. They're going to fill in Line 56 on the state's long-form tax return or Line 27 on the short form by reporting that they made no out-of-state purchases, over the Internet, by catalog or in person, in 2004. Most will be lying. And good for them, we say. Over Gov. Pataki's veto, the state Legislature added those lines to the tax forms two years ago in a niggling grab at every last penny of sales tax technically owed by New Yorkers. We urged everyone to simply report zero out-of-state purchases and are happy to report that, quite on their own, 96% of taxpayers followed that course. Among the nearly 9 million filers who reported no out-of-state purchases were Pataki, Lt. Gov. Mary Donohue, Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, Controller Alan Hevesi, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver and Senate Majority Leader Joe Bruno. Only 386,000 taxpayers coughed up money, a total of $21 million, an average of just $54.03. Call those taxpayers scrupulously, admirably honest or call them suckers, but the bottom line is the same: Only 4% are following the law. And that has to be some kind of record for blatant noncompliance. The message to the Legislature is clear: The tax is unequally applied and unenforceable. Repeal it.

The NYS Legislature approved Mayor Bloomberg's request to raise the city tax on cigarettes from 8 cents a pack to $1.50. It was effective July 2002. Sean Delonas The attack on smokers can no longer go unchallenged. While the rhetoric surrounds us that smoking is an "epidemic" it would appear that we are faced with a different epidemic of greed, social engineering and persecution. It's time to say ENOUGH ALREADY and show them that we mean it. "If I can't smoke in public why should I pay the public's taxes?" Make a conscious effort not to support NYC first, and NYS second. When possible, buy your clothes, food, household items, appliances, etc. outside of the NYC limits and outside of NYS borders if the means are available.

Eat at home! Why patronize eating establishments where the city has determined that they must not accommodate one third of their customers? The city doesn't care about your comfort so let's not keep them comfortable with the sales tax on food that we generate. Drink at home! Getting up from your warm stool and being made to stand outside is demeaning. If you're not smart enough to be embarrassed for accepting being treated like a pariah there are plenty of people who are embarrassed for you. Need to socialize? Entertain at home where YOU make the rules. Rent a movie! As the founder of NYC C.L.A.S.H. I have not entered a movie theater since they banned smoking completely over 10 years ago. Many others have done the same. Now there is another reason to stay away. Snuggle up on the couch, light a cigarette and make your own popcorn. It's cheaper, it's much more relaxing and you'll be keeping those tax dollars in your own pocket.

THE ADMINISTRATION SEEKS TO DEPRIVE US OF OUR RIGHT TO CHOOSE TO SMOKE WHILE DEPENDING ON, AND DEMANDING THAT, OUR TAX DOLLARS -- CIGARETTE AND OTHERWISE -- FINANCE THE CITY LET'S NOT FINANCE THEM AT ALL Most of all we strongly encourage everyone to seek alternative means to obtaining your cigarettes. Allowing government imposed tyranny to manipulate your behavior is unacceptable. Thus A MODIFIED BOYCOTT: This is the present day version of the Boston Tea Party. We will NOT throw our tea in the sea, thereby ceding to their demands to give up a perfectly legal behavior, but we will no longer support their addiction to tobacco money either. [back to index] BLOOMBERG'S HYPOCRISY ON THE RECORD Read the hypocritical statements made by then private, but campaigning, citizen Bloomberg on the BBC Program QUESTION TIME on the question: Should tobacco companies be sued for going about their legitimate business, or should smokers have to pay for the damages they are causing to themselves? Mike Bloomberg: " The government does better when people smoke because of the taxes they raise, and when they die early because they don't use their care or pension. The question is: at what level should the government be involved in protecting the public. The state governments have found themselves on the side of encouraging smoking by settling with the tobacco companies. I don't see any practical ways we can get rid of smoking. If you want to stay healthy: stay out of the sun, don't eat red meat and don't smoke. But in a free society, people have to have the right to run some risks." TWO CONTRADICTIONS TO HIS CURRENT POSITION ON RAISING THE TAX ON CIGARETTES: "Any loss of revenue by the state would be outweighed by lower health care costs brought on by a reduction in smoking-related illnesses," said Jordan Barowitz, a spokesman for the mayor. "The mayor has said he'd love to see the revenue on this tax go flat, to zero." ~NY Times; 3/2/02 Mayor Bloomberg proposed raising the city's cigarette tax to $1.50 a pack from 8 cents yesterday, saying he was trying to get smokers to quit. Bloomberg said, "...you raise it [taxes], consumption goes down." ~NY Daily News; 2/14/02 Neither of these statements agree with his former statements that smokers save health care costs by dying early or that government shouldn't dictate behavior even if it's risky. [back to index]

CIGARETTE TAX FACTS & CALCULATIONS SBSC Study Shows NYC Tobacco Tax Hike Kills Jobs, Hurts Businesses, Reduces Revenue, And Has Little Impact On Smoking: Released By Small Business Survival Committee

Tax Profiling of Adult Smokers in New York City Winston-Salem, N.C. - February 14, 2002 - "The proposed nearly 1,800 percent increase in New York City's excise tax on cigarettes, by $1.42 to $1.50 a pack, should be viewed as exactly what it is - tax profiling of adult smokers," Tommy Payne, executive vice president of external relations for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, said today. "This proposal comes despite the fact that the New York state legislature passed a 39-cent, or 35 percent, increase in the state

cigarette excise tax just last month. If the city succeeds in passing its onerous tax increase, New York City smokers would pay an incredible $3.39 in city, state and federal excise taxes per pack," Payne added. In 2001, smokers in New York paid almost $2 billion to the state, over and above income, sales and other taxes. State cigarette excise taxes, alone, amounted to more than $1 billion ($1.11 cents per pack tax) and Master Settlement Agreement (MSA) payments totaled $759 million. From 1999 to 2001, federal and state governments collected more than $88 billion - or about $80 million a day - from smokers through excise and other taxes and litigation settlement payments to the states. "Since 1999," Payne noted, "there is no doubt that state and federal governments have had a virtual monopoly on tobacco industry revenue. In fact, they collect 15 times more from the sale of every pack of cigarettes than does R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. On a per-pack basis, government makes $1.54 while RJR makes 10 cents. Even without the proposed increase, New York, and virtually every other state, makes more per pack than Reynolds Tobacco does. "New York City residents have the right to ask their legislators where last year's $2 billion in state tobacco revenues went before a select few are hit with a 1,775 percent increase in cigarette taxes," Payne said. He pointed out that raising the tax would cause smokers to seek other places to purchase cigarettes such as Internet sites,

cross-border purchases from other states with lower taxes, and the black-market. In addition to encouraging tax avoidance behaviors, he said, high cigarette excise taxes lead to loss of jobs, particularly in the

retail and wholesale sectors; and jeopardize what could be a significant, stable revenue source if taxed at a reasonable level. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (RJRT) is a wholly owned subsidiary of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Holdings, Inc. (NYSE: RJR). R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is the second-largest tobacco company in the United States, manufacturing about one of every four cigarettes sold in the United States. Reynolds Tobacco's product line includes four of the nation's 10 best-selling cigarette brands: Camel, Winston, Salem and Doral. Reynolds Tobacco has been recognized by FORTUNE Magazine as one of the "100 Best Companies to Work For." For more information about RJRT, visit the company's web site at www.rjrt.com.



The Proposed New York City Cigarette Tax Increase:

An Unprecedented Recipe for Economic Misery · Under a proposal by Mayor Michael Bloomberg, the New York City cigarette excise tax will rise from 8¢ per pack to a $1.50 per pack – an astounding 1,775% increase. An increase of this magnitude is unprecedented in the annals of tobacco taxation, and would make the City tax larger than any state tax in the country except New York’s. Coupled with the state tax of $1.50 (effective April 3, 2002), NYC consumers would face state and city taxes of $3.00 a pack. · The City tax would be 3 times as large as the average state tax and approximately 5 times as high as any municipal tax in the country. · The combined New York City and New York State tax would reach $3.00 per pack – before state and city sales taxes are even included – a tax level virtually unheard of outside of Europe. NYC prices would be nearly $6.80 per pack, making a pack of cigarettes about 50% more expensive than an ounce of silver. The typical NYC smoker would pay roughly $1,400 per year in NYC and NY State cigarette taxes. · New York City retailers and consumers have already being hit hard by last year’s increase in the state cigarette tax – tax-paid sales have dropped 20% in New York State due to this increase. · New York City retailers already hurting from the state tax increase and the economic recession will feel more pain as cigarette sales are likely to drop 60%. The Mayor’s own projections indicate a drop in tax-paid sales of 47% in the first year alone. [1] Even the Mayor’s lower assumption is cause for alarm – NYC merchants can expect close to $1 billion in gross retail sale losses. Gross profit losses would be about $180 million. These sales are hard to replace – cigarette sales are typically the number one in-store seller for convenience stores, comprising 35% of all sales. What a great way to pull NYC’s law-abiding small businesses out of the recession! · Over 175 million packs of NYC tax-paid volume would disappear, likely to reemerge in the black market. In fact, the magnitude of the Mayor’s projections suggests that his budget office is well aware of the smuggling problem that would be triggered by the draconian tax increase. · Cigarette smuggling, already plaguing the state since its recent tax hike, would reach enormous levels within NYC. A van can carry 57,000 packs of cigarettes. Smugglers making a run from NY’s numerous Native-American Reservations could reap profits of $170,000. Just one tractor-trailer load per day each week would be enough to supply about 44% of the NYC market. Back in 1978 New York’s Donati Commission recommended reducing the current 8¢ NYC tax to stem a bootlegging epidemic that was estimated to be taking about 20% of the NYC market. After the Bloomberg tax it will take more than a commission to stop the flood of contraband into the city. · The combined NYC and NY State tax of $3.00 could potentially lead to a retailer’s revolt like the one that occurred in Canada during the 1990’s. High taxes fueled rampant smuggling in which legitimate retailers would hurt. This led previously law-abiding retailers to openly violate Canadian tax laws. The problem was so widespread that the Canadian government lowered the hated tax.

An Estimate Of What The State And City Is Losing

From the NY Times, by Hope Reeves: One could explore the economics this way: A reporter watched seven cartons of cigarettes being sold inside Chief Wallace's shop in five minutes one day in June. Erring on the side of caution, then, one could assume 50 cartons are sold an hour. The shop is open 13.5 hours a day every day, which translates to 675 cartons a day, 4,725 cartons per week, or 18,900 per month. (And that does not include phone and Internet orders.) At an average price of $27.50 per carton, Chief Wallace would take in about $520,000. His profit would be that sum, minus his overhead and what he paid for the cigarettes. Those two costs are another mystery, as Chief Wallace, as well as the cigarette manufacturers and distributors, would not say what he pays for them. Looked at another way, at $15 in tax per carton, assuming those hypothetical calculations are not too far off, the state is losing about $283,500 a month in revenue from Chief Wallace's shop alone (again, not counting Internet and phone orders). Chief Wallace said there were 85 Indian-owned tobacco outlets in the state at his last count, in 1998. So the hypothetical statewide total: a $24-million-a-month loss to the government. And New York City is also losing $1.50 in tax per pack.

It All Started with Prop. 13

From Merced Sun Star, by Dan Walters Speaking of bad habits, another of those high-dollar measures in 1988 was Proposition 99, the first of a spate of drives to raise cigarette taxes. At the time, although cigarette sales in California had been decreasing as smoking's health impacts had become better known, it was still a fairly common practice. Thus, the proposed boost in taxes from 10 cents a pack to 35 cents was highly controversial. The tobacco industry committed millions of dollars to an anti-Proposition 99 campaign. One of its most controversial propaganda themes was that by raising taxes on cigarettes, the measure would create a criminal black market in untaxed smokes. Pro-tax advocates and editorialists universally dismissed as the allegation as fanciful. The new tax, approved by 58 percent of voters, never generated the $650 million per year in revenue that its proponents promised. After a brief $500 million spike, revenues began a years-long slide until another boost in cigarette taxes, this time 50 cents a pack, was enacted in 1998. That one, sponsored by actor-director Rob Reiner to benefit early childhood development, caused another temporary uptick in cigarette revenues to $1.2 billion a year, but they have also since declined. Last year, voters rejected a $2.60 per pack boost to underwrite health care. Per capita cigarette sales, as calculated for tax purposes, have dropped from nearly 150 packs per year in the early 1960s to scarcely a fifth of that level today, undoubtedly a good thing from the public health standpoint. But as smoking has become much more expensive because of higher taxes and surcharges imposed by cigarette makers to pay for a multibillion-dollar lawsuit settlement, the old campaign propaganda about a black market has come true. Earlier this month, the dimensions of the black market became evident when three Southern California men were sentenced to federal prison and ordered to pay the state nearly $2 million in lost taxes for their roles in a massive scheme to smuggle untaxed cigarettes from Virginia to California. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, which cracked the case after an undercover investigation, described it as "a complex conspiracy" that involved potentially huge profits. The state Board of Equalization, in a 2003 report to the Legislature that is now being updated, estimated that the state was losing $292 million per year in taxes on black market cigarettes, mostly those brought in by organized smuggling rings. There was also so-called "casual evasion" by individuals buying cigarettes in nearby states, from Indian tribes and through Internet sales. The report helped persuade the Legislature to pass bills to tighten oversight of cigarette retailers and wholesalers -- laws that state tax officials hope will reduce the traffic in black market smokes. Nevertheless, the lucrative trade in untaxed cigarettes proves that the 1988 campaign claim was on the mark. As with liquor during Prohibition and illicit drugs today, when government makes a commodity illegal or expensive, it creates a market that criminals will supply.

Cigarette tax hikes reduce smoking? The anti-smokers throw out sales revenue figures to convince you that raising taxes on cigarettes help to reduce consumption. They crow about their success when receipts go down. That's malarky. Oregon realized that and said so: "Oregon's take from cigarette taxes is declining, from $371.5 million in the 1997-1999 budget cycle to $293 million projected for the current two-year budget. "Officials say the decline cannot be attributed solely to a dwindling number of smokers. They also blame smuggling, sales of cigarettes intended for export and the use of counterfeit tax stamps." Oregon is not innocent itself. It's become its own victim of greed and now cries about lost taxes, calling it a "catastrophic problem."

THE TAX BITE ON CIGARETTES

Read more about how taxes and other payments end up going to the government rather than the cigarette manufacturer.

State Excise Taxation: Horse-and-Buggy Taxes In an Electronic Age

by Richard E. Wagner, Ph.D.

The Tax Foundation, Background Paper No. 48 Executive Summary

Selective excise taxes are already obsolete, but because government is always slow to change, they will die a slow death. In the meantime they will cause a great deal of harm, both to taxpayers and to the state governments who use them most. Because many states have raised the cigarette tax rate precipitously during the last 10 years, this particular excise tax is putting on a clinic, so to speak. It is demonstrating to any dispassionate observer that the greater mobility of people and goods, along with instant communication, have made excise taxes obsolete. This is especially true of the cigarette tax because the product is lightweight, compact and highly taxed. Cigarette excise taxes only function as a predictable, untroublesome tax at a low tax rate. States that have raised their cigarette tax to the point that it is 50 cents per pack higher than a readily available, alternative source are discovering a host of problems: Revenue estimates are rarely met, causing budget problems. Bonds sold against future master settlement revenues are unattractive except at preposterously high interest rates, and even then they are downgraded by the rating agencies. In a replay of Prohibition-era social decay, law-abiding citizens learn to break the law routinely, and states respond by adopting intrusive and sometimes abusive tactics to catch them. Organized criminals and terrorist cells begin trafficking in smuggled cigarettes, and the states spend prodigiously to catch them, with almost no success. Businesses and jobs, along with their tax revenue on income, sales and property, are lost to interstate competition. The growth of these destructive consequences brings state governments to a crossroads. In one direction: state governments that use increasingly invasive, threatening, expensive and ultimately futile tactics to enforce high tax rates. In the other direction: innovative, service-oriented state governments that know they must compete with their neighboring jurisdictions, that they are evaluated by citizens according to their willingness to support the services that government offers with tax payments. Tobacco taxation is a severe form of tax discrimination whose victims reside primarily among the working classes and not professional people. It is tax discrimination against people of modest means for the benefit of the well-to-do. Revenues from the master settlement are declining because they are linked to taxable sales that are dropping precipitously because of high state cigarette tax rates. A vicious cycle is created where states react to lower-than-expected revenue with sharp tax increases which, in turn, drive down settlement revenue and make revenue estimates less reliable by pushing smokers to cross state borders for lower-taxed cigarettes or into the underground economy. The inaccuracy of revenue estimates for tobacco tax hikes obviously creates difficulties for state fiscal planning. That inaccuracy, moreover, will surely grow as the tax rates climb, and the rate of taxed sales is further and further divorced from the rate of tobacco consumption .



State-by-state breakdown of tobacco taxes provided by Smokers Club, Inc. (does not include city/county taxes imposed in nine states). [back to index]

"WE TOLD YOU SO": TAX BACKLASH NEWS



CIGARETTES TAX-FREE IN KIOSKS A SELF-MADE PROBLEM CIG TAX MAY LURE BUTT-LEGGERS PSSST... WANNA BUY CIGARETTES? THIEVES BUTT IN ON CIG DEALERS READ THEIR LIPS: NO TAXES. (PERIOD.) COPS FLICK BUTT-LEGGERS STOLEN CIG RING NAILED TOBACCO GROUP FILES

LAWSUIT TO SNUFF LEVIES BLACK MARKET SALES GROWING DEADLY WAR FOR BOOTLEG SMOKES TAXES AND TERRORISM UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES:

SMOKE AND BULLETS COUNTERFEIT CIGARETTES COSTING MILLIONS CIG-SELLER FEUD ENDS IN DEATH 'SMOKING' GUN KILLS GRAMPS Related Stories Online Cigarette Sales Hurt States' Tax Revenue, Says Report Higher Taxes Light Up Online Cigarette Business Tax Hike Puts Store Profits Up In Smoke $200M lost to smokes smugglers:

Yearly city, state tax shortfall from gang & Internet sales Tax hike on smokes is burning bodegas Roll-Your-Owns Cut Taxes Web Burns States Expecting Cigarette Taxes: States Feel Lost Tax Revenue Pinch as Smokers Turn to the Internet for Cigarette Deals Cig-Nificant Drop Pricier cigarettes a windfall for

crooks: Robberies are rising after state tax hikes New York's cigarette tax is a taxing failure Police Investigate String Of Cigarette Thefts

[back to index]

ANTI-TAX SUPPORT The NY Libertarian Party announces: "Taxes are too high--we call a boycott!" MESSAGE: BUY ELSEWHERE . The Libertarian Party supports NYC and NYS smokers. Read the LP statement! Join them in their efforts to say ENOUGH ALREADY! NEWS RELEASE CONGRESSMAN CHARLES B. RANGEL CONTACT -- Emile Milne

202-225-4365

July 3, 2002 CONG. RANGEL SAYS CIGARETTE TAX UNFAIRLY BURDENS THE POOR Congressman Charles Rangel today came out in strong opposition to the dramatic increase in the city's cigarette taxes, describing it as an unfair burden on the poor. "Low income people are the ones who will suffer from this," Congressman Rangel said. "They are the ones who willl really feel the burden of a $1.50 tax. To those who are better off, the tax won't make any difference at all." The Congressman, who has long opposed excise taxes on similar grounds, also questioned the argument that the so-called "sin tax" will change behavior. "If the motivation is to provide a kind of treatment for smokers by punishing them economically, the attempt is not only unfair, it is likely to fail," Congressman Rangel said. "People stop smoking because they want to; if they want to continue they will find a way to get cigarettes they can afford -- even if it means illegally on the black market, on the internet or traveling to low tax states." The Congressman said he understood the city's need to raise revenues, but took issue with a method that would disproportionately burden the poor. "If the Mayor wants to raise revenues, he should find a way that spreads the pain equally. It's just not fair to impose a $1.50 tax on people earning $25,000 or $100,000 a year, and then say you're doing it in order to stop them from smoking. All you're really doing is making life harder for the... [sorry, lost the remainder] COLUMNISTS/EXPERTS WEIGHS IN: Van Dough, by Jacob Sullum - "...Yet Bloomberg, who equates zero tax revenue with zero smoking, apparently thinks smokers will not be resourceful enough to avoid his tax. He also seems to discount the possibility that they will respond to higher prices by, say, economizing on other expenditures, getting a second job, dipping into their savings, going into debt or turning to crime." New York's Deadly Cigarette Tax, by Patrick Fleenor - "Apparently more interested in meddling in individuals' choices than reducing crime, Mayor Bloomberg imposed a nearly nineteen-fold increase in the city's cigarette tax rate. To the mayor, the policy prescription is simple: "We all know that smoking kills. And increasing the cigarette tax saves lives." But it isn't that simple. The widespread availability of cheap cigarettes via the black market makes his claim dubious. Worse, the mayor's paternalistic effort to protect smokers from themselves has placed other Americans at greater peril." NYC Cigarette Tax Hike Endangers Pataki Health Funding, by FISCALWATCH MEMO - "...but it’s not unreasonable to speculate that if New York’s combined city and state cigarette is allowed to reach a whopping $30 per carton of 10 packs, the existing revenue leakage would turn into a veritable hemorrhage. Smokers could save at least $18 a carton by buying their cigarettes in any neighboring state -- or even more by using a tax-free Internet site." Cigarette Taxes Are Fueling Organized Crime, by Patrick Fleenor - "Last month, New York law enforcement authorities announced the arrest of Queens resident Rafea al-Nablisi for smuggling 12,000 cartons of cigarettes a week. It was not the first such arrest, and thanks to New York's latest cigarette tax hike, it will not be the last. On April 23, less than two weeks after Mr. Nablisi's arrest was made public, Gov. David Paterson signed into law a $1.25 per-pack tax hike on top of the state's $1.50 per-pack tax. That's in addition to New York City's own $1.50 per-pack tax. Come July 1, New York City's smokers will be paying on average $9 a pack for legal cigarettes. But if history is any guide, most cigarettes sold will actually be trucked up from Virginia, or shipped in from China, by "butt-leggers" who can make over $1 million on each tractor-trailer load of smuggled smokes. The blunt fact, which politicians of both political parties are determined to ignore, is that high cigarette taxes in New York have led to a bloody, decades-long smuggling epidemic."



[back to index]

RELATED READING MATERIAL SMOKED OUT A review of: CURBING THE EPIDEMIC: GOVERNMENTS AND THE ECONOMICS OF TOBACCO CONTROL, WORLD BANK, 1999 SNUFF THE FACTS [back to index] NYC DEPT OF FINANCE CAMPAIGN TO COLLECT BACK CIGARETTE TAXES: OUR ANALYSIS The NYC (that's CITY) Department of Finance, at the direction of Mayor Bloomberg, has embarked on an aggressive campaign to collect taxes not paid on cigarette purchases made over the internet. As the situation is explained we hope we can offer some additional information that will clarify it for you and also maybe calm some, but not everybody's, nerves. Discussion Breakdown: WHO IS AT RISK GEOGRAPHICALLY?

HOW DID THEY GET NAMES?

WHOSE NAMES DID THEY GET?

WILL THEY PURSUE MORE PEOPLE/RETAILERS IN THE FUTURE?

I RECEIVED A BILL. WHAT RECOURSE DO I HAVE?

WHAT CAN I DO TO PROTECT MYSELF IN THE FUTURE?

CREDIT CARD WARNING

RELATED READING MATERIAL

FOLLOWING THE NEWS (Updates on the Situation as they come in)

> NY Daily News - January 28, 2005: "Cig suit snuffed, city may relight"

> NY Times - February 12, 2005: "New York Hits Online Sellers of Cigarettes"

> NY Post - February 14, 2005: "354G In Ash Cash"

> Buffalo News - February 17, 2005: "Indians' cigarette, gas sales targeted"

> NY Post - February 23, 2005: "Albany's Smoking Out Puffers For Online Taxes"

> Chicago Tribune - March 7, 2005: "Smokers feeling unexpected burn"

> USA Today - March 8, 2005: "Online tax bill due for smokers"

> NY Post - March 9, 2005: "'Net Cigs Master-Barred"

> U.S. Newswire Press Release - March 16, 2005: "Internet Cigarette Sales Spark Enforcement Meeting, Possible Crackdown"

> Associated Press - March 18, 2005: "Deal Aims to Prevent Web Cigarette Sales"

> Buffalo News - March 18, 2005: "Senecas cry foul on stymied cigarette sales"

> Buffalo News - April 4, 2005: "Internet Cigarette Sales Take A Hit"

> NY Times - April 4, 2005: "Trouble for Online Vendors of Cigarettes"

> Buffalo News - April 6, 2005: "Regulations in works to collect taxes on Indian sales of cigarettes, gas"

> NY Times - May 29, 2005: "Post Office Sidesteps Fray on Illicit Sales of Cigarettes"

> The Buffalo News - January 18, 2006: "Pataki Seeks 1-Year Delay In Ending Indians' Tax-Free Cigarette Sales"

> NY Post - February 3, 2006: "Web Buyers Smoked Out"

> Associated Press - February 23, 2006: "Spitzer: Pataki Administration Poised to Violate Law March 1"

> NY Times - March 8, 2006: "Settlement Reached to Pursue Online Cigarette Sales Taxes"

> The Buffalo News - March 16, 2006: "Key Tobacco Supplier Halts Sales to Senecas"

> The Buffalo News - March 17, 2006: "Indian Protests of Cigarette Tax Law Limited for Now"

> Associated Press - March 18, 2006: "Tax Officials' Advice Eases Tension Over Indian Cigarette Sales"

> NY Daily News - March 19, 2006: "Pols Fume as Cig Tax is Ignored

> The Buffalo News - March 19, 2006: "Indians See Tax Battle With Spitzer"

> NY Daily News - March 20, 2006: "Supermart Sues L.I. Indians Over Sale of Cigs"

> Niagra Falls Reporter - March 21, 2006: "State's Latest Sales-Tax Grab Jeopardizes Rez Businesses"

> NY Sun - March 22, 2006: "Council Wants Indian Tribes to Pay State Cig Taxes"

> Indian Country Today - March 24, 2006: "Cigarette Tax Issue Smolders in NY State"

> Convenience Store News - April 29, 2006: "NY Lawmakers Seek To Halt Tax-Free Cigarette Sales"

> Utica Observer Dispatch - May 3, 2006: "Convenience Stores Plan To Sue Pataki"

> Associated Press - May 3, 2006: "Group Sues State To Overturn Law Banning Internet Tobacco Sales"

> Star-Gazette - June 22, 2006: "Senate Approves [Cigarette Tax Measure]"

> The Buffalo News - June 22, 2006: "Senecas Blast New Law Cutting Tobacco Supply"

> WXXI (PBS) - June 27, 2006: "Group Asks Pataki to Sign Back-Door Bill to Collect Cigarette Taxes"

> NY Sun - July 25, 2006: "Law Department Sues Cigarette Wholesalers"

> Adirondack Daily Enterprise - August 5, 2006: "Cigarette Tax Dispute Leaves Day Wholesale Facing Lawsuits"

> Associated Press - August 7, 2006: "Tobacco Wholesalers Mull Suit Over NY Cigs"

> NY Daily News - August 10, 2006: "City to Smokers: Cough Up 7M in Owed Net Taxes"

> NY Post - August 10, 2006: "Cough Up Web Cig Taxes: City"

> Queens Chronicle - September 14, 2006: "Up In Smoke: City Wants Cigarette Money"

> WNBZ Radio - December 7, 2006: "Cigarette Tax Suits Against Day Wholesale Dismissed"

> NY Post - February 12, 2007: "Cig-tax Dodgers Spared"

> NY Post - March 4, 2007: "Pol Signals Smoke-Tax Health Aid"

> The Buffalo News - March 18, 2007: "Focus: Taxing Cigarette Sales. The State and the Senecas: Who Will Blink First"

> Associated Press - March 22, 2007: "Gov. Spitzer Urged to Collect Cigarette Tax"

> Democrat & Chronicle - April 3, 2007: "Proposed Bill Takes on Cigarette 'Buttleggers'"

> Reuters - October 19, 2007: "Educated NY Smokers Dodge Cigarette Taxes --Report"

> NY Times - December 5, 2007: "Much of Suit Aimed at Indian Cigarette Sales is Dismissed"

> The Buffalo News - April 11, 2008: " Seneca Nation Remains Free of State's Soaring Cigarette Taxes"

> NY Post - April 27, 2008: "'Cig Break' Brawl. Heat's on Gov to Tax Indian Smokes"

> NY Times - September 30, 2008: "City Sues Reservation’s Cigarette Stores"

> Newsday - June 9, 2009: "NYC suit claiming Internet cigarette taxes fails"

> The Post-Standard - July 10, 2009: "Court Ruling Puts Cayuga Indian Nation Back in Cigarette Business"

> The Buffalo News - August 15, 2009: "State Drops Collection of Taxes on Indian Cigarettes. Writes Off Revenue From Reservation Sales."

> Associated Press - August 27, 2009: "Brooklyn Judge Enjoins Smoke-Shop Indians"

> NY Post - November 3, 2009: "Paterson Butts Out"

> Wall Street Journal - January 25, 2010: "High Court Rules Against New York City in Internet-Tobacco Suit"

> The Buffalo News - February 24, 2010: "Another Try at Taxing Indian Cigarettes"

> NY Daily News - April 3, 2013: "Cough Up 10M!. Cigarette Shops on L.I. Reservation Burned for Untaxed Sales"



WHO IS AT RISK GEOGRAPHICALLY? Only those who live in the five boroughs of NYC. UPDATE: 2/23/05 - NY State Gets in the Act. The analysis applies to the state as well now. NYC residents to be hit a second time. (See 2/23/05 news below)

HOW DID THEY GET NAMES? It's consistently reported that the names were obtained through lawsuits brought against online cigarette retailers(s) compelling them to hand over their customer list. It's unclear which jurisdiction gets the ultimate credit for obtaining the list and/or how many retailers are involved: NY Times: "Compiling names of customers from an [singular] online cigarette retailer..." NY Newsday: "The city got the New Yorkers' names from lawsuits brought by other jurisdictions that compelled online cigarette sellers to turn over their customer lists." NY Post: "The Finance Department said 2,300 letters demanding payment went out Monday to a list of city smokers obtained from Web sites sued by the federal government in Virginia. Another 1,800 letters went out yesterday to anyone who bought tobacco from another Internet company sued by the city." NY Daily News: "...the city began issuing harsh letters to 3,700 city smokers whose names popped up in lawsuits against three online cigarette sites."

WHOSE NAMES DID THEY GET? Only those who purchased cigarettes from the retailer(s) that was the subject of the lawsuit(s). Some newspapers report that people receiving bills did business with Cigs4Cheap.com that operated (now defunct) out of Virginia. Those getting bills that contacted me did business with cigoutlet.com (also defunct) that also operated out of Virginia. After an exhaustive search, even with a report that it was a "landmark" court ruling in Virginia against Cigs4Cheap.com, I found no court ruling or any other shred of information or documentation on Cigs4Cheap other than a dead link on sites that list tobacco retailers. Neither did I find anything that links the two. However, even lacking the evidence, generally one company will operate under several names and web sites. Based on the puzzle pieces it can be reasonably concluded that cigoutlet.com was owned by the same company that operated Cigs4Cheap.com. Furthermore, based on information contained in a lawsuit carried out in California against several internet retailers, it names LLP Enterprises, Inc. and its president Adib Mograbi as the Virginia corporation doing business as Cigoutlet-The Tobacco Store, www.cigoutlet.com and www.affordablecigs.com. (related link http://caag.state.ca.us/newsalerts/2003/03-039CigOutlet.pdf) * At this time (Jan. '05), based on the cumulative information available, it appears that this is the ONLY company, operating under several web site names/addresses, whose customer list is the source of the names of NYC residents being targeted. Even though the California suit I cite doesn't include Cigs4Cheap.com as one of the businesses operated by LLP Enterprises, there's sufficient reason to conclude that it might be. Though I make no promises that it isn't a separate company and that the city is possibly in possession of two company's customer lists. It's just that I doubt it. If you did not do business with any of the sites operated by this company - or did, but not within the city's targeted period of July 2002 through April 2004 -- you can be more confident that you will not be receiving one of these letters this time around. Although some of the reports state that more letters will be forthcoming shortly in a second wave it's my OPINION that they will still be related to the web sites already identified. While the first wave might have been from cigoutlet.com's customer list the second wave might be from affordablecig.com's customer list. Again, no promises though that that is the case. Though by the numbers of letters reported to be in the second wave (1800) it sounds like it's not more than from one other retailer's customer list, whatever that one might be.

*Update :

March 7, 2006 - The NYC Law Dept. reports today that it has successfully sued and obtained the customer lists from eSmokes, Inc. for purchases made between 2000 and mid 2003. This vendor is missing from the two original (and first two) lists of named targets below -- obtained from two (and only) previous press releases -- because no press release was issued or otherwise publicly reported when a suit against eSmokes, Inc. was added. March 10, 2006 - Sources report that dirtcheapcig.com has agreed to settle the suit filed against them by NYC in Jan. 2003 (below) and provide their customer list to authorities who expect these back tax letters to go out in a few months. August 10, 2006 - NYC sends back-tax letters to dirtcheapcig.com customers

WILL THEY PURSUE MORE PEOPLE/RETAILERS IN THE FUTURE? The NYC Dept. of Finance is working on it but it will depend on the success, or the degree of any success, of the lawsuits filed by the city on behalf of NYC DOF that the news reports correctly speak about. In January 2003 the NYC Law Dept., in conjunction with the DOF, released a press release regarding its commencement of a lawsuit against 14 cigarette retailer web sites. The introduction of the press release: The City’s suit seeks treble or triple the amount of the taxes the City has lost by reason of the defendants’ unreported sales to New York City residents -- which could amount to in excess of $15 million in recovery for the City -- and an injunction that would require the defendants to file the federally mandated Jenkins Act reports [that alert state tax authorities to out-of-state cigarette purchases, so that the purchases can be taxed] and to desist from continuing to misrepresent the tax status of Internet purchases. The sites named as defendants are:

1. cycocigs.com

2. aabakismokes.com

both operated under Cyco.net, Inc.

3. buydiscountcigarettes.com

4. cigarettespecials.com

5. FreeCigs4u.com

6. cybercigarettes.com

7. adobeCigarettes.com (notes on site it will not ship to NY)

all 5 operated under Hemi Group, LLC

8. dirtcheapcig.com (notes on site it will not ship to NY)

operated under Dirtcheap.com, Inc.

9. paylesscigs.com

operated under PaylessCigs

10. smokes-direct.com

11. cigsonline.com (currently unavailable - possibly defunct)

both operated under Hooray's Inc.

12. bulkcigs.com (currently unavailable - possibly defunct)

13. S4L.com (reassigned to different product)

both operated under S4L Distributing, Inc.

14. discounttobaccostore.com

operated under Double B Distributing d/b/a Discount Tobacco Store In October 2003 the NYC Law Dept. released another press release regarding its expansion of its quest and filing a new lawsuit against another 7 cigarette retailer web sites. The press release explanation is the same as the first but with the additional charge that the retailers are violating the new NYS law that prohibits shipment of cigarettes by retailers from any state (even NY) to New Yorkers. The law was effective (March 2003) prior to this second lawsuit but after the first. The sites named as defendants are:

• cheapsmoke.com

• discountcigarettes.com

• dannystobacco.com (notes on site it will not ship to NY)

• nccigarettes.com

• keweenawbay.com

• cigoutlet.com (defunct)

• cigs4cheap.com (defunct) (this time they do not note the operators but research indicates they are all operated by separate companies) (The following additional information was discovered and added on March 12, 2006) In April 2004 the NYC Law Dept. filed a third lawsuit against another 3 cigarette retailer web sites. The sites named as defendants are:

• Smoke-Spirits.com (defunct)

• www.smokincheap.com (defunct)

operated under National Wholesale LLC

• www.cigarettesforless.com

operated under C4L(ess) LLC In March 2005 the NYC Law Dept. filed a fourth lawsuit against another 6 cigarette retailer web sites. The sites named as defendants are:

• eSmokes.com (site still up but reportedly out of business)

• Tobacco123.com

operated under PA Resources, Inc.

• Double-Eagle.com

• Silver Cloud Smoke Shop

• EZTobacco.com

• Discountcigarettes4u.com (reassigned to a generic site)

As it turns out, though the two sites' customer lists that were the first to fall into the hands of NYC -- cigoutlet.com and cigs4cheap.com -- are included in one of the city's lawsuits, it was a suit brought by the federal government that gets credited with settling with those companies and providing the states (aka "the victims") with the lists that were first handed over to them. You'll note that I added that even if successful in their suits there MIGHT be a degree to which they are successful. That could mean they reach a settlement whereby the retailers agree to pay all or a portion of the taxes owed and agree to stop shipping to NY or if for some reason they continue to ship (hardly unlikely but for the sake of argument...) will agree to file the customer names with the city from that day forward. I present this scenario based on a study on Internet Cigarette Sales conducted by the United States General Accounting Office that, among other things, found that "results were limited" when states have taken action to promote Jenkins Act compliance by internet cigarette vendors. Though none of the actions or results being reviewed were due to lawsuits . This report also includes the reactions of private citizens, that might interest you, to receiving back taxes bills and what they did or did not do. The intent of this study was to conclude the best remedy to the "problem." They concluded: To improve the federal government’s efforts in enforcing the Jenkins Act and promoting compliance with the act by Internet cigarette vendors, which may lead to increased state tax revenues from cigarette sales, the Congress should consider providing ATF with primary jurisdiction to investigate violations of the Jenkins Act (15 U.S.C. §375-378). Well, the recognized "problem" (which did need Congress as a good fix) was handled another way when special interests got together and crafted the PACT Act (Prevent All Cigarette Trafficking Act). Rather than trying to enforce and recoup lost taxes the plan is to just make a federal law that prevents shipping of tobacco products. The U.S. Senate bill passed in January 2004. Since then the House has not acted on their version of the bill. I implore you to visit our action alert page, use the suggested letter, and follow the directions on how to contact your representative. Further reporting by newspapers brings some new information on what the personal risk factors are and could relieve some tension: "The city claims it will not penalize citizens at this time who purchase tobacco products from Indian tribes..." ~CNS News 1/17/05

New York also has launched lawsuits against 30 other Web sites, hoping to recover lost revenue. But those customers won't be getting letters just yet. The lawsuits ask for buyers' names and their orders to calculate how much taxes to demand from the Internet companies , a city lawyer said. New York resorted to going after the buyers this time because cigs4cheap.com was bankrupt. ''We would prefer to collect the money from the companies,'' said Eric Proshansky, a litigator for the city. ''It's rather inefficient to go after 5,000 people one at a time.'' ~LA Times 1/18/05

Not that we approve of the government going after the retailers either but it's information on how this campaign relates to your personal situation. *********** UPDATE: 2/23/06 - Judge Dismisses New York's Suit Against Internet Cigarette Sellers The New York Law Journal reports New York City's attempt to sue Internet cigarette sellers for lost tax revenue under a racketeering theory has been dismissed by a federal judge for the second time. This ruling will apply to all the suits filed since they were all based on the same theory. Caution to celebrate is warranted because the city will appeal, feeling confident the ruling will be reversed. Well, time will tell (6 mos. to a year). Perhaps the most disturbing news is that the vendors who have recently settled with the city (eSmokes and dirtcheapcigs.com) -- by providing their customer lists -- could have now backed out but none want to. So much for some promises of protecting their customers (already apparent but now emphasized).

I RECEIVED A BILL. WHAT RECOURSE DO I HAVE? First and foremost, the question that first leaps from everyone's lips is, "Can they do this? It can't be legal!" They can and it's legal. There are no constitutional violations occuring. Also, it does no good to point fingers at others who buy all sorts of other products over the internet and don't report taxes. It's tobacco and smokers who are demonized and persecuted and if this is the tax category they want to hound then that's that. That said, we strongly urge anyone who received a bill to demand to see the written proof showing the purchases before paying. Refuse to take their word for it. Despite what the person handling the taxes at the DOF told one caller --that the only option was to pay -- that is not the case: The New York City Tax Appeals Tribunal ("The Tribunal") is an independent agency created by the New York City Charter. The Tribunal has the responsibility of providing a fair, impartial, efficient, and knowledgeable forum in which to resolve disputes between taxpayers and the New York City Department of Finance (DOF). The only impediment to seeking relief through the tribunal is that you must appoint either a lawyer or CPA to represent you. The form necessary is called "Power of Attorney." One other report confirms what we urge anyone receiving a bill to do -- demand to review their information before handing over your money. It also reveals that the DOF will listen to appeals (without needing a lawyer or other professional representative): NY Daily News, Jan. 20, 2005 Smokers billed for sales tax they never paid on cigarettes they bought over the internet can settle up in installments, but one puffer warned them to look closely at the city's paperwork. The city Finance Department said offenders can call the city Office of Tax Enforcement to set up payment plans. But one smoker who was billed said city snoops counted several of her purchases twice. When she protested, the Finance Department cut her bill by $150.

I'm sorry I can't offer any other legal suggestions. A large part of the time eaten up in researching the situation was to find a legitimate legal defense. Every angle I pursued ended with a door being slammed. Perhaps an attorney reading this could share some possible defense I was unable to find myself.

WHAT CAN I DO TO PROTECT MYSELF IN THE FUTURE? 1. I've waited till now to discuss the safety of tribal-run internet retailers. It's time to reflect on which web sites have so far been the source of the customer lists obtained by the city. They were not tribal-run. Indian reservation retailers have insisted, and continue to insist, that they will never hand over their customer lists, not even if faced with a subpeona. They stand behind their sovereign nation status as being immune from government forcing them to do so or collect taxes from them. Tribal-run retailers are the safest refuge. Though even with their commitment to shield their customers I want to emphasize the word "SAFEST." Unfortunately, it's not stopping the city from going after them. Some of the retailer sites listed as defendants in the city lawsuit are tribal-run. Even so, it's a political and legal hot potato and we have most faith in their pledge not to divulge customer information under any pressure, legal or otherwise. So if you saw one of the Indian reservation sites you've done business with on the above lists you have hope that you'll still be safe. 2. The "Two Carton" provision During the constant battle over cigarettes and the NY laws created to regulate them it's been uttered (without much clarification) that "it's okay to purchase two cartons." I reviewed both the NYC Administrative Code (Title 11, Chapter 13) and the NYS Tax Code (Article 20). Both say the same: NYC Admin. Code: § 11-1302

b. The tax imposed hereunder shall not apply to:

1. The use, otherwise than for sale, of four hundred cigarettes or less brought into the city, on or in possession of, any person;

NYS Tax Code: § 471-a

There is hereby imposed and shall be paid a tax on all cigarettes used in the state by any person, except that no tax shall be imposed... (3) on the use of four hundred or less cigarettes, brought into the state on, or in the possession of, any person.

This exemption ONLY applies to cigarettes purchased IN PERSON. The exemption does not apply if it is received by mail . You probably don't know that the state provides a separate tax form for reporting cigarette taxes owed -- "Cigarette Use Tax Return (Form CG-15)" (see also form CG-15-1 - "Instructions for Form CG-15") It is on this form that the explanation is provided: Note: Cigarettes shipped into New York by mail are not brought into the state on or in the possession of the user, and therefore do not qualify for the [two carton] exemption. It further goes on to explain: If more than 400 cigarettes are brought into the state (or into the state and city), then all of the cigarettes are subject to tax(es). Cigarettes acquired by an individual to be given as a gift to another individual are not exempt because the law does not exempt gifts of cigarettes. The only cold comfort the two carton provision brings is that you can choose to travel to the retailer to make your two carton maximum purchase and be free from paying tax. Surely that's not convenient for most people but is for those who live close by. Note that purchases made at tribal-run retailers (NY based or otherwise) are the equivalent to an OUT of state purchase. As sovereign nations, even though they reside within a state, they are technically not part of the state. More than that, they are a separate nation. So the mailing exception to the exemption still applies. But as a New Yorker you can go to a reservation in New York and you would be exempt from the tax on a two carton maximum purchase because you bought them OUT of state.

3. Switch to a Discount Brand / Roll Your Own The last resort to beating them at their own game is to switch to discount or deep discount cigarettes. For instance, Seneca brand can be found for $10/carton (that's not a typo). As disgusted as it might make you feel you can then also send a check for $15 to the NYC DOF for a total cost of $25/carton. Considering that a carton of premium brand cigarettes in NYC would cost you $70+ you'd be way ahead of the game, legal, and able to give Mayor Bloomberg the finger without having anything to hide. The bonus (yes, a bonus to the finger!) is that by not purchasing cigarettes from any of the major three tobacco companies or some of the smaller tobacco companies who participate in the Master Settlement Agreement you'll be affecting the amount of the annual payment the state receives. Each state’s yearly MSA payment is based on cigarette sales by MSA participants for the previous year. That's the money the state steals from smokers (to cover the payments the tobacco companies passed the cost on to smokers by raising the price per pack) and depends on to fund just about everything else except smoking-related health care. As a matter of fact another advocate has just launched a campaign called "21st Century Boston Tea Party: Holding the States' MSA Payments Hostage." Visit the site for a detailed explanation, including a further explanation of the MSA and which brands to buy. Or roll your own (as the phrase goes). Purchasing loose tobacco is not purchasing "cigarettes." The usual city and state tax per pack does not apply. Loose tobacco products (tobacco, tubes, filters) are supposed to also be taxed but at a much lower rate and I believe is only collected by the state (who has yet to begin their own tax witchhunt). Rolling your own could cost you as little as $1.25 per pack. Click here for a fun lesson on all you need to know about cost and how to do it.

CREDIT CARD WARNING A strong rumor circulating is that the U.S. State Attorneys General are going to threaten the credit card industry with a class action lawsuit to force them to monitor credit card purchases of tobacco products. In the case of overseas vendors and the reservation shops (remember, also considered another nation) they cannot force an out of country vendor to come to the U.S. to be prosecuted for selling untaxed tobacco products in the states so they're looking to go after the buyers instead. (Read an interesting short piece on how Indian national sovereignty works in regard to taxes and the courts) The rumor gets a little murky as far as the non-tribal U.S. retailers go. It's reported that they will be forced to sign contracts with UPS, Federal Express and other common carriers that they will not use them to ship tobacco products to anywhere in the U.S. (not just NY as it legally stands now). That would leave only the US Postal Service, unless Congress passes the PACT Act as discussed previously that would make shipping illegal, period. The rumor is not clear on whether the credit card companies will be asked to monitor purchases from these sites as well. That's probably been left unclarified because non-tribal-run sites are not shielded from legal action and not immune from legal action that would demand they turn over their customer lists -- the government getting it that way instead of through credit card history. However, it's reasonable to conclude that the AGs could easily ask the credit card companies to monitor them too. The solution to protecting yourself against this new threat is a MONEY ORDER. Money orders are virtually untraceable and are happily accepted by retailers. As far as tribal-run retailers go, they might record that purchase but since they won't turn over their customer list you're doubly covered. In a related matter, likely NY's first step in working toward the above, NYS Attorney General Spitzer just recently demanded that the credit card processor, VeriSign, not accept transactions that come from NY cigarette retailers no matter what state the customer resides in. It's not clear that every retailer has been affected. Those that are have sent notices to customers about the situation or posted a notice on their site, claiming that one way they hope to rectify the situation is by finding an alternate processor. However, it appears that in regaining the ability to process credit cards, rectifying the situation only went so far as promising not to process NY customer orders only. They can process credit cards for orders placed by residents of other states. At my prompting the NY Post covered this on January 5th: CARD FIRMS SMOKED ON 'NET SALES

By Kenneth Lovett ALBANY — State Attorney General Eliot Spitzer has turned his attention to Internet cigarette sales by warning credit-card companies to block orders from tax-free online tobacco companies, The Post has learned. At least two web-based companies, Cigs4free.com and 00Taxfree.com/Indiansmokeshops.com, have told customers that they are presently not shipping to New York. Cigs4free directly blames Spitzer. "Our site is temporarily down due to credit-card processor issues," the company says in a recent message posted on its Web site. "New York State Attorney General Eliot Spitzer has ordered Verisign, our processor, to block any orders from our Web site!" The Internet company yesterday began accepting phone orders again and said it hopes to begin accepting credit-card orders again as early as today. Spitzer spokesman Marc Violette denied the AG's office ordered card companies to stop processing orders from online tobacco companies, but acknowledged that "letters of guidance" were sent. "We're simply reminding credit-card companies and the processors of credit-card transactions that . . . this falls into the category of illegal transactions," Violette said.



It's an understatement to say that New York smokers are under a complete attack. If you don't live in New York, learn and be prepared.



RELATED READING MATERIAL NYS Consolidated Law ARTICLE 13-F; Section 1399-ll (small letters "L")

Regulation of Tobacco Products And Herbal Cigarettes

Re: Unlawful shipment or transport of cigarettes (to NY)

http://assembly.state.ny.us/leg/?cl=91&a=71 Court Case Contesting NYS Law re: Unlawful shipment or transport of cigarettes (to NY). Reversal of opinion. Appelate Court finds in favor of the state. Jenkins Act as amended by the PACT Act

http://www.pact-act.com/pactact/2010-03_Jenkins_Act_Blackline_as_amended_by_S.1147.pdf Is the MSA Unraveling http://www.tobonline.com/ArticlePages/ArticlePagesVol73/vol73p32.htm MSA Update

http://www.tobonline.com/ArticlePages/ArticlePagesVol74/vol74p88.htm MSA Challenged by Kentucky Retailers http://www.tobonline.com/ArticlePages/ArticlePagesVol76/vol76p08.htm Reservation and Net Sales Under Fire (scroll down page)

http://www.tobonline.com/ArticlePages/ArticlePagesVol76/vol76p08.htm PACT Act Timeline and description

http://www.techlawjournal.com/topstories/2004/20040128.asp

Disclaimer: No assurances can be given about the accuracy of any of the opinions provided. You should seek independent professional or legal advice before acting upon any opinion, advice or information contained in this notice.

FOLLOWING THE NEWS

NY Daily News - April 3, 2013

Cough Up 10M! Cigarette Shops on L.I. Reservation Burned for Untaxed Sales Three Indian smoke shops must pay more than $10 million to New York City for trafficking untaxed cigarettes off a Long Island reservation, a Brooklyn federal judge ruled. Judge Carol Amon also prohibited the bootleg smoke sellers — which operated on the Poospatuck Reservation in Mastic — from ever selling untaxed cigarettes again. It’s a major win for Mayor Bloomberg, who sued the cigarette sellers in 2008, claiming they were selling cartons in bulk to people outside the tribe for huge profits. Bloomberg argued that selling the cheaper-priced, untaxed butts hurt lawful city businesses and deprived city coffers. “This is yet another major success in the legal battle against untaxed cigarettes,” said top city lawyer Michael Cardozo. “It should be very clear by now to those who sell and deliver untaxed cigarettes that flouting the law and undermining our city’s public health measures will cost them.” Poospatuck members would have had to smoke 960 packs a day to reach the number of cigarettes that were being sold on the reservation prior to the lawsuit, according to the city. The shops — Peace Pipe Smoke Shop, TDM Discount Cigarettes, and Red Dot Feather Smoke Shop — were permitted to sell untaxed cigarettes to members of the tribe, but not to nonmembers. In siding with the city, the court said in its March 28 decision that “unstamped cigarettes sold by these defendants were trafficked in large quantities into the city from the Poospatuck Reservation for many years. “These cigarettes entered the city without any payment of city cigarette taxes,” the court found. Authorities stamp cigarettes to show that the sellers have paid state and federal taxes. In New York City, an extra $5.85 in taxes is added onto the price of every pack of cigarettes. It’s the highest cigarette tax rate in the nation. The city had initially sued eight cigarette shops, but five voluntarily agreed to cease operations when the lawsuit began. The testimony of former cigarette bootleggers and company records helped the city win its case, the judge found. Peace Pipe was hit with the heftiest fines. The judge ordered it to pay $10,041,075, while TDM Discount must pay $450,000. Red Dot Feather Smoke will be assessed a penalty at a later date. Bloomberg — who banned smoking in bars in his first term — said that in addition to depriving the city of tax revenue, the sale of bootleg cigarettes also undermined the city’s efforts to decrease smoking.

The Buffalo News - February 24, 2010

Another Try at Taxing Indian Cigarettes ALBANY — A state tax department policy of not enforcing tax collections on Indian cigarette sales was officially rescinded Tuesday by the Paterson administration. But it will still take approval of a new set of regulations before the tax-free sales are halted. Gov. David A. Paterson announced a proposed set of rules to break the decades-long dispute over tax-free tobacco sales, which critics say could be costing the state as much as $1 billion a year in revenues. The new plan envisions the tax being collected “upstream” at the wholesale level and not at Indian retail shops. The proposed rules require cigarette manufacturers to sell cigarettes only to licensed stamping agents that certify they are not supplying tax-free retailers, such as the dozens of businesses on the Seneca Nation reservations, with cigarettes missing an official state tax stamp; they face perjury charges for lying. The latest move comes as the State Senate Finance Committee is poised to issue subpoenas as early as today to a broad segment of the tobacco industry. Sen. Carl Kruger, a Brooklyn Democrat who has railed against the lost tobacco excise taxes because of Indian and bootleg sales, is targeting nearly every aspect of the cigarette supply chain with a legal request for information that “could fill a dump truck,” said one government source. The lawmaker wants to get details on the extent of the state’s untaxed cigarette industry; one state estimate has claimed nearly 40 percent of smokers buy untaxed or low-tax cigarettes “regularly.” The Paterson administration today also will propose legislation to put in statute its new plan to permit a set number of tax-free cigarette sales to the state’s nine tribes for personal consumption by their members. It would bypass a law already on the books that calls for coupons to be used by Indians to buy their own tax-free cigarettes. The legislation would lift a current injunction imposed by a state court judge in Buffalo against the state’s enforcement of the coupon-based law. The release of the proposed rules kicks off a 45-day comment period and a review period that could see enactment in six months, according to an administration official. Government sources said any agreements struck in the coming months to resolve the issue with individual Indian tribes could supersede the new rules. The proposal comes as Paterson also is trying to push through a $1-per-pack excise tax increase, to $3.75, the nation’s highest. The move would further increase the profitability of bootleg and Indian cigarette sales unless a new collection mechanism is adopted. The new regulations would result in licensed stamping agents, which basically serve as middlemen between manufacturers and retailers, paying the taxes to Albany. Besides certifying they are making only legal, taxable sales, wholesalers would have to list the source of their cigarettes with the tax department. Manufacturers would have a legal burden, as well, because they would have to collect the certifications from wholesalers — meaning they could not sell their products to any wholesaler unless that supplier has certified to the tobacco companies that they do not sell any illegal tax-free cigarettes. The Seneca Nation did not comment on the proposal. “It seems reasonable to me,” Russell Sciandra, director of the Center for a Tobacco Free New York, said of the proposed rules. The plan also calls for an “adequate” number of cigarettes to be supplied tax-free to Indian tribes for personal consumption of its members. In the case of the Senecas’ 7,967 members, it would mean a total of 167,000 tax-free packs being supplied to the tribe every quarter — or 21 packs every three months for every man, woman and child enrolled as a Seneca. In all, the state’s nine tribes—with a total of 31,000 members — would receive 648,000 packs of tax-free cigarettes per quarter. Licensed stamping agents would be in violation of state law if they supply an amount beyond the approved allotment for each tribe.

Wall Street Journal - January 25, 2010

High Court Rules Against New York City in Internet-Tobacco Suit WASHINGTON—The Supreme Court ruled Monday that New York City couldn't use federal racketeering laws to sue out-of-state Internet tobacco retailers that don't file reports on city residents who buy cigarettes online. The city wants the reports so it can collect cigarette taxes directly from residents who purchased tobacco products online. The retailers aren't required to collect the taxes. The case before the high court centered on New York's allegations that New Mexico-based online retailer Hemi Group committed racketeering offenses of mail and wire fraud by allegedly failing to submit reports on its New York City customers to state tobacco administrators. The city, which said it lost millions of dollars in cigarette tax revenues, said federal law required Hemi to submit the reports. But the Supreme Court, in a 5-3 opinion written by Chief Justice John Roberts, ruled that the relationship between Hemi's alleged actions and the city's inability to collect taxes was too indirect to establish racketeering liability against the online retailer. Chief Justice Roberts said the direct cause of the alleged fraud against the city wasn't Hemi's conduct, but the refusal of residents to pay their taxes for online cigarette purchases. "The city, therefore, has no RICO claim," Chief Justice Roberts wrote. Justice Stephen Breyer said in dissent that the city made a sufficient racketeering connection to Hemi's alleged conduct. Had Hemi filed the reports, the state would have been able to obtain a significant share of the taxes it was owed, Justice Breyer said. Justice Sonia Sotomayor didn't participate in the case because she had participated previously as an appellate judge when the case was before the 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. The case is Hemi Group v. City of New York, 08-969.

NY Post - November 3, 2009

Paterson Butts Out Looks like Gov. Paterson was just blowing smoke when he asked the feds to assess the risk of violence from attempts to collect cigarette taxes from state Indian reservations. At a state Senate hearing last Tuesday, Paterson's chief counsel, Peter Kiernan, made clear that his boss would not pursue the taxes, because the gov -- like his predecessors, George Pataki and Eliot Spitzer -- just doesn't think enforcing the tax law is worth the hassle. Even though his recent request for a federal "threat assessment" suggested that he was preparing to go after the taxes. And even though the courts say the state has every right to collect taxes from cigarette sales to non-Indians. Paterson, it seems, is just too nervous about the prospect of tribal violence to claim what Albany is legally owed. What a dangerous message to send. Among the "costs" of enforcement (i.e., excuses for non-action), Kiernan noted "the psychic harm of forgone opportunity to live in peace with those who are entitled to sovereignty and their interpretation of what that means." Say what? He's talking about tribes that rioted, threw burning tires on the Thruway and fought state troopers, sending many to the hospital, when authorities tried to collect the tax in 1992 and 1997. Indeed, tribal leaders have made their current intentions clear, too. "We will never allow the state to tax our commerce," said Seneca leader JC Seneca. "A strong reaction to further affronts on tribal sovereignty is inevitable," warned an Oneida spokesman. Of course, the issue is hardly "sovereignty"; with some 300 million packs flowing out of state reservations each year, what's really at stake is a vast racket premised on an unfair tax advantage. Law-enforcement agents believe even terrorist networks are getting a piece of the action. Meanwhile, the state and city lose an estimated $1 billion a year in uncollected tax revenues -- even as both face multibillion-dollar budget shortfalls. Paterson's message? We won't collect taxes from you if you threaten violence. Clearly, he has no right to gripe when critics attack his lack of mettle.

Associated Press - August 27, 2009

Brooklyn Judge Enjoins Smoke-Shop Indians A Brooklyn federal court federal judge this week issued a ruling that could doom an Indian reservation’s booming business in tax-free cigarettes and spell trouble for other native American tobacco dealers in the state. In a decision announced Wednesday, U.S. District Judge Carol Bagley Amon barred a group of smoke shops on Long Island’s Poospatuck reservation from selling tax-free cigarettes to the general public, saying their location on tribal lands didn’t exempt them from state and federal tax law. Only members of the Unkechaug tribe, which controls the reservation, have a right to buy cigarettes there without paying taxes, she ruled, not the many non-Indian customers who flock to the shops for cheap smokes. If upheld, the injunction would eliminate much of the business at the stores, which sell millions of cartons of cigarettes a year and are among the biggest suppliers in the state. The judge stayed the ruling for 30 days to give the shops time to appeal, and Unkechaug Chief Harry Wallace quickly promised that the tribe wouldn’t let the decision stand unchallenged. “It’s improper,” he said of the ruling. He accused the judge of ignoring state law and policy regarding taxes and Indian reservations because she dislikes cigarettes. “She wanted to stop sales at any cost,” he said, adding that the ruling would be difficult to comply with, while robbing the stores of their competitive edge. “It would put every Indian store ... out of business.” The ruling is a victory for the city and its mayor, Michael Bloomberg, who sued the stores over their sale of tax-free cigarettes, saying they were illegal. “The city will go after every dollar that is owed to city taxpayers,” Bloomberg said. “Based on the evidence introduced at the four-day hearing, the court found that each business was selling huge quantities of cigarettes on which state and city taxes had not been paid. It also found that such sales of unstamped cigarettes were likely to continue in the absence of the court’s injunction – and that there is a substantial trade in unstamped cigarettes between the Poospatucks and New York City.” The court issued the injunction after concluding that “the city has established a clear or substantial likelihood of success on the merits of its claim” that the defendant businesses’ “receipt, possession, sale, distribution and purchase of quantities far in excess of 10,000 cigarettes, which do not bear New York tax stamps, under circumstances where such stamps are required” violates the Federal Contraband Cigarette Traffick-ing Act, Bloomberg said. In its suit, the city claimed the reservation shops had made a mockery of rules restricting the sale of tax-free cigarettes to members of the tribe. Each resident of the 55-acre reservation, near the town of Mastic, would need to consume 19,200 cigarettes a day to account for the tons of tobacco sold by the shops, the city said. City lawyers estimated that smoke shops cost the city and state a combined $840 million in tax revenue, much of it lost to smugglers who traveled to the reservation to stock up on cigarettes, then resold them in the city. “We are pleased that the court ruled in the city’s favor,” said New York City Corporation Counsel Michael A. Cardozo. “The Law Department will continue to support efforts to lawfully collect cigarette taxes and also to reduce smoking.” Smoke shops located on state-recognized Indian reservations have enjoyed a huge business in cigarettes since the mid-1990s, in part thanks to a string of governors who have refused to enforce state laws that were supposed to set up a system for taxing sales to the general public. State courts have repeatedly split on whether that policy, known as forbearance, absolves the reservation shops of any responsibility of collecting taxes. As recently as July, a midlevel state appeals court ruled that smoke shops on land claimed by the Cayuga Indian Nation could not be prosecuted under state law for failing to collect taxes on cigarette sales. Federal judges, however, have taken a harder line. One Poospatuck smoke shop owner is awaiting sentencing in a case in which he was convicted of racketeering for selling large quantities of untaxed cigarettes. The injunction covers five smoke shops - Monique's, Peace Pipe Smoke Shop, Red Dot & Feather, Smoking Arrow and TDM - and nine individuals. Other reservation smoke shops settled earlier in the case.

The Buffalo News - August 15, 2009

State drops collection of taxes on Indian cigarettes. Writes off revenue from reservation sales Despite a ballooning budget deficit, the Paterson administration quietly has written off taxes it had been expecting to collect on sales of cigarettes by American Indian retailers — an admission that yet another governor has no plans to resolve the long-standing, thorny matter. In April, Gov. David A. Paterson and lawmakers agreed on a budget for the state's current fiscal year that projected revenue of $65 million from taxing cigarettes sold to non-Indians in smoke shops, through the mail or over the Internet from reservation-based businesses. But with no fanfare — or even public notice — the administration has eliminated the $65 million, meaning the governor now does not expect to begin collecting the taxes at least until April 1, the start of the new fiscal year. The decision drew immediate and sharp criticism from health groups and an association that represents non-Indian retailers who say they cannot compete with the American Indians, who do not charge the state's sales $2.75-per-pack excise tax. "It's embarrassing, and it's outrageous that the Empire State can't seem to figure out how to collect this tax when just about every other state does," said Russell Sciandra, director of the Center for a Tobacco Free New York, which is connected with the American Cancer Society. Critics say the state loses $1 billion annually by not collecting the cigarette tax. Seneca Nation of Indians retailers lead the country in the sales of untaxed cigarettes. For years, state officials have worried about potential violence, such as the clash between state troopers and Indians on the Thruway in 1995, when then-Gov. George E. Pataki tried to end the tax-free sales. Seneca Nation officials, who were working Friday on flood relief efforts, were unavailable to comment. Last week, the Paterson administration released a 329-page update on state spending through the first quarter of the fiscal year. The report said the administration believes the state now faces a $2.1 billion deficit this year, and Paterson is looking at spending cuts and other options to propose to a special session of the State Legislature, expected to be held next month. Lawmakers have not ruled out raising taxes to close the gap. Deep in its pages, the spending update briefly mentions lower cigarette tax revenues, but makes no specific reference to jettisoning the cigarette tax collections. During an interview on an unrelated topic, Robert Megna, the governor's budget director, revealed to The Buffalo News that the state is backing away from the projection of $65 million from the potential revenue source. Matt Anderson, a spokesman for Megna, later said the $65 million was deleted from the budget "to prudently address potential risks to our receipts forecast." "We continue to work diligently toward a negotiated settlement of this issue," he added. Laws on the books already permit the state to collect the tax, which has been an issue going back to the days of Mario M. Cuomo's tenure as governor. Over the past decade, the dispute has intensified as the state increased cigarette taxes, widening the playing field between Indian and non-Indian retailers. The Senecas have maintained that treaty rights going back to the days of George Washington give them the right to sell products, including cigarettes, without taxes. They have long said they never will act as agents of the state government in collecting taxes, which they say would kill off a flourishing Western New York business that employs hundreds of people. On numerous occasions, the State Legislature has sought to force Paterson, and governors before him, to collect the tax. In January, Paterson said he wanted to resolve the issue through negotiation. But critics say that, with the stakes so lucrative, the Indian tribes, especially the Senecas, have little reason to negotiate. "It's sending totally the wrong signal," James Calvin, executive director of the New York Association of Convenience Stores, said of the administration quietly striking the Indian cigarette tax money from the budget. "If the state has a $2.1 billion deficit, it's crazy not to access the hundreds of millions of dollars in tax revenue that's readily available from this source," he added. "It's already a law. It's collectable. The United States Supreme Court has said we can collect it. Why would you ignore close to $1 billion when staring at such a huge deficit?" In June 2008, the state raised its excise tax on a pack of cigarettes by $1.50 to $2.75. That gives an Indian retailer who does not charge the tax a built-in price advantage of $27.50 per carton. "By the end of the fiscal year, the state and Gov. Paterson, we conservatively estimate, will have forgone $1 billion that is owed on Indian cigarette sales," Sciandra said.

The Post-Standard - July 10, 2009

Court Ruling Puts Cayuga Indian Nation Back in Cigarette Business Cigarette sales resumed Friday at the Cayuga Indian Nation's LakeSide Trading convenience stores in Union Springs and Seneca Falls after state appellate judges in Rochester ruled in favor of the Indian nation in its tax dispute with Cayuga and Seneca counties. "The word is out," said B.J. Radford, retail operations manager for the Cayuga nation. In a 4-1 decision released about 3 p.m., judges in the Fourth Judicial Department ruled that as a "qualified reservation," the Cayugas could sell unstamped cigarettes. In late November, sheriff's deputies in the counties raided the Cayugas' two LakeSide stores, seizing about 17,600 cartons of cigarettes. The Cayugas estimated the cigarettes were worth more than $500,000. The Cayugas had not paid state excise taxes on the cigarettes, and the counties claimed that because the Cayugas did not have an official reservation they were violating state tax law. The nation's two stores lie within the Cayugas' former ancestral homeland around the north end of Cayuga Lake. The Cayugas argue that the territory is a reservation that was established by federal treaty and that it has never been disestablished. The stores have been selling gas and sundries -- but no cigarettes -- since the raid. Radford said customers buying gas used cell phones to alert friends that the stores were back in the cigarette business. "The customer base seems to be excited," she said. "I'm surprised at how fast the word seems to be getting around." The ruling also precludes prosecution of Nation officials by the counties. "The Nation is very gratified by this decision, which will permit it to resume doing what every other Indian tribe in the state has been doing for years without threat of criminal prosecution," said Dan French, the lawyer representing the Cayugas. Philip Spellane, an attorney for the counties, said he has not yet met with county officials to discuss what their next step would be. The Cayugas had appealed a December ruling by state Supreme Court Judge Kenneth R. Fisher, who said the Cayugas did not have a qualified reservation status and thus could not sell tax-free cigarettes. Fisher also allowed the counties to proceed with criminal tax-evasion charges against the Cayugas. District attorneys in both counties filed sealed indictments. The indictments were never opened, and an appeals court ruling later barred any prosecution until the court ruled on the Cayugas' appeal. French said Friday's ruling bars any prosecution. The Cayugas maintain the confiscated cigarettes have spoiled in the more than seven months since the counties raided the stores, he said. French said the Nation will pursue a separate civil claim, suing the counties not only for the actual value of the cigarettes but for revenue lost during the time the stores were closed. "The Nation anticipates lost revenues in the millions," he said. [NY counties plan to appeal Indian cigarette ruling - July 13, 2009]

Newsday - June 9, 2009

NYC suit claiming Internet cigarette taxes fails New York's top court says New York City lacks legal standing to sue Internet cigarette retailers for lost taxes under state business laws. The Court of Appeals says the city and state now charge $4.25 per pack in excise taxes, which are owed by purchasers in New York. The city argued some online retailers misrepresent their cigarettes as "tax free" and claim that they don't have to file state sales reports identifying buyers, which is required by federal law. (See Decision: http://www.courts.state.ny.us/CTAPPS/decisions/2009/jun09/92opn09.pdf)

NY Times - September 30, 2008

City Sues Reservation’s Cigarette Stores Plunging headfirst into a delicate issue that has long bedeviled New York State and Long Island’s Indian tribes, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg criticized Gov. David A. Paterson on Monday for not enforcing cigarette tax laws, which the mayor estimated had deprived the city of up to $195 million a year in revenue. Residents of Indian reservations — like the 50-acre Poospatuck reservation in Mastic — are entitled to buy cigarettes tax free for their own use. But in a federal lawsuit filed on Monday, the Bloomberg administration accused eight stores on the reservation in Suffolk County of breaking state and federal law by selling cigarettes in bulk to bootleggers. The bootleggers, the lawsuit said, then shipped the cigarettes into the city. At a news conference in City Hall, Mr. Bloomberg acknowledged that the practice had existed for years. But he said the city’s lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, would not have been necessary if the state had been enforcing the law. Indeed, Mr. Bloomberg said, the state also would have benefited with $525 million a year in tax revenue. “I think the governor should go to the reservations and say, ‘As of tomorrow morning, stop this practice,’ ” Mr. Bloomberg said. “And if it requires law enforcement, that’s what the governor has the State Police for — to enforce the law.” To reinforce just how prevalent the practice was, Mr. Bloomberg stood next to a table stacked with packs of cigarettes and said that each of the 279 residents of the Poospatuck reservation — every man, woman and child — would have to smoke 960 packs, or 19,200 cigarettes, a day to account for the millions of cigarettes sold there in 2007. The mayor framed the lawsuit in the context of the global financial crisis, noting that the city was trying to slice $500 million from this year’s budget, and was likely to propose raising property taxes by 7 percent to generate an additional $600 million starting in January. “This one step alone could go a long ways in closing our budget gap,” he said. When asked about Mr. Bloomberg’s criticisms, Errol Cockfield, a spokesman for Mr. Paterson, said the governor was involved in discussions with the state’s Indian nations, those recognized by the state or the federal government, “to preclude the need for more endless litigation.” Harry Wallace, who is a lawyer and the chief of the Unkechaug Indian Nation, which is on the Poospatuck reservation, said in a telephone interview that he had not heard about the lawsuit. “Before we get a lawsuit, before we even get served, he serves the media first,” Mr. Wallace said of Mr. Bloomberg. “This debate has reached fanatical levels, where we are being scapegoated from everything from the fiscal crisis in New York to the mortgage crisis. I assume that at some point we’ll be blamed for global warming.” The lawsuit is part of a broader strategy by Mr. Bloomberg to tackle cigarette bootlegging as well as reduce smoking in New York. Earlier this year, the city won a couple of legal victories: cigarette wholesalers were found potentially liable for violating a federal law, and the city was allowed to proceed with racketeering lawsuits against out-of-state Internet cigarette retailers. The latest move seeks to go after cigarette retailers, but it could also entangle issues of Indian sovereignty, said Kathryn R. L. Rand, a law professor at the University of North Dakota who is an expert on Indian gambling. “It has legal merit, but I think it’s pushing the envelope a little bit,” she said.

NY Post - April 27, 2008

'Cig Break' Brawl. Heat's on Gov to Tax Indian Smokes Tax-free cigarettes from Indian reservations will go up in smoke if some in Albany get their way. Lawyers for a state lawmaker and Gov. Paterson are scheduled to face off in an upstate courtroom tomorrow in a case aimed at forcing the state to follow the law and collect sales tax on every pack sold by the 200 or so reservation stores and via the Internet. Last year, roughly 304 million packs of cigarettes were sold by New York's Indian tribes - and, as has been the practice for years, not a penny of tax was collected. As the state tax rises to $2.75 a pack - the highest in the nation - on June 3, New York would be forfeiting about $836 million in annual revenue by choosing not to collect taxes from reservations. In the city, the tax is $1.50 more. Critics of the state's non-enforcement stance say sales via Indian reservations - which now represent one of every three cigarettes sold in the state - stand to soar as folks look to save money. Assemblyman David Townsend, an upstate Republican who has sued to force the state to collect the tax, is hoping to change that. In 1997, when then-Gov. George Pataki began collecting the tax, violent protests broke out at reservations. In one instance, Seneca Indians set fire to tires on a state highway, closing it. Since then, the state has lost and regained its right to collect the taxes. The state passed a law allowing for the collection of sales tax from reservation sales to non-Indians in 2006, but Govs. Pataki and Eliot Spitzer did not move to enforce it. Some say they were afraid of sparking protests or a political backlash. The price of cigarettes at reservation stores ranges from $11 to $30 a carton, compared to $40 or more in the city. As a result, local convenience stores are hurting. "It is driving hundreds of thousands of non-Indian customers away from licensed convenience stores, decimating their businesses," James Calvin, president of the New York Association of Convenience Stores, wrote in a recent letter to Paterson. Under pressure from Spitzer, then New York attorney general, credit-card companies and overnight-delivery firms stopped their associations with tax-free cigarette sales. But customers were willing to pay with a check or money order and absorb the cost of a more expensive US postal delivery service. Paterson has asked his staff to research the topic, and he wants to come to an agreement with the tribes, a statehouse spokesman told The Post. That is not sitting well with a host of critics. They are urging Paterson simply to follow the law. The Poospatuck Indian reservation on Long Island, home to about 270 residents, accepted shipment from wholesalers of roughly 100 million packs of cigarettes in 2007. That is enough to supply every smoker in New York City with a pack a day for more than three months.

The Buffalo News - April 11, 2008

Seneca Nation remains free of state's soaring cigarette taxes.

Defying New York law, Indian nationmerchants can expect a windfall fromstate’s continuing lack of enforcement. If smokers are stewing over the state’s decision this week to raise the cigarette tax by $1.25 per pack, one group that stands to reap a considerable financial windfall was not complaining Thursday: Seneca Nation tobacco merchants. The tax increase makes cigarettes in New York the costliest in the nation. So come June 3, Buffalo smokers will be paying more than $30 per carton just in excise and sales taxes. On the Senecas’ Cattaraugus territory Thursday, a carton of Marlboro cigarettes was selling for $27 to $28, while lesser-known brands were selling for as low as $11 per carton. By contrast, at the CVS downtown at Main and Court streets, a carton of Marlboro costs $42.70. The state will take no steps to try to stop the sale of tax-free cigarettes. Legislators erased from the final budget a provision that then- Gov. Eliot L. Spitzer proposed to stop the tax-free sales at the manufacturing level in the cigarette- distribution chain. About a third of New York’s smokers now turn to Indian retailers, bootleggers, cross-border outlets and the Internet. “There’s no question the extra $1.25 is going to send smokers to Indian outlets,” said Assemblyman William Magee, D-Nelson. “Customers are going to go elsewhere because government has artificially raised the price of the product, and we don’t have a level playing field,” said Dan Shanahan, chief financial officer of Wilson Farms, a 196- store upstate convenience store chain. A half-dozen Indian tribes in New York sell tax-free cigarettes in some fashion, but the Seneca Nation has long been considered the king of the tax-free tobacco market. Through online sites and independently owned smoke shops, the Senecas supply smokers in Western New York and also do a brisk business in other areas, including New York City. The Big Apple adds another $1.50 per pack in local taxes on top of the new $2.75 state tax, bringing the total excise tax there to $42.50 per carton. Seneca Nation President Maurice A. John Sr. declined an interview request. In a written statement, he sought to downplay the tax increase’s effect on Seneca merchants’ finances, saying cigarette sales are “not overly significant” to the tribe’s increasingly diverse economy. “It would be erroneous for anyone to think that this tax increase is some sort of windfall for Indian nations,” he said. “Due to our sovereignty, the state’s tax burden on its residents does not affect us.” Still, the managers at two Cattaraugus territory smoke shops, who asked not to be named, said they are anticipating an increase in business. “We’ll get a lot of business,” one of them said. “Nobody wants to pay that extra $12.50 a carton.” Health groups praised the decision to raise the tax, but health lobbyists recognize that with the higher tax, the cigarette tax-evasion problem is now going to worsen. “My concern is that, obviously, New York’s high taxes have encouraged a lot of tax avoidance. More taxes will encourage more tax avoidance, and we think, from a public health point of view, that is unfortunate,” said Russell Sciandra, director of the Center for a Tobacco Free New York. Spitzer came into office vowing to end the tax-free sales. But like governors before him, he backed down, and his tax department did not enforce a law already on the books that makes it illegal for wholesalers to supply cigarettes to tax-free outlets. That law was slapped with an injunction last year when the tax agency failed to distribute coupons to Indians to obtain tax-free cigarettes for their own consumption. But Spitzer put into his January budget proposal a plan to make it illegal for manufacturers to supply wholesalers who sell to retailers that fail to collect the excise tax. The Senate embraced the plan, but the Assembly rejected it. The administration of Gov. David A. Paterson has declined on repeated occasions — and again Thursday — to say what it intends to do regarding the tax-free issue. Though the state has declined to enforce the tax collection law that has been on the books for several years, that did not stop the State Legislature and Paterson from counting on revenues from new tax collections in the budget approved Wednesday. The budget anticipates getting $120 million from collection efforts involving cigarettes now sold tax-free, according to Jeffrey Gordon, a spokesman for Paterson’s budget office. But Gordon said the administration has not yet decided how the taxes will be collected. In addition, the state anticipates getting an additional $265 million for the higher cigarette taxes. But those sums are now in question. Critics say the new administration, like ones before it, will not collect the tax, but wanted to put a revenue number in the budget as a way to justify spending increases in the budget for the fiscal year that began April 1. Magee has long criticized tax-free tobacco sales. “It’s time we realize we’ve got to move forward,” Magee said. “The courts have said we could and should collect the taxes.” For many smokers, the tax increase will drive them to do something the tax department says is illegal: avoid paying taxes on cigarettes. When New York residents file their their state income tax returns, they are required, by law, to pay any sales and excise taxes that they did not pay over the course of the year through Internet sales. Additionally, there are criminal penalties for possessing untaxed cigarettes, including a felony level for possession of more than 50 cartons. A lawsuit brought by Assemblyman David R. Townsend Jr., R-Sylvan Beach, seeking to require the state to collect the cigarette taxes is scheduled for oral arguments in State Supreme Court later this month. James Calvin, executive director of the New York Association of Convenience Stores, said, “It’s ludicrous to have a law in place and for an agent of state government to blatantly refuse to enforce it.”

NY Times - December 5 , 2007

Much of Suit Aimed at Indian Cigarette Sales is Dismissed A federal judge has dismissed all but one charge in a lawsuit, filed last year by a supermarket mogul who hopes to be the next mayor of New York City, that challenged two Long Island Indian tribes over their longstanding practice of selling tax-free cigarettes from reservation smoke shops. John A. Catsimatidis, whose holdings include the Gristedes supermarket chain, claimed in the suit that the two tribes illegally undercut his business, and he sought to force Indian retailers to buy cigarettes from wholesalers at the taxed price. He also asked for $20 million from the two tribes’ cigarette retailers, the amount he claims he has lost. Leaders from the tribes, the Shinnecock and Unkechaug Indian nations, responded by moving to have the claims dismissed. In a decision rendered on Friday and announced yesterday, Judge Carol Bagley Amon of Federal District Court in Brooklyn dismissed the claim that the non-tax sales “created, fostered and nourished a thriving black market in illegally discounted cigarette sales” and also dismissed charges of corrupt business dealings and unfair competition. Harry Wallace, chief of the Unkechaug nation and a lawyer who owns a smoke shop on a reservation in Mastic, said yesterday that his tribe was pleased with the ruling. But Judge Amon did not dismiss the entire suit, finding that advertisements calling the cigarettes tax-free were misleading because cigarette sales are not actually tax-free under state law, and that they were “likely to mislead the consumer into believing that he or she need not pay taxes on purchased cigarettes.” Mr. Catsimatidis said he would persevere with the suit. “Everyone has to pay their taxes, and Indians must charge tax on cigarettes when they sell to non-Indians,” he said. The state sets minimum price levels for retailers and imposes a sales tax of $1.50 a pack. But historically, the state has not collected cigarette taxes from tribes within its borders because they are considered sovereign nations, so Indian-owned smoke shops have long sold cigarettes at far lower prices than non-Indian competitors.

Reuters - October 19, 2007

Educated NY Smokers Dodge Cigarette Taxes--Report New York City's smokers dodged as much as $43 million of cigarette taxes last year, and the worst offenders were "the more highly educated," a new report said on Friday. Another $105 million was siphoned off by New York state, because in 2002 it required the city to give up 46 percent of all of its cigarette tax revenues in return for agreeing to let New York City hike the tax to $1.50 a pack. That increase was one of Mayor Michael Bloomberg's first anti-smoking measures; he also made headlines by banning smoking in bars and restaurants. New York City smokers pay one of the highest cigarette tax rates in the nation, a total of $3.00 a pack, because the state matched the city's tax increase. Even so, the rest of the state surpassed city folks when it came to ducking the tax. Only 27 percent of city smokers said they bought no-tax or low-taxed cigarettes in a 2006 state survey, according to new report by the Independent Budget Office. In contrast, some 34 percent of other state residents said they got "under-taxed" smokes via the Internet or Indian reservations. The tax-dodging divide was even more vivid when city dwellers were compared based on their education. "Twenty percent of smokers without high school diplomas reported evading cigarette taxes, compared with more than 60 percent for those with college degrees," the report said. The worst offenders lived in the borough of Queens, added the report by the Independent Budget Office, which mirrors the Congressional Budget Office but on a local level. An Independent Budget Office spokesman was not immediately available to explain why Queens might have the most tax-avoiders, though these residents tend to rely more on cars for transportation than in any other borough except Staten Island, and thus might have more choices. While the state this year rejected Bloomberg's bid for another 50-cent-per-pack hike, the report noted more increases might drive more smokers to buy "under-taxed" cigarettes. "There is considerable evidence that supports the mayor's enthusiasm: increases in cigarette excise taxes result in reduced rates of smoking among adults and by an even greater margin among youth," the report said. But it concluded: "The availability of under-taxed and therefore cheaper cigarettes undermines the city's efforts to reduce smoking and deprives the city of funds that would be otherwise directed towards public health initiatives." The extra tax dollars the state gets help pay for health care, the report noted. Local prosecutors have gone after smokers who ducked taxes by buying cigarettes over the Internet, for example. The report did not examine this possible deterrent though it noted city residents with more than two cartons of untaxed cigarettes must pay the equivalent of the regular cigarette tax.

Democrat & Chronicle - April 3, 2007

Proposed Bill Takes on Cigarette 'Buttleggers' ALBANY — Legislators ha