Shocking bribe probe hauls in dozens in N.J.
The parade of perps shuffling into a Newark courthouse Thursday like a white-collar chain gang was an astonishing array of public officials, taken down in a huge corruption bust.

Three Jersey mayors, two assemblymen, a deputy mayor, a council president and a clutch of candidates and hangers-on were all charged with taking bribes from dirty developer Solomon Dwek.

All maintained their innocence.

"The list of names and titles of those arrested today sounds like a roster for a community leaders meeting," said the FBI's Weysan Dun.

"Sadly, these prominent individuals were not in a meeting room but were in the FBI booking room," Dun said. "Those who engage in this culture of corruption should know the cross hairs of justice will continue to be focused on them."

The corruption probe, which grew out of a money laundering investigation of area rabbis, even reached into Democratic Gov. Jon Corzine's cabinet.

Agents searched the home and office of New Jersey Community Affairs Commissioner Joseph Doria - a former state senator and Bayonne mayor.

Doria, who was not charged, resigned his post at Corzine's request.

"The scale of corruption we're seeing as this unfolds is simply outrageous and cannot be tolerated," Corzine said.

Prosecutors denied there was any political motivation in the massive bust that netted largely Democrats, but it is sure to put Corzine on the defensive.

He is locked in a tough re-election battle against Republican Christopher Christie - a former federal prosecutor who made his name locking up corrupt Garden State pols, and who was in charge when the probe began.

"New Jersey's corruption problem is one of the worst, if not the worst, in the nation," said Ed Kahrer, who heads the FBI's white-collar and public corruption division. "Corruption is a cancer that is destroying the core values of this state."

The probe began as a fluke when prosecutors working with an indicted developer to catch money-laundering rabbis found a web of corrupt local officials who were willing to help his building projects - for a price, prosecutors charge.

They would meet in diners, then pass cash-stuffed envelopes in parking lots, prosecutors said - pumping money into their pockets or into political campaigns in Jersey City and Hoboken. And in one case, the snitch even handed out $97,000 stuffed in an Apple Jacks cereal box.

So many accused public officials were hauled into court that U.S. Magistrate Madeline Cox Arleo had to arraign them 12 at a time, and allow just one relative per defendant into the courtroom.

"I'm trying to go too fast," Arleo said. "We have a lot of people here."

Outside court, the son of defendant Joseph Castagna, a Jersey City health officer accused of accepting a $5,000 bribe, asked a reporter for a copy of the complaint against his father.

"What's he being charged with?" the son asked. "They just swooped him up out of nowhere this morning. ... He is basically being charged with being at the wrong place at the wrong time."

While some arrested were similar small-time officials, the 26 officials charged included Secaucus Mayor Dennis Elwell, Ridgefield Mayor Anthony Suarez and newly elected Hoboken Mayor Peter Cammarano, a 32-year-old rising politicial star accused of taking $25,000 in bribes.

"He's young, handsome, he has a family. He was going to bring change to Hoboken for the better," said Laura Nieves, 38, a lifelong resident who said she twice voted for Cammarano. "He was not only handsome and young but he was going to bring us a fresh start."

Prosecutors say they taped Cammarano promising to ram through a high-rise project for Dwek, who was posing as a developer. The Hoboken pol bragged that, "I could be, uh, indicted, and I'm still gonna win 85 to 95%" in a runoff election, according to court papers.

"There's the people who were with us, and that's you guys," he told the informant. "There's the people who climbed on board in the runoff. They can get in line. ... And then there are the people who were against us the whole way. ... They get ground into powder."

Many of the pols were from nearby Jersey City, legendary for corruption since the days of Mayor Frank Hague, the boss who declared, "I am the law!"

Jersey City Deputy Mayor Leona Beldini was charged with conspiracy to commit extortion by taking $20,000 in illegal campaign contributions.

State Assemblymen Daniel Van Pelt and Harvey Smith were also accused of taking payoffs to help the undercover developer get permits and approvals from state officials for building projects.

"There's been a lot of indictments and convictions in Jersey over the years," said John Weingart, associate director of Rutgers University's Eagleton Institute of Politics. "But this is just so many people.

"Exceptional is probably not the word," he added. "It is stunning."

alisberg@nydailynews.com