ISIS can muster 20,000 to 31,500 fighters, triple previous estimates: CIA
The CIA estimates that ISIS has more than three times the number of fighters it previously thought.

The Islamic State can call upon between 20,000 and 31,500 terrorists throughout Iraq and Syria, according to a spokesman for the intelligence agency.

"This new total reflects an increase in members because of stronger recruitment since June following battlefield successes and the declaration of a caliphate, greater battlefield activity and additional intelligence," the spokesman told CNN.

Experts used to think the number of fighters for the jihadist group, whose savagery has been widely condemned, topped out at 10,000.

The CIA assessment's new figure was revealed on the 13th anniversary of 9/11 — a day after President Obama outlined his plan to "dismantle and ultimately destroy" ISIS in an address to the nation.

Obama said the ongoing strategy will continue the U.S. airstrikes he ordered last month that have already killed ISIS fighters, destroyed weapons and helped our allies reclaim strategic territory.

Gen. Martin Dempsey (bottom left), chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and military officials arrive at the U.S. Capitol to brief U.S. Senate members on the strategy to fight ISIS. (Win McNamee/Getty Images) Iraqi security forces pull down an ISIS flag in the town of Dalli Abbas on June 30. (STRINGER/IRAQ/REUTERS)

"These strikes have helped save the lives of thousands of innocent men, women and children," he said.

It is not immediately clear how the number of ISIS fighter grew or whether these new recruits are from Iraq.

The CIA source told CNN that more than 15,000 foreigners from more than 80 countries — including 2,000 from Western nations — have traveled to Syria to fight.

It was not known, however, whether these groups were joining the Islamic State primarily or were scattered across the various groups fighting the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

mwalsh@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!