U.S. vets commit suicide at alarming rate: study
For those who serve, the struggle does not always end when they return to American soil.

A U.S. military veteran commits suicide every 65 minutes, on average, according to a recent study from the Department of Veterans Affairs.

An older, less detailed government analysis reported that about 18 former service members kill themselves each day. But a recent, more precise study of veteran suicides from 1999 to 2010 shows that the number is heartbreakingly higher: 22 deaths per day.

"The mental health and well-being of our courageous men and women who have served the nation is the highest priority for VA, and even one suicide is one too many," said VA Secretary Eric K. Shinseki.

"We have more work to do," he continued, "and we will use this data to continue to strengthen our suicide prevention efforts and ensure all Veterans receive the care they have earned and deserve."

The report claims that people over the age of 50 constitute nearly 70% of the suicides.

The VA, which also conducted the previous study, released the sobering results Friday — two weeks after the military acknowledged another gloomy fact.

A new, more accurate study of veteran suicides from 1999 to 2010 shows that the number is higher than previously thought: some 22 suicides a day. (Manuel DvÉ¬?az/Getty Images/Flickr RF)

More active duty soldiers die from suicide than combat. Last year a record-setting 349 members of the armed forces took their own lives, the military said.

Sen. Patty Murray of Washington, who has been pushing for stronger mental health care for veterans, argues that the VA study highlights how pressing reform is for giving veterans proper support, reported Reuters.

"This data provides a fuller, more accurate, and sadly, an even more alarming picture of veteran suicide rates," Murray said.

Similarly, the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America advocacy group said that U.S. citizens should be "outraged" by the statistics, according to NBC News.

"Our leaders in Washington need to accelerate efforts to shrink wait times for mental health care and find more creative solutions," said Paul Rieckhoff, founder and CEO of IAVA.

mwalsh@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!