At least 26 Democratic lawmakers will boycott Trump inauguration
At least 26 Democratic lawmakers, including five from New York, have said they will boycott Donald Trump's inauguration on Friday, pointing to the President-elect's weekend attack on civil rights icon Rep. John Lewis (D-Ga.).

New York City Democratic Reps. Nydia Velazquez, Yvette Clarke, Adriano Espaillat, Jerrold Nadler and Jose Serrano all revealed over the weekend their plans to ditch the quadrennial event, citing Trump's insults of Lewis and the general negative tenor of Trump's campaign.

"Given the tone of the campaign, Rep. Velazquez didn't think it appropriate to attend the inauguration and made that decision weeks ago," the congresswoman's office told the Daily News Sunday. "She will spend her time elsewhere on events like the Women's March."

Donald Trump’s inauguration will be boycotted by at least 26 Democratic lawmakers. (Evan Vucci/AP)

"We stand shoulder-to-shoulder against anyone (@realDonaldTrump) who seeks to deny our humanity. #boycotttrump," fellow congresswoman Clarke, who represents central Brooklyn, tweeted Sunday.

President-elect Donald Trump calls Rep. John Lewis 'sad!'

"When you insult @repjohnlewis, you insult America," Clarke wrote a day earlier.

I will NOT attend the inauguration of @realDonaldTrump. When you insult @repjohnlewis, you insult America. — Yvette D. Clarke (@RepYvetteClarke) January 14, 2017

Nadler, who will appear on CNN Monday morning to discuss his decision, tweeted Saturday that Trump "stands with V. Putin. I stand with @repjohnlewis."

In a Facebook post Saturday evening, Espaillat, wrote, "many have given their lives and dedicated their lives to working to fulfill Dr. King's dream and make it a reality, and it is up to us to preserve his legacy and the legacy of President Barack Obama."

"President-elect Donald Trump is trying to take us back," he wrote. "That's why I am not attending the presidential inauguration. Donald Trump and the hate-filled rhetoric that plagued his election simply will continue in his administration. THIS is not Dr. King's Dream!"

N.Y. pols to boycott Trump inauguration over Rep. John Lewis spat

Among the other 20 reps skipping Trump's inauguration were Reps. Lucille Roybal-Allard (D-Calif.), Luis Gutierrez (D-Ill.), Katherine Clark (D-Mass.), Raul Grijalva (D-Ariz.), John Conyers (D-Mich.), Marcia Fudge (D-Ohio) and Mark Pocan (D-Wis.)

Rep. John Lewis (D-Ga.) said he did not see Donald Trump as a "legitimate president." (JOSHUA ROBERTS/REUTERS)

The number of House lawmakers skipping the event, his however, is unprecedented in modern history.

As of Sunday evening, no U.S. senators had announced plans to join the boycott, although incoming Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) tweeted Saturday that he would "always stand by my friend, American hero @repjohnlewis."

Schumer did not respond to questions Sunday whether that meant he would not be attending Friday's inauguration.

Zimmerman: John Lewis sinks to Donald Trump's level

Trump repeatedly insulted Lewis, a 16-term Georgia representative, Saturday after Lewis said he did not see the billionaire as a "legitimate president," citing claims that the Kremlin meddled in the U.S. election in Trump's favor.

"We stand shoulder-to-shoulder against anyone (@realDonaldTrump) who seeks to deny our humanity. #boycotttrump," said Congresswoman Yvette Clarke. (Ron Sachs/Ron Sachs/picture-alliance/dpa/A)

Trump tweeted that Lewis "should spend more time on fixing and helping his district, which is in horrible shape and falling apart" — a claim with little basis in fact — "rather than falsely complaining about the election results."

"All talk, talk, talk - no action or results. Sad!," Trump tweeted.

Lewis, who in 1965 suffered a skull fracture during the police crackdown on marchers at the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Ala., meanwhile, said that he will not attend the Jan. 20 transfer of power out of protest.

Trump, for his part, returned to Twitter Sunday morning, as the list of members of Congress planning on joining the boycott grew.

"The Democrats are most angry that so many Obama Democrats voted for me," he wrote.