Ryan: Dems can vote on gun legislation when they win the House
WASHINGTON — House Speaker Paul Ryan dug in his heels even further against gun control on Tuesday, declaring that the only way Democrats would be able to get a vote on their version of legislation to keep suspected terrorists from buying guns is to take control of the House in November.

“Win elections and get the majority, then you can set the agenda,” Ryan (R-Wis.) said on Milwaukee conservative talk radio host Charlie Sykes' show Tuesday.

Democrats took over the House floor two weeks ago to protest Ryan's refusal to give “no fly, no buy” gun legislation a vote, refusing to leave for 25 hours with the rallying cry “No bill, no break.”

Ryan and other Republicans remain furious about House Democrats' sit-in protest, but decided last week to give a National Rifle Association-approved alternate version a vote this week that would make it much harder to stop gun purchases from suspected terrorists than the one Democrats support. Both bills have already failed to pass the Senate.

Paintings expose senators who oppose stronger gun-control laws

They still won't meet Democrats' demands to give their bill a vote, though, leading to the prospect of even more House floor protests this week.

Democrats are threatening more actions if they can't get a vote as tensions continue to escalate between the two sides.

House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) said in a separate meeting with reporters Tuesday morning that he and Ryan are meeting with the House Sergeant at Arms to discuss what had happened and possible punishments for the Democrats who broke House rules by live-streaming video of the protest after Republicans cut off the House's cameras and microphones.

“That behavior cannot be tolerated,” McCarthy said. “That behavior and the breaking of the rules, I've never seen in my lifetime.”

Why do gun lovers love seeing a 7-year-old firing

Ryan is meeting later on Tuesday with some of the Democrats who led the protest — civil rights icon and Rep. John Lewis (D-Ga.) and Rep. John Larson (D-Conn.), a member of House leadership.

House members are still coming back to Congress after the Fourth of July holiday recess — one made longer when Ryan decided to cancel votes early as Democrats were refusing to leave the House floor.

But while Congress is still trickling back in, eight pro-gun control protestors were arrested by Capitol police after a 10-minute protest where they sat in the rotunda, under the dome, and chanted “no bill, no break."