Haitian American labor leader Patrick Gaspard in key job with Barack Obama

New York's Haitian community and Barack Obama supporters have something to celebrate - a dynamic local labor leader, Haitian American Patrick Gaspard, has been named national political director of Sen. Obama's presidential campaign.

In this position, Gaspard - who is executive vice president for politics and legislation for the 1199SEIU United Healthcare Workers East labor union - will work to develop relationships with labor unions, elected officials and political groups in the Democrats' battle for the White House.

"This election offers a clear choice between John McCain's agenda for continuing the failed policies of George W. Bush, and Barack Obama's vision for change," said Gaspard. "I am proud to be a part of this campaign, and I look forward to working to bring people together across the country to elect Barack Obama."

Gaspard has lobbied for the 1199SEIU for about a year and he's been heading volunteer efforts in Texas, Ohio, Pennsylvania and other primary elections states for the union since it endorsed Obama in February. Gaspard will take a leave of absence from his job with the 1199SEIU.

African Arts fest arrives

The four-day International African Arts Festival returns to New York this week with live music, dance, storytelling, children's activities, spoken-word performers and its anticipated African marketplace of vendors.

The festival kicks off in Commodore Barry Park, at Park Ave. and Navy St., on Thursday at 10 a.m. and runs until 10 p.m. each day. "Akili na Moyo" (which means "mind and heart" in Swahili) is this year's festival theme. For information, call (718) 638-6700 or visit www.iaafestival.org.

New Air Jamaica baggage rules

With some exceptions, Air Jamaica is bucking the airline industry trend to charge for checking luggage 50 pounds and under. At present, the airline still allows passengers to check up to two bags in economy class and up to three bags in Lovebird Executive class at no charge. However, some changes in the policy are taking effect on Tuesday: 1) the baggage allowance for Lovebird Executive Class will now be three pieces at a maximum of 50 pounds each; 2) there will be a $75 per piece charge for checked bags weighing between 51 pounds and 70 pounds; and 3) sporting equipment will no longer be considered as standard checked baggage and baggage fees will apply.

In addition to these changes, no excess bags will be accepted from July 1 to Aug. 31 on the following flights: Toronto to Jamaica, New York/JFK and Barbados/Grenada, and New York/JFK and Jamaica. For details on their baggage rules visit www.airjamaica.com.