Erie County Anti-Sanctuary Community Resolution Stalls In Committee
From the Morning Memo:

The Prevention of Emotional Neglect and Childhood Endangerment (P.E.N.C.E.) conversion therapy ban isn’t the only bill being held up in the Erie County Legislature’s Government Affairs Committee. When the committee met Thursday, a resolution introduced by Republican Ted Morton, in opposition of sanctuary policies, wasn’t on the agenda either.

“Both of them deal with situations that I don’t think are a huge pressing problem in Erie County,” committee chairman Kevin Hardwick, R, said.

A sanctuary community is a broad term for areas where, in general, law enforcement doesn’t cooperate with federal immigration rules. The concept garnered increased attention during the presidential election.

President-elect Donald Trump has threatened to cut off funding to cities that promote the policy. In introducing his resolution, Morton said the policy often threatens public safety.

“This resolution essentially works to ensure that we stay in compliance with federal law and not stand in the way of our federal immigration enforcement agencies,” he said.

Hardwick said, unless there’s an unforeseen reason the committee would need to address the bill, it will remain tabled and will expire without action after a year. He believes Morton got his point across through media coverage.

Democrat Pat Burke was less diplomatic.

“It’s awful. Everybody knows it’s awful. He used statistics cited from the Center for Immigration Studies, which was founded and funded by a white supremacist. It’s a disgrace, and it has no business in this body,” he said.

Burke, the author of the much-covered P.E.N.C.E. bill, said his bill and Morton’s shouldn’t even be mentioned in the same conversation. He said while his proposed conversion therapy ban would have a very specific impact, the sanctuary policy resolution does nothing.

“Sanctuary cities are pronouncements from elected officials who are encouraging their law enforcement not to follow through on certain rules, but it’s not set policy. So you can’t have an anti-policy of a policy that doesn’t exist,” he said. “Also it’s a resolution so it’s not binding. It literally makes no sense at all.”

Morton did not attend Thursday’s committee meeting.