A Semi-Quiet Game Of Musical Chairmanships
Senate Majority Leader John Flanagan with little fanfare last week re-assigned committee chairmanships, a reshuffling that was triggered in large part by his rise to the leadership post last month.

Flanagan, the former chairman of the Senate Education Committee, had previously appointed fellow Long Island Sen. Carl Marcellino to that post.

That left Marcellino’s chairmanship at Investigations and Government Operations opened. It has been filled by Staten Island Sen. Andrew Lanza, according to the Senate’s website

Lanza’s move left the Children and Families Committee chair open; he was replaced by IDC Sen. Tony Avella, who made the announcement public in a news release this afternoon.

Avella, who had chaired Senate Ethics, was replaced by Sen. Tom Croci, who still leads the chamber’s Veterans, Homeland Security and Military Affairs committee.

Brooklyn Sen. Simcha Felder, a Democrat who conferences with the Senate GOP, had led the Children and Families committee.

Felder has been switched over to lead the Senate Cities Committee (formerly chaired by Lanza at the start of the year) and retains his chairmanship of the subcommittee on New York City education issues.

The changes were made on Thursday, Avella indicated in a news release.

“I am thrilled to announce that I will be the new Chair of the Senate Committee on Children and Families. With my previous experience as the Chair of Social Services, and as the current Chair of the Task Force on the Delivery of Social Services in New York City, I look forward to continuing my role in addressing the needs of our most vulnerable populations,” Avella said in a statement. “As we look toward next year’s session, as Chair of Children and Families I am wholly committed to working towards a better quality of life for all of New York’s children and families.”

There hasn’t been as much shuffling among the Assembly committee chairmanships, where Speaker Carl Heastie left those posts largely intact after he replaced Sheldon Silver earlier this year. It’s believed by some that Heastie will make some changes to the leadership and committee chairs later on.