Transcript of the Preliminary G.O.P. Presidential Debate
HUCKABEE: I don’t think it’s that the message isn’t working, I think it’s the message isn’t getting out because the message that I have this time, Bill, it’s exactly what I said eight years ago. I talked about people who are standing on their feet on factory floors, people who lift heavy things, who sweat through their clothes, they’re getting gut punched. They are not having a fair shake in this economy.

I talked about that eight years ago, and I’m talking about it now. I talked about the importance of preserving life, of not just saying we’re going to defund Planned Parenthood, but let’s do something bolder. Let’s get rid of abortion once and for all by applying the Fifth, and Fourteenth amendment to every person from conception because that means that we recognize that no person can be deprived of life or liberty unless they have due process. And, that’s not happening in our country.

And, I believe, and continue to practice that we need the Fair Tax to revive our economy. To make it so that people are able to be rewarded for their work rather than punished for it.

(APPLAUSE)

HEMMER: Governor, thank you.

Senator Santorum, four short years ago you won Iowa. You beat Mitt Romney, pretty much shocked the country. But, just the other day you talked about what is in the greater good for your campaign. Is Monday night your last stand?

SANTORUM: You know, listening to what your network was talking about prior to this race, this debate, reminded me of the coverage that many on this floor are getting. This race, this debate, was called the, “Undercard Debate”. The undercard debate.

It wasn’t advertised significantly. In fact, the entire hour lead up to this there was no conversation about any of the four people on this debate stage, and that is the chronic situation.

In fact, they listed — they put a poll up from Wall Street Journal/NBC News, they listed the candidates, and they failed to mention I wasn’t listed. I got zero, why? Because they — NBC, Wall Street Journal poll never includes my name on the list.