Seizing on Rising Costs, Trump Says Health Law Is ‘Over’
That leaves seven million people buying insurance on their own without subsidies, because their income is too high or they are not aware of the option — a significant number but not a huge voting base.

Even for those seven million, the effect will range widely. For a 27-year-old in the battleground states of Ohio and New Hampshire, the average monthly premium for a benchmark plan will rise next year by only 2 percent. In Indiana, where the health care law is helping to shape a key Senate race, the average monthly premium for a benchmark plan will actually decrease, by 3 percent.

But in tightly contested North Carolina, it will rise by 40 percent, to $446 from $319. In Iowa, it will rise by 25 percent, to $308 from $246. And the biggest increase will hit the new battleground of Arizona, where premiums will rise 116 percent.

Mr. Trump stumbled out of the gate on Tuesday as he sought to bash the health law. Speaking to scores of his own workers at his Miami golf course, he said that “all of my employees are having a tremendous problem with Obamacare” — suggesting that his company doesn’t provide health insurance or else misunderstanding the program. Moments later, he said of his employees, “They’re not worried about their health care because we take great care of people.”

After finishing, Mr. Trump left it to the resort’s general manager to talk to reporters about the confusion and confirm that only a few employees may be insured through the Affordable Care Act.

The problems with the health law have been apparent for some time. Neither the law’s subsidies nor its penalties for those who refuse to buy insurance have persuaded enough young, healthy people to go into the insurance marketplaces it created. That has left a customer pool in some parts of the country that is too sick and too small. Because so many marketplace customers have needed expensive medical care, some insurers have spent more on claims than they have earned in premiums.

Another reason for the volatility in the marketplaces is political. The Obama administration, blocked by Republican opponents in Congress, has paid out only a fraction of the $2.5 billion it owes insurers under a provision of the health law that was supposed to protect them from unexpectedly large losses during their first few years in the marketplaces. Several insurers cited the minimal payments as one of the main reasons they raised rates or abandoned the marketplaces.