Texas Attorney General
Notice To Crime Victim Advocates

Regarding recent story which contained misinformation and inaccurate statements

The Office of the Attorney General is committed to protecting and serving Texas crime victims.

Importantly, last year the Crime Victims' Compensation Fund has provided reimbursement for more than 8,500 sexual assault exams and sexual assault examination kits. These exams help preserve crucial evidence that law enforcement uses to identify the perpetrators after an innocent victim has been sexually assaulted. For years the Fund has covered, and will continue to cover the costs of sexual assault forensic examinations and kits.

Unfortunately, a Houston television station recently broadcast a misleading and inaccurate story that has caused confusion within the crime victim services community. As a result, some sexual assault survivors-and the organizations that serve them-are unsure about the services that are available to victims.

This message is intended to reassure all interested parties that the Crime Victim Compensation Fund has always covered the costs associated with sexual assault examinations. And that practice will continue.

From a process perspective, the kits are paid for by local law enforcement agencies, which seek reimbursement from the Crime Victim Compensation Fund. Under Texas law, sexual assault victims may be eligible for additional financial assistance to offset other costs associated with crime.

However, the law requires that reimbursement must first be sought from all other sources of reimbursement -- such as private insurance -- before filing a claim with the Crime Victims' Compensation Fund. Thus, to ensure that we fully comply with the law, anyone seeking direct compensation for their out-of-pocket expenses must fill out an application.

To help victims navigate the crime victim compensation application process, we provide training to victim advocates, hospitals, and law enforcement officials across the state. The training, along with informational pamphlets and this website, are intended to help victims and their advocates better understand application and payment procedures.

Unfortunately, in the case cited by the Houston television station, that process broke down when the hospital incorrectly billed a victim for her sexual assault examination. Though the media has reported that the victim's sexual assault forensic exam was not paid for by the Fund, those reports are inaccurate. A check for the cost of sexual assault examination-and the kit-was issued in 2007.

This message is intended for the hard-working victim advocates who are committed to serving sexual assault victims. We know many advocates were confused by the television station's inaccurate story, so we are posting this message to correct the record and clear up any confusion it may have caused. By turning directly to the network of committed victim advocates and volunteers, we hope to correct this unnecessary confusion and reassure Texas crime victims that we will continue to fund sexual assault examination costs.

Anyone with questions about the Crime Victims' Compensation Fund or the Office of the Attorney General's Crime Victim Services Division, please call (800) 983-9933.