With justice's exit, Crist can reshape state court
TALLAHASSEE - Benefiting from historic timing, Gov. Charlie Crist will appoint a majority of the Florida Supreme Court and leave his stamp on the third branch of government for years to come.

Justice Kenneth Bell, a father of four, announced his departure Friday morning, saying "family responsibilities require that I return full-time to Pensacola."

Bell's resignation is effective Oct. 1. Justice Raoul Cantero III announced his resignation last month and will leave the court in September.

With the constitutional retirement forcing justices Harry Lee Anstead and Charles Wells to retire at age 70 next year, Crist will have the unusual chance to appoint four of the high court's seven members.

"It's an historic opportunity," said George LeMieux, Crist's close friend and former chief of staff. "This is one of the biggest decisions of any governor and the fact that he will appoint four and basically appoint a majority of the court in his first term is unprecedented."

Bell's resignation also marks the abrupt end of Gov. Jeb Bush's influence on the state's top court. During his eight years in office, Bush solely appointed only two justices - Bell and Cantero. They were reliable conservative voices, evidenced by their dissent in a 5-2 decision in 2006 that found a Bush-backed school voucher program unconstitutional.

Bell, 52, and Cantero, 47, were thought to be potential long-term conservative voices on the court. Currently, appointments from former Gov. Lawton Chiles, a Democrat, still hold a 4-2 edge. The seventh justice, Peggy Quince, was a joint appointment by Chiles and Bush.

Publicly, few governors will state a political or philosophical objective for new justices other than a respect for restraint when considering legislative or gubernatorial decisions.

The phrase "separation of powers" has been the rallying cry for lawmakers, generally Republican, who frequently criticize judicial decisions that override their own.

"I think he's going to look for lawyers who have a great respect for law, have respect for the separation of power," LeMieux said, "lawyers that are above not only high ethical standards but that have strong work ethics and are going to bring a lot of diligence."

Crist touched on the idea in a brief statement praising Bell.

"He will be remembered for his firm belief in the separation of powers and the system of checks and balances on which our nation was founded," Crist said. "As a justice, he was always careful to respect the appropriate roles of the judicial, legislative and executive branches."

Jason Unger, a Tallahassee lobbyist and chairman of the committee that will interview applicants for the Supreme Court positions, said he has not spoken with Crist about the coming appointments.

"The governor is a conservative and I assume that he's going to be looking for judges that share his judicial philosophy," said Unger.

Former justice Stephen Grimes said Friday that law and precedent override the politics of who selected a justice for the court.

"I would not want someone who was just bound and determined to follow a particular political bent," Grimes said.

Another factor that may be considered in the appointment is diversity. Cantero was the first Hispanic on the court. There are two women on the court, Barbara Pariente and Quince - who is also the court's only black member and who will become chief justice on July 1.

The selection process will bring new attention to a body known as the Supreme Court Judicial Nominating Commission, or JNC. Each appellate and circuit in the state has a JNC that interviews applicants and submits between three and six finalists for the governor's final decision.

The Supreme Court JNC has not met since 2002, when Bell and Cantero were appointed. Crist chose three of the JNC's nine members: Unger, Robert Hackleman and Howard Coker.

The remaining six JNC members were named by Bush, but three have terms that expire this summer and will be replaced by Crist before the process of choosing Cantero's replacement begins. Three of Bush's selections for the commission will remain.

Florida's Supreme Court has jurisdiction over rulings by state circuit courts, most notably death penalty cases and decisions invalidating state statutes. It oversees the entire state court system and regulates admission and discipline of lawyers in the Florida Bar.