Utility will build plant with or without new pipeline

If Duke Energy gets the regulatory approval it needs to build a natural gas plant in Citrus County, the energy company will do so regardless of whether a new proposed gas pipe line is allowed to cut across Florida. Another certainty is that customer utility prices will increase as soon as the plant is fired up.

Nearly 300 people came to a recent open house in Crystal River hosted by Duke Energy, with 40 company representatives and consultants on hand to answer questions.

Mark Landseidel, general manager of Duke’s major energy projects, said during the event that Duke wants Sabal Trail Transmission LLC to build a 24-mile-long offshoot pipeline to carry fuel to the proposed Citrus County natural gas plant. But, he said, there are two other accessible natural gas pipelines and Duke would go forward regardless of whether Sabal builds its new pipeline.

Landseidel said a third pipeline would give Duke additional options for fuel sources and that while Duke is agreeing to buy natural gas from Sabal if the fuel is available, the $1.5 million plant would be built regardless.

Duke has about 60,000 Marion County customers and about 1.7 million throughout Florida.

The two other natural gas lines close enough to extend to Duke’s 400-acre proposed plant site belong to Florida Gas Transmission and Gulfstream Natural Gas System, Landseidel said.

The Sabal pipeline project is projected to cover about 460 miles and be capable of delivering up to 1.1 billion cubic feet of natural gas a day from central Alabama to Florida Power & Light’s plant in South Florida. Many are objecting to the pipeline, saying the buried structure would be dangerous and potentially do environmental damage.

Sabal may build a 24-inch wide offshoot pipe, off its 36-inch diameter pipeline, through western Marion County, near Dunnellon, for Duke’s new plant.

If approved, Duke’s natural gas plant would be located on 400 acres near its existing Crystal River Energy Complex. Duke Energy officials said if its applications and permit request are approved as expected for the 1,640 megawatt facility, construction would start in early 2016. The plant’s first 820 megawatts would go online in 2018.

That is the same time Duke would raise customer utility rates to help pay for the natural gas plant, said Maria Olivier, director of rates and regulatory planning.

The company would raise rates $7.61 per month, based on 1,000 kilowatts of monthly usage.

That rate could change based on other costs, Olivier said, but the plan is to raise customer rates enough over the 35-year life of the plant to pay for the facility and any interest on borrowed money.

Company spokesman Rick Rhodes said Duke needs the additional power from the natural gas plant, especially now that it plans to shut down two of its coal fired plants at Crystal River in 2016. Combined, the two plants can generate about 900 megawatts. Earlier this year, Duke announced it would no longer try and repair its Crystal River Nuclear Plant and decommission the facility. That facility could generate about 800 megawatts of power.

The cost to dismantle the two coal plants is estimated at $43 million, according to a 2009 study. Duke said it has been putting money aside for that project.

Contact Fred Hiers at 352-867-4157 or fred.hiers@starbanner.com.