Cut off of LIP funds will impact healthcare providers
The Heart of Florida Health Center is bracing for a nearly 13 percent cut in its budget this summer as federal funding for the Florida lower income is slashed.

The Heart of Florida Health Center is bracing for a nearly 13 percent cut in its budget this summer as federal funding for the Florida lower income is slashed, leaving the health care organization scrambling to make up the $1.2 million loss.



The lost money will most likely force the local organization to postpone or eliminate expansion plans to under-served Marion County areas and cut financial help that subsidizes clients, meaning they would pay more out of pocket.



The federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, which distributes the Low Income Pool (LIP) money to states, announced in 2014 it was closing that funding source after a one-year special extension for this year, which will end June 30.



The LIP tap also will be cut off to Marion County's two hospital companies: Community Health Systems, which operates Munroe Regional Medical Center and received about $5.9 million in LIP money during 2014/2015; and Ocala Health, which owns Ocala Regional Medical Center and West Marion Community Hospital, and which received $3 million in LIP funding during 2014/2015.



In total, Florida received $1.8 billion in LIP funding in 2014/2015.



LIP funding is part of the federal government's approved Florida Medicaid waiver and is meant to cover the cost of providing services to patients using Medicaid or those who are uninsured or under-insured. The federal waiver approval in 2014 was for the next three years, allowing Florida to continue to move Medicaid recipients over to Medicaid managed care plans. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services pulled the LIP out of the three-year extension, however, and announced its termination this summer.



The problem for the Heart of Florida Health Center is that such a large cut from the funding stream will be difficult to make up, and there are only so many financial wells to dip into.



Heart of Florida has about 22,000 patients, most of whom are low income and many of whom have no insurance or are on Medicaid.



Executive Director Kerrie Jones Clark said she will look to improve in-house efficiencies, but the center will eventually have to ask uninsured, cash-paying patients to pay a larger portion of the cost for their health care.



“We have to look at every aspect of the business,” Clark said.



Many critics of the LIP funding loss say the cut is linked to Florida's refusal to accept the federal government's offer to pump an additional $5 billion annually to expand the state's existing Medicaid program and add about 760,000 more Floridians to the rolls.



When Florida applied for LIP money, it wrote to the federal government: “This request is made to improve the health of Floridians and has no connection to the Medicaid expansion provisions of the Affordable Care Act.”



But industry experts say the link between Florida's refusal to accept expanded Medicaid is the obvious reason for the federal government's cuts of LIP funding. Advocates of expanded Medicaid say the LIP elimination would not be an issue if Florida accepted expanded Medicaid.



“Covering low-income, uninsured adults through this expansion funding would thus reduce the amount of uncompensated care and the need to maintain the safety-net at the same level,” stated Florida Legal Services Inc., a nonprofit group that provides free, civil legal service to the poor, in a 2014 report.



“While LIP funding losses pose potentially dire economic consequences for the state, and certain counties in particular, the loss of local safety-net funding could be more than offset if the Florida Legislature accepted federal funds for expansion,” the agency noted in the November 2014 report.



The LIP funding loss comes just as Heart of Florida was able to better help those with no insurance.



Last year, Florida Medicaid providers began operating under new guidelines and health care standards as the state moved Medicaid patients into private insurer plans and managed care models. Lawmakers' predictions were that the move would cut costs and keep people out of emergency rooms.



The managed care plans call for regular doctor's visits and pay the health care provider's annual fees regardless of whether patients get sick. The managed care plans added about 7,500 patients to Heart of Florida's rolls.



Clark said the managed care program worked well in that patients with regular checkups routinely came in to see health care providers healthier than they did before managed care. It also changed the patient landscape because before managed care, about 60 percent of Heart of Florida patients had no Medicaid or private health insurance. That has now dropped to about 40 percent.



So, for Heart of Florida, the managed care funds meant additional money left over was spent on patients with no insurance, Clark said.



“Now, we're right back to where we started,” Clark said. “For us, it's a really big deal, but for hospitals it's a huge deal.”



Munroe Regional officials, in an email statement to the Star-Banner, said the hospital would continue serving the uninsured with emergency care, regardless of the LIP funding loss.



“We are aware that Low Income Pool funds are set to expire, but we remain encouraged that work between our Florida lawmakers and the federal government is underway to identify how hospitals can continue serving the large number of low-income patients who benefit from this program,” the email noted. “Regardless, Munroe Regional Medical Center will continue its commitment to provide medically necessary emergency care for anyone who needs it, whether or not they have insurance or the ability to pay for services. In 2013, the hospital provided more than $81 million in uncompensated care.”



A statement from Ocala Health officials, also sent via email, said: “There is a wide disparity that exists between payments and care provided within the current structure of the program. In calendar year 2013, Ocala Health provided more than $27 million in charity and uncompensated care. That figure is estimated to top $29 million for calendar year 2014.



“We believe that all options and opportunities to continue using local funds to secure a federal match should be considered. We're also investing significantly in expansion projects on both campuses that will allow us to care for a greater number of patients across several service lines. This anticipated growth is expected to generate additional income and help mitigate the potential loss of LIP dollars.”



Federal law prohibits health care providers from denying someone emergency care based on their inability to pay.



Aaron Liberman, professor emeritus from the University of Central Florida's Department of Health Management & Informatics, said hospitals will complain about losing the LIP money “but I don't think the pressure, in and of itself from hospitals (to accept expanded Medicaid), will make much of a difference.”



Under expanded Medicaid, the federal government pays 100 percent of the state's Medicaid costs during the first three years and 90 percent the following three years. The states pay the rest. After the second three-year increment, it is unknown how the costs will be divided.



Liberman thinks lawmakers' fear of how much Florida will have to pay in Medicaid in six years exceeds the pressure hospitals can exert on them.



“The hospitals can go on screaming, but hospitals are part of the problem, making unconscionable profits,” he said. “It's not going to put them out of business.”



Contact Fred Hiers at 867-4157 or fred.hiers@starbanner.com.