Ohio Senate race could break campaign spending records

Ohio appears to have the most expensive seat in the U.S. Senate.

A report released this week by the Sunlight Foundation, a nonpartisan research group, found the race between incumbent Sen. Rob Portman, a Republican, and former Gov. Ted Strickland, whose campaign spent $2.2 million to win the Democratic primary, has attracted more spending by candidates and outside groups than any of the 34 Senate races at stake this fall.

Strickland’s primary opponent, Cincinnati councilman P.G. Sittenfeld, and the outside group that supported him, New Leadership for Ohio, contributed to the record spending.

The race has generated $11.5 million in spending through March with a more recent campaign expenditure filing due soon. However, the most expensive leg of the race, the general election, is only beginning.

Portman’s campaign war chest, at $12,740,702, is the largest cash reserve of any Republican running for Senate this year. And it dwarfs the $2,021,536 Strickland had on hand as of the latest filing with the Federal Elections Commission.

A brewing quarrel over who is softer on trade with China hints at the costly ad war to come.

Big money ads

Portman recently launched a six-figure digital ad campaign with the release of two online videos this week attacking Strickland for approving, while in the U.S. House, measures that gave China “most favored nation” status and failed “to hold China accountable for unfair trade practices.”

The Senate Majority PAC, an outside spending group opposing Portman and other incumbent Republicans, started the tiff over trade with a $650,000 ad purchase in March to attack Portman on the same issue.

Strickland has called Portman China’s best senator, noting his support for past trade agreements and initial support for the most recent deal, the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Portman, who supported President Barack Obama’s ability to fast-track negotiate the deal before Senate approval, has said he ultimately opposes the final version of the trade agreement, which impacts trade and eliminates tariffs between North America, Chile and Pacific Rim countries, including Singapore, Malaysia and Vietnam, but not China.

The Senate Majority PAC is boasting its recent television ad — which calls Portman a “job creator everywhere but in Ohio” — as the first of the 2016 election cycle. Previous attacks on Portman came through digital advertising launched by the group in January.

Stay tuned

The Senate Majority PAC — which has raised more than $9 million this election cycle, all but $5,000 from outside Ohio — isn’t the only outside group that helped Ohio’s U.S. Senate seat achieve top-spending status. The group’s $660,000 ad buy represents nearly every penny spent by an outside group against Portman, who has thus far received little attention with no serious primary challenge.

Strickland, on the other hand, has been the recipient of nearly $2.5 million in outside attack spending, about $1.8 million of which came from Freedom Partners Action Fund Inc.

The National Rifle Association spent $222,123 to oppose Strickland. Another $394,056 came from the PAC supporting Sittenfeld, who received as much in support from the group.

Freedom Partners, though, is the biggest dog in the fight, eclipsing even the NRA in terms of money raised or cash on hand. The group, other than dropping $36,332 to oppose Hillary Clinton, has focused all of its spending against Strickland, as of the most recent filing reported by the Sunlight Foundation.

At the end of February, Freedom Partners had $15 million left over to spend in the general election. It spent the roughly $1.8 million against Strickland on or days before the March 15 primary. The political action committee, propped up by a $3 million contribution by Charles Koch, chairman of the board of Koch Industries, has more money on hand than the total spending to date in what could be the most expensive U.S. Senate race in history, and one of the few in play.

Before Senate showdowns cracked the $100 million spending mark in 2014, Ohio claimed the second most expensive Senate race ever in 2012 (fresh off the Citizen’s United Supreme Court ruling upholding unlimited corporate giving). That year, Sen. Sherrod Brown beat his Republican challenger, Ohio Treasurer Josh Mandel, but not before the two campaigns and outside groups dropped more than $80 million.

Doug Livingston can be reached at 330-996-3792 or dlivingston@thebeaconjournal.com. Follow on Twitter: @ABJDoug.