Victims of Illegal Aliens Memorial
Ohio Jobs & Justice PAC "These d eaths could have been prevented if Congress and Executive branch would have secured our border and enforced U.S. immigration laws." - Steve Salvi, Founder VICTIMS OF ILLEGAL ALIENS MEMORIAL In honor of the thousands of American citizens killed each year by Illegal Aliens. ~ (Please scroll down) ~ List of Victims Randy Nordman, 49



Husband, Stepfather, Son & Friend Allegedly Murdered by Pablo Antonio Serrano-Vitorino, 40 2019 Update: Pablo Antonio Serrano-Vitorino, 40 , a Mexican illegal alien hung himself in his cell on April 8, 2019. Serrano-Vitorino was in jail for 1st degree murder of Missouri resident Randy Nordman, 49. Serrano-Vitorino reportedly shot Nordman during a struggle on Nordman's property after Serrano-Vitorino abandoned his auto nearby and is believed to have been planning to steal Nordman's car.



Nordman was a well liked mechanic who loved motorcycles. He is survived by his wife and stepchildren. Sources: Suspect in 5 murders dies after hanging himself in St. Louis jail, By Kim Bell, St. Louis Post Dispatch, April 9, 2019 Paige Gomer , 28 Daughter, Mother, & friend Allegedly killed by Ramon Hector Martine Ontiveros , 33 Ramon Hector Martine Ontiveros, 33, an illegal alien from Mexico, has been charged with first degree murder of Paige Gomer, 28, of Hinton, Oklahoma. Ms. Gomer was shot and killed on March 21, 2019. Ontiveros reportedly confessed to shooting Gomer to police.



A judge denied Ontiveros a bond and ICE has an immigration hold on Ontiveros. The Canadian County Sheriff's Office has an on-going investigation of the murder. Police are unsure if Gomer knew Ontiveros, but Gomer's best friend reported said that she did not recognize Ontiveros. Gomer's best friend was also quoted as saying Gomer was a selfless friend and should be remembered as such.



Gomer is survived by a daughter. Sources: Friend remembers woman killed in Canadian County shooting, By News 4, Oklahoma, 3-24-19; Illegal immigrant charged with murder for shooting dead 28-year-old Oklahoma mother-of-1, By Staff, UK Daily Mail, 3-25-19. Deputy Ryan Thompson, 42 Husband, Father, Son & Friend Murdered by Juan Manuel Flores Del Toro, 29 Juan Manuel Flores Del Toro, 29, a reported Mexican illegal alien, murdered Deputy Ryan Thompson, 42, on March 20, 2019 during a traffic stop shootout in Kittitas, Washington. Reportedly Deputy Ryan Thompson had responded to a road rage incident call and began pursuing the suspect. After Flores Del Toro stopped, the suspect fired at law enforcement, and a gun battle ensued, in which Deputy Thompson and Flores Del Toro both were shot and later pronounced dead at Kittitas Valley hospital. One other officer was shot in the leg but survived. Flores-Del Toro reportedly originally entered the US legally in 2014 with a H2A Temporary Ag Worker Visa. That visa expired but he remained in the US illegally. Deputy Thompson is survived by his wife and thee children. Sources: Killer of Kittitas County Deputy Ryan Thompson has been identified, By Holly Matikin and Christopher Berg, Blue Lives Matter, 3-21-19; ICE Bambi Larson, 59 Mother, Daughter, Sister & Friend Allegedly murdered by Carlos Arevalo-Carranza , 24 Carlos Arevalo-Carranza, 24 , an illegal alien from El Salvador, has been arrested for the brutal February 28, 2019 stabbing murder of San Jose California resident Bambi Larson, 59. Prior to murdering Ms. Larson, Arevalo-Carranza had been deported in 2013 but was able to illegally enter the U.S.'s porous southern border again.



After illegally returning to the U.S., Arevalo-Carranza reportedly was arrested several time in San Jose in 2014 for drug possession, battery on a police officer and other crimes. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) reportedly claimed that the federal law enforcement agency's detainer requests were ignored by Santa Clara County because of the county's illegal alien sanctuary policy. As a result, Arevalo-Carranza was not turned over to ICE for detention and deportation after being released by the Santa Clara County jail. Ms. Larson was a college graduate and worked in Silicon Valley. She was well liked and was described by friends as a wonderful kind woman. She is survived by a son, daughter, brother, boyfriend, and many other relatives and friends. OJJPAC Note: Another tragic example why cities, counties, and states, with alleged sanctuary policies need to be investigated and held accountable for any violations of law by the federal government. My Sanctuary Cities list can be viewed here . Ms. Larson's blood is also on the hands of those who aided and abetted this alleged criminal illegal alien. Sources: Bambi Larson case: Gory details emerge in murder of San Jose mother, By David Louie, News-7 San Jose, 3-14-19; Obituary. Jamar Rashan Beach, 27 Father, Son , Brother & Friend Killed by Neri Damian Cruz-Carmona, 26 Neri Damian Cruz-Carmona , 26, an illegal alien, has been sentenced to 20-33 months in prison for the September 1, 2018 death of 27-year-old Jamar R. Beach. According to news reports, Cruz-Carmona failed to yield and crashed his vehicle into Beach who was riding his motorcycle on the night of September 1, 2018 in Raleigh, North Carolina. Beach was decapitated at the scent and Cruz-Carmona also reportedly fled the scene of the accident with Beach's body still stuck to his vehicle. Police later captured Cruz-Carmona.



Beach is survived by his fiancé, two-year-old son, and many family members. Source: Man sentenced to prison in 2018 crash that killed motorcycle rider, Associated Press, 3-15-19; Illegal Alien Accused of Killing North Carolina Man in 'Horrific' Hit-And-Run, by John Binder, Breitbart News , 9-2-18; Jamar R. Beach obituary.

Logan Gage Wilson, 34 Father, Husband, Son & Friend Allegedly killed by Eduardo de la Lima Vargas, 40 Eduardo de la Lima Vargas , 40, an alleged illegal alien living in Hubbard, Oregon, was arrested for the death of Salem Oregon resident Logan G. Wilson, 34 and his wife. According to news reports, on August 19, 2018, Lima-Vargas allegedly was driving his horse trailer and truck drunk; ran a red light and crashing into the Wilson's motorcycle in Salem. The Wilson's were pronounced dead at Salem Hospital that day.



The Wilson's are survived by their children and many family members. They were laid to rest together on August 29, 2018. Source: Police ID Salem Couple Killed in Fiery Crash, by Associated Press, 8-20-18; Obituaries of Logan and Jessica Wilson. Jessica Lynn Wilson, 32 Mother, Wife, Daughter, Sister & Friend Allegedly killed by Eduardo de la Lima Vargas, 40 Eduardo de la Lima Vargas , 40, an alleged illegal alien living in Hubbard, Oregon, was arrested for the death of Salem Oregon resident Jessica L. Wilson, 32 and her husband. According to news reports, on August 19, 2018, Lima-Vargas allegedly was driving his horse trailer and truck drunk; ran a red light and crashing into the Wilson's motorcycle in Salem. The Wilson's were pronounced dead at Salem Hospital that day.



The Wilson's are survived by their children and many family members. They were laid to rest together on August 29, 2018. Source: Police ID Salem Couple Killed in Fiery Crash, by Associated Press, 8-20-18; Obituaries of Logan and Jessica Wilson. Jerry David, 81 Former President of Reno Rodeo Allegedly murdered by Wilbur Ernesto Martinez-Guzman, 20 Wilbur Ernesto Martinez-Guzman, 20 , an alien illegally in the US, has been arrested on charges of burglary, possession of stolen property, and obtaining money under false pretense. Martinez-Guzman also will likely be changed for the murder of Jerry David, 81, and three other people including his wife. Immigration and Customs Enforcement has also submitted an immigration detainer for Martinez-Guzman too. A news report stated that Martinez-Guzman was initially arrested by deputies in the parking lot of the Carson Mall. He is currently believed to have lived in the Carson City area for about 1 year. He is currently being held in the Carson City Detention Facility.



Mr. & Mrs. David's bodies were found January 16, 2019. Both had been shot dead in their home.



Sources: Nevada police arrest man in connection with four homicides, By Riobhan McAndrew, Marcella Corona and Benjamin Spillman, Reno Gazette Journal, 1-20-19; Murder charges expected against suspect in killings, KOLO TV, Reno NV, 1-20-19; Wilbur Martinez-Guzman held in connection to Reno, Douglas murders; neighbors relieved, Siobhan McAndrew, Marcella Corona, Benjamin Spillman and Anieanette Damon, Reno Gazette Journal, 1-20-19 Sherri David, 80 Allegedly murdered by Wilbur Ernesto Martinez-Guzman, 20 Wilbur Ernesto Martinez-Guzman, 20 , an alien illegally in the US, has been arrested on charges of burglary, possession of stolen property, and obtaining money under false pretense. Martinez-Guzman also will likely be changed for the murder of Sherri David, 80, and three other people including her husband. Immigration and Customs Enforcement has also submitted an immigration detainer on Martinez-Guzman too. A news report stated that Martinez-Guzman was initially arrested by deputies in the parking lot of the Carson Mall. He is currently believed to have lived in the Carson City area for about 1 year. He is currently being held in the Carson City Detention Facility.



Mr. & Mrs. David's bodies were found January 16, 2019. Both had been shot dead in their home. Sources: Nevada police arrest man in connection with four homicides, By Riobhan McAndrew, Marcella Corona and Benjamin Spillman, Reno Gazette Journal, 1-20-19; Murder charges expected against suspect in killings, KOLO TV, Reno NV, 1-20-19; Wilbur Martinez-Guzman held in connection to Reno, Douglas murders; neighbors relieved, Siobhan McAndrew, Marcella Corona, Benjamin Spillman and Anieanette Damon, Reno Gazette Journal, 1-20-19 Sophia Renken, 74 Allegedly murdered by Wilbur Ernesto Martinez-Guzman, 20 Wilbur Ernesto Martinez-Guzman, 20 , an alien illegally in the US, has been arrested on charges of burglary, possession of stolen property, and obtaining money under false pretense. Martinez-Guzman also will likely be changed for the murder of Sophia Renken, 74, and three other people. Immigration and Customs Enforcement has also submitted an immigration detainer on Martinez-Guzman too. A news report stated that Martinez-Guzman was initially arrested by deputies in the parking lot of the Carson Mall. He is currently believed to have lived in the Carson City area for about 1 year. He is currently being held in the Carson City Detention Facility.



Renken was found dead in her home on January 13, 2019. Sources: Nevada police arrest man in connection with four homicides, By Riobhan McAndrew, Marcella Corona and Benjamin Spillman, Reno Gazette Journal, 1-20-19; Murder charges expected against suspect in killings, KOLO TV, Reno NV, 1-20-19; Wilbur Martinez-Guzman held in connection to Reno, Douglas murders; neighbors relieved, Siobhan McAndrew, Marcella Corona, Benjamin Spillman and Anieanette Damon, Reno Gazette Journal, 1-20-19 Connie Koontz, 56 Allegedly murdered by Wilbur Ernesto Martinez-Guzman, 20 Wilbur Ernesto Martinez-Guzman, 20 , an alien illegally in the US, has been arrested on charges of burglary, possession of stolen property, and obtaining money under false pretense. Martinez-Guzman also will likely be changed for the murder of Connie Koontz, 56, and three other people. Immigration and Customs Enforcement has also submitted an immigration detainer on Martinez-Guzman too. A news report stated that Martinez-Guzman was initially arrested by deputies in the parking lot of the Carson Mall. He is currently believed to have lived in the Carson City area for about 1 year. He is currently being held in the Carson City Detention Facility.



Koontz was found dead in her home on January 10, 2019. Sources: Nevada police arrest man in connection with four homicides, By Riobhan McAndrew, Marcella Corona and Benjamin Spillman, Reno Gazette Journal, 1-20-19; Murder charges expected against suspect in killings, KOLO TV, Reno NV, 1-20-19; Wilbur Martinez-Guzman held in connection to Reno, Douglas murders; neighbors relieved, Siobhan McAndrew, Marcella Corona, Benjamin Spillman and Anieanette Damon, Reno Gazette Journal, 1-20-19 Deputy Josie Greathouse Fox, 38 8th Anniversary Tribute Wife, Mother, Daughter, & Friend Murdered by Roberto Miramontes Roman Roberto Miramontes Roman, a previously deported Mexican illegal alien, was convicted of murdering Millard County Sheriff's Deputy Josie Greathouse Fox on January 5, 2010.



Deputy Fox had stopped Roman's Cadillac sedan related to a car theft and drug investigation near Delta, Utah. During the stop, Deputy Fox was shot in the neck by Roman. Roman then fled but later was arrested in Beaver, Utah. Roman was acquitted of murder but convicted on weapons charges and tampering with evidence in August 2012 and sentenced to prison for 10 years. In a subsequent 2017 trial in federal court, Roman was convicted on February 7th on a number of charges including methamphetamine distribution and intentionally killing Deputy Fox. Roman was sentenced to life in prison plus 80 years. Roman's criminal history in the US included arrests going back to 1996 and 1997 for drug and weapons charges. He was deported back to Mexico by ICE in 1998 after being released from jail. He was caught reentering the US in 2005. Deputy Fox's mother was quoted in the news as saying her daughter was a kind, beautiful, and strong woman. Deputy Fox is survived by her husband and two children. Source: Deputy Sheriff Josie Greathouse Fox, ODMP.org; Man convicted of killing Utah sheriff's deputy is sentenced to life and more, By Pamela Manson, The Salt Lake Tribune, 56-18-17 Pierce Corcoran, 22 Son, Brother, Grandson & Friend Allegedly killed by Franco Cambray Francisco-Eduardo, 44 Franco Cambray Francisco-Eduardo , 44, an illegal alien, has been arrested for the December 29, 2018 death of Pierce Corcoran, 22, of Knoxville Tennessee. Francisco-Edurado has been charged with criminal negligent homicide, driving without a license, and driving without insurance, for the December 29th fatal motor vehicle accident in which Corcoran was severely injured and later died at a hospital. Corcoran's 21-year old female passenger survived the crash but was injured and taken to the hospital and is recovering from her injuries. Pierce Corcoran is the son of D.J. Corcoran, a Knoxville's Fire Department Fire Chief. Wendy Corcoran, mother of the deceased wrote that her son was "a responsible, hardworking and loving son, brother and grandson."

Sources: Driver charged with negligent homicide in fatal Chapman Highway wreck, by Tyler Whetstone, Knoxville News Sentinel, 12-31-18; Mother of Pierce Corcoran speaks out after son's death in car crash, By Travis Dorman, Knoxville News Sentinel, 1-6-19 Officer Ronil Singh , 33 Husband, Father, Son , Brother & Friend Allegedly murdered by Gustavo Perez Arriaga, 32 Gustavo Perez Arriaga, a 32-year-old Mexican national illegally living in the U.S., has been arrested for the murder of Newman California Police Officer Ronil Singh, 33. Officer Singh, who has worked for the Newman Police Department since 2011, was shot and killed during a morning traffic stop involving Arriaga on December 26, 2018. Two days later Arraiaga was captured in Bakersfield, CA, 280 miles away from the City of Newman. Police stated they believe Arriaga was attempting to flee back to Mexico.



Arriaga, reportedly had been involved in a gang and arrested twice previously for DUI. He had also been previously deported back to Mexico. Arriaga is expected to be charged with homicide. OJJPAC note: This officer's death is the result of the radical sanctuary policies instituted by the Progressive Democrats that control many of the cities, counties, and overwhelmingly the legislature and executive branch in California. These leftist public officials have worked to encouraged the creation and expansion of illegal alien sanctuaries across California. These sanctuary policies protect law breakers from arrest by ICE agents from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and put the lives of all Americans at greater risk. The U.S. Department of Justice needs to sue the cities, counties and state of California that are violating federal law.



Source: California illegal immigrant ‘cop-killer’ taken into custody, officials say, By Elizabeth Zwirz & Greg Norman, Fox News, 12-29-18 Clinton Howell, 12 . Son, Brother, Student & Friend Allegedly murdered by Tajay Chambers, 18 Tajay Chambers, 18 an illegal alien from Jamaca, has been arrested for the murder of Clinton Howell, 12. The 12-year-old was shot in the chest during a drive-by shooting on December 18, 2018, in front of his family's home in Bridgeport, CT. Chambers was arrested on December 19th on another warrant for a prior alleged assault on another student at a high school on October 12, 2018. An immigration detainer was placed on Chambers by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).



Clinton Howell is survived by his parents, sisters, and cousins according to his obituary. Sources: Arrest made in 12-year-old's murder, By Daniel Tepfer, Connecticut Post, 12-24-18; Clinton Howell obituary. Rocky "Roc" P. Jones, 51 Son , Father, Brother, Friend & Dairyman Allegedly murdered by Gustavo Garcia, 36 Gustavo Garcia, 36 , an illegal alien has been arrested for the murder of Rocky Paul Jones, 51, of Visalia, California. Garcia was caught on store video confronting Jones in a convenience store parking lot at 2:30a.m on December 16, 2018. Garcia is then alleged to have shot and killed Jones. That night Garcia also reportedly is believed to be involved in multiple shootings, including the shooting of a farm worker, and robbery of a gas station in another town.



Garcia is alleged to have a criminal record dating back to 2002 and apparently ordered to be deported in 2014 and had past multiple immigration holds.



Some in law enforcement have pointed out that the State of California's controversial passage of Senate Bill 54, also knows as California's illegal alien "sanctuary" law in 2017, is the reason Garcia was allowed to remain in the US and go on his crime spree and kill Mr. Jones. Mr. Jones was a dairyman who was born in Tulare California. He is survived by his daughter, brothers, stepfather, and nieces ands nephews. Family members said Rocky was a "loving and genuine" person.

Sources: Man killed in violent crime spree by suspect ordered to be deported in 2014, By Justin Lum, Central Valley.com, 12-17-18; Rocky Paul Jones obituary; After a shooting suspect's 'reign of terror,' a California sheriff blames the state's sanctuary law, By Antonia Noori Farzan, The Washington Post, 12-20-18 Robert Page, 76 Husband, Father, Grandfather, Friend Allegedly murdered by Christian Ponce-Martinez, 25 Christian Ponce-Martinez, a.k.a. Christian Ponce, 25 , an illegal alien from Mexico, was arrested in the murder and dismembering of his neighbor Robert Page, 76, of Morrow, Georgia. Page's wife contacted police on November 8, 2018 to report her senior citizen husband missing. A trail of blood led police to an adjacent home where Ponce-Martinez was renting a room. At that home, investigators found bloody pieces of a body hidden in a cooler and under a tarp, which were determined to belong to Mr. Page.



Police found Ponce-Martinez hiding under a piece of furniture on the property. A news report indicated that security video showed Ponce-Martinez on Page's property prior to Mr. Page's murder and said that the two men may have been arguing before the murder. Ponce-Martinez, who reportedly moved to Morrow Georgia just 3 months earlier, has been charged with murder. Although Ponce-Martinez had just moved next to the Page family recently, Ponce-Martinez had been caught by the US Border Patrol attempting to illegally enter the US once before in 2015. Mr. Page is survived by his wife of almost 50 years, his children and grandchildren. Sources: Suspect charged with dismembering Morrow man seeks psych eval, By Robin Kemp, Cayton News-Daily, 12-18-18; Trump mentions Georgia killing in border wall speech, By Alexis Stevens and Joshua Sharpe, Atlanta Journal Constitution, 'Very nervous' man hides under sofa when cops find dismembered grandpa in yard, cops say, By Scott Berson, Ledger-Enuirer, 11-12-18



Sabrina Starr, 21 Daughter, Friend Allegedly murdered by Luis Rodrigo Perez, 23 Luis Rodrigo Perez, 23, an alleged illegal alien from Mexico, has been arrested and charged with the shooting death of Sabrina Starr, 21, on November 2, 2018. Immigration and Customs Enforcement reported that Perez had a immigration detainer placed on him during Perez's 2017 incarceration at the New Jersey Middlesex County Jail. Perez was in jail related to a domestic violence charge. The Middlesex jail however would not honor the ICE immigration hold and released the illegal alien back into the community. The NJ jail also failed to notify ICE of Perez's release, which allowed Perez to avoid arrest and to commit 3 murders in two days, one of which was Ms. Starr. Source: Illegal immigrant killed 3 after 'sanctuary' release from custody, ICE says, By Louis Casiano, Fox News Network, 11-11-18 Steven R. Marler, 38 Son, Father Friend Allegedly murdered by Luis Rodrigo Perez, 23 Luis Rodrigo Perez, 23, an alleged illegal alien from Mexico, has been arrested and charged with the shooting death of his former roommate Steven Marler, 38 on November 1, 2018. Immigration and Customs Enforcement reported that Perez had a immigration detainer placed on him during Perez's 2017 incarceration at the New Jersey Middlesex County Jail. Perez was in jail related to a domestic violence charge. The Middlesex jail however would not honor the ICE immigration hold and released the illegal alien back into the community. The NJ jail also failed to notify ICE of Perez's release, which allowed Perez to avoid arrest and to commit 3 murders in two days. Source: Illegal immigrant killed 3 after 'sanctuary' release from custody, ICE says, By Louis Casiano, Fox News Network, 11-11-18 Aron Hampton, 23 Son, Friend Allegedly murdered by Luis Rodrigo Perez, 23 Luis Rodrigo Perez, 23, an alleged illegal alien from Mexico, has been arrested and charged with shooting death of his former roommate Aron Hampton, 23 on November 1, 2018. Immigration and Customs Enforcement reported that Perez had a immigration detainer placed on him during Perez's 2017 incarceration at the New Jersey Middlesex County Jail. Perez was in jail related to a domestic violence charge. The Middlesex jail however would not honor the ICE immigration hold and released the illegal alien back into the community. The NJ jail also failed to notify ICE of Perez's release, which allowed Perez to avoid arrest and to commit 3 murders in two days. Source: Illegal immigrant killed 3 after 'sanctuary' release from custody, ICE says, By Louis Casiano, Fox News Network, 11-11-18 Neidy Roche, 39 Daughter & Friend Allegedly Murdered by Juan Carlos Hernandez-Caseres, 37 Source: Man killed two women in Miami, dumpted bodies on street, police say, By Martin Vassolo and Charles Rabin, Miami Herald, 6-19-18; Illegal immigrant charged with killing two Miami women, dumping bodies on street, By Robert Gearty, Fox News, 6-19-18



Ann Farrin, 41 Mother, Daughter & Friend Allegedly Murdered by Juan Carlos Hernandez-Caseres, 37 Source: Man killed two women in Miami, dumpted bodies on street, police say, By Martin Vassolo and Charles Rabin, Miami Herald, 6-19-18; Illegal immigrant charged with killing two Miami women, dumping bodies on street, By Robert Gearty, Fox News, 6-19-18



Justin James Dennis Lee, 14 Son , Brother, Student, Football player, Friend Allegedly killed by Miguel A. Ibarra Cerda, 21 Miguel A. Ibarra Cerda, 21 , an illegal alien living in Michigan, was arrested for the June 11, 2018 death of teenager Justin Lee, 14, a resident of Wixom, Michigan. Cerda is accused of driving a minivan recklessly at high speed and striking the teenager who was riding a bicycle. After the accident, Cerda fled the scene and left Lee to die in the street. Cerda was attempting to escape to Mexico but only got as far as Lancing Michigan before being captured by police. Lee's family and friends now grieve the loss of Justin. Justin's mother was quoted in a news report as saying "My little boy was my everything. He was the reason why I got up every day."

OJJPAC note: Another DACA aged illegal alien who should have never been allowed to remain in the US. The result is another needless death of an American teen who is now listed on this Memorial. Sources: Mother grieves loss of son killed in Wixom hit-and-run as man accused of hitting him learns charges, By Derick Hutchinson, ClickOnDetroit.com, 6-14-18; Justin Lee obituary; Justin Lee Dennis obituary. Paul Robert Besaw, 36 Husband, Father, Son, Friend, & Medic Allegedly killed by Genaro Delacruz Ajqui Sources: Paul Robert Besaw obituary; Attorneys for man accused in deadly, drunk-driving crash say he's 'incompetent' to go to trial, By Mehgan McRoberts, TV-5 West Palm Beach, FL, 12-1-17 Amanda Ferguson Weyant, 28 "Mandy" Daughter, Teacher & Friend Allegedly killed on Thanksgiving Day by Joel Velazquez, 24 Source: Family of teacher killed, learns suspect had criminal past and was in US illegally, By Genevieve Curtis, KFOX-TV, El Paso, Texas. Carl Edgar "Chase" Chapman, Jr. , 31 Father, Son & Friend Died August 26, 2017 Allegedly killed by Douglas Morales-Flores Sources: Young dad killed in DUI crash on way to work, By Ellen Eldridge, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, 8-29-17; Family: DeKalb strip club liable for DUI death of Chick-fil-A worker, By The Atlantic Journal-Constitution. Shirra Nicole Branum, 37 Wife, Mother, Daughter , & Friend Died March 16, 2017 Allegedly killed by Alan Jacob Mogollon-Anaya, 30 Source: A mother's search for alleged drunk driver who killed daughter turns to Kenner, By Littice Bacon-Blood, The Times, Picayune, Tennessee, 10-3-17

Blake Michael Zieto , 20 Son , Brother & Friend Allegedly killed by Jesus Maltos Chacon, 45 Jesus Maltos Chacon , 45, a Mexican national illegally in the U.S., is wanted by U.S. law enforcement in connection to the death of 20-year-old Blake Zieto on November 18, 2006.



The Louisiana State Police believe that Chacon was driving the truck that crashed head-on into Zieto's motorcycle in Denham Springs, LA. The State Police told reporters that Chacon fled the scene of the accident, leaving the badly injured 20-year-old to die in the street. Zieto's injuries were so severe, he died on the way to the hospital.

According to a WAFB TV-9 news report, "Chacon is wanted for negligent homicide, failure to yield, hit-and-run and operating a vehicle without legal presence." Judy Zieto, Blake Zieto's mother, claims that Chacon was not only in the U.S. illegally, he also had a criminal record and was awaiting a deportation hearing. Mrs. Zieto has been pursuing prosecution of Chacon since her son's death in 2006. Louisiana law enforcement believe Chacon returned to Mexico after the crash to avoid prosecution in the U.S. Blake is survived by his parents, two sisters, his fiancée, and many other family members and friends who grieve his loss and miss him every day. The Justice for Blake Facebook page can be found here:

https://www.facebook.com/Justice-for-Blake-206424859418277/ From Blake's obituary: "But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not be faint." Isaiah 40:31. Sources: Email from Judy Zieto (Mother of Blake); Blake Michael Zieto Obituary, The Advocate, 11-20-06; WAFB TV-9 news report, 11-23-06 Mollie Tibbitts, 20 Daughter & Friend Allegedly killed by Cristhian Baherna Rivera, 2 4 Cristhian Baherna Rivera, 24 , has been arrested for the brutal murder of Iowan native Mollie Tibbitts, 20. Authorities have determined that Rivera, a Mexican national, is an illegal alien and has been living and working illegally in the US for several years.



Investigators believe that Ms. Tibbitts, a sophomore at the University of Iowa, encountered Rivera in July while she went running on July 18th in her rural Brooklyn, Iowa neighborhood. Ms. Tibbits never returned home from her run. She was reported missing and law enforcement began searching for the missing woman. Rivera was identified as a suspect thanks to security camera video captured him following Ms. Tibbits. Rivewra reportedly confessed to the murder of Ms. Tibbitts after getting angry after she rebuffed his advances and threatened to call police.



Rivera led law enforcement agents to a field where he claimed he put Ms. Tibbits body. A body was found at that location but it has not officially been confirmed to be Ms. Tibbitts.



Rivera has been charged with first-degree murder. Conflicting reports have bail set at $1-5 million.



Sources: CNN, August 22, 2018, ABC News, August, 22, 2018

Chrishia Odette , 13 Daughter, Friend, Student Allegedly killed by Ramiro Tolentino Guevara Ramiro Tolentino Guevara , an alleged Mexican illegal alien in Texas was charged with driving without a license after allegedly killing Chrishia Odette, 13, in a car accident on September 12, 2014.



According to Chrishia's family, Guevara was released in less than an hour after posting bond for two existing warrants. Chris Odette claimed that Rockwell TX law enforcement informed the family that they do not check a defendant's legal status or notify ICE unless the crime involved is a violent felony.



The family indicated that local law enforcement lacked interest in prosecuting Guevara. The family gives credit to Congressman Michael Burgess, for getting ICE involved into Ms. Odette's case.



Sources: Email from Victim's family, August 14, 2018 Carlos Wolff , 36 Agent, Federal Bureau of Investigation Husband, Father, Son, Brother & Friend Killed by Roberto Garza Palacios, 28 Sources: FBI Agent, Fire Lt. Killed in I-270 Crash in Rockville, NBC Washington, 12-9-17; Negligent Driving Case That Killed 2 Ends With $280 Fine, NBC-TV, Washington, 7-7-18 Sander Benjamin Cohen , 33 Deputy Chief State Fire Marshal Killed in the Line of Duty Son, Grandson, Nephew, Cousin & Friend Killed by Roberto Garza Palacios, 28 Sources: FBI Agent, Fire Lt. Killed in I-270 Crash in Rockville, NBC Washington, 12-9-17; Negligent Driving Case That Killed 2 Ends With $280 Fine, NBC-TV, Washington, 7-7-18; Sander B. Cohen Obituary. Sarah Rae-Ann Root, 21 Daughter, Sister, Granddaughter & Friend Allegedly killed by E swin G. Mejia , 33 Sarah Root lived in Council Bluff, Nebraska and was killed on January 31, 2016 while out with friends celebrating her college graduation. Source: The story of Sarah Root, who Trump said was sacrificed 'on the altar of open borders', By Fred Barbash, The Washington Post, June 22, 2016; Sarah Root obituary. Peter Hacking Son, Husband, Father & Volunteer Firefighter K illed by Margarito Quintero Rosales, 35 Margarito Quintero Rosales, 35 , a previously deported illegal alien was arrested and pled guilty to negligent homicide for the March 31, 2016 death of Texan Peter Hacking. Rosales was given a two-year prison sentence. Rosales, an unlicensed driver, crashed into Hacking's vehicle, killing Hacking and two of his children. Rosales reportedly entered the US in 2006 and was deported once in 2008.



Mr. Hacking is survived by his wife Courtney who was quoted as saying Rosales' punishment was equivalent to a slap on the wrist. Source: Illegal Alien Killed Firefighter and 2 children, Trump Wall Would Have Saved Them, By Kim Smith, ConservativeTribune.com, 11-2-17

Ellie Jean Bryant, 4 Daughter, Sister & Child K illed by Margarito Quintero Rosales, 35 Margarito Quintero Rosales, 35 , a previously deported illegal alien was arrested and pled guilty to negligent homicide for the March 31, 2016 death of 4-year-old Ellie Jean Bryant of Lavon, Texas. Rosales was given a two-year prison sentence. Rosales, an unlicensed driver, crashed into the vehicle driven by the child's father, killing the child's father and 22-month old brother. Rosales reportedly entered the US in 2006 and was deported once in 2008.



Ellie is survived by her mother, Courtney, who was quoted as saying Rosales' punishment was equivalent to a slap on the wrist. Source: Illegal Alien Killed Firefighter and 2 children, Trump Wall Would Have Saved Them, By Kim Smith, ConservativeTribune.com, 11-2-17; Ellie Jean Bryant obituary. Grayson Hacking, 22 months Son & Toddler K illed by Margarito Quintero Rosales, 35 Margarito Quintero Rosales, 35 , a previously deported illegal alien was arrested and pled guilty to negligent homicide for the March 31, 2016 death of 22-month-old Grayson Hacking of Texas. Rosales was given a two-year prison sentence. Rosales, an unlicensed driver, crashed into the vehicle driven by the child's father, killing the child's father and 4-year-old sister. Rosales reportedly entered the US in 2006 and was deported once in 2008.



Grayson Hacking is survived by his mother, Courtney, who was quoted as saying Rosales' punishment was equivalent to a slap on the wrist. Source: Illegal Alien Killed Firefighter and 2 children, Trump Wall Would Have Saved Them, By Kim Smith, ConservativeTribune.com, 11-2-17 Shayley Estes, 22 3rd Anniversary Tribute Listing 7-24-15 to 7-24-18 Daughter, Sister, Aunt, Student, & Friend Murdered by



Igor Zubko, 26 August, 2017 update: Russian national Igor Zubko admitted to the murder of Shayley Estes. He accepted a plea deal in which he will serve a life sentence in prison, which allowed him to avoid a possible death sentence conviction. Original entry below: Igor Zubko, 26, a Russian illegal alien was arrested for the brutal murder of Shayley Estes, 22, who was found dead in her Phoenix, Arizona home on July 24, 2015. Police caught Zubko at the Sky Harbor International Airport before he could flee on a flight to San Francisco, California. [OJJPAC note: San Francisco's extreme sanctuary policy protects criminal aliens from federal detention and deportation.] Zubko was charged with first-degree murder, kidnapping, among other criminal offenses. The victim, whom had befriended Zubko several months earlier, had allowed Zubko to move into her home. However, according to the victim's mother, the Russian national began threatening her daughter, so Shayley obtained a restraining order against Zubko. One news report stated that the order was served on Zubko on July 14, 2015, and death threats from Zubko followed.



The restraining order served on Zubko on or about July 14, 2015, did not deter Zubko. Zubko reportedly told police that he bought a gun, entered the victim's home using a house key he had retained, and shot Estes on July 24th. Zubko alleged that the shooting was an accident, a story police and prosecutors didn't believe--concluding that the young woman was shot after attempting to flee Zubko. Prior to her murder, Shayley was working a full-time job and also attending college where she was studying chemistry. The Estes family has been devastated by the loss of Shayley. Shannon Estes, Shayley's broken-hearted mother, wrote that her daughter was her best friend. Shayley is also survived by 4 loving brothers and a nephew, all whom she also loved very much.



Shannon Estes wrote that Zubko enter the U.S. legally but overstayed his visa, and remained in the U.S. illegally. The judge in the case set Zubko's bond at $1 million dollars. Sources: Email from Shannon Estes, 7-23-16; Slain woman's mom sheds light on murder suspect, Fox 12, 7-26-15 ; Life Senetence for North Adams Native Shayley Estes, By Staff writers Derek Gentile, Bob Dunn and Eoin Higgins, The Berkshire Eagle, August 26, 2017. Dominic Daniel Durden, 30 6th Anniversary Tribute Listing 7-12-12 to 7-12-18 Son, Friend, Sheriff's Dept. 911 Dispatcher K illed by Juan Zacarias Lopez Tzun, 32 Updated 11-27-15 Juan Zacarias Lopez Tzun was convicted of causing the 2012 death of Dominic Durden in April, 2013. Tzun pleaded guilty to vehicular manslaughter without gross negligence. Superior Court Judge Rafael A. Arreola sentenced Tzun to only nine months in jail. After serving his jail sentence, Tzun was deported in March, 2014. Mr. Durden's mother believes that Tzun has likely illegally returned to the illegal alien sanctuary of Riverside, California. OJJPAC note: Since originally adding "Dom" Durden's name to the Memorial in 2012, I have come to know his mother, Sabine Durden. Sabine has become a very active advocate for the enforcement of U.S. immigration laws. She shares the story of her family's personal tragedy and heartache as a warning to others. Juan Zacarias Lopez Tzun, 32, a Guatemalan illegal alien living in California, has been arrested for causing the death of Riverside County Sheriff's department dispatcher Dominic Durden, 30, on July 12, 2012. Police said that Tzun, who was driving a Chevy pickup truck, turned in front of the victim's motorcycle, causing a crash, in which Durden died at the scene from his injuries.



Tzun reportedly attempted to flee the scene of the accident but was stopped and held by two U.S. Marines who witnessed the crash. Tzun initially pled not guilty to the charges of vehicular manslaughter without gross neglect and for driving without a license. Dominic Durden, better known as "Dom," had many friends, formerly served as a volunteer firefighter, and was a pilot. He was the 2002 Moreno Valley Volunteer of the Year. Sabine Durden, "Dom's mom," said that her only child's death shattered her heart in millions of pieces. Tzun and the failure of the Obama administration to enforce U.S. immigration laws ended her son's future and severely changing her's--she lost her only child, best friend, and will never experience being a mother-in-law or grandma. Ms. Durden now advocates for the enforcement of U.S. immigration laws and has a website dedicated to her son: DomHugs.com Sources: Service planned for fallen Sheriff's dispatcher, Mydesert.com, 7-19-12; Valley News, 7-18-12; Illegal alien charged with killing sheriff's dispatcher in California, by David Gibson, Examiner.com, 7-31-12; and Immigration status of driver in dispatcher's death won't be checked, By Bryan Rokos, The Press-Enterprise, 7-13-12; Durden obituary; and Dispatcher's killer could serve only 34 days, Press Enterprise, 4-4-13; Statement by Sabine Durden. Edwin Jackson, 26 Son, Friend, Colt's Football Player Allegedly killed by Manuel Orrego-Savala, 37 Manuel Orrego-Savala, a/k/a Alex Cabrera Gonsales, 37, a Guatemalan illegal alien living in Indiana has been arrested for causing the death of Edwin Jackson, 26. Indiana State Police said that Orrego-Savala was driving drunk and crashed into the stopped vehicle in which Jackson was a passenger. Jackson and his Uber driver died from their injuries.



Like most cowardly illegal aliens, Orrego-Savala reportedly failed to aid the victims and attempted to flee the scene of the accident on foot but was taken down and arrested. It was reported that Orrego-Savala was not only allegedly drunk, but was driving without a license, and had previously been deported from the U.S. in 2007 and 2009. Jackson's teammates remembered their friend as someone who was not only a great football player but also someone who took the time to aid community groups and institutions such as Riley Children's Hospital. Source: Edwin Jackson was killed by a twice-deported illegal immigrant. Now the Colts' Player's death is par of the Indiana Senate race, By Philip Wegmann, Washington Examiner, 2-6-18 Grant Ronnebeck , 21 3rd Anniversary Tribute Listing Murdered January 22, 2015 Son, Friend Allegedly murdered by Apolinar Altamirano, 29 Apolinar Altamirano, 29, an unauthorized Mexican illegal alien DREAMer, has been arrested for the January 22, 2015 first-degree murder of Phoenix Quick Trip store clerk Grant Ronnebeck, 21. Altamirano is accused of shooting Ronnebeck and stealing two packs of cigarettes after the 21-year-old clerk demanded payment before giving Altamirano any cigarettes. The murder was recorded on the store's security camera and police captured Altamirano after a high speed chase in Phoenix. Altamirano had previous run-ins with local police and Immigration and Customs Enforcement. In 2012, he pleaded guilty to facilitation to commit burglary and got probation but was placed in deportation proceedings.



Before the murder of Ronnebeck, Altamirano was released on a $10,000 bond in 2013 from ICE custody despite the defendant's own claims of ties to the Mexican Mafia. After his release, but before Ronnebeck's murder, Altamirano also allegedly threatened to kill two people, resulting in harassment injunctions against Altamirano. Altamirano reportedly entered the U.S. illegally at the age of 14 and prior to his arrest, worked illegally as a landscaper. OJJPAC note: Another senseless murder of a young US citizen, who was also a son, brother, nephew and friend to many. Grant's life was viciously taken while earning an honest day's pay..." allegedly" by an illegal alien from Mexico who obviously has contempt for our laws and the rights of our citizens. This young man's blood is on the hands of the Obama administration and those who support Obama's non-enforcement immigration directives. The Obama administration's conduct defies common sense. The harm it has caused has been of such an egregious nature, all its policy architects deserve the title of saboteur if not traitor, and all should be prosecuted for their acts of public malfeasance. Source: Suspect in Mesa QT killing faced deportation proceedings, By Arizona Central, 1-27-15 Kristopher William Eggle, 28 15th Anniversary Tribute August 15, 1973 - August 9, 2002 Son, Friend, U.S. National Park Ranger Murdered by Mexican drug smugglers Illegal alien drug smugglers from Mexico murdered Kristopher William Eggle, 28, on August 9, 2002. Kris Eggle was murdered while working as a U.S. National Park Ranger at the Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument in Arizona. In 2000, Eggle accepted the ranger position at Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument. Eggle had previously worked as a ranger at other NPS parks, including Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore and Canyonlands National Park. Because of Organ Pipe's proximity to the US border with Mexico, NPS rangers duties included intercepting Mexican drug smugglers. Eggle was shot and killed August 9, 2002 while tracking Mexican drug smugglers through the national park in Arizona.

In honor of Eggle, the U.S. Congress passed a law in 2003 dedicating the visitor center at Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument as the Kris Eggle Visitor Center. Eggle, who grew up in Cadillac Michigan, was an Eagle Scout and was an outstanding student. He graduated high school in 1991 and was the valedictorian of his class. He went on earn a degree in wildlife biology from the University of Michigan. He also received the Director's Award for outstanding achievement at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center. Kris was known by his family, friends, and park visitors as an outstanding worker and human being. He is dearly missed by his family and friends. Source: National Park Service website 10th Anniversary Tribute Listing 7-29-07 to 7-29-17 Terry Wendover, 45 Homeless woman, daughter to someone Murdered by Juan Jorge Santiago Toledo, 33 Update: Juan Jorge Santiago Toledo , an illegal alien from Mexico, who was arrested in 2007 for the murder of Terry Wendover recently agreed to plead guilty to Wendover's murder. Toledo admitted to stabbing Wendover several times with a knife during an argument. Wendover, who was a Poughkeepsie resident, was found dead on July 29, 2007 in a Rite Aid parking lot at 690 Main St, Poughkeepsie. Toledo guilty plea to first-degree manslaughter means that he can be imprisoned up to 25 years, after which he may be deported. Original story Sources: 11-4-07 Man Held in July Killing, by Larry Hertz, Poughkeepsie Journal (New York). Updated story source: Plea deal taken in '07 fatal city stabbing, Poughkeepsie Journal, 1-29-09; City of Poughkeepsie Police Dept Alert RSS Feed, 10-4-07. Marilyn Pharis , 64 Daughter, Sister, Aunt & Veteran K illed by Victor Aureliano Martinez Ramirez Update: Victor Aureliano Martinez Ramirez, an illegal alien from Mexico was arrested for the July 24, 2015 break-in and vicious physical and sexual attack and later death of Marilyn Pharis, 64, of Santa Maria, California. Martinez-Ramirez was found guilty of "special circumstances murder" after a long trial in 2018. Martinez-Ramirez was sentenced to life in prison without parole.



According to a news report, the jury found special circumstances of robbery, burglary, sexual penetration, and use of a deadly weapon. Martinez-Ramirez reportedly had prior assault and drug convictions. The Santa Maria P.D. had previously arrested him 6 times. He was arrested just one week prior to the Pharis attack on weapons and drug charges, and was released from jail 96 hours prior to breaking into Pharis' home. Because California prosecutors were reducing his criminal charges from felonies to misdemeanors, Martinez-Ramirez was able to avoid being turned over to federal agents from Immigration and Customs Enforcement and placed into deportation proceedings.



Ms. Pharis was a veteran and later employed at the Vandenberg Air Force Base prior to her murder. Friends said outside work, she was involved in charity work, rescuing animals, and had been planning a trip to Denmark. OJJPAC's Founder Note: After I put Santa Maria, CA on the OJJPAC illegal alien Sanctuary Cities List, USA (before Pharis's murder), the city had sent me a letter threatening legal action if I didn't remove the City of Santa Maria off my list. I did not remove it and continued to pressure the city to end its protection of illegal aliens. Unfortunately it was not enough to save the life of Ms. Pharis. -Steve Salvi, Founder, OJJPAC.org Sources: Guilty verdict handed down in Marilyn Pharis murder, By Gina Kim, Santa Maria Times, 6-27-18; Candlelight Vigil Memorializes Marilyn Pharis, By Kyle Harding, Lee Central Coast News, 8-25-15; Illegal immigrant convicted of the murder of Marilyn Pharis, Cal Coast News, 6-28-18 Kenneth Scott Mahr, 18 Son, High School Senior Allegedly killed by Eustacio Gregorio-Meza, 40 Eustacio Gregorio-Meza, 40, an alleged illegal alien from Mexico, has been arrested for the May 14, 2017 killing of Kenneth Scott Mahr, 18, of Palm Beach Gardens, Florida. Mahr was allegedly killed after Meza, an unlicensed driver, ran a stop sign and failed to yield for Mahr's motorcycle, causing Mahr to be thrown off his motorcycle and suffer fatal injuries.



This is one of the rare cases in which an alleged illegal alien remained at the scene of the accident and didn't attempt to flee the scene of the crash. Mahr is survived by his parents, Joshua and Jennifer Walter, and several siblings. Source: Illegal Alien Kills High School Senior Before Graduation, Say Prosecutor, by Bob Price, Breitbart News, 5-18-17; Obituary for Kenneth Scott Mahr, Palms West Funeral Home. Jamica Williams , 42 Allegedly murdered by Genaro Muniz-Padilla, 18 Genaro Muniz-Padilla, 18, has been arrested and charged with second-degree murder in connection with the April, 2017 death of Jamica Williams, 42, of Kenly, North Carolina. It was reported that police believe that Williams, who was riding a bicycle, was allegedly intentionally struck by Muniz-Padilla's vehicle after Padilla got upset with Williams over a comment Williams made to a third party. Source: Illegal Immigrant Driver Intentionally Killed Bicyclist, Police Say, by John Binder, Breitbart News, 4-24-17. Michael Furlow, 49 Allegedly killed by Jorge Solis, 20 Jorge Solis, 20, has been arrested in connection with the June, 2015 head-on wrong-way crash in Atlanta Georgia, that killed three people and injured two others. One of the victims was 49-year-old Michael Furlow. Source: Two children, aged 7 and 8 and a man killed by 20-year-old drunk driver who drove wrong way on a Georgia interstate, y Baily Mail, 6-22-15 Kaybrin Ingoldsby, 8 Allegedly killed by Jorge Solis, 20 Jorge Solis, 20, has been arrested in connection with the June, 2015 head-on wrong-way crash in Atlanta Georgia, that killed three people and injured two others. One of the victims was 49-year-old Michael Furlow. Source: Two children, aged 7 and 8 and a man killed by 20-year-old drunk driver who drove wrong way on a Georgia interstate, y Baily Mail, 6-22-15 Halle Ingoldsby, 8 Allegedly killed by Jorge Solis, 20 Jorge Solis, 20, has been arrested in connection with the June, 2015 head-on wrong-way crash in Atlanta Georgia, that killed three people and injured two others. One of the victims was 49-year-old Michael Furlow. Source: Two children, aged 7 and 8 and a man killed by 20-year-old drunk driver who drove wrong way on a Georgia interstate, y Baily Mail, 6-22-15 Officer Kevin Will, 38 Killed in the line of duty, May 29, 2011 6th Anniversary Tribute Listing Husband, Father, Son, & Houston Police Officer K illed by Johoan Rodriguez, 26 Update: Rodriguez was convicted of intoxication manslaughter and sentenced to 55 years in prison in June, 2012. Source: KHOU.com, June 8, 2012



Johoan Rodriguez, a suspected illegal alien has been arrested and charged with intoxicated manslaughter, cocaine possession, and resisting arrest, in the death of Huston police officer Kevin Will. Rodriguez allegedly was driving drunk when he drove his vehicle into a police barricade, striking and killing officer Will who was investigating a non-related hit-and-run call. Immigration and Customs Enforcement has placed an immigration hold on Rodriquez. Sources: Huston Chronicle, 5-30-11 (Houston Police Dept. Photo) OJJPAC note: Our sympathies to officer Will's wife Alicia, children, family, friends, and the Houston Police Department. We encourage everyone to demand that their public officials at the local, state and federal levels of government begin to take illegal migration seriously and take steps to combat it rater than accept and encourage it. Sergeant Brandon Mendoza, 32 Killed May 12, 2014-3rd Anniversary Tribute Listing Son, Brother, Uncle, & Friend to many Killed by Raul Silva Corona, 42 Illegal alien Raul Silva Corona , was determined to be criminally responsible for the May 12, 2014 death of Mesa Arizona Peace Officer Brandon Mendoza, 32. Corona was drunk and driving the wrong-way on an Arizona freeway when he slammed into officer Mendoza's vehicle. The impact killed Corona and officer Mendoza, a 13-year veteran of the Mesa Police Department. The Mesa Police Department posthumously promoted Mendosa to the rank of sergeant. Sergeant Mendoza is survived by his parents, siblings, and nieces and nephews. He is remembered by those who knew him as a good police officer whom was also a valued friend and community volunteer.



OJJPAC note: I met Brandon's mother in Washington D.C. in the fall of 2015. We walked the halls of congressional offices advocating for congressional support for the enforcement of U.S. immigration laws so more innocent Americans are not killed. Too many members of the U.S. Congress continue to oppose immigration law enforcement. Source: Wrong-way driver was drunk, fallen Mesa PD sergeant remembered, Fox TV-10, Mesa Arizona, 5-16-14; Funeral services set for Mesa Police Officer killed by wrong-way driver, By Jennifer Thomas, AZFamily.com, 5-14-14 LaDonna "Jeannie" Brady , 45 Daughter, Wife, Sister, Mother & Friend Allegedly killed by Esteban J. Tomas, 33 Illegal alien Esteban J. Tomas, 33 , is wanted in the fatal early morning New Year's day crash that killed LaDonna "Jeannie" Brady, 45. Authorities allege that Thomas was driving drunk and drove his SUV in the wrong direction on Interstate 74, causing the fatal collision with Ms. Brady's Chevrolet Equinox. A delay in arresting Thomas allowed him to escape justice after he was released from the hospital for his crash related injuries. Tomas, now a fugitive from justice, is reportedly is a citizen of Guatemala, and has a number of alias, including Estaban Tomas Jurarez, Estaban Juarez-Tomas, Victor Ochoa, and Estaban Juarez Tomas. was living illegally in Urbana, Illinois. Fugitive Tomas is charged with one counts of aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol and one count of driving without a license by the Campaign County State's Attorney Julia Rietz. Ms. Brady was born in Springfield, IL on March 1, 1971. She is survived by her parents, husband Eric, children, siblings, and many other family members and friends. Ms. Brady was a productive citizen, worked at the Christie Clinic, and was a valued community member. She was a strong supporter of the American Legion and described as "an amazing woman, mother, wife, and friend." OJJPAC note: Another outrageous incident in which city and county sanctuary policies enacted by Illinois' elected and appointed public officials (including law enforcement heads) likely resulted in this alleged criminal illegal alien's ability to remain illegally in the U.S. as well as escape justice. Sources: Felony charges filed in fatal New Year's crash, by Mary Schenk, The News Gazette, 1-17-17; Warrant issued for accused DUI driver, by Maggie Hockenberry, 1-27-17. Family photo used with permission. Robin Shelhammer , 60 Son, Husband, Father, Mechanical Designer & Friend Allegedly killed by Alejandro Ramirez-Jaramillo , 26 Illegal alien Alejandro Ramirez-Jaramillo , 26 , had been arrested for causing the March 26, 2017 motor vehicle accident which resulted in the death of Robin Shellhammer, 60, his wife, and daughter. Three other people were also injured in the crash that reportedly happened on North Cousino Road in Jerusalem Township, Ohio. Jaramillo's passengers, Javier Cervera, 38 and Pedro Martinez [of unknown legal status in the U.S.] were two of the injured who were transported to local hospitals. Jaramillo told authorities that he lived in Asheboro, N.C. and did construction work. Jaramillo has been charged with three counts of aggravated vehicle homicide and Judge Jeffery Keller set Jaramillo's bond at $100,000 per count. Through an interpreter, Jaramillo pleaded not guilty in Oregon Municipal Court and remains in the Lucas County jail.



OJJPAC note: This is the first Ohio family member killed during President Trump's administration. It emphasizes the need for the federal government to remove ALL identified illegal aliens from the U.S. If Jaramillo had been deported by Obama or Trump, the members of the Shelhammer family would still be alive today. Although the Trump administration has done more than the Obama administration, it is still coming up short and needs to fulfill its promises made during the campaign.



Source: Local graduate, wife and daughter killed in car crash, by staff and wire reports, Norwalk Reflector, April 1, 2017 Barbara Shelhammer , 56 Daughter, Wife, Mother, Friend & Business owner Allegedly killed by Alejandro Ramirez-Jaramillo , 26 Illegal alien Alejandro Ramirez-Jaramillo, 26 , had been arrested for causing the March 26, 2017 motor vehicle accident which resulted in the death of Barbara Shellhammer, 56, her husband, and daughter. Three other people were also injured in the crash that reportedly happened on North Cousino Road in Jerusalem Township, Ohio. Jaramillo's passengers, Javier Cervera, 38 and Pedro Martinez [of unknown legal status in the U.S.] were two of the injured who were transported to local hospitals. Jaramillo told authorities that he lived in Asheboro, N.C. and did construction work. Jaramillo has been charged with three counts of aggravated vehicle homicide and Judge Jeffery Keller set Jaramillo's bond at $100,000 per count. Through an interpreter, Jaramillo pleaded not guilty in Oregon Municipal Court and remains in the Lucas County jail.



OJJPAC note: This is the first Ohio family member killed during President Trump's administration. It emphasizes the need for the federal government to remove ALL identified illegal aliens from the U.S. If Jaramillo had been deported by Obama or Trump, the members of the Shelhammer family would still be alive today. Although the Trump administration has done more than the Obama administration, it is still coming up short and needs to fulfill its promises made during the campaign.



Source: Local graduate, wife and daughter killed in car crash, by staff and wire reports, Norwalk Reflector, April 1, 2017 Whitney Meinke , 33 Daughter, Wife, Mother, Teacher & Friend Allegedly killed by Alejandro Ramirez-Jaramillo , 26 Illegal alien Alejandro Ramirez-Jaramillo, 26 , had been arrested for causing the March 26, 2017 motor vehicle accident which resulted in the death of Whitney Meinke, 33, her father and mother. Three other people were also injured in the crash that reportedly happened on North Cousino Road in Jerusalem Township, Ohio. Jaramillo's passengers, Javier Cervera, 38 and Pedro Martinez [of unknown legal status in the U.S.] were two of the injured who were transported to local hospitals. Jaramillo told authorities that he lived in Asheboro, N.C. and did construction work. Jaramillo has been charged with three counts of aggravated vehicle homicide and Judge Jeffery Keller set Jaramillo's bond at $100,000 per count. Through an interpreter, Jaramillo pleaded not guilty in Oregon Municipal Court and remains in the Lucas County jail.

Ms. Meinke graduated in 2002 from Clay High School and received her Bachelors of Education from Lourdes University. She was a third grade teacher at RC Waters Elementary School in Oak Harbor, Ohio. Ms. Meinke is survived by her husband Luke Meinke and their two young sons.

OJJPAC note: This is the first Ohio family member killed during President Trump's administration. It emphasizes the need for the federal government to remove ALL identified illegal aliens from the U.S. If Jaramillo had been deported by Obama or Trump, the members of the Shelhammer family would still be alive today. Although the Trump administration has done more than the Obama administration, it is still coming up short and needs to fulfill its promises made during the campaign.



Source: Local graduate, wife and daughter killed in car crash, by staff and wire reports, Norwalk Reflector, April 1, 2017; Obituary, Toledo Blade, March 29, 2017. 1st Anniversary Tribute Listing Baby Thorne, Unborn Killed April 24, 2016 Son of Brandy & Grandson of Terry Killed by Jose Fransisco Flores Santos, 29 1st Anniversary Tribute Listing Brandy Lee Thorne, 22 Killed April 24, 2016 Mother, daughter, sister & friend Killed by Jose Fransisco Flores Santos, 29 Jose Fransisco Flores Santos, 29 , is another arrogant and self-centered illegal alien from El Salvador with no concern for American lives. Flores Santos was arrested for causing the March 31, 2016 motor vehicle accident which resulted in the injury and eventual death of Brandy Lee Thorne,22, and her unborn child on April 24, 2016. Ms. Thorne was a young mother on her way home from work at an Aurora, Ohio restaurant, when Flores Santos is alleged to have been driving intoxicated and crossed the center line hitting Thorne's vehicle head-on. Thorne, who was pregnant with her second child, was severely injured and was transported to Hillcrest Hospital but died a few weeks later. Her unborn child died too. Flores-Santos reportedly was driving a vehicle owned by someone he knew but took the car without permission. Flores Santos' passengers [of unknown legal status in the U.S.] were also injured and transported to local hospitals. Although Flores-Santos' admitted to police that he was in the U.S. illegally, he was somehow able to get a drivers license (which at the time of this accident, had been suspended for a unknown reason). Flores-Santos was indicted by a Portage County Grand Jury and charged with a number of felonies and misdemeanors including aggravated vehicular homicide. He was held in the Portage County Jail and Judge Laurie Pittman set Flores-Santos' bond at $100,000. Update: Since that time, Santos was found guilty and sentenced to 20 years in prison. [OJJPAC note: Thanks to the abysmal open US border policy of President Obama, this criminal was able to easily enter the U.S., obtain housing, apparently work illegally at a local Mexican restaurant, and then kill Americans and rip apart her loving American family. This story will likely never be told at the many misguided churches, such as the Catholic Church, that aid and abet illegal aliens in order to fill their empty churches, pews, and collection plates. Sources: Brandy Lee Thorne obituary, 4-30-16; Woman, unborn baby die a few weeks after Aurora crash, The Aurora Advocate 5-4-16; Driver in fatal Aurora crash indicted, By Dave O'Brien, Record-Courier Reporter, 5-18-16; and OJJPAC conducted personal interviews and original research. Sergeant Corey Blake Wride,44 September 28, 1969-January 30, 2014 Husband, Father, Son, Brother, Grandfather, & Friend Murdered by suspect Jose Angel Garcia-Jauregui, 27 Jose Angel Garcia-Jauregui , 27, a Mexican illegal alien, was shot and killed after he engaged Utah law enforcement in a fire fight after he shot and killed Sergeant Cory Wride of the Utah County Sheriff's Office and seriously wounded another officer.



Sergeant Wride was shot and killed while checking on a vehicle in which Jauregui and his 17-year-old accomplice occupied.



It is believed that Jauregui used a rifle to opened fire on Wride as he pulled behind Jauregui's vehicle, killing Wride before he exited his patrol car. Before Sergeant Wride was killed, he relayed a description of the assailant's vehicle to a department dispatcher. Another sheriff's deputy was then able to identify Jaurengui's vehicle and continue the pursuit. However, that officer was also shot in the head by Jauregui. (That officer survived his head wound.)



Jauregui continued to flee by carjacking a vehicle until that vehicle crashed after a pursuit and shoot-out with officers from the Juab County Sheriff's Department. Jauregui was wounded and taken to a hospital where he later died.



Megan Grunwald, Jaurengui's 17-year-old girlfriend and accomplice was arrested, charged, and convicted for her role in the duo's crime spree. She was sentenced to 30 years to life in prison.



Before Sergeant Wride's death, he had served nearly two decades with the Utah County Sheriff's Office. Sergeant Wride is survived by his wife Nannette, his children, eight grandchildren, his parents, siblings, and numerous other relatives and friends. His full obituary can be viewed here. He is buried in Spanish Fork City Cemetery. Fork, Utah. Sources: Cory Blake Wride Obituary; Teenage girl charged with murder in shooting of Sgt. Cory Wride, Daily Herald, 2-18-14; Officer Down Memorial Page; Suspect in Utah County Shooting Has Died, The Salt Lake Tribune, 2-1-14. Dennielle N."Nikki" Schermock, 25 15th Anniversary Tribute Listing 5-24-1976 to 11-17-2001 Mother, daughter, sibling & friend Allegedly killed by Fernado Reyes Fernado Reyes , an illegal alien from Mexico, remains a wanted fugitive 15 years after his implication in the November 17, 2001 death of Dennielle "Nikki" Schermock, 25.



According to Vickie Lyon, the victim's mother, Fernado Reyes was high on cocaine and intoxicated and was driving in the wrong direction on Poinciana Boulevard. Reyes pickup truck smashed head-on into Ms. Schermock 1988 Toyota. The crash instantly killed the young mother. Ms. Schermock's two young children, Brieanna, 4, and 16-months-old Brandon were also in their mother's car. The 4-year-old sustained serious injuries too but paramedics were able to revive her at the crash scene. Schermock's toddler was in a car-seat that Lyon said saved the young boy's life, despite various skin abrasions. Both children were life-flighted to an Orlando, FL Trauma Center, where Lyon's granddaughter underwent emergency surgery.



Vickie Lyon then has the horrible task of going to the local morgue to identify her daughter's violently broken body--a task that is every parents worst nightmare--and an experience that haunts Ms. Lyon to this day.



Fernado Reyes was treated at an Orlando Medical Center and then at a rehabilitation center. Lyon says that Reyes's family "snuck him out in the middle of the night" [of the rehab center] and Reyes has been a missing fugitive from justice ever since. Lyon believes that Reyes was basically "allowed" to escape. She believes that the Florida Highway Patrol and the State of Florida's lax investigation and control over Reyes was purposeful because they didn't want to deal with the sticky issue of his illegal immigration status and Mexican authorities. "It was like dealing with the Keystone Cops" said Lyon. Ms. Schermock was a member of the New Community Baptist Church. She was survived by her parents, her brothers, grandparents, and her children. She is missed by her family members and many friends. Source: Emailed letter, by Vickie Lyon, Mother of Dennielle Nikole Schermock, 10-18-16; Mother Dies, 2 Children Hurt In Head-on Crash, By Anthony Colarossi, Orlando Sentinel Writer; and Obituary, Dennelle N. Schermock, Orlando Sentinel, 11-21-2001 Joshua Wilkerson, 18 6th Anniversary Tribute Listing 11-16-2010 to 11-16-2016 Son, Student & Friend M urdered by Hermilo Vildo Moralez, 19 2016 Case Update: Illegal alien Hermilo Moralez, now 24, was convicted in January, 2013, of the brutal murder of Joshua Wilkerson, 18, of Pearland, TX. Moralez beat, strangled, and tortured Joshua Wilkerson on November 16, 2010 until he died. After the young man didn't return home from school, police were notified. A search team found his burned body in a field the following day.



Moralez was sentenced to life in prison. Moralez's family are Belize nationals who entered the U.S. illegally on or about 2001, when Moralez was 10-years-old. Original entry: Hermilo Moralez, 19 , a suspected illegal alien from Belize, has been arrested for the brutal murder of Joshua Wilkerson, 18, of Pearland, TX. Police say Moralez has confessed to murdering Wilkerson, who reported was a friend of Moralez and gave Moralez a ride home. Police also stated that they believe Wilkerson was first murdered, then bound and moved to a field where his body was set on fire. Sources: More Charges Filed Against Teen Killer Suspect, by Huston.com, 11-19-10; 21-year-old immigrant convicted in beating death of former Pearland classmate, by Carol Christian, Houston Cronicle, 1-29-13; Mother of Son Murdered By Illegal Alien Slams Sanctuary Cities, Politicians: 'Your Silence Speaks Volumes', by Julia Hahn and Katie McHugh, 7-21-15; Personal account by Laura Wilkerson, mother of Joshua Wilkerson. OJJPAC note: Another innocent U.S. citizen murdered because President Obama and the members of the Hispanic and Progressive Congressional caucuses work with a multitude of "non-profits" and ethnocentric groups to impede the enforcement of U.S. immigration laws. Adding insult to injury, these parties also advocate for amnesty for millions of illegal alien criminals for purely political reasons. I have personally met Joshua's mother. I have listened to her tell the horrific account of her son's death that shook me too my core. Laura Wilkerson and her family should not have had to experience this tragedy--it was preventable--and a direct result of the federal government failing to enforce US immigration laws. Eric Nathaniel "Krikit" Zepeda 5th Anniversary Tribute Listing 9-8-11 to 9-8-16 Son, Brother, Grandson & Friend Killed by



Pablo Arturo Duarte Rodriguez Sergeant Brandon Mendoza, 32 Killed May 12, 2014-2nd Anniversary Tribute Listing Son, Brother, Uncle, & Friend to many Killed by Raul Silva Corona, 42 Illegal alien Raul Silva Corona , was determined to be criminally responsible for the May 12, 2014 death of Mesa Arizona Peace Officer Brandon Mendoza, 32. Corona was drunk and driving the wrong-way on an Arizona freeway when he slammed into officer Mendoza's vehicle. The impact killed Corona and officer Mendoza, a 13-year veteran of the Mesa Police Department. The Mesa Police Department posthumously promoted Mendosa to the rank of sergeant. Sergeant Mendoza is survived by his parents, siblings, and nieces and nephews. He is remembered by those who knew him as a good police officer whom was also a valued friend and community volunteer.



OJJPAC note: I met Brandon's mother in Washington D.C. in the fall of 2015. We walked the halls of congressional offices advocating for congressional support for the enforcement of U..S. immigration laws so more innocent Americans are not killed.. Source: Wrong-way driver was drunk, fallen Mesa PD sergeant remembered, Fox TV-10, Mesa Arizona, 5-16-14; Funeral services set for Mesa Police Officer killed by wrong-way driver, By Jennifer Thomas, AZFamily.com, 5-14-14 Jamiel "Jas" Shaw, 17 (Murdered March 2nd 2008-Anniversary Listing) Son, nephew, good student, high school athlete Murdered by Pedro Espinosa, 23 Case update (11-6-12) : Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Ronald Rose accepted the jury's May, 2012 death sentence recommendation for Pedro Espinoza, the 23-year-old gangster who senselessly murdered Jamiel Shaw in 2008. 5-22-12 Conviction Update: Illegal alien gang member Pedro Espinosa, 23 has been convicted of first-degree murder on May 9, 2012. Espinosa had been arrested for the murder of Jamiel Shaw, 17, who was killed in an unprovoked March 2, 2008 attack. Shaw was brutally murdered three houses down from his family home in Los Angeles. According to the LAPD and District Attorney, 19-year-old Pedro Espinosa, has a long juvenile criminal record and is a member of of the 18th Street Gang. He is also a Mexican national in the U.S. illegally. Shockingly, Espinosa was released from jail for assault with a deadly weapon March 1, 2008, one day prior to the murder of Jaimel Shaw. Why was Espinosa given probation? Why was Espinosa not turned over to Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) for deportation prior to committing any crimes in the U.S.? The Shaw family now wants the City of Los Angeles to repeal Special Order 40 which prohibited police from inquiring about Espinosa's immigration status--and prevented his deportation back to Mexico. The repeal effort is called "Jamiel's Law" and more information is available at http://www.jamielslaw.com . Anita Shaw, Jamiel's mother, wants her son to be remembered as a hero and Christian-- a good example for young people to follow. Rumors that Shaw was a gang member seem unfair--and many supporters of the Special Order 40 repeal campaign believe the rumors are part of a smear campaign to stop repeal efforts. The fact is that Shaw was the victim and he had NO POLICE RECORD and even the police say Shaw was NOT known to hang-out with local gangs. [OJJPAC note: I met with the Shaw family to learn more about this tragedy. This grieving family is attempting to prevent more murders by illegal alien gang member in Los Angeles and in your neighborhood. I encourage you to visit their web site (see above link) and help support the repeal of the City of Los Angeles' Special Order 40.] Sources: NBC-TV 4, Los Angeles, 11-6-12; KNBC TV, Los Angeles, et al. Updated 9-18-08; 2-16-10 With information from the Shaw family. Photo courtesy of the Shaw family; and 5-10-12 article: Gang member convicted of killing L.A. high school football standout, The Orange County Register; KPCC 89.3 FM News 5-23-2012. Brandy Lee Thorne, 22 Mother, daughter, sister & friend Killed by Jose Fransisco Flores Santos, 29 Jose Fransisco Flores Santos, 29 , is another arrogant and self-centered illegal alien from El Salvador with no concern for American lives. Flores Santos was arrested for causing the March 31, 2016 motor vehicle accident which resulted in the injury and eventual death of Brandy Lee Thorne,22, and her unborn child on April 24, 2016. Ms. Thorne was a young mother on her way home from work at an Aurora, Ohio restaurant, when Flores Santos is alleged to have been driving intoxicated and crossed the center line hitting Thorne's vehicle head-on. Thorne, who was pregnant with her second child, was severely injured and was transported to Hillcrest Hospital but died a few weeks later. Her unborn child died too. Flores-Santos reportedly was driving a vehicle owned by someone he knew but took the car without permission. Flores Santos' passengers [of unknown legal status in the U.S.] were also injured and transported to local hospitals. Although Flores-Santos' admitted to police that he was in the U.S. illegally, he was somehow able to get a drivers license (which at the time of this accident, had been suspended for a unknown reason). Flores-Santos was indicted by a Portage County Grand Jury and charged with a number of felonies and misdemeanors including aggravated vehicular homicide. He was held in the Portage County Jail and Judge Laurie Pittman set Flores-Santos' bond at $100,000. Update: Since that time, Santos was found guilty and sentenced to 20 years in prison. [OJJPAC note: Thanks to the abysmal open US border policy of President Obama, this criminal was able to easily enter the U.S., obtain housing, apparently work illegally at a local Mexican restaurant, and then kill Americans and rip apart her loving American family. This story will likely never be told at the many misguided churches, such as the Catholic Church, that aid and abet illegal aliens in order to fill their empty churches, pews, and collection plates. Sources: Brandy Lee Thorne obituary, 4-30-16; Woman, unborn baby die a few weeks after Aurora crash, The Aurora Advocate 5-4-16; Driver in fatal Aurora crash indicted, By Dave O'Brien, Record-Courier Reporter, 5-18-16; and OJJPAC conducted personal interviews and original research. Jesse Benavides, 33 Son, Father, Fiancée, Brother, & Friend Murdered by Santana Gaona, 34 Santana Gaona , a 33-year-old illegal alien had been arrested and put on tril for the 2011 murder of Jesse Benavides, 33, of Dallas, Texas. On April 16, 2015, a jury found Gaona guilty of murder and the trial judge sentenced Gaona to 50 years in prison. Jesse Benavides was shot and killed while attending a children's birthday party at a home in west Oak Cliff. Gaona shot Benavides 7 times in the back after an argument at the party. After the murder, the Benavides family found out that Gaona had been in the U.S. illegally and and been arrested for rape and was flagged for transfer to the Department of Homeland Security for deportation proceedings after release from jail. However, the FBI intervened and had the immigration hold removed because Gaona had been an FBI informant. So Gaona was eventually released from jail and remained in Dallas. The Benavides family is still attempting to get answers to their questions regarding how Gaona was allowed to remain in the U.S. after being identified as a criminal illegal alien. Jesse Benavides senseless murder has traumatized his family. He is survived by a 10-year-old son (who witnessed his father murder), his former fiancée, a brother, Juan Benavides, and other family and friends. Benavides was a loving father who enjoyed watching the Dallas Mavericks and playing practical jokes on family and friends. Source: Justice Not Served: Family of Victim Slain by Illegal Immigrant Blasts U.S. 'Negligence' for Not Enforcing Own Laws, By Sara Carter, The Blaze.com, 12-3-13; Dallas man gets 50 years in prison for fatal shooting at children's party, By Tasha Tsiaperas, The Dallas Morning News, 4-16-15 Emily Cortez 7-week-old baby Killed by Laura Flores-Santillan, 49 Laura Flores-Santillan , 49 , a Mexican national illegally living in Akron Ohio, has pled guilty (via an interpreter) to child endangering and reckless homicide. In a special pleading called an Alford plea, Santillan avoids a possible life sentence for murder. Santillan now faces a maximum of 11 years in prison and deportation to Mexico after she serves her prison sentence. Santillan reportedly has lived in the US illegally for 11 years and was an in-home daycare operator. Baby Cortez was in the care of Santillan after which the baby ended up on a ventilator at the Akron Children's Hospital. Baby Cortez died several days later. Prosecutors were prepared to have medical experts testify that Baby Cortez suffered severe head injuries from blunt force trauma while in the care of Santillan.

OJJPAC note: How was it possible for Santillian to enter the US illegally, settle in Akron Ohio, and evidently run an in-home daycare without any interference from local, state, or federal authorities? This deserves further investigation to find out if authorities were aware of Santillan's presence and her apparent illegal business which resulted in the death of a baby. Source: PAkron babysitter pleads guilty in 7-week-old girl's death, by Adam Ferrise, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 8-18-15 Unborn Baby, 18 weeks Child of Sandra Lancaster Allegedly Killed by



Illegal Alien (to be named) An illegal alien driving drunk crossed into the lane of Sandra Lancaster's vehicle in 2015, causing a serious accident. Ms. Lancaster who was pregnant lost her child and the ability to have any other children due to a required hysterectomy. Ms. Lancaster's injuries also included a broken hip, pelvis, and femur and the loss of a kidney. During her recovery, she had two strokes and died twice before being resuscitated.



Her medical bills exceeded $1,000,000.00 due to the accident and now has difficulty obtaining medical insurance.



The illegal alien was deported but Ms. Lancaster is left without her child, and continuing medical issues and bills.

Source: Email from Sandra Lancaster, mother of child, sent 1-8-19. Sviatlana Dranko, 30 Wife, Daughter, Sister & Friend Murdered by Juan Jimenez-Olivera , 30 Juan Jimenez-Olivera , 30 , a Mexican national illegally living in Hillsborough, New Jersey, has pled guilty to theft, aggravated arson, corpse desecration, and the strangulation murder of Sviartlana Dranko, 30. Olivera knew the victim because they both worked at the same pizzeria. Olivera strangled Dranko to death after an apparent sexual assault at her home in Hillsborough in April, 2014. Olivera is believed to have tried to cover up the theft of $6,000 and the murder by setting Dranko's body on fire. Eventually Olivera admitted to the murder, theft, and lying to police about the murder. Olivera's previous $1 million bail has been revoked and awaits sentencing. Members of victim's family attended Olivera's guilty plea court hearing. OJJPAC note: Olivera not only was in the US illegally, he was also working illegally in New Jersey. Perhaps if employers and public officials didn't make it so easy for illegal aliens to enter and remain in the US, Ms. Dranko would be alive today. Source: Illegal Immigrant admits murdering his pizza parlor co-worker and setting her body on fire, By Snejana Farberov, UK Daily Mail, 8-6-15 Spencer Golvach, 25 Son, Brother, Boyfriend, Friend, Musician Murdered by Victor Rodriquez Reyes, 31 Victor Rodriquez Reyes, 31, an illegal alien shot and killed Spencer Golvach, 25, on January 31, 2015 in Houston, Texas. According to the victim's mother, her son had just dropped off his girlfriend after they stopped to get cookies. It was his girlfriend's birthday and Golvach's last words before he was murdered were to his girlfriend..."Happy birthday. I love you. See you tomorrow." According to news reports, minutes later, Mr. Golvach's truck was stopped at a stoplight when Reyes' vehicle pulled next to Golvach. Without provocation, Reyes shot into Golvach's vehicle, hitting the young musician in the head, killing him. Reyes was later shot and killed by a Harris County Sheriff's deputy after a separate shooting incident in which Reyes was involved. The family was told that Reyes had been previously deported from the U.S. on multiple occasions. The Golvach family has since attempted to learn how Reyes was able to keep illegally returning to the U.S. After getting the runaround from both the Houston Police Department and Harris County Sheriff's office, the Golvach family hired an investigate reporter to find out more about Reyes and their son's murder. Citing an ongoing investigation, the investigative reporter who filed public records requests was unable to get the HPD or th HCSO to turn over even basic information about Reyes.



What the family did find out was that Reyes had at least two other past arrests, including a 2002 burglary and an assault in 2003. Spencer Golvach was a self-taught musician who played bass in a progressive rock band. His family, friends, and band mates described Spencer as a nice, very funny, intelligent, and trustworthy person. Spencer's parents, Dan and Julie, miss their son every day. His mother said that "her laughter, her love, and her legacy were taken in an instant." Dan Golvach was quoted as saying "I'll never get over it." Spencer is also dearly missed by his brothers, Dylan and Christopher, and numerous extended family and friends.



OJJPAC note: How many more parents, family members, and friends must suffer the consequences of local governments protecting illegal aliens with sanctuary policies, and the federal government's purposeful refusal to enforce immigration laws? Sources: Local musician shot, killed at traffic light in NW Harris County, KTRK TV 13, 2-1-15; Man killed by deputy served time for drug charge, Huston Chronicle, 2-1-15; Dan Golvach wants to know a few things about the man accused of killing his son. Law enforcement says he doesn't have the right, Houston Press, 5-13-15; Personal contact with Spencer's parents. Margaret "Peggy" Kostelnik, 60 Wife, Daughter, Sister, City Employee, Friend Allegedly murdered by Juan Emmanuel Razo, 35 Juan Emmanuel Razo, 35, a Mexican illegal alien was arrested for the July 27, 2015 rape and murder of Margaret "Peggy" Kostelnik, 60, in her Concord Twp., Ohio home. The Lake County Prosecutor's office is seeking the death penalty in the aggravated murder case. Razo allegedly broke into Kostelnik's home and shot to death the 60-year-old civil servant after raping her. Razo is also alleged to have shot and wounded a Painesville woman on the Lake Metroparks Bicycle Path and attempted the rape of a teenage girl in Helen Wyman Park in Concord Township. Razo eventually surrendered to police after a local resident called police after seeing a man with a rifle in his yard. After Razo exchanged fire with police, he surrendered according to a news report. Razo has been provided a public defender who entered a "not guilty" plea. Razo's bond was set at $10 million dollars. Source: Lake County shooting suspect arraigned, bond set at $10M, WKYC-TV3, 7-28-15; Death penalty sought in Lake County slaying, By Rylie Danylko, The Cleveland Plain Dealer, 12-18-15 Kathryn "Kate" Steinle, 32 Daughter, sister, friend Killed by Juan Garcia Zarate a/k/a Francisco Lopez Sanchez, 45 Francisco Sanchez, 45, a previously deported illegal alien from Mexico, has been charged with the July 1, 2015 murder of Kathryn Steinle, 32 of San Francisco California. Steinle family members said that Ms. Steinle, affectionately called "Kate" by friends and family, was with her father on Pier 14, a popular local gathering place, when she was shot and killed. Witnesses took photos of the killer which led them to Francisco Sanchez, who was captured later nearby Ms. Steile's home. At the time of the shooting, Sanchez reportedly had seven felony convictions and five prior deportations. He was also released from jail just months before the shooting because of the San Francisco's sanctuary policy for illegal aliens. Ms. Steinle was a 2001 graduate of Amador Valley High School and was employed by Medtronic, a medical device provider. The Steinle family is in shock over the death of their loved one. Her brother Brad said his sister was a loving and caring person who enjoyed making people laugh. OJJPAC note: The City of San Francisco has passed laws protecting illegal aliens from federal law enforcement for years. The city likely has the most pro-criminal illegal alien Sanctuary policy in the nation, protecting them from federal law enforcement efforts to identify and deport unauthorized aliens from the US. Source: Family Devastated After Woman Shot, Killed In San Francisco, By Vic Lee and Chris Nguyen, 7-2-15; In memory of Katie Steinle, it's time to finally shut down 'snctury cities', by Dave Ray Opinion contibutor, The Hill, 11-2-17; Photo: Courtesy of the Steinle family which reserves its copyright. Bob Barry Jr., 58 Husband, Father, Son, Brother, Sportscaster, Friend Killed on June 20, 2015 by Gustavo Castillo Gutierrez, 26 This entry was edited and updated on February 5, 2016 to reflect Gutierrez's guilty plea and sentencing. Gustavo Castillo Gutierrez was a 26-years-old illegal alien from Mexico when he was arrested for killing Bob Barry, Jr., 58, a well-known veteran Oklahoma City sportscaster in June, 2015. Gutierrez, now 27, accepted a plea agreement and plead guilty in January, 2016 to possession of cocaine, driving without a license, and causing the death of Barry. Gutierrez has been sentenced to 10 years in prison for drug possession and 5 years for the additional charges related to the crash. Gutierrez may be deported to his native Mexico after serving his sentence. Barry was killed on June 20, 2015 in Oklahoma City after Gutierrez made an illegal U-turn into Barry's motorcycle path, causing Barry to be thrown off his motorcycle and suffer fatal internal injuries. Gutierrez reportedly had been working illegally in the U.S. as a roofer. After his arrest, Gutierrez was charged with drug possession, driving without a license, and first degree manslaughter. A police report reportedly said Gutierrez's only ID at the time was a "Mexican identification card." According to news reports, thousands of people attended Barry's funeral at the Crossings Community Church. Barry's life-long passion was sports--playing and reporting sports. At the time of his death, Barry, Jr. was Sports Director for KFOR-TV, where he worked for over 30-years. During his long sportscasting career, Barry became a beloved sports personality and celebrity in Oklahoma. Barry leveraged his popularity to help raise funds for a number of community groups and was honored as sportscaster of the year on several occasions. Barry is survived by his wife Gina, four children, and many friends. OJJPAC commentary on the Bob Barry Jr. case: While thousands of American families are being injured, maimed and killed every year, the Obama administration continues its unconstitutional immigration policies and neutering of all enforcment programs previously available to enforce U.S. Immigration laws. The Obama administration's actions are directly responsible for Barry's death. Under the Obama administration's enforcement protocols, illegal aliens can basically violate our immigration laws with impunity until public outrage forces it to act. It took Bob Barry, Jr.'s death for the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency (ICE) to place an immigration hold on Gutierrez, even though he was a repeat offender. Some cities and counties in the U.S. even protect illegal aliens by passing "sanctuary" policies that prohibit local law enforcement from honoring federal immigration hold requests. Some of these cities and counties also help the Mexican government by accepting and allowing the distribution of Matricula ID cards as valid ID, which they are not. I suspect this is what Gutierrez presented as ID to Oklahoma law enforcement. Like many other illegal aliens, Gutierrez has been caught entering the U.S. illegally on multiple occasions. US Border Patrol agents had captured Gutierrez three times prior to killing Barry. How did Gutierrez avoid a felony charge of illegal reentry before he even had a chance to kill Barry? Gutierrez apparently benefited from the Obama administration's "illegal alien catch and release policy." Gutierrez reportedly was "voluntarily" returned to Mexico two times in 2010 and once in 2013. Gutierrez's voluntary removal allowed him to avoid prosecution which might have deterred him from returning to the U.S. again, keeping him out of the path of Bob Barry, Jr's motorcycle of that fateful day, June 20, 2015. How many more Americans must die before we get true public servants in the offices of our three branches of federal government who are willing to protect and defend U.S. sovereignty and the citizens of the United States?

Sources: Authorities: Suspect In Crash That Killed Bob Barry Jr. Previously Deported 3 Times, TV-9, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 6-24-15; ICE: Man accused in Bob Barry Jr. fatal crash had been returned to Mexico 3 times, TulsaWorld.com, 6-24-15; Bob Barry Jr. Remembered: Oklahomans Mourn Sportscaster, The Inquisitor, 6-27-15; Man Charged In Crash That Killed Bob Barry Jr. Sentenced, TV-9 Oklahoma, 1-21-16; Driver in crash that killed Bob Barry Jr. pleads guilty in Oklahoma County Court, The Oklahoman, 1-21-16; Bob Barry Jr. Obituary, smithandkernke.com Michael Grubbs, 63 Father, Grandfather, Veteran, Friend Allegedly killed by Galina Kilova, 29 Galina Kilova , 29, an illegal alien from Bulgaria, was arrested for the November 24, 2014 hit-and-run death of Michael Grubbs, 63 in Las Vegas, NV. The prosecutor alleges that Kilova was driving erratically and struck Grubbs who was pushing his 18-month-old granddaughter in a stroller. Kilova faces one count of leaving the scene of an accident with injury or death. Witnesses allege that Kilova's vehicle struck Grubbs and the stroller carrying his grandchild. She then fled the scene of the crash with witnesses in temporary pursuit. Kilova got away, but witnesses were able to give police a partial plate number and one witness could identify her face. Kilova then went to her workplace but parked her now damaged car away from her usual parking place. A later tip to police from Kilova's employer may have led to Kilova turning herself into the police. Kilova entered the U.S. on a tourist visa in 2006 but illegally remained in the U.S. after the visa had expired. In 2007 she was arrested for DUI, [but apparently not placed into deportation proceedings.]



On New Years Eve, Kilova's bail was raised from 20,000 to $100,000. Immigration and Customs Enforcement have placed an immigration hold on Kilova after Grubbs death. OJJPAC note: Another one of Pres. Obama's DREAMer "children" he wants to give Amnesty to (illegal aliens up to the age of 31 are considered DREAMer kids) Sources: Family hopes for hit-and-run crash suspect to come forward, KLAS-TV 8, Las Vegas, 11-25-14; Bail increased to $100K in deadly hit-and-run crash, By Caroline Bleakley, et al., 8 News Now, 12-19-14; Woman accused in fatal hit-and-run to face jury, By David Ferrara, Las Vegas Review Journal, 12-31-14 Jamie Oxendine, 43 Father, husband, friend Allegedly killed by Rodolfo Marin Vela, 29 Rodolfo Marin Vela , a unauthorized alien illegally living in the U.S. was arrested for the January 23, 2015 deaths of Jamie Oxendine, 43, his wife, and one son. The Oxendine's lived in Red Springs, North Carolina. Vela faces multiple criminal charges, including but not limited to three counts of felony death by vehicle, driving while impaired, and driving without a license. Police allege that Vela ran a stop sign and hit the Oxendine family's SUV, killing all three occupants. Authorities also allege that Vela was intoxicated at the time of the crash. According to a news report, Raleigh police had just arrested Vela in September, 2014 for intoxication and public disturbance. The Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security has reportedly verified Vela's illegal status. Vela is currently in jail and a judge set bail at $750,000. Vela's next court date is March 5, 2015. The Oxedine's have three surviving children, aged between 16 and 23. OJJPAC note: It apparently took the death of three people to get the Obama administration to have the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency check Vela's immigration status. Most likely Vela was not taken by ICE after his September arrest was Obama's controversial hands-off illegal aliens DREAMer policy. Therefore, ICE likely would not take custody of Vela and charge him with federal immigration violations. Source: ICE: Driver charged with killing 3 in Hoke Co. in US illegally, By WNCN staff, WNCN.com, 1-26-15 Mary Ann Oxendine, 40 Wife, mother, friend Allegedly killed by Rodolfo Marin Vela, 29 Rodolfo Marin Vela , a unauthorized alien illegally living in the U.S. was arrested for the January 23, 2015 deaths of Mary Ann Oxendine, 40, her husband Jamie Oxendine, 43, and Shane Oxendine, 17. The Oxendine's lived in Red Springs, North Carolina. Vela faces multiple criminal charges, including but not limited to three counts of felony death by vehicle, driving while impaired, and driving without a license. Police allege that Vela ran a stop sign and hit the Oxendine family's SUV, killing all three occupants. Authorities also allege that Vela was intoxicated at the time of the crash. According to a news report, Raleigh police had just arrested Vela in September, 2014 for intoxication and public disturbance. The Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security has reportedly verified Vela's illegal status. Vela is currently in jail and a judge set bail at $750,000. Vela's next court date is March 5, 2015. The Oxedine's have three surviving children, aged between 16 and 23. OJJPAC note: It apparently took the death of three people to get the Obama administration to have the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency check Vela's immigration status. Most likely Vela was not taken by ICE after his September arrest was Obama's controversial hands-off illegal aliens DREAMer policy. Therefore, ICE likely would not take custody of Vela and charge him with federal immigration violations. Source: ICE: Driver charged with killing 3 in Hoke Co. in US illegally, By WNCN staff, WNCN.com, 1-26-15 Shane Oxendine, 17 Son, brother, student, friend Allegedly killed by Rodolfo Marin Vela, 29 Rodolfo Marin Vela , a unauthorized alien illegally living in the U.S. was arrested for the January 23, 2015 deaths of Shane Oxendine, 17, and his parents, Jamie and Mary Ann Oxendine. The Oxendine's lived in Red Springs, North Carolina. Vela faces multiple criminal charges, including but not limited to three counts of felony death by vehicle, driving while impaired, and driving without a license. Police allege that Vela ran a stop sign and hit the Oxendine family's SUV, killing all three occupants. Authorities also allege that Vela was intoxicated at the time of the crash. According to a news report, Raleigh police had just arrested Vela in September, 2014 for intoxication and public disturbance. The Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security has reportedly verified Vela's illegal status. Vela is currently in jail and a judge set bail at $750,000. Vela's next court date is March 5, 2015. Shane Oxedine is survived by three siblings, aged between 16 and 23. OJJPAC note: It apparently took the death of three people to get the Obama administration to have the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency check Vela's immigration status. Most likely Vela was not taken by ICE after his September arrest was Obama's controversial hands-off illegal aliens DREAMer policy. Therefore, ICE likely would not take custody of Vela and charge him with federal immigration violations. Source: ICE: Driver charged with killing 3 in Hoke Co. in US illegally, By WNCN staff, WNCN.com, 1-26-15 Parker Moore, 20 Son, Student, Athlete Murdered by Juventino Bermudez-Arenas, 33 Juventino Bermudez-Arenas, 33, believed to be illegally in the U.S., has been determined to be responsible for the November 15, 2014 murder of Linfield College student Parker Moore, 20. Moore reportedly was murdered at a 7-Eleven convenience store, across the street from the Linfield College campus. Bermudez-Arenas was shot and killed by police after the attack when the suspect refused to drop his knife. An autopsy determined that Moore died from stab wounds. The District Attorney determined that Bermudez-Arenas had been working at a Christmas tree farm in the Dalles. Bermudez-Arenas was also arrested in July, 2000 in McMinnville, in which he gave police a different name and birth date. In addition to being a student at Linfield College, Moore also served as a resident advisor and was a member of the college's football team. Source: Moore stabbing suspect possibly illegal immigrant, By KOIN 6 News Staff, 11-19-14 Amos Milburn Jones , 54 Son, Father, and Veteran Allegedly murdered by Almicah Sergovir, 18 Jose Irving Guzman Dominquez, 23 Oscar Alberto Parada, 20 Jose Martinez Serrano, 18 Jose Eduardo Menjibar-Alaman, 18 Katherine Abigial Lopez, 17 Almicah Sergovir, 18, Jose Irving Guzman Dominquez, 23, Oscar Alberto Parada, 20, Jose Martinez Serrano, 18, Jose Eduardo Menjibar-Alaman, 18, and Katherine Abigial Lopez, 17, have been arrested for the brutal stabbing murder of Amos Milburn Jones, a 54-year-old homeless man. Jone's body was found on Huron Avenue in Suitland, Maryland. Authorities believe that the accused beat and stabbed Jones to death after Jones got in an argument with the defendants, two of which police believe are MS-13 gang members. The defendants are being held without bond. Mr. Joes's relatives said that Jones was a loving person and enjoyed fishing, basketball, and boxing. His relatives stated that Jones choose to be homeless and had once served in the military. OJJPAC note: Although it has been reported and is likely that the defendants are in the U.S. illegally, we are waiting for confirmation from the police department since the media doesn't seem to have written a follow-up story on this murder. Sources: Six charged with first-degree murder in Suitland stabbing, By Lynh Bui and Julie Zauzmer, The Washington Post, 7-23-14; 6 Charged in Stabbing Death of Homeless Man, 7-23-14 Naomi Mercury, 18 Daughter, Student and Friend Allegedly killed by Mateo Guzman-Palacios, 32 Mateo Guzman-Placios , 32, a previously deported illegal alien living in North Carolina, has been arrested in the death of Naomi Mercury, 18, of Wake Forest. Guzman-Placios is charged with two counts of misdemeanor death, two counts of felony hit-and-run, driving with a suspended license and failing to stop at a red light. Mercury and another Wake Technical school student were killed after Guzman-Palacios allegedly ran a red light in Raleigh and hit a vehicle in which Mercury and several other people were passengers. Guzman-Palacios is alleged to have left the scene of the accident. Guzman-Palacios was later captured by police. Prosecutors allege that Guzman-Palacios has a history of driving impaired and was once deported in 2011. Guzman-Palacios claimed he has no money and will be defended by a public defender. A hearing is set for November 24, 2014. OJJPAC note: Why was Guzman-Palcios given a drivers license in the first place? And if he had a history of driving infractions, was was he not arrested and charged with felony re-entry to the U.S. prior to the death of these women? Sources: Suspect in Raleigh fatal hit-and-run deported in 2011, WRAL.com; Man arrested in hit-and-run that killed two young NC women, Fox-8 TV, 11-2-14 Brittany Williams, 24 Daughter, Student and Friend Allegedly killed by Mateo Guzman-Palacios, 32 Mateo Guzman-Placios , 32, a previously deported illegal alien living in North Carolina, has been arrested in