Oregon kids must be immunized by Feb. 20 or risk exclusion from school, day care
Parents, be warned: Exclusion day is five weeks away. If you haven't provided schools and day-care centers with proof that your children are up to date on required immunizations by Feb. 20, your little ones will be sent home.

Counties statewide mailed almost 35,000 letters early last year informing parents their children ran such a risk.

By the time exclusion day rolled around in February, the parents of 4,618 children still had failed to comply with the state's vaccination law, says Stacy de Assis Matthews, school law coordinator in the Oregon Health Authority's Public Health Division.

This year's numbers, she says, are likely to look similar.

"Immunization," she says, "is an effective way to keep schools and the entire community healthy. We want to make sure children are fully protected against vaccine-preventable diseases such as whooping cough."

Oregon law requires children attending public and private schools, preschools, child-care facilities and Head Start programs to be immunized against tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, hepatitis A and B, polio, chickenpox, measles, mumps and rubella.

Recommended but not required are a second dose of chickenpox vaccine for children who haven't had the illness and an influenza vaccine.

Only children whose parents have been granted a religious or medical exemption from the law are allowed to attend school once exclusion day arrives. Even those kids might be disallowed from attending in the case of a disease outbreak.

Last year, 5.8 percent of parents with kindergartners claimed a religious exemption to one or more vaccines, a number that's grown in the last decade; 0.2 percent of parents with kindergartners claimed medical exemptions to one or more of the required vaccines.

Parents who still need to get their children immunized should call their health-care provider or local health department; pharmacists can immunize children age 11 or older.

Some county health departments are planning special immunization clinics in the weeks ahead. Call Oregon SafeNet, 1-800- 723-3638 to find a clinic in your area.

No one can be turned away from a local health department because of the inability to pay for required vaccines in Oregon.

Learn more online.

- Katy Muldoon; twitter.com/katymuldoon