Oregon University System will not appeal court decision allowing guns on campus
The Oregon University System will not appeal a court ruling that declared its gun ban on its seven campuses exceeds its authority and is invalid

The system still has authority to control its property and facilities and can make and enforce internal policies that ban guns from university classrooms, dormitories and sports stadiums, said Chancellor George Pernsteiner on Tuesday. Some universities, for example, already prohibit firearms in sports arenas as a condition of purchasing a ticket to a sporting event.

"While we feel strongly that the court decision is not in the best interests of our students and campus communities, we do not want to go through a long and costly process (of appeal) that may produce the same outcome," Pernsteiner said in a prepared statement. "Instead, we have started work on internal processes that are already in place or that we can put in place that will maintain a reasonable and satisfactory level of campuses safety and security."



Kevin Starrett, executive director of the Oregon Firearms Education Foundation, questioned whether the university system can restrict students with permits from carrying guns in public buildings. He said he had predicted university officials "would try to find ways to circumvent the intent of the (court) decision."

The decision was the result of a lawsuit filed by the foundation, a nonprofit group that fights for second amendment rights. Starrett said he could not say whether the foundation would take further legal action.

"What we can do will be predicated on what they do," he said.

A three-judge panel of the Oregon Court of Appeals said in September that the State Board of Higher Education cannot use an administrative rule to ban guns. Only the Legislature can regulate the use, sale and possession of firearms, the court said.

Some campuses have some agreements to restrict guns from some buildings. Portland State University, for example, bars guns from its student housing, but students or faculty still can pack concealed guns into classrooms and other buildings if they have permits, said Scott Gallagher, spokesman. The university has not made plans to strike agreements to restrict guns from buildings other than housing, he said.

But lawyers across the system are working on a comprehensive set of contracts and policies that would effectively ban guns from all classrooms, dorms and university buildings, said Di Saunders, spokeswoman for the system. It may take up to a year to put those changes into place, she said.

In the meantime, students and faculty with permits can carry concealed guns into classrooms and other buildings where contracts are not yet in place, she said. University leaders have not talked about turning to the Legislature to pass a law to keep guns off campuses, Saunders said.

The state's 17 community colleges, which each has its own governing board, have various positions on guns. Some have no policies while others have barred guns with policies similar to the OUS ban that was struck down by the court.

The Oregon Community College Association has recommended they all review their policies in light of the OUS decision, said Andrea Henderson, executive director.

- Bill Graves