Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton want to save Social Security, but agreement on the issue ends there
The issues. Remember those?

They used to be at the core of every presidential campaign. This year, however, has been different. Republican nominee Donald Trump's larger-than-life personality and propensity for insults, along with the ongoing soap opera starring Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton's email server, has made the 2016 contest all about temperament and character.

To be sure, temperament and character are important, but in the end politics is about getting things done, solving problems. About issues.

So let's address at least one of them right now, one that affects all of us: Social Security.

You've no doubt heard that our national retirement program is going broke. The Social Security trust fund, or surplus, is expected to run dry around 2034. When and if that happens, Social Security will be able to pay out each year only the amount that comes in via payroll taxes, which, in the program's present form, would be about 75 percent of promised benefits.

So what would the major-party presidential candidates do about this?

Clinton, embracing the left wing of her party, wants to expand benefits for those struggling in retirement the most. The Social Security Administration data shows that 10 percent of recipients live below the poverty line and many more are barely over it.

Clinton's reform plan zeroes in on "women and caregivers," The Motley Fool points out. "Women's work histories tend to be shorter than those of their male counterparts, as they're often the ones who wind up taking care of children in the home and caring for sick family members or friends," the investing website writes. "This leaves women with smaller average benefits, and Clinton wants to change that."

Her plan is premised on the principle that "no American should face poverty because he or she is disabled, or when a loved one dies," the Clinton campaign website states. "That we all have an obligation to each other."

The former secretary of state also wants to dramatically improve the system's long-term finances, primarily by raising the cap on income that's taxable for Social Security. Right now, the earnings cap on payroll taxes is $118,500, meaning the middle class gets walloped while the very wealthy pay almost nothing toward the retirement program, at least in terms of the percentage of their overall income. She has also said she's open to taxing dividends and other investment income.

Clinton says she is opposed to both raising the retirement age and reducing cost-of-living adjustments. And she vows to "fight any attempts to gamble seniors' retirement security on the stock market through privatization." (Remember President George W. Bush's privatization reform effort?)

Such a progressive approach to Social Security puts Clinton on the opposite end of the spectrum from Republican orthodoxy on this issue. GOP plans for the retirement system haven't changed much since Bush's failed reform. "You cannot tackle this debt crisis that's coming in America if you do not fix this entitlement problem," GOP Speaker of the House Paul Ryan said in May. He has called for reducing benefits overall and offering privatization for "younger workers."

So Trump, the Republican nominee, wants to cut Social Security benefits too, right? That's not what he says. The businessman and reality-TV star has shown throughout his controversial campaign that he has little use for GOP norms. "They want to cut your Social Security," he said of his opponents during the Republican presidential primaries. "I'm not cutting your Social Security."

Beyond that statement, however, his plans for the bedrock retirement program are vague -- indeed, his campaign website does not include a Social Security reform proposal. He has not talked about expanding benefits for anyone, and he has not talked about raising the payroll-tax cap or adding any taxes to aid the program.

"The key to preserving Social Security and other programs ... is to have an economy that is robust and growing," his campaign states. Trump insists he will kick-start the economy by cutting taxes (primarily on upper incomes and corporations), renegotiating "unfair" trade deals (he doesn't say how he's going to tilt these deals more in the U.S.' favor) and deporting illegal immigrants.

The nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget isn't convinced that Trump's proposals would turbocharge the economy and thus save Social Security. It concludes, "Under Trump's plans, debt would grow to a whopping 127 percent of GDP by 2026." (It's now at 75 percent of Gross Domestic Product.) Does this possible jump in the debt under a Trump presidency surprise you? Vox's Alvin Chang points out that the GOP nominee's economic-policy proposals feature "massive tax cuts, without much of a plan to spend less."

The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget states that Clinton's economic plan would cause federal debt to grow to 87 percent of GDP over the next 10 years.

There have been many plans over the years to save Social Security (and Medicare, the federal health-insurance program for seniors that's in even worse shape). The best known recent one was in the bipartisan Simpson-Bowles budget proposal, which both Republicans and Democrats in Congress refused to support during President Obama's first term. Simpson-Bowles, wrote the Washington Post in 2012, recommended increasing "the taxable maximum on income [for Social Security] to 90 percent of all income, which raises $238 billion over the next decade. It uses a different measure of inflation to slow cost-of-living adjustments. It raises the retirement age to 68 in 2050 and 69 in 2075."

Simpson-Bowles and various nonpartisan studies show that a solution to the Social Security funding crisis is out there. But it will involve pain, be it decreased benefits or higher taxes -- or a combination thereof. The candidates have a month left to talk about the possibilities and trade-offs.

-- Douglas Perry