Crist team explores Medicaid expansion
Democratic gubernatorial candidate Charlie Crist said his team is researching the prospect that he could sign an executive order on his first day in office to immediately and unilaterally expand the state's Medicaid program to cover uninsured Floridians.

In a day of dueling politics in Orlando – with both Crist and Gov. Rick Scott appearing – Crist started by announcing his interest in an executive order while speaking to the Florida Nurses Association on Saturday at the Florida Hotel and Conference Center.

"There is some school of thought that makes the argument that there is the potential the governor can do it unilaterally by executive order. If we have the research that proves that is a viable argument, I'll sign the executive order that day," Crist said.

Crist's comments came at the end of a speech spent mostly bashing Scott – calling him the "corporate governor – and the Republican Party of Florida. Crist left that party in 2010 after being elected to one term as a Republican governor, and now is seeking, as a Democrat, to oust Scott.

Scott shot back later Saturday at the Republican Party of Florida's "Victory Dinner," at Walt Disney World, calling Crist a "slick talker" and a "smooth politician" with no principles.

"Unfortunately, Charlie Crist left us a mess," he said. "He gave us a $3.6 billion budget deficit. He said he cared about education and raised tuition 15 percent year after year. He raised the state debt by over $8 billion. He cut education funding. And then he ran away. He used the Barack Obama playbook."

"Where are we today? We changed the direction of the state," Scott told the 900 Republicans gathered at the Grand Floridian Resort.

Attorney General Pam Bondi also lashed out at Amendment 2 on the November ballot, to legalize medical marijuana, saying it would undo the anti-drug progress Florida has made by shutting down pill mills and outlawing synthetic drugs. But she said that if the amendment passes, she would fight to enforce it – just as she enforced Florida's Constitutional Amendment banning gay marriage.

"You don't want an attorney general who lets their personal feelings get in the way," she said.

smpowers@tribune.com or 407-420-5441