Dueling education records define gubernatorial campaigns
TALLAHASSEE — It's a blisteringly effective strategy for both Rick Scott and Charlie Crist: burn down the opponent's education credentials.

And as the summer and the ad wars heat up, both gubernatorial candidates have facts on their side.

Crist, the former Republican governor-turned-Democrat, oversaw the ship of state during the worst economic downturn since Black Tuesday in 1929. Consequently, education spending was cut, and tuition rates were allowed to climb.

Scott, the current Republican governor, inherited the economic detritus in 2010 and opted to keep cutting education budgets instead of raising taxes. As Florida's tax coffers recovered, funding for schools inched back closer to historic highs.

Last week in a Leon County library, teachers gathered around a table with Crist to complain about a bill that Scott signed into law in 2011 creating a "merit pay" system for them.

One thanked Crist for vetoing a similar merit-pay bill his final year in office.

"It was the last time anybody listened to us," Fran Hern, a Leon County teacher, told him.

But the realities of wrestling with an uncertain economy will haunt both sides during this silly season.

Crist has accused Scott of shortchanging teachers, passing a historically large, $77 billion budget this year that included less money for Bright Futures scholarships and per-pupil spending compared with the heyday levels of Crist's first year as governor.

This year's budget devotes $18.9 billion in aid to classrooms, or $6,937 per pupil. Although that's up $176 from last year, it still falls a bit short of the record $7,126 per student that Florida was spending in 2007, before the Great Recession.

"You want people to get good jobs, but you won't educate them," Crist said. "It's nonsense."

Despite Crist's claim, his administration actually reduced per-pupil spending after 2007, and Scott and Republican lawmakers have been increasing it since the current governor's second year in office.

Education has been an outsized focus so far for Scott's campaign, which has spent $16 million on ads.

A new $2 million ad buy attacks Crist's decision in 2007 to sign a bill allowing Florida's top public research schools to begin charging higher "tuition differentials" for students.

The former governor has defended that decision as "the right thing to do at the time," given the economic collapse that was hamstringing university budgets.

The University of Florida and Florida State University both have ambitions to boost their national rankings as research schools. Other universities jumped on board in 2009 and were allowed tuition differentials as well.

Last week, Scott signed a bill blocking the other universities from imposing the increases and reducing the amount UF and FSU could add each year, from 15 percent to 6 percent. The bill also reinstates a cap on future college costs for parents under the Florida Prepaid College Plan.

Democrats have countered that Scott cut funding for another popular higher-education tool, the Bright Futures scholarship program. The Legislature reduced funding from $306 million to $266 million this year — down from more than $400 million a year when Crist was in office.

Crist closed his teacher meeting by saying that "Rick Scott doesn't treat you right, and I'm sorry for that. But in 41/2 months, it's over."

Whatever the outcome of the election, that much is true.

adeslatte@tribune.com or 850-222-5564