Rep. Richard Corcoran formally named House Speaker-designate
TALLAHASSEE – Florida House Republicans voted in a formal ceremony to elect Rep. Richard Corcoran, R-Land O’Lakes, as House Speaker-designate for the 2016-2018 term.

Corcoran, a Tallahassee insider who has worked as chief of staff for Marco Rubio when he was House Speaker and as an aide for other lawmakers, blasted the influence of special interests in his speech, as well as the unwillingness to stand up to them by lawmakers.

“The enemy is not the special interests; the enemy is not the press; the enemy is not any of that stuff. The enemy has always been and will always be . . . us!” Corcoran said.

“The great news is this: We’re the ones in control of the enemy. We can shun self-interest. We can lead from principles. We can forge and fight for our philosophy,” he added.

Corcoran, 50, garnered the ire of advocates for Medicaid expansion this year as he became one of the most vocal opponents of a Senate bill to expand health care coverage through federal Medicaid dollars. In February, he upset Central Florida supporters of the Orlando City Lions when he helped block $30 million in state taxpayer funds to help build a new stadium for the Major League Soccer club.

More recently, Corcoran has been seen as helping to lead a coup to oust one of his presumed predecessors, Rep. Eric Eisnaugle, R-Orlando, who has the pledges from Republican House members of his class to become House Speaker for the 2020-2022 term.

Orange County Republican Party chairman Lew Oliver, is skeptical that the Republican Party of Florida - which is led by Corcoran ally Rep. Blaise Ingoglia - will funnel enough resources to Republican incumbents in swing districts in Orange County. Last month he helped set up a separate fundraising account to aid those members in the 2016 cycle.

Corcoran, however, has disputed those claims and pledged to support local incumbents. He has stated instead that the process for electing a new House Speaker needs to be changed to prevent pledges from being collected before members are even elected.

“All we’re saying is that it’s a huge responsibility, it’s a huge thing to preside over a chamber and you ought to be able to see that person in committee, see what bills they file, see how they debate, have time to break bread with them and ask them about their philosophy and their ideology,” Corcoran said.

Eisnaugle, too, recently wrote about the need for reforms in choosing the House Speaker and decentralizing power in the House in a recent op-ed piece for the Orlando Sentinel.

The Florida Democratic Party slammed Corcoran as a “hypocrite,” in light of a Politico story detailing his lavish spending of RPOF money paid by special interests.

“Corcoran has lived large for years on the dime of lobbyists and special interests as a staffer, failed candidate, political operative, and elected official. It’s hard to think of someone who has benefitted more from the very process he now self-righteously bemoans than career Tallahassee insider Richard Corcoran,” stated FDP spokesman Max Steele.

Yet Corcoran unveiled several proposals to combat special interests’ influence, including extending the ban on lawmakers lobbying the Legislature and the executive branch after their terms expire from two years to six years. He also floated new registration requirements for lobbyists to disclose which bills and amendments they are attempting to influence. Lawmakers should also be banned from taking unelected government jobs for six years after leaving office, he added.

Corcoran peppered his speech with call-to-arms rhetoric to fight special interests and install changes that have long been on the wish-list of conservatives – universal school vouchers, opening the health care system to “free market” change and tempering the power of the judicial branch.

“Right now even as I speak, right here in this chamber, there are skeptics and critics, who in their heads are saying that drumbeat of, ‘I’ve heard this before. Good Luck. It is what it is and you’re never going to change it.’

“Members, they’re wrong. They are wrong! We can serve a purpose greater than ourselves. We can sacrifice our own interests. We can stand and fight, regardless of the cost, regardless of the consequences, regardless of the opposition,” Corcoran said.

When a reporter pointed out that many lawmakers would be heading to venues nearby the Capitol after the ceremony to accept checks from special interests at fundraisers, Corcoran admitted money would play a role in the legislative process regardless of any reforms made, but insisted there were ways to limit their influence.

“You’re always going to have money in campaigns. And I’ll say handing somebody a check for money in a campaign isn’t nearly as debilitating and problematic as hiring a legislator, as giving that legislator the opportunity to lobby, as traveling with that legislator, having dinner with that legislator,” he told reporters.