Giffords', Kelly's gun control group endorses Murphy for U.S. Senate
Patrick Murphy was endorsed for U.S. Senate Wednesday by Americans for Responsible Solutions, the gun violence prevention organization founded by former U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and her husband, former astronaut Mark Kelly.

Kelly, who spoke on a conference call with U.S. Rep. Murphy, D-Jupiter, said that Murphy backs important gun legislation including closing "loopholes" that allow terror suspects, felons and abusers to buy guns, as well as increased background checks.

"We need more leaders like Congressman Murphy – leaders who will protect the rights of law-abiding gun owners like us but who also have the courage to stand up to the gun lobby and stand up for common sense," Scott said in a statement. "We look forward to seeing Congressman Murphy be a voice for responsibility in the United States Senate.”

Murphy said he was "in awe" of Scott and Giffords, who founded the ARS PAC following the Sandy Hook shooting in 2012 and Giffords' own wounding in a shooting in 2010.

Murphy said that mass shootings like Pulse "are only part of the story. There were 33,000 gun deaths and 133,000 people shot [in 2015]. We cannot accept this as the new normal."

Murphy said he also supported a renewed assault weapons ban like the one proposed by his opponent in the Democratic Senate primary, U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson, D-Orlando.

But, he said, "right now, with the composition of Congress, I don't think that's necessarily reasonable [to be passed]."

Murphy added that congress should start with background checks and closing loopholes, which Scott said has the support of 90 percent of Floridians.

Murphy also criticized Rubio for his visit to Orlando Tuesday, in which Rubio was confronted by a protester during a private meeting with businesses affected by the Pulse shooting.

Murphy said Rubio "refused" to meet with constituents, "hid from their pleas and played the blame game. He went so far as to call constituents 'paid protesters.' To me, that's insulting."

Rubio spokesman Michael Ahrens responded, "After lying about [Murphy's] own resume and getting caught delaying needed aid to Floridians for his own publicity, now he's spreading even more lies. Marco has a strong record of fighting to keep Florida's families safe."