Syriza: Big, fat economic challenges: Front & Center
Last month, Syriza won Greece's national elections. Now, the left-wing party wants to ease austerity bailout measures imposed on Greece by the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund. A move, some speculate, that could prove disastrous. However Greece turns, Jim Johnson, professor of international business at the Crummer Graduate School of Business at Rollins College, says the situation bears watching given Central Florida's economic ties with the EU. Excerpts of our email interview with him follow. The full transcript is online at OrlandoSentinel.com/opinion.

Q: What has caused Greece to tip back into an economic crisis after a few years of what appeared to be relative calm?

A: The Greek people had had enough of the austerity imposed on them in 2010 by the "troika" of the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund as a condition of the €240 billion ($270 billion) bailout that the Greek government received. The populist political parties that won last week's election promised an end to austerity if they came to power, without explaining exactly how they would manage the economy.

Q: Does Syriza make a good case for European leaders and bankers to ease the terms of the bailout for Greece?

A: Yes and no. Greece's debt has ballooned to an unmanageable level, so some renegotiation of the debt repayment terms is inevitable. Syriza wants to renegotiate the debt by reducing the amount owed, extending the repayment period, or a combination of the two. But Syriza has also promised an end to the austerity measures that have been in place for almost five years; this would mean an increase in government spending, an end to the planned privatization of state-owned companies, and the rehiring of public-sector employees who had been laid off. These measures are expected to bankrupt Greece within months.

Q: What happens if Europe plays hardball with Greece and refuses to ease the terms?

A: It depends on what the new Greek government does. If it insists on rolling back the austerity measures, the country will soon go bankrupt and be forced to quit the euro zone — and possibly the European Union, too. If it continues the austerity policies, going back on Syriza's pre-election promises, Greece will default on its loan payments, the coalition government will lose popular support and collapse, and a new election will likely occur with its outcome uncertain.

Q: What would an exit from the euro zone mean for Greece?

A: In the short term, Greek exit from the euro zone ("Grexit") would result in even greater unemployment and the collapse of some Greek banks. But some observers think that Grexit would be the best course for that country in the long run. Greece would reintroduce its own currency, which would be heavily discounted against other currencies, including the euro, making Greek goods and services (e.g. tourism, shipping) relatively cheap. This would make Greece more competitive and boost Greek exports to the rest of the world, bringing much-needed foreign currency into the country. ... Continued free spending by the Greek government would quickly result in bankruptcy, intervention by the IMF, and more austerity.

Q: How would economic disruption in Europe affect the rest of the world economy?

A: Most of Europe's major economies are in the euro zone. ... Recovery from the recession has been very weak so far, and further economic disruption might send the euro zone into recession and deflation, similar to what Japan experienced for more than 10 years.

Q: What impact might it have on Central Floridians?

A: The EU is Florida's largest export market — around $6 billion per year. Recession in Europe would mean a drop in merchandise exports to Europe and in the number of European visitors to Central Florida, and this would negatively impact the local economy.