Changes in Mortality After Massachusetts Health Care Reform: A Quasi-experimental StudyChanges in Mortality After Massachusetts Health Care Reform
From the Harvard School of Public Health and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, and The Urban Institute, Washington, DC.

Presented in part at the 36th Annual Meeting of the Society of General Internal Medicine in Denver, Colorado, on 26 April 2013 and the Annual Research Meeting of AcademyHealth in Baltimore, Maryland, on 24 June 2013.

Disclaimer: Dr. Sommers is an advisor in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. However, this paper was written in Dr. Sommers’ capacity as a Harvard employee and does not represent the views of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Acknowledgment: The authors thank James Ware at the Harvard School of Public Health for thoughtful advice on our statistical analysis; Jacob Robbins and Sarah Gordon, Research Assistants at the Harvard School of Public Health, for their work on this project; and Katherine Hempstead at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for helpful suggestions related to health care–amenable mortality.

Disclosures: Disclosures can be viewed at www.acponline.org/authors/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M13-2275.

Reproducible Research Statement: Study protocol and data set: Not available. Statistical code: Available from Dr. Sommers (e-mail, bsommers@hsph.harvard.edu).

Requests for Single Reprints: Benjamin D. Sommers, MD, PhD, Department of Health Policy and Management, Harvard School of Public Health, Kresge Building, Room 406, 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115; e-mail, bsommers@hsph.harvard.edu.

Current Author Addresses: Drs. Sommers and Baicker: Department of Health Policy and Management, Harvard School of Public Health, Kresge Building, Room 406, 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115.

Dr. Long: Health Policy Center, Urban Institute, 2100 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20037.

Author Contributions: Conception and design: B.D. Sommers, S.K. Long, K. Baicker.

Analysis and interpretation of the data: B.D. Sommers, S.K. Long, K. Baicker.

Drafting of the article: B.D. Sommers, S.K. Long, K. Baicker.

Critical revision of the article for important intellectual content: B.D. Sommers, S.K. Long, K. Baicker.

Final approval of the article: B.D. Sommers, S.K. Long, K. Baicker.

Statistical expertise: B.D. Sommers, S.K. Long, K. Baicker.

Collection and assembly of data: B.D. Sommers.