Scott leads charge on changing no-fault insurance laws
By Dara Kam

Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

— A fired-up Gov. Rick Scott gave proponents of changes to the state's no-fault insurance laws a lesson in politics, urging them to knock on lawmakers' doors and let them have it.

Scott joined a crusade led by business industry leaders and Chief Financial Officer Jeff Atwater pushing legislation intended to crack down on personal injury protection insurance fraud the governor said is costing Floridians $1 billion a year.

On Wednesday, Scott came out in favor of the House's PIP fix that would require people injured in auto accidents to be treated in emergency rooms within 72 hours, cap attorneys' fees and prohibit chiropractors or massage therapists from providing follow-up care.

"This is how laws get changed. Show up and let your legislators know what you want. You're sick and tired of this $1 billion a year of fraud. You're tired of it. You're tired of scammers taking advantage of you. You're tired of attorneys taking advantage of you. Enough is enough. We need to change this," Scott told dozens of PIP reform advocates at a press conference on the fourth-floor rotunda in the Capitol.

The press conference came on the heels of a House committee's approval of HB 119. The bill next goes to the House Economic Affairs Committee.

Proponents of the changes - including Scott - say they're needed to cut back on fraud like staged auto accidents that are causing auto insurance premiums in some areas to skyrocket.

But the bill, passed by the House Civil Justice Committee along partisan lines Wednesday morning, is in trouble. Even some GOP committee members said they can't support the measure in its current form.

While most business and insurance interests support the measure, many who spoke before the committee were opposed . They said it would subject accident victims to long waits in understaffed emergency rooms, and would prevent them from seeing doctors or other health care professionals who already know their health condition.

Others said the 72-hour requirement was too short. Symptoms of soft-tissue injuries and concussions, they said, may not manifest until later.

The bill also limits reimbursement to doctors, dentists, physician's assistants and nurse practitioners. Chiropractors said their business would suffer and they would have to lay off staff.

And attorneys who represent emergency room doctors also opposed the examinations under oath, saying they will take time away from treating patients.

Lawmakers passed PIP coverage in 1972 to make sure anyone hurt in a crash could get timely medical treatment. The legislation mandated that a driver's insurance company pay up to $10,000 to cover medical bills and lost wages after an accident - no matter who's at fault. All Florida drivers are required to carry no-fault insurance.

But over the years, fraudsters have turned Florida into the top state for staged accidents, particularly in the Tampa and Miami-Dade areas.

Estimates show PIP fraud nearing $1 billion in the state this year. Those costs are passed on to customers through increased premiums.

The Associated Press contributed to this story.