Portland Association of Teachers
The Portland Association of Teachers Political Action Committee (PAT PAC) is proud to announce its endorsements for the May 2019 school board election.

The PAT PAC endorsement panel consisted of 8 educators along with OEA staff. The panel considered the following criteria while making their endorsements: support for collective bargaining; commitment to educator voice; knowledge of education issues such as standardized testing and disrupted learning; commitment to racial equity; advocacy for strong, fully-funded public schools; and electability.

We look forward to working with these candidates to improve our school district.

Michelle DePass, in Zone 2, has deep roots in PPS and the Portland community, and brings expertise and skills that will be huge assets to the board. She is experienced in engaging communities and addressing systemic inequity through her work as the Community Engagement Coordinator for the Portland Housing Bureau. Having managed large construction projects, she will have a crucial role as the board works to keep bond projects on time and on budget. She is committed to creating safe and healthy environments for students, which include social-emotional supports and time for outdoor play.

Amy Kohnstamm, in Zone 3, will provide needed consistency to the board in a time of continued turn-over among district leaders. In her work on the District’s bargaining team, she demonstrates a commitment to honoring our contract, and will be the only remaining member of the District's original Interest-Based Bargaining team. Amy believes that corporations should not have undue influence on our state legislature, and has committed to working us to fight for funding from the state.

Eilidh Lowery, in Zone 7, is a longtime volunteer and supporter of public schools. She has served on the Citizen’s Budget Review Committee, and seeks to disrupt systems of inequality that are evident across the District. She is a strong supporter of unions, understands the value of teacher voice, and has been actively standing with us to demand that the legislature fully fund our schools.

Andrew Scott, in Zone 1, has the experience and expertise to be a successful PPS Board Member. As the Budget Director for the City of Portland & Deputy Chief Operating Officer of Metro, he has a proven record of making the government work better for its people. He is a strong advocate for teachers and students, and is committed to working with us to increase funding for our schools. He is also a PPS parent.

Learn more about the PAT PAC here.