Ex-Williamsport cop pleads guilty to involuntary manslaughter
WILLIAM SPORT -- A former Williamsport police officer has pleaded guilty to involuntary manslaughter in the death of a motorist his cruiser struck in 2014 while traveling 88 mph.

Jonathan DePrenda immediately was placed on five years' probation and ordered to perform 100 hours of community service. He also was fined $825 and must pay the victim's funeral expenses of $4,443.

"No man is above the law," Potter County Senior Judge John B. Leete said when he sentenced DePrenda Thursday.

The proceeding got emotional at times as DePrenda apologized to the family of James David Robinson, 42, of Williamsport. Several family members including the dead man's mother, Nancy Robinson Westbrooks, told the former officer they forgave him.

Initially her hatred of DePrenda was strong but she said she had to stop because she had raised her children not to be vengeful.

"You are amazing given the loss you have suffered," Leete commented about the Robinson family. The judge also said he was confident DePrenda's apology was sincere.

Lycoming County District Attorney Eric R. Linhardt noted in the months since the accident never has he heard a member of the Robinson family talk about revenge or vengeance. They realized the death was unintentional, he said.

What DePrenda forgot that night was law enforcement has the responsibility to protect the public, the prosecutor said.

DePrenda told the judge his goal in life was to be a police officer and Linhardt acknowledged he "was one of the good ones."

But, he never again will be able to be an officer and he will carry a criminal record the rest of his life, the prosecutor said.

"This is a very sad courtroom in many ways," Leete said as he prepared to sentence DePrenda, who pleaded guilty also to reckless endangering another person, failure to drive at a safe sped, careless driving resulting in unintentional death and reckless driving.

A charge of vehicular homicide was withdrawn as part of the plea agreement.

When Leete asked DePrenda why he was pleading guilty, he replied "because I am guilty."

DePrenda, who City Council fired last year due to the criminal charges, referred to Jan. 12, 2014, as "a night the worlds collided."

He was headed east on East Third Street about 6:50 p.m. to assist another officer who was in pursuit of a drug suspect blocks away on another street.

State police, who investigated the accident, determined DePrenda was traveling at speeds up to 101 mph with siren and emergency lights activated on the two-lane street that is posted for 35 mph.

As he was attempting to pass three cars, Robinson in the lead one, attempted a left turn onto Railway Street. Investigators said the cruiser was traveling at 88 mph at impact.

Robinson was trapped in his car when, after it hit an utility pole, it struck a vacant house and burst into flames.

"I tried my darndest to help that man," DePrenda said emotionally. He said he sees that vehicle everytime he closes his eyes at night.

"We can't go back to that day and we can't change what happened what happened that day," Leete said. "I wish we could."

He said he believed DePrenda was a good officer and added there was no hint he intended to hurt Robinson but it happened because of the choices he made that day.

Evidence showed the other officer's pursuit ended a minute before the fatal accident.

Although the criminal case is over, still pending in U.S. Middle District Court is a civil rights suit Westbrooks has brought on behalf of her son's estate against the city, its police department and DePrenda.

DePrenda is accused of being indifferent to the constitutional rights of Robinson in numerous ways including driving at an excessive speed, causing a collision and failure to exercise due care in operating a motor vehicle.

The city is accused of failing to properly train and supervise DePrenda and engaging in a practice or custom that disregards the safety and constitutional rights of the public.

Judge John E. Jones III has scheduled the trial for October 2016.