As budget deadline nears, Gov. Wolf needs a fiscal reality check: Mike Turzai
By Mike Turzai

This year's budget requires common sense and an understanding that we remain the stewards of other peoples' money - the hard earned tax dollars of citizens.

Gov. Tom Wolf will have his budget goals, as will members of the House and Senate.

We can find a way to reach an understanding, but only after we recognize that a balanced, on-time budget must be grounded in fiscal reality, not unrealistic wishes.

It's important to look at recent budget history.

Under former Gov. Ed Rendell, the rates of spending and debt far exceeded growth in the state's economy.

We were spending what we didn't have, only to run headlong into the 2008 recession that caused tax revenues to plummet.

Pennsylvania's dilemma was - as often happens with rescues - only worsened under the Obama administration's "stimulus" spending.

State government plugged billions of one-time federal dollars into general fund spending, acting as if these one-time revenues would somehow reappear from somewhere else. Rendell delayed addressing the inevitable.

It came anyway.

When those stimulus dollars ran out, we needed to hit reset and adjust our spending to match our revenues.

Under former Gov. Tom Corbett, we made some tough decisions. But in the face of a sputtering economy, we delivered four on-time, balanced budgets without increasing broad-based taxes.

Each budget finished in the black.

Along comes Wolf, who promised billions in new spending, demanding billions in new taxes.

Indeed, his pursuit of a slate of tax increases was the focal point of last year's budget dispute.

As Speaker of the House, I stood firm against any further tax burdens on Pennsylvania families and job creators.

The quality of government and the amount we spend on it long ago lost any connection, especially in the face of spiraling public pension obligations and the legacy of debt inherited from the Rendell years. Paying more taxes for less service is - and should be - a non-starter for Pennsylvanians.

The bulk of this year's final budget was passed in December 2015, while the remainder was passed with bipartisan support in March 2016.

That budget spent less than the original, on-time budget that the governor vetoed in June 2015.

Our most current budget increased spending by 2.8 percent, while the state's economy grew by less than 1 percent.

Wolf and others had advocated for an unsustainable increase in spending of nearly 6 percent.

The salient question is how to make this budget season different. We are determined to avoid a repeat of last year.

First and foremost, Wolf should understand that many members of the General Assembly, reflecting the views of their constituents, will not support an increase in the state's personal income tax or sales tax.

Real earnings by working families have hardly increased to match government's appetite for spending. If anyone needs to tighten a belt, it's government, not working people.

The General Assembly, in turn, must recognize that on some level, we need to identify our cost drivers: pensions, debt-rate increases, and the growth in entitlement spending. We need to find ways to solve these root problems, while covering the cost of the transition.

All sides need to sit down and find mutually acceptable solutions.

Last year's blanket veto left us no room to settle. Angry rhetoric and hardening of positions on both sides only exacerbated the situation.

This year, we must tone down the language and learn to listen. All sides need to be smarter, look further ahead, and achieve the art of the possible.

We saw an example of that last week when the General Assembly and the governor compromised on a cause that our caucus has long championed: an end to the state's monopoly on alcoholic beverages.

My deeply held belief is that government has no place in the sale of wine and spirits.

Wolf holds a different view. Still, we were able to put together a law that delivers a win for our citizens.

The larger point is that we got something done, and the state's fiscal office believes it will add $150 million in new revenue every year.

After last week's success, we can begin the necessary task of reforming public pensions, reducing the commonwealth's debt load, and forging a path to domestic energy independence.

We can pass a budget that meets the needs of all our citizens, grows the economy, and respects the earnings of our working families.

Principled compromise is not a failure of government. It is the definition of successful governing.

State Rep. Mike Turzai, a Republican, is Speaker of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives. He represents the Allegheny County-based 28th House District.