About Stateline
What is Stateline?

Stateline provides daily reporting and analysis on trends in state policy. Since its founding in 1998, Stateline has maintained a commitment to the highest standards of non-partisanship, objectivity, and integrity. Its team of veteran journalists combines original reporting with a roundup of the latest news from sources around the country. Stateline focuses on four topics that are key to state policy: fiscal and economic issues, health care, demographics, and the business of government.

Use our stories and graphics

All Stateline stories and graphics may be republished in print or online for free. All we ask is that you follow a few rules:

All stories must be attributed to Stateline, an initiative of The Pew Charitable Trusts

Stateline material may not be edited or changed, except for style reasons or to shorten for length

Any use online must include a link back to our website

Use of Stateline material must follow Pew's Terms and Conditions

Stateline content is published daily at pewtrusts.org/Stateline.

Our Staff

Scott Greenberger - Executive Editor

Scott S. Greenberger is the executive editor of Stateline, the daily news service of The Pew Charitable Trusts. Greenberger guides a team of veteran journalists who report on state politics and policy in the 50 states and the District of Columbia.

Before joining Pew, Greenberger was a staff writer at The Boston Globe, where he covered education, served as City Hall bureau chief, and was the primary policy reporter in the Globe’s State House bureau. He wrote extensively about city and state politics, budgets, health care, crime, housing, and economic development. Previously, Greenberger was a reporter at the Austin American-Statesman, where he covered a wide range of city and state issues and traveled with then-Texas Governor George W. Bush on the presidential campaign trail. He is also the co-author, with former Senator Tom Daschle, of The New York Times bestseller Critical: What We Can Do About the Health Care Crisis, published in 2008.

Greenberger graduated cum laude with a bachelor’s degree in history from Yale University and earned a master’s degree in international relations from the Elliott School at George Washington University.

Jeffrey Stinson - Editor

Jeffrey Stinson is editor at Stateline. He has covered state government in Topeka, Pierre, Indianapolis, Albany and a special legislative session in Little Rock. Jeff has covered Congress and the White House for Gannett News Service. He was senior national editor at USA Today and the newspaper’s London bureau chief.

Holly Yeager - Deputy Editor

Holly Yeager is deputy editor of Stateline. She has been a reporter and editor in New York and Washington, covering state, national, and global politics, for 25 years. As Middle East and Asia editor at The Washington Post, she led the paper’s coverage of the Arab Spring and the Japanese tsunami. Earlier, she was a reporter and editor for the Financial Times, covering the media industry, New York City after 9/11, Congress, and national politics. Her long-form journalism includes the first full profile of Michelle Obama, for O, The Oprah Magazine, and a lengthy study of women in the military that appeared in the Wilson Quarterly. She has written for the Columbia Journalism Review, the American Prospect, and other magazines and journals, and was interim editor of The Washington Independent, a pathbreaking online news site.

Yeager was also a reporter in the Washington bureau of Hearst Newspapers and at States News Service. She is a graduate of Georgetown University’s School of Foreign Service and Johns Hopkins University’s School of Advanced International Studies.

Rebecca Beitsch - Staff Writer

Rebecca Beitsch writes about fiscal policy for Stateline. She has covered the statehouse in Missouri and North Dakota, writing about the intersection of politics and policy for NewsRadio KMOX, the Columbia Missourian, and the Bismarck Tribune. She graduated from the University of Missouri and also served as a Peace Corps volunteer in Panama.

Jenni Bergal - Staff Writer

Jenni Bergal is a veteran journalist who covers the business of government at Stateline. She has been a reporter at Kaiser Health News, the Center for Public Integrity and the South Florida Sun-Sentinel, and was a senior editor at NPR. She has won numerous national awards, including the Gerald Loeb Award for Distinguished Business and Financial Journalism, the National Press Club Consumer Journalism Award and the Worth Bingham Prize for Investigative Reporting and is a two-time Pulitzer Prize finalist. She is co-author of the book, City Adrift: New Orleans Before and After Katrina.

Sarah Breitenbach - Staff Writer

Sarah Breitenbach writes about the business of government for Stateline and has spent much of her professional life writing about Maryland politics and policy. She began her career covering education and state government for the Frederick News-Post and has worked at outlets including the Gazette of Politics and Business and the Associated Press. Sarah is a winner of several regional journalism awards and a past vice president of the Maryland chapter of the Society of Professional Journalists. She is also a founding board member of Baltimore Student Media, a nonprofit organization committed to independent student journalism at Towson University, her alma mater.

Tim Henderson - Staff Writer

Tim Henderson has been a newspaper reporter at the Miami Herald, the Cincinnati Enquirer and The Journal News in suburban New York. He became fascinated with Census demographics in the early 1990s, when AOL offered the first computerized reports. Since then he has broken stories about population trends in South Florida, including a housing affordability analysis included in the 2007 Pulitzer-winning series "House of Lies" at the Miami Herald, and a prize-winning analysis of public pension irregularities back at The Journal News, where he returned in 2007. He has been a member and trainer for the National Institute for Computer Assisted Reporting since its inception 20 years ago, specializing in online data access and visualization along with demographics.

Michael Ollove - Staff Writer

Michael Ollove was a long-time journalist at The Baltimore Sun, first as an enterprise reporter and then an enterprise/narrative editor. A number of stories or series he edited won national awards, including National Headliners, Mike Berger, Excellence in Urban Journalism, Society of Professional Journalism, Associated Press Sports Editors and Livingston for Young Journalists.

Elaine S. Povich - Staff Writer

Elaine S. Povich is an award-winning reporter who covers tax and budget issues forStateline. Povich has reported from Washington for Newsday, the Chicago Tribune and UPI. She also covered taxes and government finances as a freelancer for The Fiscal Times, Governing, AOLGovernment, Kiplinger and AARP Bulletin. She has written three books and is an adjunct professor of journalism at Maryland.

Sophie Quinton - Staff Writer

Sophie Quinton writes about fiscal and economic policy for Stateline. Previously, she wrote for National Journal, where she covered everything from the White House to demographic change. She has a bachelor’s degree from Yale University.

Ben Streeter - Staff Writer

Ben Streeter is the copy editor for Stateline. A cum laude graduate of Gettysburg College, he began his editorial career in his college town, writing movie reviews for the Majestic Theater and editing for The Gettysburgian, his college paper; Celebrate Gettysburg magazine; the Hanover Evening Sun; and The Gettysburg Review, a literary journal.

He also was a copy editor for the Carroll County Times in Westminster, Maryland, and The Hill in Washington.

Christine Vestal - Staff Writer

Christine Vestal covers the health care beat for Stateline. Christine has 30 years of experience in the news business. She started her career at McGraw-Hill as managing editor of energy and environmental newsletters. She then launched her own company, publishing newsletters on telecommunications. After selling her business to the Financial Times newsletter group, Christine became publisher of their energy, finance and telecom group. Before joining Stateline, Christine was editorial director for a group of award-winning newsletters on leadership and management issues.

Teresa Wiltz - Staff Writer

Teresa Wiltz is a veteran journalist who covers demographics for Stateline. Over the course of her career, she has worked for the Washington Post, the Chicago Tribune, the Root and Essence, where she served as deputy editor, supervising the magazine's news and culture coverage. As a staff writer on the Chicago Tribune’s metropolitan news desk, she was part of the reporting team that won the Grand Prize, Robert Kennedy Journalism Award for a series on murdered children in Chicago; the team also was the finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for Public Service. She graduated from Dartmouth College with honors and obtained a masters’ degree from the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University. She is the author of The Real America: The Tangled Roots of Race and Identity.

Bryant Stukes - Administrative Assistant

Bryant Stukes serves as the administrative assistant for Stateline. Before joining the Stateline staff in 2013, he worked in the U.S. Senate, Office of Senate Curator, as an executive assistant.