A Premier Southern California Christian University in San Diego
Lynn Reaser, Ph.D., CBE Chief Economist Email: LynnReaser@pointloma.edu Education B.A. Economics, UCLA

M.A. Economics, UCLA

Ph.D. Economics, UCLA

Background

As a professional economist, Dr. Reaser brings extensive experience in the financial services sector with a keen ability to translate complex economic issues into understandable language with relevant and actionable implications. Dr. Reaser, a leading spokesperson for the University, conducts over 300 media interviews annually, including newspapers, magazines, television, radio, wire services, and the internet. She also addresses numerous domestic and international conferences and forecast events. She is presently a member of the PLNU School of Business Faculty, teaching managerial economics in the MBA program. Involved in public policy, she is the Chief Economist of the Council of Economic Advisors for California State Treasurer John Chiang, and is a participating economist in the S & P/Case-Shiller Real Estate Index and many other leading economic gauges and surveys.

Dr. Reaser is active in many professional organizations including serving as past President of the National Association for Business Economics (NABE), which has also named her a Fellow for her contributions to the profession. She received the NABE Outlook Award for the most accurate economic forecast in 2011-12 and is currently Chair of the NABE Foundation.

As Chief Economist, Reaser leads the economic research at the Fermanian Business & Economic Institute (Institute), and is highly proficient at analyzing economic data, modeling, and forecasting, with special attention given to providing clear and concise recommendations for the reader. She brings an engaging, personal, and practical approach to writing and speaking on economic issues to all audiences with a passion towards using economics as a tool to assist people personally and in their enterprises. Additionally, she provides actionable economic counsel to PLNU and its stakeholders. Guest lecturing, publishing, consulting, and public speaking are among many of her responsibilities.

The Institute's consulting clients include San Diego Military Advisory Council (SDMAC), Building Industry Association San Diego, Jacobs and Cushman San Diego Food Bank, Sempra Generation, San Diego Zoo Global, Equinox Center, as well as other trade associations and professional organizations.

From 1999 to 2009, she served as the Chief Economist for the Bank of America Investment Strategies Group. Dr. Reaser provided the global and U.S. economic framework for investment strategy for high net-worth, institutional, and brokerage clients, encompassing over $500 billion under management. She previously served as Barnett Bank’s (Bank of America) and First Interstate Bank’s (Wells Fargo Corporation) Chief Economist. In these roles she furnished economic advice for all of the Bank’s various business lines, including consumer finance, business banking, real estate, and wealth management. She built and led an extraordinarily cohesive team of professional economists who advised senior management on tactical issues and strategies involving all aspects of their business.

Previously she served as Chairman of the American Bankers’ Association’s Economic Advisory Council. She has also served on the Governor’s Council of Economic Advisors for the State of California; Leadership Florida; Boston Economic Club; was a fiscal advisor to cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco; California’s Economic Strategy Panel; Chairman of the Board of Economic Advisors to the Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce; President of the Economic Roundtable of Jacksonville; President of the Los Angeles Chapter of the National Association for Business Economics; and member of the Editorial Advisory Board, Contemporary Economic Policy. She holds a B.A. in Economics (cum laude) and a M.A. and Ph.D. in Economics, all from the University of California, Los Angeles. She resides in San Diego, Ca.

Dr. Reaser has also earned The Certified Business Economist™ (CBE), which is the certification in business economics and data analytics developed by the National Association for Business Economics. The CBE documents a professional’s accomplishment, experience, abilities, and demonstrates mastery of the body of knowledge critical for a successful career in the field of economics and data analytics.

CBE™ and Certified Business Economist™ are certification marks owned by the National Association for Business Economics.