McCain sends out harsh robocall hitting Mitt from right
John McCain launched perhaps the toughest robocall yet here this afternoon, using a woman's voice to attack Romney on abortion and gay rights and to claim he has treated "social issues voters as fools."



The call, and audio file of which was shared by a Brevard County Republican and confirmed by McCain's campaign as their own, is portrayed as a social conservative expressing concern about Romney.



"Mitt Romney thinks he can fool us," says the voice. "He supported abortion on demand, even allowed a law mandating taxpayer-funding for abortion. He says he changed his mind, but he still hasn’t changed the law. He told gay organizers in Massachusetts he would be a stronger advocate for special rights than even Ted Kennedy. Now, it’s something different."



Romney, the caller continues, "has treated social issues voters as fools, thinking we won’t catch on."



"Sorry, Mitt, we know you aren’t trustworthy on the most important issue -- and you aren’t a conservative."



McCain spokeswoman Jill Hazelbaker said they launched the automated calls as a response to the calls Romney sent out against them over the weekend.



Full message after the jump.

“I’m calling with an urgent Mitt Romeny [unintelligible]"



"We care deeply about traditional values and protecting families. And we need someone who will not waver in the White House: Ending abortion, preserving the sanctity of marriage, stopping the trash on the airwaves and attempts to ban God from every corner of society. These issues are core to our being.



"Mitt Romney thinks he can fool us. He supported abortion on demand, even allowed a law mandating taxpayer-funding for abortion. He says he changed his mind, but he still hasn’t changed the law. He told gay organizers in Massachusetts he would be a stronger advocate for special rights than even Ted Kennedy. Now, it’s something different.



"Unfortunately, on issue after issue Mitt Romney has treated social issues voters as fools, thinking we won’t catch on. Sorry, Mitt, we know you aren’t trustworthy on the most important issue and you aren’t a conservative



"Paid for by John McCain 2008.

comments closed

permalink