Dems rail against Cantor train "hypocrisy"
House Minority Whip Eric Cantor (R-Virginia) led the GOP's unanimous opposition against the Dems' stimulus and blasted inclusion of $8 billion for mass transit projects -- taking aim at the possible use of some cash for a Vegas-to-Disneyland mag-lev light rail project.

During a March 15 Meet the Press appearance, Cantor said: "Over the last 50 days we have passed the stimulus bill...You've got that train from Disneyland to Las Vegas, you have, you know, you have other things like the, the money that goes to remove pig, pig odor."

Alas, the Richmond Times-Dispatch is reporting that Cantor joined a group of local officials lobbying to direct greater federal funding to a planned Richmond-to-Washington 110-MPH train that would cut travel time between the two capitals to 45 minutes.

Rep. Eric I. Cantor, the House minority whip, led House GOP opposition to President Barack Obama's $740 billion (sic) stimulus program.



Yesterday, though, the Henrico County Republican said bringing high-speed rail to the region could further spur economic development, creating as many as 185,000 jobs and bringing $21.2 billion to a region already home to about a half-dozen Fortune 500 companies and 20,000 small businesses.



"If there is one thing that I think all of us here on both sides of the political aisle from all parts of the region agree with, it's that we need to do all we can to promote jobs here in the Richmond area," Cantor said.

That prompted DCCC Communications Director Jennifer Crider to say: “Congressman ‘No’’s attempt to take credit for the high-speed rail funding that he led the fight against is the height of hypocrisy."

Cantor spokesman Brad Dayspring said the key difference between the Vegas-LA line and the Richmond-DC plan is that the latter has long been included on the DOT's list of "planned corridor" projects and the Harry-Reid-backed Vegas project isn't.

(Click for a map of the approved projects here.)

Dayspring responded by pointing a finger not a Crider -- but at Democratic National Committee Chairman and Virginia Gov. Tim Kaine:

"I'm shocked that that DNC Chairman, Governor Tim Kaine would order these kind of attacks against the Virginia high speed rail and Democrat Bobby Scott [a rail supporter]. This is the same old Washington that people have grown sick of and the President campaigned against."

comments closed

permalink