Reid to Republicans: "Stop crying over reconciliation"
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) said Tuesday that Republicans should "stop crying over reconciliation" as the two parties prepare to meet with President Barack Obama to discuss the future of health care reform.



Reid answered questions about health care following the Democratic weekly policy luncheon, and seemed particularly irked by the question over whether reconciliation was the only way forward on getting a health care bill passed.



"The answer to that is no," Reid said abruptly. "But I have been told that my Republican friends are lamenting reconciliation. I would recommend to them to go back and look at history. Since 1981, reconciliation has been used 21 times—the vast majority of those reconciliation efforts have been by Republicans. So nothing's off the table. We'll have to take a look at that.

"But realistically, they should stop crying about reconciliation as if it's never been done before. It's been done by almost every Congress, and they're the ones who have used it more than anyone else. Contract for America was done with reconciliation. Tax cuts, done with reconciliation. Medicare, done with reconciliation," Reid continued.



The majority leader also emphasized that Obama's attempts at bipartisanship are genuine, in what seemed to be a direct response to the continued GOP attack line that given the president posted his plan for reform Monday, Thursday's meeting is more for show than it is a real back-and-forth debate on the legislation.



Reid—who met this morning to discuss strategy with the eight Democrats invited to Thursday's meeting—also pointed to the Republicans' earlier involvement in working on this bill at the committee level as a sign that they might be able to come to the negotiating table yet again as the legislation nears what he hopes is a finish line.



"We have a health care bill that's passed the Senate with 60 votes. We're anxious to have them involved in the process. They were involved for a while and, that, as you know, didn't pick up a single Republican vote. We've heard that they have ideas, and we look forward to hearing those ideas," Reid said. "The president did this because he wants to be able to reach out to the Republicans. That's who he is—he is not a partisan president. And I look forward to the meeting."

Meredith Shiner

comments closed

permalink