Republicans outline health plan
While Senate Democrats marked up a $1 trillion health care package Wednesday morning, House Republicans unveiled an outline of their own plan.

House GOP leaders pledged their plan would lower health care costs, improve the private marketplace, and expand accessibility — and they promised to keep government bureaucrats out of the process. The Republican plan allows for dependents to stay on their parents’ health plans until they are 25 years of age and provides a small business tax credit to employers who offer health care.

Minority Leader John Boehner said the goal of the House GOP plan was to improve the current health care system

“As we proceed down this path, we have to be careful not to impede what works in the current system,” Boehner told reporters. “We take the current health care system and make it better for all Americans.”

“I guarantee you we will provide you with a bill that costs less and provides better care for the American people,” said Rep. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.), who is heading up the House GOP’s health care effort.

The Politico 44 Story Widget Requires Adobe Flash Player.

But while Republican leaders today attacked Democrats for the cost of their plan, they declined to offer any details on how much their own blueprint would cost.

Rep. Dave Camp (R-Mich.), the ranking Republican member on the Ways and Means Committee, acknowledged that the outline lacked solid numbers, but pledged that the plan would cost less than what Democrats were proposing.

“I’m not going to have a bill that’s larger than the GDP of most countries,” he said.

Camp also was quick to argue that Democrats — who, he said, are first in line in the legislation-making process — had yet to provide details on how much their health care reform effort would cost.

Boehner urged President Obama and Democratic leaders to take a close look at the GOP plan, but said he was under no illusions that they would do so.

“From everything we’ve seen so far ... they’ve ignored our better solutions,” he said.