Opinion: Keep abortion funding out of health care reform
Both houses of Congress are currently considering a major overhaul of America’s entire system of health care and health insurance. While expanding access to health care and insurance is a major public policy goal, plans currently under consideration in the Democratic Congress could have another effect — forcing taxpayers to pay for abortions for the first time in more than three decades.

During the first years after the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision, the federal government did pay for abortions for low-income women using Medicaid funds, treating it as a medically necessary service that was suitable for government reimbursement. The practice was halted only by passage in 1976 of the Hyde Amendment, named for the late Rep. Henry Hyde (R-Ill.). The Hyde Amendment is an annual amendment (a “rider”) to an appropriations bill, and it has been included in federal law every year since.

The Hyde Amendment was challenged in court, but it was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in the 1980 case of Harris v. McRae. The court’s ruling said that a distinction could be made between abortion and “other medical procedures, because no other procedure involves the purposeful termination of a potential life.”

The 6th Circuit Court of Appeals had also upheld the right of Congress to restrict abortion funding — but only after stating that “abortion fits within many of the mandatory care categories, including ‘family planning,’ ‘outpatient services,’ ‘inpatient services’ and ‘physicians’ services.’” In other words, if Congress does not explicitly exclude abortion coverage, it will be included in government health care coverage.

In the 1993-94 health care debate, President Bill Clinton made clear that although abortion was not mentioned in the Clinton-Mitchell bill, abortion would have been covered, as would other surgeries or medical procedures not explicitly mentioned.

Several provisions in the America’s Affordable Health Choices Act of 2009 (H.R. 3200) provide examples of how abortion will be funded or mandated. Under the minimum benefits package required, abortion could be mandated as part of “outpatient clinic services.” Abortion could be mandated under the auspices of “family planning” coverage in another section. Abortion could be funded under the part of the plan that authorizes the secretary of Health and Human Services to create a “public health insurance option.”

The Hyde appropriations provision would not cover all the programs established in this legislation, as there are several self-appropriating provisions contained in the current bill. Moreover, the Hyde Amendment could be removed in future appropriations cycles. To ensure that the long-standing U.S. policy against funding or mandating abortion coverage is maintained in this new health care authorization, abortion must be permanently and explicitly excluded.