Grayson likens health crisis, holocaust
Republicans got an apology of sorts from Democratic Rep. Alan Grayson Wednesday – it just wasn’t the one they wanted.

Instead of saying he was sorry about accusing Republicans of wanting people to “die quickly,” he gave an apology “to the dead.”

“I would like to apologize,” he said. “I apologize to the dead and their families that we haven't voted sooner to end this holocaust in America.”

His sarcasm, delivered on the House floor, drew a swift rebuke from the National Republican Congressional Committee, which hopes to see Grayson defeated in an Orlando-based swing district next year.

“This is an unstable man who has come unhinged,” NRCC spokesman Andy Sere said. “The depths to which Alan Grayson will sink to defend his indefensible comments know no bounds.”

Grayson told reporters he’s not worried at all about a backlash from voters and instead thinks his chances for re-election have been boosted.

“It improves them,” he said. “People like elected officials with guts who say what they mean.”

But in the same interview, he wavered between suggesting he meant what he said Tuesday night – “Republicans want you to die quickly” – and saying it had been a tongue-in-cheek satire.

“I stand by what I said,” he said. “I didn’t violate any House rules. I didn’t do anything inappropriate. I’m not under any pressure at all.”

Grayson provided the contretemps of the day on Capitol Hill, and even one of his party’s leaders, Democratic Caucus Chairman John B. Larson of Connecticut, at one point publicly called on him to apologize for Tuesday night’s speech.

“I wouldn’t have used the words that Mr. Grayson has,” Larson said. “I would encourage Alan to apologize.”

Later, Grayson contested whether Larson really meant what he said.

“I spoke to him and he did not ask me to apologize,” Grayson offered.

He also claimed he hadn’t said “Republicans want you to die quickly” – until a reporter read his words back to him.

Republican Study Committee Chairman Tom Price of Georgia drafted, but did not offer, a resolution that would have expressed the House’s disapproval of Grayson’s remarks.

Republicans hoped to equate Grayson’s behavior with that of Rep. Joe Wilson, R-S.C., who was disciplined by the House for yelling “You lie!” at the president during a joint session of Congress earlier in September.

Wilson declined to discuss Grayson’s comments, saying he hadn’t heard them.

Other Republicans weren’t so charitable.

“The people of central Florida sent Alan Grayson to Washington to work for them. Instead, he has become the laughing stock of the House of Representatives and a complete embarrassment to his constituents,” said Jim Greer, chairman of Florida’s Republican Party. “What we have seen over the course of the last 24 hour[s] is a Congressman who is completely consumed with his own spotlight and has absolutely no respect for the citizens who elected him.”

One thing is clear: The otherwise obscure first-term lawmaker has raised his profile.