Former Murphy partner says his comments in a CBS story were 'taken out of context'
Patrick Murphy. | AP Photo/J Pat Carter Former Murphy partner says his comments in a CBS story were 'taken out of context'

TALLAHASSEE — A Louisiana resident says his comments in a CBS-Miami story that questioned Democratic Rep. Patrick Muprhy’s role in a company that worked to clean up the Gulf of Mexico after the 2010 BP oil spill were taken “out of context.”

Taylor Beery said that what has him angry is that the story downplays the role Murphy, who is running for U.S. Senate, had in the operation of the company.

Story Continued Below

“Patrick was a vital part of the management and success of our small business,” Beery, a registered Republican, said in a statement to POLITICO Florida. “Anyone who disagrees with that wasn't there with us on the deck of the skimmer pulling oil from the Gulf in the 95 degree heat of August of 2010.”

Murphy became involved because of Coastal Environmental, a company started as an affiliate of Coastal Construction, a firm whose CEO and president is Murphy’s father, Tom. Coastal Environmental got directly involved with BP cleanup in August 2010 when it purchased Crescent SQ, a company Beery owned that had two oil skimming contracts.

The CBS story, which also touched on issues outside of Beery’s concern, was put together over four months by CBS-Miami reporter Jim DeFede. The report noted that Coastal Environmental shared top officials with Coastal Construction, including Tom Murphy, and that documents finalizing the purchase were signed by Coastal Environmental president Daniel Whiteman, also a vice chairman of the construction company, not Murphy, who was Coastal Environmental’s vice president.

“In fact, it is now apparent Coastal was controlled and operated by Coastal Construction,” DeFede said when reporting the story on air. “Incorporation papers show the depths to which Coastal Environmental and Coastal Construction are intertwined.”

This is a point with which Beery takes issue.

He said any implication that Muprhy was not involved in the company, including going out on boats and helping design the skimmer operation, is false. He characterized the story as “completely false” because he thinks it downplayed Murphy’s role in the operations. He said his comments were “taken out of context.”

DeFede’s story does note that “the campaign said Murphy's contributions were integral to the success of Coastal and Crescent because he helped design a new type of oil skimmer that could collect oil three feet below the surface.

The story also quoted Beery saying he has a “lot of respect” for Murphy.

In an email, a spokeswoman for CBS-Miami said the station stands by its reporting.

The more than six-minute story in Florida’s largest media market immediately prompted attacks from Republicans and Rep. Alan Grayson, an Orlando Democrat challenging Murphy in the U.S. Senate primary.

The Murphy campaign put out an email Thursday morning “setting the record straight.” The email touched on several elements of the story, including those unrelated to Beery’s concerns.

The story’s claims, though, will no doubt play a role in the race moving forward. A new super PAC supporting Sen. Marco Rubio, the seat’s incumbent, already released an ad using the DeFede story to hammer Murphy.

UPDATE: This story has been updated with a statement from CBS-Miami.