Rauner snubs Trump during visit to Chicago
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump. | Kristen Zeis/The Virginian-Pilot via AP Rauner snubs Trump during visit to Chicago

CHICAGO — Gov. Bruce Rauner gave his party's presumptive presidential nominee the cold shoulder on Tuesday.

The Republican governor announced the formation of a school funding commission at the Thompson Center while Donald Trump was in town for a fundraiser just blocks away.

Story Continued Below

Rauner instructed reporters to keep their questions focused on the commission. Some strayed off topic anyway and asked the governor why he was not joining the presumptive leader of his party. Rauner declined to comment.

“I’ve said everything I’m going to say about the presidential race,” Rauner said.

But the governor’s only public comments came in March when he told students in Wilmette that he was “horrified” by the rhetoric in the Republican presidential campaign and that “it’s ugly and it’s nasty and it’s weird.” He stopped short of mentioning Trump's name.

That same month, he also promised to back the eventual Republican nominee, regardless of who it would be. But he has refused to formally endorse Trump, declining to lead the Illinois delegation at the GOP Convention in Cleveland. In fact, he will not attend next week's convention at all.

On Tuesday, Rauner ignored a question about where he would be during the convention.

Sen. Mark Kirk, a fellow Republican in the midst of a contentious re-election campaign, will also skip the convention. But he has taken a more aggressive approach toward the presumptive nominee.

Kirk rescinded his support for Trump last month, saying in a statement, “After much consideration, I have concluded that Donald Trump has not demonstrated the temperament necessary to assume the greatest office in the world.”

Last week Trump attacked Kirk for refusing to support him in a closed-door meeting with Senate Republicans on Capitol Hill. Kirk fired back, calling Trump an “Eastern, privileged, wealthy bully.”

If a snub from a pair of Illinois politicians in his own party wasn’t enough, two demonstrations railed against Trump outside of Chicago’s Trump Tower. U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky, a Democrat, held a “Chicago Trumps Hate” protest while NextGen Climate Illinois and Latino Policy Forum’s A.C.C.E.S.S. student group protested Trump’s energy plan and his comments on immigrants and minorities.