How health care reform could fall apart
With so many players divided on key issues, there's no guarantee that Reid can pass a bill at all. How health care reform could fall apart

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid eked out 60 votes on a procedural motion to start the health care debate Saturday night – but there’s no guarantee he can pass a bill on the merits.

And as he struggles, the reasons are clear: deep divides among Democrats on a public insurance plan, abortion, tax hikes and cost-cutting. Liberals want the plan to be generous enough. Moderates fear a budget-buster. And everyone is trying to avoid angering seniors.

Story Continued Below

Even in the blush of Saturday’s victory, Reid (D-Nev.) is far from having the votes to move his $848 billion package to final passage. At least four centrists have pledged to oppose it in its current form, largely over the public option. Reid is in a bind. Stay to the left, and moderates vote no. Move a tad to the right, and Reid faces insurrection from the left, as liberals in his own caucus and in the House vow not to compromise any further on their signature issue.

As one of the Senate most liberal members, Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), told POLITICO’s The Arena: “I have made it clear to the administration and Democratic leadership that my vote for the final bill is by no means guaranteed.”

Health care reform proponents considered Saturday’s vote a major milestone, one that significantly boosted the odds of passing a bill. But, as Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) vowed Saturday, “the battle has just begun.”

Here are the battle lines where President Barack Obama’s vision of reform could falter.

No good option for public option

A Democratic dream – expanding the government’s role in guaranteeing health care to the uninsured – might well be reform’s undoing.

Public option proponents, including Sanders and Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio), say they have already given up enough. They agreed to forgo a single-payer system. They decided not to push a government plan tied to Medicare rates. And they accepted Reid’s proposal to include the opt-out provision. That’s it, they say.

The more conservative members of the caucus won’t budge either. They agreed Saturday to allow the debate to begin, but effectively killed the opt-out idea – Reid’s attempt at compromise.

Right now, there is no public option plan that could garner 60 votes. A public plan “trigger” if private insurers fall short could come close – saying, losing Sanders but picking up Olympia Snowe (R-Maine) – but there’s no guarantee it would fly in the House.

Enter “The Hammer,” an idea from Sen. Tom Carper (D-Del.) States that lack affordable choices would be required to offer a national insurance program that wouldn’t be government-financed or government-run.

Carper had already attempted a compromise with Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) – and came up empty-handed. Brown and others sound prepared to walk away if Democrats can’t work this out.

“Four members of the Senate aren’t going to tell the other 55 what to do on these issues,” Brown said of the public option.

No room for abortion compromise

It’s one of the most emotionally charged issues in the debate, with anti-abortion activists insisting that health reform cannot expand federal funding for abortions.

But when it comes down to whether Democrats can accomplish health reform this year, it becomes a vote-counting problem – how many anti-abortion Democrats would walk away from a bill they don’t like?

Reid can’t afford a single defection – and already, Sen. Ben Nelson (D-Neb.), who opposes abortion rights, says weak language could be enough to oppose final passage.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) could lose at least 10 Democrats if the Senate tried to water down the tough anti-abortion language in her bill.

At the same time, about 40 Democrats in the House say they can’t vote for a bill that goes as far as the House bill does now, with the so-called Stupak amendment that prevents a public insurance plan from offering elective abortions.

The big player here isn’t Reid or Pelosi but the Catholic Church, which helped get the Stupak amendment into the House bill. Any abortion language may have to win the backing of the church for members to sign on – and the church is sticking by a tough anti-abortion stance that angers many liberals.

Is there a middle ground? That’s not at all clear.

Millionaires vs. Cadillacs



Republicans pounded one big talking point all day Saturday: health reform raises taxes. And it’s true, the plans would.

What’s worse for Democrats is that the House and Senate have starkly different visions of how to pay for reform. The House hates the Senate tax, and the Senate hates the House tax.