At heart of Paul Ryan budget: Repealing Obamacare - Jennifer Haberkorn and Brett Norman
This week’s dueling budget releases show that the fight over health care reform and entitlements is far from over — and the parties are still miles apart on how to move forward with either plan.

But what is clear is that implementation of the health law is moving forward, Medicaid won’t be converted into a “block grant” anytime soon and there is no politically easy answer for Medicare.

Text Size -

+

reset Ryan budget: Break down with Republican strategist Ryan: 'Reviving' budget process

House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan’s budget assumes that the health law is repealed and defunded. The budget generates about half of its spending cuts from defunding the law.

(Also on POLITICO: Dueling budgets: Key takeaways)

Ryan’s budget eliminates health law revenues Republicans found objectionable, such as the tax on medical devices or health insurance, but it does keep the law’s $716 billion in cuts to Medicare.

His plan would also eliminate the controversial Independent Payment Advisory Board. It would keep Obamacare’s Medicare spending growth cap of 0.5 percent, which IPAB is meant to police, but does not say how to enforce it.

“As we did last year, our budget repeals Obamacare and all of its tax increases,” Ryan spokesman William Allison said in an email. “It also calls for fundamental tax reform because we believe there’s a better to way to fund the government than through our broken Tax Code. That’s why we repeal Obamacare and enact comprehensive tax reform.”

Senate Democrats are expected to release their budget Wednesday. As expected, they plan to preserve the health law and reject the House GOP blueprints for Medicare and Medicaid.

Democrats remain fiercely opposed to Ryan’s premium support model for Medicare, which would introduce vouchers for the program while preserving the traditional program as an option. They believe that idea was vetted and roundly rejected by the public in last year’s presidential election.

His plans for Medicaid are a nonstarter as well. Ryan would block grant the program to states, with growth indexed to inflation and population growth, and in doing so cut the low-income health care program by $756 billion over 10 years. The Obama administration and many Democrats have pledged to fight reductions in Medicaid, which is being expanded under the president’s health care law.

The Senate Democrats have not released their budget yet, but they will propose $275 billion in spending cuts from health care programs over 10 years, according to a Democratic source close to the talks. That’s about one-tenth of the $2.72 trillion in health care cuts called for in Ryan’s budget.

Details of the Democratic plan were not available Tuesday, but the reductions will not shift costs to the states or privatize Medicare, the source said.

So it appears that the two budgets show few signs for any common ground on entitlement reform going forward.

One potential exception is Ryan’s plan to gradually raise the Medicare eligibility age by two years for those who are now under 55. While opposed by many Democrats, the administration has put eligibility age on the table in previous deficit talks, and it could find some Democratic support in a broader deficit reduction deal that also raises revenues.

Obama — who told Democrats Tuesday that they must consider some changes in entitlements if Republicans do more on revenue — has also suggested he was open to saving money by changing the way entitlements factor in inflation by pegging it to a measurement called chained CPI, but Ryan’s budget did not take that step.