For Tom Cotton, Army was good training - Seung Min Kim
Tom Cotton is only 35 years old but already has a résumé anyone nearing retirement age would envy.

The Harvard Law School graduate has clerked for a federal judge, earned a Bronze Star for his military service overseas, tended to the family cattle farm — and can run a marathon in 2 hours and 51 minutes.

Text Size -

+

reset A guide to the 113th Congress

(Also on POLITICO: Tom Cotton's fact sheet)

And on his first try, the political neophyte won a seat in Congress and was almost instantly minted by the Republican Party as one of its rising stars. It’s not just his sterling résumé but his broader vision for the party, particularly on economic issues, that excites the GOP, party leaders say.

“I decided to run for a lot of the same reasons that I joined the law practice and joined the Army,” Cotton said during a recent interview in Washington. “I wanted to be on the front lines to preserve our freedom for the next generation.”

As a law school student during the Sept. 11 attacks, Cotton said he felt an immediate need to enlist in the military. But his pending student loan debt — paid off after a year at the law firm Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher — and a previous commitment to clerk for Judge Jerry Smith of the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals kept him away from the Army until December 2004.

(See also: POLITICO's guide to the 113th Congress)

Cotton served as a platoon leader in Baghdad for the 101st Airborne, directing a 41-man air-assault infantry platoon. In 2007 and 2008, Cotton was part of the Old Guard at Arlington National Cemetery, where he helped carry out military funerals for war veterans. He volunteered to return overseas — this time, to eastern Afghanistan — in 2008 as an operations officer of a provincial reconstruction team.

He left active duty in September 2009 and subsequently went to work at McKinsey & Co. as a management consultant before starting his congressional campaign.

“The military is great training for any walk of life — great training for politics, great training for business, for being a community leader,” Cotton said. “Most importantly, you learn tangible skills: leadership, teamwork, positive attitude, dealing with ambiguity and imperfect information, decision making under great stress and stakes.”

The sprawling southern Arkansas district was occupied by outgoing Rep. Mike Ross, a member of the shrinking Blue Dog Coalition, a group of moderate Democrats whose ranks have been decimated in recent elections. Ross opted to retire instead of running for a seventh term in Congress.