Libertarianism goes mainstream - James Hohmann
“The libertarian message of self-reliance resonates with younger voters,” said another Republican strategist who has worked with the libertarian forces. “Ron Paul tapped into that.”

Steve Schmidt, John McCain’s senior strategist in 2008, said libertarians were always one of the important pillars of the party but the balance within the coalition got out of whack when President George W. Bush signed an act of Congress intervening in a custody dispute aimed at keeping Terri Schiavo alive despite being in a persistent vegetative state.

Text Size -

+

reset Young voters dominate CPAC 2013 Gary Johnson on running as a libertarian

“This is a manifestation of big government conservatism that a lot of people are uncomfortable with in the Republican Party,” Schmidt said. “The [libertarian] movement has thus far been defined in many ways by what it is against rather than what it is for…In both parties, you have to pass a threshold test of seriousness.”

Rand Paul is aggressively trying to pass that test and unite the various factions. He’s taken a series of steps to distance himself from his father’s most unpalatable positions, from articulating a more nuanced position on the drug war to taking a harder-line on national security and more vocally professing his opposition to gay marriage and abortion. The junior Kentucky senator will give high-profile speeches in Iowa and New Hampshire this May.

“Maybe he delivers the message a little bit better than I ever did,” the elder Paul acknowledged.

These are not your father’s libertarians. The rising generation is more pragmatic than the last. They don’t just want to make a point; they want seats at the table.

More realize that The Libertarian Party is not the vehicle to win elections. Ron Paul ran as the nominee in 1988, winning 432,000 votes or 0.47 percent of the overall vote. In 2008 and 2012, he passed on pursuing the third party’s nomination – recognizing the futility of a quixotic bid but also mindful of the damage that would be done to his son if he cost a Republican candidate the White House.

After failing to catch any fire in the Republican race last year, former New Mexico Gov. Gary Johnson ran as the Libertarian candidate and got 1.2 million votes, or 1 percent. Former Republican Rep. Bob Barr ran for president as a Libertarian in 2008, but he just announced that he’ll run for the House again in 2014…as a Republican.

Paul loyalists felt shut out by state parties in 2008. So, in 2012, they organized and used the rules to their advantage to make inroads in Republican states parties in places like Iowa, Maine, Nevada and Alaska. These insurgents recognize America has a two-party system and that they can maximize their influence by playing inside the GOP.

Now that they are inside the tent and trying to broaden their appeal, many libertarians put much less emphasis on purity. Most of the Paul boosters on the 168-member Republican National Committee, for instance, agreed in January to support the re-election of Chairman Reince Priebus over a less-qualified candidate who had backed Paul – a sign of maturity and a willingness to cooperate.

“The laws force us to use the political parties, but they’re totally controlled by the insiders of the two parties,” the elder Paul said with some frustration. “In many ways, they’re irrelevant compared to changing people’s minds and attitudes.”