Mythbusters: Obamacare edition - David Nather
There are a lot of wild stories about Obamacare that make the debate sound like a fact-free zone.

No, the IRS isn’t going to be posting your medical tests all over the Internet. No, people’s premiums aren’t doubling in the crucial swing state of Ohio. And no, the Obamacare “data hub” isn’t like a new version of the NSA, spying on your hemorrhoids instead of your phone calls.

Text Size -

+

reset Rubio: Obamacare like 'New Coke' TOP 5 Obamacare complaints

Those are all claims that are muddying the waters as consumers get ready to sign up for Obamacare for the first time in October. On the other hand, not all of the stories that are swirling around the health care law these days are completely far-fetched. And the Obama administration is spinning some rosy scenarios of its own.

(PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

That’s why these stories need the “MythBusters” test — where, just like the TV show, “busted” means it’s not true, “confirmed” means it’s true and “plausible” means it could happen, but only under certain, narrow conditions.

Here is POLITICO’s Obamacare version of “MythBusters” — and what we found when we tested the wildest stories in the debate:

The IRS is going to be laughing at your medical tests.

Very few things in Obamacare are scarier to conservatives than the IRS role in enforcing it — especially after its targeting of conservative groups.

So Republicans are going to town with warnings that the agency will be able to spy on everyone’s medical records, as if IRS employees will be looking up the embarrassing medical tests of people they don’t like and posting them on the Internet. That could become a talking point again this week, when the House takes up a bill to prohibit the agency from enforcing its parts of Obamacare.

(Also on POLITICO: TOP 5 complaints about Obamacare)

“Certainly, we don’t need the IRS policing our private health care information,” Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.) said during the House debate in May over an Obamacare repeal bill. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) has said he’s “worried that some of our privacy will be violated.”

The reality, though, is that the only IRS roles in Obamacare are to make sure people have health insurance and give out the subsidies to people who are eligible.

That means the IRS needs to know two things: what kind of health insurance you have — which your employer or insurer will report — and your income, which, really, it knows already. It doesn’t need to know if you had your flu shot.

And even if someone wanted to look for secrets in your medical history, it’s not clear how they’d find them since the Obamacare application doesn’t ask for any medical records.

Rating: Busted

You’ll never know if your information is safe.

There is a more reasonable concern, shared by experts who are closely following the implementation of Obamacare, that other sensitive information will fall into the wrong hands during the screening process.

That’s partly because the federal government is building a “data hub” to help the new health insurance marketplaces gather information quickly from different agencies when you sign up for coverage — like verifying your income level with the IRS, your Social Security number with the Social Security Administration and your citizenship information with the Department of Homeland Security.

All of that is sensitive personal information. Some GOP critics say it’s unclear how secure the hub will be, so there’s no guarantee that sensitive information couldn’t leak out — or be hacked.

(WATCH: Obamacare shutdown ‘suicidal,’ Cole says)

An Obama administration official says that’s based on a fundamental misunderstanding of how the hub will work. It’s not a database and won’t store information, the official said — it’s a routing tool that will just allow connections to different agencies to pull bits of information. To verify someone’s income, for example, the hub won’t pull their entire tax return. It will just pull one bit of information — their income level — and plug it in.

But Brett Graham of Leavitt Partners, which is consulting with states on the construction of the health exchanges, says it would be easier to reassure people that the hub is secure if it had been tested publicly, with the results widely available. Since that hasn’t happened, “we really don’t know whether it’s a small concern or a large concern,” he said.

And the hub is not the only way people’s information can become vulnerable. Graham said it would be easy for “navigators” — the community groups that will help customers enroll in health insurance — to come across sensitive information about the customers’ medical history, especially if the customers themselves blurt it out.

“You could easily see someone saying, ‘Can you tell me what kind of plan I need? I have a heart condition, or I have diabetes, or I have hypertension,’” Graham said. That’s very different from someone intentionally spying on your health care information — but it’s one reason there are gray areas that make it hard to guarantee absolute security.

Rating: Plausible

Your health care costs are going to double.

Two states are playing starring roles in Republicans’ “Obamacare rate shock” warnings: Ohio, which said its health insurance rates for individuals will go up 88 percent, and Indiana, which estimated its individual rates will rise by 72 percent.

Republicans are using those estimates to suggest Obamacare will raise people’s premiums through the roof. The Ohio statement has been a special favorite of House Speaker John Boehner, who used it to suggest that his constituents will have to pay another $200 a month in health care costs.

There’s just one problem: Both states’ insurance departments tell POLITICO that people’s premiums won’t necessarily go up by that much.

For one thing, neither state was actually talking about premiums — they were talking about the basic cost of providing health insurance. In Ohio, that price includes everything, from the costs the insurer will pay to the expenses the customers will pay on their own, according to insurance department spokesman Chris Brock. People who get Obamacare subsidies won’t pay the full cost.

That estimate could change anyway, since those were preliminary rates and Ohio is about to release the final ones.

And neither state tried to distinguish between the four different levels of Obamacare coverage. They just mashed all of the costs together, so a casual customer would have no sense that some plans will be cheaper than others.

Dennis Rosebrough, a spokesman for the Indiana Department of Insurance, said it was “virtually impossible to calculate the premiums” because “there are too many variables” — including what level of Obamacare plan people will choose. Under the law, people are supposed to have a choice of four plans — bronze, silver, gold and platinum — with each one covering a larger share of the medical expenses. The law also allows cheaper, catastrophic plans for people under age 30.

“We don’t have the capacity to drill down and figure out every level of this,” Rosebrough said. “That’s why we focused on the cost.” Boehner’s office declined to comment.

That doesn’t mean the costs of individual health insurance won’t go up for people whose employers don’t offer insurance. They almost certainly will, since the individual insurance market includes a lot of bare-bones plans, with skimpier coverage and high deductibles, that are being phased out under Obamacare. But those costs don’t tell you a lot about what people will pay in the end.

Rating: Busted