Rubio shifts direction on Syria
Rubio says Syria is 'vital' to the national security interest of the U.S. | John Shinkle/POLITICO Rubio shifts direction on Syria

For much of the last two years, Marco Rubio has been banging the drum on Syria: Demanding U.S. intervention to knock the Assad regime from power.

Now, the senator has taken a different tack: The administration has missed the boat.

Story Continued Below

How the Florida Republican has evolved on the issue is emblematic of the difficulties President Barack Obama faces in winning congressional approval of military action in Syria, particularly among Republicans. It also shows the difficult line GOP presidential contenders like Rubio must balance in trying to project a sense of American military might without turning off conservatives skeptical about following Obama’s lead on a war.

( PHOTOS: Syria: Where politicians stand)

Indeed, the Syria vote is turning out to be the first big foreign policy test of the 2016 campaign, as prospective presidential contenders like Rubio stake out their positions on the most controversial – and consequential — vote of the 113th Congress so far. Since winning election on a tea party platform in 2010, Rubio has been a proponent of a more aggressive foreign policy, breaking from fellow tea party favorites and potential 2016 rivals like Ted Cruz and Rand Paul, who have argued for a more limited American role overseas.

That split — which played out Tuesday in the Senate Foreign Relations committee — is emblematic of the larger GOP divide over foreign policy heading into the next election.

Unlike Cruz and Paul, neither of whom believe that military action is necessary in Syria, Rubio argues what happens in Syria is “vital” to the national security interest of the United States, given the Assad regime’s ties to Iran and terrorism groups. But like Cruz and Paul, Rubio appears likely to vote against the resolution authorizing force against Syria.

(Also on POLITICO: Senators craft Syria compromise)

At the hearing Tuesday, Rubio attacked the administration for making a choice to “lead from behind” on Syria. And he tried to make the case that had the administration heeded the calls he and others made two years ago to arm the Syrian rebels, it wouldn’t be in the predicament it is in today.

“What we’re seeing here now is proof and an example of when America ignores these problems, these problems don’t ignore us,” Rubio said. “We can ignore them, but eventually they grow and they come to visit us at our doorstep.”

As the GOP engages in a vigorous debate over the direction of its foreign policy, Rubio has embraced a more hawkish stance — though he’s not quite in the Dick Cheney-Bill Kristol neoconservative wing of the Republican Party. His decision to join Paul on the floor earlier this year to rail against Obama administration’s use of drones or express more of an openness to negotiate with Iran are both emblematic of the middle-ground he has tried to pave.

( Also on POLITICO: On Syria, House GOP won’t follow their leaders)

But Rubio was an early advocate of arming the Syrian rebels; he backed the U.S. mission in Libya; and he’s been an unabashed supporter of providing foreign aid including to turmoil-ridden Egypt. And over the last two years, Rubio has advocated a larger U.S. presence in the region, pushing for everything from humanitarian aid to imposing tougher sanctions on the Syrian central bank to arming the rebels fighting the Assad regime.

But over the last several months, Rubio has backed away from that position, raising concerns that the Obama administration has waited too long — and now is seeking a meek response that will only further destabilize the region. In the hearing, he said he was “skeptical” of Obama’s approach for limited airstrikes — and he argued that a more aggressive effort seeking regime change would bring forward its own problems.