Election 2013: Greens face dilemma on backing Alison Lundergan Grimes
Green donors have a choice to make with Kentucky Democratic Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes: overlook her support for coal and her disdain for the Environmental Protection Agency or leave her on her own in the contest against Senate GOP leader Mitch McConnell.

That dilemma will test how far green-minded groups and donors will veer from their core agenda in order to help the Democratic Party in Washington as part of their broader effort to support the Obama administration’s agenda on climate and the EPA.

Text Size -

+

reset

Grimes doesn’t offer much for the green community to rally behind. She has criticized President Barack Obama for taking “direct aim at Kentucky’s coal industry” and faulted proposed EPA carbon dioxide controls of existing power plants. Those positions aren’t likely to be controversial in the nation’s No. 3 coal producing state and one that derives nearly all its electricity from the fuel, but they don’t mix well with the agenda of environmental groups and some of their wealthy backers.

(QUIZ: Do you know Alison Lundergan Grimes?)

Still, the support of major Democratic donors such as Susie Tompkins Buell — who is part of an informal circle of wealthy climate activists and 2012 backers of climate friendly candidates — illustrates that not all is black and white.

“It is far better to win the Senate than have every senator on the same page,” Buell said in an email after an October fundraiser she and her husband, Mark, held for Grimes at their California home. “We can’t always be idealistic. Practicality is the political reality.”

But perhaps more than that, there is a sentiment among environmentalists and other liberals to catch their Moby Dick of 2014: McConnell.

(QUIZ: How well do you know Mitch McConnell?)

“LCV hasn’t made any decisions about this race, but obviously the motivation for getting involved is clear: removing one of the biggest reasons for gridlock in Washington,” League of Conservation Voters Senior Vice President of Campaigns Navin Nayak wrote in an email.

McConnell — whose Senate leadership role makes him a prime target — has increasingly taken aim at the Obama administration’s climate agenda as he also tries to fend off a stiff primary challenge from the tea party’s Matt Bevin. That includes chiding EPA at a public “listening session” at the agency’s Washington headquarters Thursday for its proposed carbon controls for existing power plants.

But before groups such as LCV, the Natural Resources Defense Council Action Fund and the Sierra Club dole out campaign funds, they first want to make sure that Grimes is close enough to their camp to overlook the differences.

(PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

“We understand that candidates are running to represent different constituencies in different parts of the country, and how issues play out for each is consistently unique,” spokeswoman Maggie Kao emailed.

“And we are broadly pleased with the result, which is endorsing candidates who consistently stand with the health of our communities and the health of our planet at the most important times,” she added.