Dems seize on income inequality for 2014
Democrats aren’t wasting any time tackling an issue they are convinced will help them this election year: income inequality.

One of the Senate’s first votes upon returning to Washington from its holiday break Monday will be on a bill reviving emergency unemployment benefits that lapsed at the end of 2013.

Text Size -

+

reset

The vote marks the first concrete step by Democrats toward a populist economic platform ahead of the November elections. The inequality campaign will intensify later in the year with a push in the Senate to raise the federal minimum wage that will be synced with President Barack Obama’s State of the Union speech, which is expected to dig heavily into the issue of economic disparity.

(Turn the Table: Control of Senate top of agenda in 2014)

The focus on income inequality builds on the economic themes Obama successfully harnessed to beat Mitt Romney in 2012. Democrats believe they can win again by spotlighting the growing divides between the rich and poor and daring Republicans to oppose legislation aimed at benefiting low-income Americans.

“Our Republican colleagues should take note. Certainly we’re going to build on the progress we’ve made to reduce the deficit, but it is no longer the most important issue that we face,” Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) said in laying out Senate Democrats’ agenda for the coming year. “Issues like job creation, minimum wage and unemployment insurance are going to weigh on the minds of voters far more than Obamacare by the time the 2014 elections roll around.”

For their part, congressional Republicans sound open to an extension of unemployment benefits, but only if the $6.5 billion cost of a three-month extension is paid for — a nuanced argument that Democrats hope won’t sound convincing at a time when the number of long-term unemployed is on the uptick. And no matter what Democrats argue, Republicans will seek to keep voters’ focus on Obamacare.

(Also on POLITICO: Fate of jobless benefits unclear)

For now, reviving emergency unemployment insurance may have more legislative legs than a federal minimum wage increase, given that the three-month extension has the support of Sen. Dean Heller (R-Nev.), a key development for a bill that will need the support of four more Republicans to break a filibuster.

The lead sponsor of the bill, Sen. Jack Reed (D-R.I.), said he hopes other Republicans from high-unemployment states will come around when they “begin to recognize these are real constituents in their home state that have worked very hard.”

“The most encouraging thing, ironically, is the fact that a lot of the stories about people being affected by this are coming out. It turns out these are men and women in their 50s, they’ve worked all their lives,” Reed said. “These are the people that kept working some of the toughest days of the recession.”

(Also on POLITICO: SCF invests big in Mitch McConnell’s challenger)

Democrats argue that seizing on the minimum wage is also key to appearing serious about improving peoples’ lives — and even if legislation fails on the Senate floor, as is currently expected, the party believes the high-profile vote will augment vulnerable incumbents’ campaigns as Democrats work to defend their five-seat Senate majority.

The Capitol Hill push follows a wave of national polls that show Americans increasingly favor raising the minimum wage, a rate that has stayed put at $7.25 per hour since 2009 for most workers. Few, if any, Republicans are likely to support Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin’s (D) bill to raise the rate to $10.10 an hour, though his legislation could be filled with incentives for small businesses, and the wage could be whittled to a more palatable number to entice moderates in both parties.

Democrats see special appeal in spotlighting a rate hike when the road to retaining the Senate runs through red states with Democratic incumbents such as Alaska’s Mark Begich, Arkansas’s Mark Pryor, Louisiana’s Mary Landrieu and North Carolina’s Kay Hagan. Minimum wage issues are particularly poignant in Southern states like North Carolina, Louisiana and Arkansas, all of which have above-average numbers of employees paid at or below the federal minimum wage, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

(Also on POLITICO: Lobbyists cash in on do-nothing Congress)

“In all the battleground states, I think that it will be not only a rallying cry for the Democratic base but also an important appeal to voters in the middle,” said Matt Canter, a spokesman for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. “This is not a 50/50 issue; this is not a 55/45 issue. It’s a 70/30. It puts Republicans squarely on the side of wealthy special interests.”

The congressional spotlight will give the nation’s lowest-paid workers the most attention nationally since Congress last approved a rate hike in 2007 under President George W. Bush, part of massive legislation that included tax cuts. But the minimum wage is also the centerpiece of a larger shift for Senate Democrats away from approving presidential nominees and social legislation and toward fiscal policy.

“The thing that is going to help us keep the Senate is focusing on the economy,” said a Democratic leadership aide.

(PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

While most 2014 Democratic candidates are supportive of the liberal Harkin legislation and associated fiscal messaging, their positions aren’t uniform. Begich is a co-sponsor of the $10.10-an-hour bill, and Kentucky Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes, who is challenging Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R), is making the $10.10 rate a central focus of her campaign.