Report: David Vitter, Alan Grayson introduce most bills
Sen. David Vitter introduced more bills than any other member of Congress last year, according to a new analysis of lawmakers in 2013.

The Louisiana Republican ran away with the tally, introducing 67 bills, according to report cards released by GovTrack, an independent government tracking website. That was eight more than the second-place finisher, Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.), who introduced 59 bills.

Text Size -

+

reset In 90 secs: What's driving the day

In the House, Rep. Alan Grayson (D-Fla.) led the pack, with 45 bills introduced, narrowly edging out Del. Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-D.C.), who offered 44 bills.

(PHOTOS: 2013’s most outrageous quotes)

In terms of advancing those bills, however, Menendez led senators with 15 bills advanced out of committee. Rep. Pete Sessions (R-Texas) led in the House with 12.

The numbers dwindle for laws actually passed. Three representatives tied with three bills ultimately passed: Norton, Reps. Mike Coffman (R-Colo.) and Hal Rogers (R-Ky.). Two senators tied at two bills passed: Menendez and Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.).

If you’re a lawmaker looking for a co-sponsor, Rep. Raul Grijalva (D-Ariz.) is your best bet in the House, co-sponsoring 535 bills in 2013. In the Senate, Sen. Mark Begich (D-Alaska) added his name to 272 bills, topping the list.

The lawmakers that were able to attract the most co-sponsors were Rep. Jeff Miller (R-Fla.) and Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.). Miller got 1,195 co-sponsors on bills he introduced in 2013 in the House, and Markey, who spent half the year in the House before winning a special election to become a senator, led senators with 591 co-sponsors.

(Also on POLITICO: Week 1: House back to ACA votes)

The most likely to co-sponsor a bipartisan bill in the House was Rep. Jim Matheson (D-Utah), with 73.1 percent of the bills he co-sponsored introduced by a member of the other party. The least was Rep. Jeb Hensarling (R-Texas), with 1.2 percent of the bills he co-sponsored authored by someone on the other side of the aisle.

In the Senate, Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine) led the way, with 72.9 percent of her bills. Last among senators counted was Sen. Al Franken (D-Minn.), at 9.7 percent.

GovTrack also tracked 20 bills it identified as supporting government transparency in 2013, declaring Reps. Darrell Issa (R-Calif.) and Elijah Cummings (D-Md.) “transparency heroes” for supporting nine of those bills each. Issa is the chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, and Cummings is the ranking member. In the Senate, Sen. Jon Tester (D-Mont.) supported eight of the bills.

(Also on POLITICO: McConnell, Paul to White House meeting)

GovTrack compiled a report card for each member of Congress on the above measures and others, including ideology scores, leadership scores and missed votes. Each member was compared with their entire chamber as well as relevant groups like party and state delegations.