Rand Paul wins big in CPAC straw poll
NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. — Rand Paul handily won the presidential straw poll at the Conservative Political Action Conference Saturday, one gauge of the Republican base’s mood less than two years before the 2016 primary season kicks off.

The Kentucky senator received 31 percent, far ahead of second place Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), who received 11 percent. Neurosurgeon Ben Carson finished third with 9 percent, ahead of New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who received 8 percent.

Text Size -

+

reset

The announcement came at the end of the group’s annual three-day confab. Organizers said that 2,459 attendees voted on computer kiosks.

(See POLITICO's full coverage of CPAC 2014)

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum tied for fifth place, with 7 percent.

Paul, who spoke at the conference on Friday, also won the 2013 straw poll. As the results were announced at a resort just outside the Washington Beltway, the crowd erupted and began chanting “President Paul” while waving “Stand with Rand” signs.

Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), who finished second last year just behind Paul, fell to seventh place, receiving only 6 percent. Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) finished eighth, with 3 percent — tying Texas Gov. Rick Perry.

(Also on POLITICO: Coulter slams GOP on immigration)

Four others pulled 2 percent: Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin.

GOP pollster Tony Fabrizio, who has run the straw poll since 1986, said that nearly half of the straw poll voters were between the ages of 18 to 25.

“This is a sampling of people from all 50 states who are at the forefront of the conservative moment,” he said. “They’re the people who go knock on doors.”

Paul quickly released a statement touting his win.

“The fight for liberty continues, and we must continue to stand up and say: We’re free and no one, no matter how well-intentioned, will take our freedoms from us,” he said. “Together we will stand up for the Constitution. Together we will fight for what is right. Thank you, and onwards to victory.”

The poll also asked attendees their views on a series of issues, and their answers highlighted how libertarian this year’s crowd is:

• Forty-one percent said marijuana should be legalized for recreational purposes, 21 percent said it should legalized only for medicinal purposes and 31 percent said the drug should remain illegal.

• A slight majority, 52 percent, said it is time for America’s allies to stand up and defend themselves.

• Three-quarters disapproved of the National Security Agency monitoring phone calls and scanning emails, compared to 19 percent in favor.

• On fiscal issues, 78 percent said the best way to solve the budget deficit is by cutting spending, while 16 percent said that there should be a mix of higher taxes and spending cuts.