Book deals rewrote Rubio’s story of financial woe
After years of bad press about his poor money management, Marco Rubio this summer quietly cleaned up his personal finances. He refinanced the mortgage on his West Miami home and paid off a high-interest home-equity line of credit that had saddled him with negative headlines.

The changes — along with the sale of a Tallahassee rental money pit that had been dubbed Rubio’s “House of Horrors” — allowed him to run for the presidency with fewer distractions. They also gave his campaign a surprise boost.

Story Continued Below

Running in a field of largely wealthy competitors, Rubio is making an asset of having the same kind of debt as average Americans have. He's using his history of borrowing money to fund an upper middle-class lifestyle to underscore a tenet of his autobiography: Even the son of a bartender and a maid can get ahead in America through pluck and drive.

Rubio’s personal financial picture has come a long way since his 2011 election as Florida’s junior senator, but he still has a negative net worth. POLITICO’s analysis of Rubio’s financial disclosure filed in May with the Federal Election Commission shows an average net worth of negative $175,592. Shedding the home-equity loan now brings it to a negative $55,000, his campaign argues.

“I still recognize that despite all that, I make more money than most Americans do just by the amount senators are paid. … I don’t know if that’s eight times or 10 times the average pay, so I’m by no means poor,” Rubio told POLITICO. “I’m not as wealthy as most of the people I serve with. But I usually only discuss it in the context of something that is a policy issue — like student loans.”

Rubio owes much of his newfound stability to the book deal that earned him $800,000 in 2012— 4½ times his annual Senate salary. The best-seller, An American Son: A Memoir, came out during the 2012 presidential race, when Rubio made Mitt Romney’s vice presidential shortlist.

Rubio used the book money to settle more than $100,000 in student-loan debt, put at least $100,000 in a money-market account, buy an $80,000 fishing boat for the family and give nearly $65,000 to charity over two years. He sent his four kids to private school and set up savings accounts for their college education. Rubio parlayed his first book into a second publishing deal for American Dreams: Restoring Economic Opportunity for Everyone, a policy discussion foreshadowing his current bid for president.

Settling college debt was a big step for Rubio. “That was a big load off our shoulders,” he told POLITICO. “All the other debt I have is a mortgage.”

Rubio has used his student debt politically to show he identifies with the struggles of middle-class voters or to differentiate himself from the Democratic front-runner.

“How is Hillary Clinton going to lecture me about living paycheck to paycheck? I was raised paycheck to paycheck,” Rubio said at the first GOP presidential debate last month. “How is she going to lecture me about student loans? I owed over $100,000 just four years ago.”

At 44, Rubio is among the least-wealthy members of the U.S. Senate, ranking 83rd in 2013, according to the most recent Center for Responsive Politics analysis of financial disclosures. Another center report noted that Rubio was one of 46 incoming 2010 freshmen with college debt.

Rubio’s outside income grew with his political ascension. After securing the Florida House speakership in late 2003, Rubio landed a high-paying job with the Broad & Cassel law firm. His total income in 2004: $298,825 — a 144 percent increase from 2003.

By 2005, Rubio reported owning three homes. (Rubio bought his current West Miami home— at the top of the market — before he sold his previous one that year. And he also purchased the Tallahassee property.)

About a month after buying the West Miami residence, where he still lives, Rubio received a $135,000 home-equity line of credit from a bank that included political allies. He failed to report the debt on his state financial disclosure forms. Rubio said the arrangement wasn’t the result of an inside deal from supporters and that his failure to disclose the debt was “an oversight.”

The Tallahassee house was purchased with his ally and fellow state Rep. David Rivera and proved to be more of a headache. The two paid too much for it, $135,000. And, when the two ran for federal office five years later, they ended up in a bank dispute that led to foreclosure proceedings. The owners paid up before the foreclosure went through. They finally sold it in June for $18,000 less than what they paid a decade ago.

“We’ve always wanted to sell it; the problem has been the house has been worth less than what we owe[d] on it for quite a while,” Rubio said.

Rubio also tried to sell his West Miami home for more than a year so that he could bring his family with him to Washington. But the house, listed above market at $675,000, didn’t sell. Rubio pulled the house off the market Feb. 25, a little more than a month before announcing his presidential bid.

Clockwise: The model of a sport fishing boat Rubio bought with the money from his first book deal; the Rubios’ home in West Miami.; and Marco Rubio teaching political science at Florida International University in February. | Edgewater, Ryan Stone, Getty Images

Shortly after deciding not to sell the West Miami house, Rubio liquidated a $68,000 retirement account.

“We wanted to have access to cash in the coming year, both because I’m running for president but also my refrigerator broke down. That was $3,000,” he told Fox News. “And I had to replace the air conditioning unit in our home.”

Rubio recently refinanced the West Miami home for $604,000, getting rid of his home-equity credit-line of debt and lowering his mortgage rate to 4.5 percent.

With just one debt at a low interest rate, Rubio’s supporters hope the serious questions about his personal finances will now come to an end.

Rubio has turned some criticisms to his advantage.

Before the first presidential debate in Ohio last month, Rubio brought up a New York Times report on his finances that called his family fishing vessel a “luxury speed boat.”

“Any boat where you have to go to the bathroom off the side of the boat is not a yacht,” Rubio told a pre-debate crowd. They cheered him on.