Priebus to FBI director: 'Get back to work' on Clinton
Hillary Clinton "has got a big problem now," Reince Priebus says. | AP Photos Priebus to FBI director: 'Get back to work' on Clinton

The FBI should take another look at the findings of the investigation into Hillary Clinton's private email server as secretary of state, Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus said Tuesday, a day after it was revealed that the bureau found nearly 15,000 new messages during its probe.

Clinton "has got a big problem now," Priebus said on The Mike Gallagher Show.

Story Continued Below

"And maybe [FBI Director] James Comey needs to get back to work and reevaluate where his conclusions led him a month ago and look at these emails and find out what was done," Priebus remarked. Comey, who recommended no charges against Clinton after the FBI investigated her email habits -- though he said she and her aides were "extremely careless" in their handling of classified information -- was first appointed to the Justice Department by President George W. Bush.

The chairman later said he agreed with GOP nominee Donald Trump that the relationship between Clinton's State Department and the Clinton Foundation should be investigated. Trump on Monday called on the Justice Department to appoint a special prosecutor to lead such a case. Priebus tweeted his explicit approval of the position later in the afternoon.

.@RealDonaldTrump is right to call for a Special Prosecutor into the @clintonfdn that can be trusted to get to the bottom of this matter — Reince Priebus (@Reince) August 23, 2016

Priebus made note of the Clintons' past speech income, remarking of the "many cases they’re directly affiliated with the same places that are giving this money in large chunks to the Clinton Foundation."

"And so, these people ask the question in interviews, especially in the liberal media, you know, well ‘don’t you think they do great work?’ Well, I don’t know what great work they do," Priebus said. "I mean the fact is, is if they’ve got about 80 percent overhead and 20 percent of the money's actually getting into the place that it should, then it seems like the only work that the Clinton Foundation is doing is lining the pockets of Bill and Hillary Clinton. And that, to me, should be investigated on top of the fact that she is giving away state secrets through her secret server and forwarding things that she shouldn’t be forwarding. You put all of that together and you have a person who should be disqualified from being president of the United States."