Trump’s lawyer raises concerns about remaining in Paris climate accord, sources say
White House counsel Don McGahn raised concerns about the legal ramifications of the U.S. remaining in the Paris climate change agreement during a pair of closed-door meetings over the last week. | Getty Trump’s lawyer raises concerns about remaining in Paris climate accord, sources say

President Donald Trump's top White House lawyer is raising concerns about the legal ramifications of the U.S. remaining in the Paris climate change agreement, according to sources familiar with the discussions — a development that could bode ill for the campaign by several top administration advisers to remain in the landmark accord.

White House counsel Don McGahn raised the concerns during a pair of closed-door meetings over the past week, the sources told POLITICO, although they added that he has not yet made a formal recommendation to the president and his stance isn't set in stone. Trump has said he plans to make a decision in the coming weeks, in what has become a symbolic debate about how far he will push his “America First” agenda despite potential blowback from U.S. allies.

Story Continued Below

Advocates for withdrawing the U.S. from the pact argue that its terms could somehow interfere with Trump's plans to roll back the Obama administration's domestic climate regulations — even though State Department lawyers strongly argue that's not the case.

Trump’s team remains divided over the Paris deal, even after a Thursday meeting of Cabinet secretaries and other advisers and a Monday meeting of administration lawyers. Trump officials could not reach consensus at either meeting, sources said.

The 2015 agreement, which won the backing of 195 nations, achieved a major policy goal of former President Barack Obama by getting countries around the world to make non-binding pledges to rein in their greenhouse gas emissions. Making the agreement legally binding could have required Obama to submit the deal to an extremely unlikely ratification in the Senate.

Chief White House strategist Steve Bannon and EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt support withdrawing, while other advisers, including Ivanka Trump and Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, are said to support remaining.

Opponents of the Paris agreement have made a two-pronged legal case for withdrawing. The first, which Pruitt has raised in recent weeks, argues that staying in the Paris deal creates a legal opening for climate advocates to use the courts to challenge Trump’s efforts to undo Obama’s climate regulations for power plants. The second suggests that the terms of the Paris agreement don’t allow any country to reduce its emissions targets.

McGahn, sources said, raised both of those arguments during the Thursday meeting, and on Monday reiterated the concern that Paris could be cited in court challenges to Trump’s efforts to kill Obama’s climate rules. McGahn’s comments shocked State Department lawyers, who strongly reject both of those contentions, the sources said.

McGahn did not respond to requests for comment. A White House spokesman disputed POLITICO’s characterization of McGahn’s comments at the meeting, but did not specify what was inaccurate.

Hard-line conservatives are pressuring Trump to withdraw, noting that he promised to "cancel" the agreement during the campaign.

Pruitt first floated the idea of legal risk to the Obama administration's carbon rule for power plants in April. Several outside groups have published memos in recent weeks pushing back on Pruitt’s contention. Daniel Bodansky, an Arizona State University law professor who served as a State Department climate coordinator at the end of the Clinton administration, said that under common legal doctrine, a court would be unlikely to take the Paris deal into account on a challenge to a domestic policy.

Meanwhile, as news of the administration’s internal debate about the Paris deal spreads, environmental groups and supporters of the agreement have taken the unusual step of publicly defending the United States’ right to weaken its climate target. The Paris agreement was written to be non-binding, they argue. And while its intent was to enable countries to create more stringent carbon reductions, there's nothing in it to prevent backsliding.

The Sierra Club, which might otherwise be expected to challenge U.S. action to lower its commitments under Paris, indicated in a recent internal memo obtained by POLITICO that it likely wouldn’t win a court challenge.

“[I]t would be extremely difficult to prevail on the merits” if the group tried to sue the administration to prevent it from weakening its domestic climate change pledge or quickly withdrawing from the deal, the memo says.

In interviews with POLITICO, international diplomats said it was ridiculous to argue that countries can’t weaken their domestic climate plans, noting that the deal was specifically written to provide flexibility to countries at the request of the United States. Obama administration officials objected to efforts to insert legally binding language requiring countries to increase their ambition over time, officials familiar with the issue said.

Instead, the text says a country “may at any time adjust its existing nationally determined contribution with a view to enhancing its level of ambition.” In the parlance of international negotiations, “may” suggests that countries have a choice. “Shall,” on the other hand, suggests a legal obligation.

Morning Energy newsletter The source for energy and environment news — weekday mornings, in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

European officials have had limited direct conversations with the White House over the Paris deal. But they have quietly tried to make the case that the benefits of remaining far outweigh the risks.

The officials, along with U.S. defenders of the Paris deal, worry that the international blowback of withdrawing is not getting enough attention from the White House.

“Legally and economically, the United States would be much more vulnerable outside of Paris than in," one European official told POLITICO. "Being outside a major multilateral environmental agreement like the Paris agreement leaves a country more vulnerable to trade-related measures from countries that are inside the agreement."

The official added that there would be a "very, very sharp expression of disappointment" from Europe if the United States pulls out, adding that there would be political and diplomatic fallout that would be felt at the upcoming G-7 and G-20 meetings and for many years to come.

"The U.S will once again by isolated and struggling against the pull of where the rest of the major economies want to move," the official said.

The administration could end up facing the kind of fierce criticism that President George W. Bush saw when he refused to back the Kyoto Protocol, even though the U.S. signed the agreement in 1998 when Bill Clinton was president.

Trump “will piss off every single country in the world” if he withdraws, said an international official who was closely involved in the negotiation over the text of the Paris deal. “It will haunt the administration in every aspect of its international diplomacy.”