KIRK ad slams DUCKWORTH on national security — U.S. Senate race expected to play key role — BGA shows $3 M mistake by CTU fund

By Mark Guarino (markguarino10@gmail.com; @markguarino with Bianca Padró Ocasio (bpadro@politico.com; @BiancaJoanie)

Happy Monday, Illinois! I am once again filling in for Natasha Korecki, who is off this week.

Story Continued Below

To start things off, Playbook has the first look at a television ad from Independent Voice for Illinois PAC, an organization supporting Republican U.S. Senator Mark Kirk in his intense race against U.S. Rep. Tommy Duckworth, his Democratic challenger. The spot will start running today in Rockford and a number of downstate markets, namely Peoria, Champaign, and Springfield. Titled “Secret Documents,” the spot attacks Duckworth for her support of the Iran nuclear deal. Watch it here: http://bit.ly/2aT9kQ6

Speaking of, Kevin P. Craver of The Northwest Herald published a lengthy piece Sunday that shows how the battle for Kirk’s seat could result in how the U.S. Senate shapes up in November. Besides the key role this race plays nationally, Craver astutely points out how historic this match-up is considering both candidates are disabled veterans.

He writes: “Illinois voters will have a significant say in whether the GOP keeps control of the Senate and, should Hillary Clinton win the White House, the makeup of the U.S. Supreme Court. Kirk, despite having repeatedly broken with his party and tacked leftward on a number of issues, is considered by many pundits to be the most vulnerable Republican in the Senate this election. The seat he is trying to win for a second six-year term was that of President Barack Obama before Kirk won as part of the 2010 tea party wave that returned the congressional majority to the GOP.

“What’s more, the race could be a historical first in that both major-party candidates are disabled veterans. Kirk, who served 22 years in the Navy Reserve as an intelligence officer, is recovering from a debilitating stroke he suffered in 2012. Duckworth, who flew Black Hawk helicopters in the Illinois Army National Guard, lost both her legs and suffered other serious injuries in 2004 when her helicopter was shot down in Iraq by a rocket-propelled grenade. Both retired at the same officer grade – Kirk a commander, and Duckworth a lieutenant colonel. While Kirk has called his regular departures from the GOP platform a matter of putting principles before party, Duckworth’s campaign has called it an attempt to pretend he’s a Democrat in a blue state that tends to vote even bluer in presidential elections. Twenty-four of the 34 Senate seats up for election this year are held by Republicans.”

Read more here: http://bit.ly/2aVo3Nl

First McDonald’s, now Motorola — Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel is expected to announce today that Motorola Solutions will relocate its new global headquarters in the Weste Loop at 500 W. Monroe. Emanuel will be joining CEO Greg Brown at the event. The move will bring 800 workers downtown, mainly from their ventures group, software engineering team, and chief technology office. Details about the event are below. In June, McDonald’s Corp. announced it was relocating its headquarters from Oak Brook to the West Loop.

Most Conservative Cities in Illinois? — Conservatives in Illinois: Where you do you live? A website called Roadsnacks.com (which claims to “use data to create bite-sized snacks of shareable information about places and cities across the country”) is outing you with its just-released list of top ten Illinois cities populated by conservative voters, based on 2012 voting results.

Read it here: http://bit.ly/2aVoVBz

STATE

RAINY DAY FUND SOON DRY — “Illinois drains state's savings account due to budget crisis by the Associated Press’ Sara Burnett: A stopgap spending plan that lawmakers approved to address Illinois' lack of a state budget for a second straight year is quickly draining the state's "rainy day" fund, focusing more attention on the state's unique and long-running financial management problems. An account that experts say should have $1.5 to $3 billion to help weather an economic downturn was down to about $180 million as of Friday. In a matter of weeks, the balance in what is supposed to be a savings account will be zero … Using the rainy day fund for cash flow is nothing new in Illinois, where critics say lawmakers have spent decades making politically popular short-term decisions that dug a deeper financial hole. Illinois has hundreds of billions in pension and other debt and is on track to spend nearly $8 billion more than it takes in this year … Illinois was ranked as the least prepared of those with a fund because its account has been used to help pay day-to-day bills when there's not enough in the general operating fund. Its maximum balance has typically ranged from $226 million to $275 million, but the daily balance often is zero — or close to it. http://bit.ly/2bry5oX

STATE ROAD FATALITIES SPIKING — “Illinois traffic fatalities on pace for eight-year high in 2016” by The State Journal-Register’s Tim Landis: Illinois traffic fatalities are on pace to pass 1,000 this year for the first time since 2008 through a combination of higher speeds, more miles driven and an increase in younger drivers on the road, say safety and insurance industry experts. Much of the rising toll has been on rural interstates … As of Friday, 629 people had died in vehicle, motorcycle, pedestrian and bicycle crashes in Illinois this year, up 50 from the same period of 2015. The increase follows 998 fatalities in 2015, which was the highest number since 1,043 died in 2008. Despite the increase, fatalities remain well below pre-recession levels of more than 1,200 a year. Illinois raised speed limits on rural interstates from 65 mph to 70 mph on Jan. 1, 2014, joining most states with higher limits. http://bit.ly/2aWP41B

SUICIDE RULING DOESN’T DETER QUESTIONS OF PRISONER NEGLIGENCE — “Jail hanging report leaves unanswered questions” by The Telegraph’s Linda N. Weller: Recently released results of an Illinois State Police investigation into a man’s hanging in Alton City Jail last fall state he had a small amount of methadone in his system, and verifies his death was by suicide … Still, questions remain unanswered publicly as to if and when jailers physically checked on Bowman, 30, of rural Jerseyville on Oct. 15, 2015, as required every half hour; what policies the Alton Police Department changed since his death; if the 30-minute, in-person checks are more strongly enforced as a result; and what disciplinary actions the police chief took against staff on duty, among others. The Telegraph has been seeking answers to those questions since the incident, and most recently, since the third week of July when ISP released the report to a reporter and the Alton Police Department … On Oct. 27, 12 days after Bowman’s death, the Illinois Department of Corrections (IDOC) conducted its annual, routine inspection of the jail and found it was noncompliant with Illinois County Jail Standards on observing prisoners. In November, Alton Police Chief Jason “Jake” Simmons said the finding was related to Bowman’s death. http://bit.ly/2aMRAKt

RAUNER GOES FOR GOLD — “Governor Rauner sign bills honoring Gold Star Families” by the WPSD Staff: Governor Bruce Rauner today took action on five bills as part of Veterans Day at the 2016 Illinois State Fair … Two of the bills support the families of our Illinois veterans. HB 4389 designates the day after Gold Star Mother's Day as Gold Star Family Day to be observed throughout the Illinois as a day to honor and commemorate the families of men and women who gave their lives while serving with the armed forces of the United States. HB 4432 allows a child in any grades 6 through 12 to be absent from a public school for the purpose of sounding "Taps" at a military honor funeral held in Illinois for a deceased veteran. http://bit.ly/2aVisGM

HELP FOR COP CANINES — “Rauner signs bill allowing officers police dog adoptions — K-9s, partners remain together in retirement” by The Telegraph Staff: Gov. Bruce Rauner signed legislation Saturday that gives retiring police dogs the chance to be adopted by their handlers creating the Police Dog Retirement Act. The act will allow all K-9 police dogs that are deemed no longer fit for public service to be offered first to the handler on the force. Rauner signed the bill on First Responders Day at this year’s state fair during a ceremony at the Illinois State Police (ISP) tent. Otherwise, retiring K-9s will be given to a no-kill shelter. Currently, it is up to the village manager, mayor or police chief to determine how retired police dogs are handled. http://bit.ly/2bgOr5d

CHICAGO

doh! CTU PENSION FUND OVERPAYS BY NEARLY $3 MILLION — “Teachers’ Pension Fund Makes Multi-Million Dollar Mistake” by the Better Government Association’s Katie Drews: For two years, the Chicago Teachers’ Pension Fund used incorrect dates to calculate retirement benefits — a mistake that resulted in $2.78 million in overpayments for more than 200 retirees. Now the fund is asking retirees for its money back … In a statement, Jay Rehak, president of the 12-member board that oversees the pension fund, blamed “an error in interpretation and application of the Illinois Pension Code." As a result of the error, the fund miscalculated benefits for 234 retirees who were wrongly given lump-sum payments, ranging from $566 to $217,185 a person, as back-pay from 2012 to 2014, records obtained under the Illinois Freedom of Information Act show. http://bit.ly/2bnpBBc

‘TWO CHICAGOS’ NARRATIVE ERODING? — “Industry rediscovers the other Chicago” by Crains Chicago Business’ Joe Cahill: A budding industrial renaissance in Chicago is taking another step forward, reaching a neighborhood that really needs a boost … Developer Clarius Partners is proposing a $43 million industrial/retail project for 21 acres of vacant city-owned land in North Lawndale on the West Side. According to plan documents, the 380,000-square-foot complex at Roosevelt Road and Kostner Avenue would bring 380 jobs … Projects like the Clarius development also can help rewrite the “tale of two cities” narrative that has spun out of the downtown revival. Many emphasize that large areas of Chicago have seen little benefit from an economic resurgence concentrated in a cluster of neighborhoods around the Loop. Outlying neighborhoods struggle to attract jobs while we celebrate McDonald's headquarters move to the West Loop. http://bit.ly/2aUT06W

COP’S SON KILLED AS CITY VIOLENCE MOUNTS — “Police investigate shooting of Chicago cop's son as case of mistaken identity” by the Chicago Tribune’s Megan Crepeau, Rosemary Regina Sobol, and Marion Renault: The 19-year-old son of a Chicago police officer was shot and killed Sunday morning, hours before he was due to return to college in New York, police and family members said. The shooting took place in the Wrightwood neighborhood on the Southwest Side just after midnight, according to police … Police spokesman Anthony Guglielmi confirmed that Dennis' father is a Chicago police officer. Officer Arshell "Chico" Dennis and Superintendent Eddie Johnson once worked together as patrol officers in the Gresham District, Guglielmi said … Dennis’ slaying added to the mounting violence this year. As of Thursday, 436 people had been slain in the city and 2,534 had been wounded by gunfire, according to a Tribune analysis. http://trib.in/2bqAIHx

NORTH SIDE CAR JACKINGS — “Robber Using Assault Rifle To Carjack People In Bucktown, Avondale: CPD” by DNAInfo’s Joe Ward: A robber has been using an assault weapon to steal cars in Bucktown and Avondale, according to police. Three cars were stolen at gunpoint on Saturday, police said in a community alert. In the incidents, a robber in broad daylight pulls out an assault rifle before demanding the keys to the victim's car, police said. The first incident happened at 11:42 a.m. Saturday in the 2700 block of North Western Avenue, police said. The robber struck again at 4:35 p.m. in the 3000 block of North Sawyer Avenue. Another carjacking was reported at 8:15 p.m. in the 2600 block of North Elston Avenue, police said. http://dnain.fo/2b915A4

NATIONAL

POLICE SHOOTING AFTERMATH IN MILWAUKEE — “Milwaukee reeling after deadly police shooting” by CNN’s Faith Karimi, Joe Sutton, Thom Patterson and Ryan Young: The deadly shooting of an armed man by Milwaukee police stirred anger, fear and disbelief as authorities worked to restore calm after a night of violent protest.

Peaceful demonstrations Saturday on the city's north side over the death of 23-year-old Sylville K. Smith turned violent as the evening progressed, Mayor Tom Barrett said at a news conference Sunday. Protesters burned six businesses, including a gas station, and threw rocks at police, leaving four officers injured, seven police vehicles damaged and 17 people arrested. "Last night was unlike anything I've seen. I hope I never see it again," Barrett said … Local officials planned to meet with church and community leaders Sunday to discuss ways to move forward … The National Guard is activated but it will not be deployed unless authorized by police Chief Edward Flynn, Barrett said. http://cnn.it/2bfssvn

GREAT LAKES KEY FOR ALL WET TRUMP — “Great Lakes no help for a struggling Trump on road to 270” by the Associated Press’ Thomas Beaumont: The numbers are stark for Donald Trump. Down in Colorado, Virginia and North Carolina … The GOP nominee needs a place to reset the electoral map, and stops this past week in Michigan and Pennsylvania suggest he's looking at the industrial heartland states on the Great Lakes. It's a part of the country where he has said he can compete with Democrat Hillary Clinton. Trump will find the going there no easier than anywhere else. "Trump has to start making some moves," said Stephan Thompson, a senior adviser to Gov. Scott Walker, R-Wis. "We need to see a positive week out of him to create a positive trajectory. You're not seeing that anywhere, whether it's in Wisconsin, Ohio or elsewhere.” … If Clinton claims states such as Colorado, Virginia and North Carolina, where recent polls suggest she has a significant lead, Trump would need to win most of the states bordering one of the Great Lakes to have any chance at reaching 270. http://bit.ly/2aTqBIz



FLOODING CLAIMS THREE LIVES — “At least 7,000 rescued from Louisiana floods” by the Associated Press: Louisiana’s governor says at least 7,000 people have been rescued so far due to widespread flooding in the state. Gov. John Bel Edwards emphasized Sunday that the rain-caused flooding was “not over.” He says the fatalities have not risen from the three dead reported on Saturday. One person is unaccounted for in St. Helena Parish. Edwards says the storm has “subsided in its intensity” but he is encouraging people to not go out and “sightsee” even as the weather gets better. The governor says water is continuing to rise in some areas even though the sunshine is out. http://bit.ly/2bgNknl

EPHEMERA

ROBERT JORDAN RETIRES — WGN’s Robert Jordan to retire with ‘profound gratitude’ by RobertFeder.com’s Robert Feder: Capping a distinguished 43-year career in Chicago television news, Robert Jordan announced plans Sunday to retire next month as weekend news anchor at Tribune Broadcasting WGN-Channel 9. ... Jordan, 72, expressed “deep and ambiguous feelings” in an email to colleagues. “There are not sufficient words to express my profound gratitude for your wonderful friendships to those of you whom I have known for so long,” he wrote. “It has indeed been my pleasure to have known you and to have been able to call you a colleague and friend.” He’ll officially anchor his last weekend newscast on September 25, but will still turn up from time to time as a vacation-relief news anchor for the remaining year of his contract. http://bit.ly/2b9BdUJ

CHICAGO’S IDOL — “Jennifer Hudson, sister hand out school supplies to Chicago children in need” by WGN Web Desk: With a line outside and backpacks dozens deep, the back to school giveaway draws thousands every year. Jennifer Hudson and her sister Julia began “Hatch Day” six years ago to honor Julian King, Julia’s son, who was killed in 2008 along with their brother and mom. “Just trying to turn a negative into a positive,” Hudson said. “My mother always told me, ‘Jenny, one thing about you, you always find the positive no matter how negative things may be.’” http://bit.ly/2b83H30

WHERE’S RAHM? – He’s cutting the ribbon at the new headquarters for Motorola Solutions, 1:30 p.m. at 500 West Monroe Street, 44th Floor.

WHERE’S RAUNER? – No public events.