Last day for most of QGA Public Affairs

With David Beavers, Aubree Eliza Weaver and Daniel Lippman

FIRST IN PI — LAST DAY FOR MOST OF QGA PUBLIC AFFAIRS: Two months after Jack Quinn, the chairman of QGA Public Affairs, announced his departure, the rest of the firm is largely shutting down. Today is the last day for most of the firm’s staffers. “Following Jack Quinn’s departure, we are restructuring the business to best serve our clients,” Pat Przybyski, who replaced Quinn as the firm’s acting chairman, said in a statement. Sue Garman Kranias, the director of the communications practice, is staying on with a few junior staffers, but the rest of the firm is leaving.

Story Continued Below

— QGA, founded as Quinn Gillespie & Associates by Ed Gillespie and Quinn in 2000, was one of the top bipartisan lobbying firms in town during George W. Bush’s administration, bolstered by Gillespie’s relationship with Karl Rove. But the firm lost some of its luster after Gillespie — who’s running for Virginia governor now — left to work in the White House in 2007. By 2012, the firm was struggling to “retain talent and increase lobbying revenues,” POLITICO reported at the time, losing top lobbyists like Marc Lampkin and Dave Lugar. “I think people have been sort of trickling out the last couple of years,” said one person familiar with the situation at QGA. The firm hasn’t signed any new lobbying clients since 2015, according to disclosure filings. Still, “the fact of the matter is this company made money every year — just not enough to satisfy the parent company,” WPP, which bought the firm in 2004, according to another source familiar with the situation at the firm.

— Now most of QGA's staffers are scattering. John Feehery, the president of the firm's communications practice; John Easton, a vice president; and two directors, Adam Belmar and Chris Brown, are leaving to start a new firm, EFB Advocacy, with more details forthcoming, according to sources familiar with the situation. Kevin Kayes, the managing director, is also starting his own firm. Mike Hussey and Jim Manley are currently weighing their next moves, the sources said.

HOW A TECH-TELECOM ALLIANCE WIPED OUT THE FCC’S PRIVACY RULES: “Big broadband companies that chafed for years under the Obama administration’s Silicon Valley-friendly tech agenda have scored their first massive win in President Donald Trump's Washington,” POLITICO’s Alex Byers reports. “This week’s congressional repeal of federal broadband privacy rules — meant to block internet providers from using or selling customers' web browsing history without their consent — was an unmistakable sign of the telecom industry's resurgence. Big ISPs like Comcast and Verizon drew support from almost every Senate Republican and conservative groups backed by Charles and David Koch. They also got a surprising assist from groups representing big tech firms like Google and Facebook, which feared that similar regulations could someday curtail their own ability to harvest their users' data.” Full story.

Good afternoon, and welcome to PI. This newsletter thrives on your tips. Switching jobs? Sign a new client? Get in touch: tmeyer@politico.com. You can also follow me on Twitter: @theodoricmeyer.

CALLOUT: Thanks to everyone who’s emailed me tips about influencers who aren’t registered to lobby. I’m following up on your tips. If you haven’t gotten in touch yet, there’s still time: tmeyer@politico.com.

DEMOCRATS ASK FOR INVESTIGATION OF TRUMP’S AZERBAIJAN DEAL: “The ranking Democratic members of the Senate’s Foreign Relations, Banking, and Judiciary committees have written a joint letter to several Trump Administration officials asking them to address the possibility that the Trump Organization violated several laws in its dealings in Azerbaijan,” The New Yorker’s Adam Davidson reports. “The concerns raised in the letter are based on an article [Davidson] wrote in The New Yorker about the Trump International Hotel & Tower Baku, a project that was nearly completed but never opened. The letter, by [Sens. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio), Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) and Ben Cardin (D-Md.)] was sent to the Attorney General, Jeff Sessions, the Treasury Secretary, Steven Mnuchin, and the F.B.I. director, James Comey.” Full story.

ANTI-VACCINE ACTIVISTS FLY IN: “Several dozen activists who reject the robust science supporting vaccinations held a march and rally Friday in a day of demonstrations that’s scheduled to include an afternoon speech from Robert F. Kennedy Jr., a noted and vociferous vaccine skeptic,” STAT’s Rebecca Robbins reports. “The small rally, on a gray and drizzly morning, follows an intense lobbying push on Thursday. The activists held 80 meetings on Capitol Hill, many of them with staffers for members of Congress, according to Irene Pi, an organizer from Arizona. … High on the lobbying agenda: Pushing members of Congress to encourage President Trump to establish a new vaccine safety commission,” which Kennedy met with Trump about in January. Full story.

COAL DIVIDED OVER PARIS CLIMATE DEAL: The coal industry is divided over whether President Donald Trump should pull out of the Paris climate change agreement — with some producers hoping they could gain some economic leverage if he stays,” POLITICO’s Andrew Restuccia reports. “The top three U.S. coal producers — Peabody Energy, Arch Coal and Cloud Peak Energy — indicated in recent meetings with White House officials that they would not publicly object to sticking with the international accord, particularly if the administration can secure more financial support for technology to reduce pollution from the use of coal, according to industry officials and sources close to the administration. … But that approach faces resistance from others in the industry, such as Murray Energy CEO Robert Murray, mirroring the broader split within the administration over the global climate deal.” Full story.

MORE DETAILS ON GIULIANI REPRESENTING TURKISH TRADER: “The lawyer for Reza Zarrab, a Turkish gold trader jailed in New York on charges of violating United States sanctions on Iran, sent a letter to a judge on Thursday that suggested that Rudolph W. Giuliani had been retained to negotiate a resolution of the case with government officials at higher levels than the federal prosecutor overseeing the matter,” The New York Times’ Benjamin Weiser and William K. Rashbaum report. “The judge in the case on Tuesday asked Mr. Zarrab’s lawyers to clarify the roles of Mr. Giuliani, the former New York City mayor who is close to President Trump, and Michael B. Mukasey, a former federal judge and attorney general in the George W. Bush administration, who have both been retained by Mr. Zarrab.” Full story.

CORRECTION: Thursday’s edition of PI misidentified Tom Connelly Jr. He is the executive director of the American Chemical Society.

JOB MOVES:

— Sun Life Financial has tapped James Slotnick as assistant vice president for government relations. He was previously Sun Life’s assistant vice president for broker education.

— The National Marine Manufacturers Association has added Mike Pasko as director of federal government relations.

— “ Hess lobbyist Troy Lyons has been selected as EPA's new liaison to Congress, according to Greenwire,” per Morning Energy. “EPA declined to confirm whether Lyons has been hired, saying only that it does not comment on personnel.”

— “ David Kreutzer, a special adviser to EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt, is leaving the agency on Friday and hopes to rejoin the Heritage Foundation, marking the second departure of a political appointee this month,” POLITICO’s Andrew Restuccia and Alex Isenstadt report. “Kreutzer told POLITICO he is in negotiations to accept a job at Heritage working on ‘productivity and economic growth’ with an emphasis on labor and trade.”

SPOTTED: At a reception hosted by John Bode, the chief executive of the Corn Refiners Association, in the House Agriculture Committee’s hearing room on Thursday afternoon, according to a PI tipster: Randy Gordon of the National Grain and Feed Association; Jeff Jones of the Agriculture Department; Sharon Bomer-Lauritsen of the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative; Michael Hawkins of the Canadian Embassy; Tom Hammer of the National Oilseed Processors Association; Tom Sleight of the U.S. Grains Council; Ritika Robertson of Rep. Ken Buck’s office; Yvesner Zamar of Rep. John Conyers’ office; Samuel Negatu of Rep. Matt Cartwright’s office; and Trevor White and Stacy Revels of the House Agriculture Committee.

NEW JOINT FUNDRAISERS:

Strengthen The Majority Committee: Non-Qualified Non-Party, Joint Fundraiser

NEW PACs:

North State Leadership Council: Super PAC, Unauthorized

Progress Youth: Non-Qualified Non-Party, Unauthorized

Project Veritas PAC: Non-Qualified Non-Party, Unauthorized

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS:

Alston & Bird LLP: Quality Health Strategies, Inc.

American Continental Group: Credit Protection Coalition

American Continental Group: YouthBuild USA, Inc.

Banner Public Affairs, LLC: Fincantieri Marine Group

Barnes & Thornburg, LLP: Superior Air Ground Ambulance Service, Inc.

BGR Government Affairs: Entertainment Software Association

BGR Government Affairs: Embassy of the Republic of Azerbaijan

Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC: Play Shortstop LLC

Capitol Counsel, LLC: Coalition to Protect Access to Care

Capitol Counsel, LLC: Physician Hospitals of America

Causey Law Firm: Catfish Farmers of America

Hahn Loeser & Parks LLP: Association of Art Museum Directors

K&L Gates LLP: Eastern Congo Initiative

Philippe Melin: Peanut Butter, Inc.

Raffaniello & Associates: McCormick & Company, Inc.

Ridge Policy Group: International Economic Development Council

Rowland Strategy Group: RAI Services Sandra Salstrom: Americans for Tax Fairness

SMW Partners, LLC: Comcast Corporation

SMW Partners, LLC: Laborers' International Union of North America

SMW Partners, LLC: Scrivner Leon Group, LLC on behalf of Shell Oil Company

Steptoe & Johnson LLP: LPC Conservation LLC

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS:

Mehlman Capitol Strategies, LLC: UP Entertainment LLC

The FGA Group LLC: The FGA Group LLC