SD-37: Natalie Mihalek Seeks Republican Nomination in Special Election

Written by Lizzy Hardison, Contributing Writer

Natalie Mihalek, an Upper Saint Clair attorney, announced today that she is seeking the Republican nomination for the 37th District State Senate special election.

“I’m running to change how Harrisburg does business,” Mihalek said Thursday. In her announcement, she stressed the importance of prioritizing people over politicians.

“I was always taught to lead by example,” she said. “…That’s why I will refuse the state pension and the costly per diems, and will never vote for a pay raise. My career choices prove that I believe public service should be about serving the public, not the politicians and special interests.”

Mihalek is the first candidate to seek the seat formerly held by Democrat Matt Smith, who resigned in late May to become president of the Greater Pittsburgh Chamber of Commerce. Smith had represented the 37th district, which includes Washington and Allegheny counties, since 2013.

We reported back in May that Mihalek is attempting to coalesce the Republican Party behind her candidacy.

An Allegheny county native, Mihalek enlisted in the Navy after graduating from high school and served in their Nuclear Power Program. Upon her return from active duty, she earned a B.A. from the University of Pittsburgh and a Juris Doctor from the Appalachian School of Law. She served as Allegheny County’s Assistant District Attorney from 2007 -2010 and currently maintains a private law practice, where she specializes in criminal and family law.

Mihalek, who lives in Upper Saint Clair with her husband and two children, pledged to advocate for families by “protecting taxpayers” and improving the local economy and schools.

“In the legislature, I will continue to fight for the issues that matter most to local residents,” Mihalek said. “I’ll stand up to the politicians and always put the needs of my constituents first.”

June 19th, 2015 | Posted in Front Page Stories, Harrisburg, Top Stories | 6 Comments