Donald Trump Whined the Emmys Were Rigged Too – Three Years in a Row
10.8k SHARES Facebook Twitter Whatsapp Pinterest Stumbleupon Print Mail Flipboard

Donald Trump’s recent twitter meltdown over rigged elections and Saturday Night Live brings to mind other occasions when Donald Trump cried like a baby over something he wanted but didn’t get, including a Romney win in 2012, and Emmy awards in 2012, 2013, and 2014.

The New Yorker‘s Ryan Lizza treated us to a history lesson this weekend as he reminded us of Trump’s attacks on our election process back in 2012, when Mitt Romney lost to Barack Obama. Trump’s reaction sounds more like a dress rehearsal for this 2016. Here are his series of 2012 Election tweets courtesy of Lizza:

Reminder: this is how Trump responded on election night 2012 to Romney's loss: "revolution!" https://t.co/gOBOS7URpB pic.twitter.com/T1BM7ZQk8D — Ryan Lizza (@RyanLizza) October 15, 2016

What most people may not realize is that this is far from the first time Donald Trump has whined that things are rigged against him, a rich guy who pays fewer taxes than you do.

AmericaBlog took us down memory lane Sunday to the Emmys. Here is how Trump reacted to the 2012 Emmys. See anything familiar?

If that is not enough, how about his reaction to the 2013 and 2014 Emmys?

You can bet if Trump had been able to buy the Emmys, he would have never lost again.

Trump, who portrays himself as a man’s man, has never looked more childish and insecure as when he’s not getting something he’s sure he deserves. The lesson is not lost, of course, that the country did not devolve into revolution when his fellow 1 Percenter Mitt Romney lost in 2012.

Business Insider tells us Trump deleted about half his Romney tweets shortly after putting them up, but the spirit of the tweets remained and have been carried over into another election.

Trump is not waiting till after the election this time, to call for revolution. He’s been careful to lay that groundwork going in, undermining the democratic process with unprecedented zeal. The lesson is that the only time things aren’t rigged is when Trump gets what he wants.

It is difficult to believe there is still any sympathy left at all for Donald Trump, let alone that anyone would launch a revolution on behalf of the big cry-baby, but crazier – and more pointless – things have happened in history. After all, it’s not like they’re not already threatening death to anyone and everyone who questions their whiny hero.