Issue Spotlight: Undocumented Children at the Border
Unaccompanied Children Crossing the US-Mexico Border

Background: Tens of thousands of unaccompanied minor children are arriving at the US-Mexico border. More than 50,000 children have already crossed the border this year — and sources expect the number to reach a record 90,000 by the end of the year.

Parents in Central American countries are sending their children across the border to escape the large amount of violence, corruption, political instability and poverty rampant throughout their countries. There is also misinformation about the Obama Administration’s “Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals” (DACA) program — which was initiated in 2012 — and gives a small amount of undocumented children short-term work authorization and protection from deportation. DACA, according to Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson, “does not apply to a child who crosses the US border illegally today, tomorrow or yesterday.” To be eligible for DACA, a child must have been in the United States prior to June 15, 2007 – seven years ago. Secretary Johnson issued an open letter to parents stating that the “long journey is not only dangerous; there are no “permisos,” “permits,” or free passes at the end.” (Read his letter)

(Source: DHS)

The House passed a bill before recess, which the President plans to veto

Before leaving for recess, the House passed a Supplemental Appropriations bill (HR 5230), a $694 million border proposal to address the "humanitarian crisis at our southern border," according to House Speaker John Boehner (R-OH).

The Supplemental Appropriations bill includes:

$405 million for the Dept. of Homeland Security to boost border security and law enforcement activities. $22 million to accelerate judicial proceedings for immigrants. $35 million for National Guard border efforts – essentially doubling the funding for the Guard presence on the border. $197 million for the Dept. of Health and Human Services (HHS) to provide temporary housing and humanitarian assistance to unaccompanied minors. $40 million in repatriation assistance to Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador. The funding in the legislation is fully offset through cuts and rescissions of existing funds within various federal agencies. (See the full summary.)

President Obama opposes the House measure and has threatened to veto the bill. (Read the Administration's statement.) The President requested $3.7 billion to address the crisis, while the Senate's proposal (S 2648) -- which failed to advance to a vote -- provided $2.73 billion. President Obama had also urged Congress to work on immigration reform. The Senate had passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill last year, and the President said that “our country and our economy would be stronger today if House Republicans had allowed a simple yes-or-no vote on this bill or, for that matter, any bill.” (Read the President’s remarks)

In July, Congresswoman Kay Granger (R-TX), Chairwoman of the House Working Group to address the national security and humanitarian crisis at the southern border, announced the group’s recommendations and solutions. The House bill includes several of these policy provisions, including:

Requiring that all unaccompanied minors are treated the same as Mexicans for the purpose of removals. This would require unaccompanied children who do not wish to be voluntarily returned to their home country to remain in HHS custody while they await an expedited immigration court hearing that must occur not more than seven days after they are screened by child welfare officials. A prohibition on the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture from denying or restricting CBP activities on federal land under their respective jurisdictions within 100 miles of the US-Mexico border. A change to the Immigration and Nationality Act to strengthen the law prohibiting criminals with serious drug-related convictions from applying for asylum. A provision expressing the “Sense of Congress” that the Secretary of Defense should not house unauthorized aliens at military installations unless certain specific conditions are met.

The House also passed DAVA reform (HR 5272), which would "freeze the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program and prohibit President Obama from taking future executive actions to expand amnesty for illegal aliens," according to the bill sponsor.

Recently Introduced Bills

Recently, several new bills were introduced in the House to directly address the problem of undocumented children crossing the border:

Expedited Processing of Children

Border Security

Appropriations And Foreign Aid

Transparency in Where these Children are Placed

Addressing DACA and the President

The Obama Administration’s “Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals” (DACA) program — which was initiated in 2012 — and gives a small amount of undocumented children short-term work authorization and protection from deportation. DACA, according to Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson, “does not apply to a child who crosses the US border illegally today, tomorrow or yesterday.” To be eligible for DACA, a child must have been in the United States prior to June 15, 2007 – seven years ago. However, Members of Congress are calling on the President to amend DACA.

S 2631 Preventing Expansion of DACA (HR 5160 in the House) To prevent the expansion of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program unlawfully created by Executive memorandum on August 15, 2012.

SRes 486 Senate Resolution — *Bipartisan*— A resolution expressing the sense of the Senate that President Obama should take immediate action to mitigate the humanitarian crisis along the international border between the United States and Mexico involving unaccompanied migrant children and to prevent future crises.

A resolution expressing the sense of the Senate that President Obama should take immediate action to mitigate the humanitarian crisis along the international border between the United States and Mexico involving unaccompanied migrant children and to prevent future crises. HR 5272 DACA Reform To prohibit certain actions with respect to deferred action for aliens not lawfully present in the United States including newly authorizing any alien to work in the United States who was not lawfully admitted into, and not lawfully present in, the United States. -- Passed by the House on Aug. 1 --

Related Immigration Bills

There are also renewed calls for comprehensive immigration reform:

Please keep in mind that highlighting a bill doesn't imply a POPVOX endorsement in any way. Rather, we're simply trying to offer one more way to stay informed of an overwhelmingly complex legislative system.