Tomah VA rep sought Feingold, Kind's help in '09
Buy Photo The Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Tomah. (Photo: File/Gannett Wisconsin Media)Buy Photo

WASHINGTON — The union president at the Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center tried to alert congressional Democrats about the over-prescription of opiates at the facility as early as 2009 — five years before a 35-year-old Marine died there when doctors prescribed him a fatal mixture of drugs, according to memos obtained by USA TODAY.

Lin Ellinghuysen, president of the local chapter of the American Federation of Government Employees that represents Tomah employees, outlined the issues in an April 2009 memo that is marked as having been "hand-delivered" to Rep. Ron Kind, then-congressman Dave Obey and then-Sen. Russ Feingold.

RELATED:Read the 2009 memo

"(M)any of the Veterans served at this facility are prescribed large quantities of narcotics," she wrote, adding that it had become a "significant" and "serious" concern.

Ellinghuysen also said the center's chief of staff at the time, Dr. David Houlihan, was ordering as many as 1,000 narcotic tablets per month for a single patient, and that pharmacists who raised concerns were disciplined and fired.

"Many of the patients call Dr. Houlihan 'The Candy Man' because of the easy access to narcotic drugs/medications at this facility," she wrote.

But little was done to address the issue until earlier this year, when news reports detailed the problems and chronicled the circumstances surrounding the death of Marine veteran Jason Simcakoski of Stevens Point.

Kind and other members of Congress from Wisconsin then called for investigations of Tomah, which uncovered deadly prescription practices at the facility. The VA then ousted the center's director and Houlihan from their positions.

Memo from Tomah VA union representative about problems at the facility. (Photo: Slack, Donovan)

Obey and representatives of Kind and Feingold say they have no recollection or record of receiving the 2009 memo, although for former members, such incoming correspondence would have been destroyed when they left office, Obey said.

And Ellinghuysen now says she has no proof it was delivered.

"We assumed the documents had been delivered to several members of the Wisconsin delegation at that time, but we can't confirm that they actually made it to those offices," she said, adding that she had "mistakenly operated on that assumption."

But earlier this year, Ellinghuysen penned another memo recounting the concerns of the first and reiterating that the 2009 memo had been delivered to the lawmakers. She gave out that memo, marked "confidential," in meetings on Capitol Hill.

The Tomah VA has been a political flash point since the news reports about the scandal broke earlier this year. Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Madison, was heavily criticized after USA TODAY reported in January that she received a report on the opiate-prescription issues in August 2014 but didn't take any action until this year, despite repeated pleas from a whistleblower that she call for an investigation. She ended up firing one aide, demoting two others and fining her chief of staff for mishandling the case.

Buy Photo Tammy Baldwin (Photo: Gannett Central Wisconsin Media file photo)

Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Oshkosh, didn't have a copy of the report but his office received an email from the whistleblower last year and he has since said his staff could have done more to address the concerns at that time. Kind received a complaint about Tomah in 2011 that he referred to the inspector general for investigation but his staff didn't follow up to see what happened.

A spokesman for Feingold — who is running to reclaim the Senate seat he lost to Johnson in 2010 — said a "thorough review" of Feingold's archived Senate records produced no evidence that Feingold ever received the memo. The campaign released a detailed list of actions Feingold took on behalf of veterans when he was in office.

"Russ believes our veterans deserve the care they've earned and been promised," campaign manager Tom Russell said in a statement. "As a U.S. senator, Russ fought to open new clinics and centers in Hayward, Rice Lake, La Crosse and Wausau and for increased resources to help veterans in western and northern Wisconsin. As a U.S. senator, Russ would fight to improve care at our VA facilities and honor the service of our veterans by advocating for their interests in the Senate."

In spring 2009, when Ellinghuysen wrote the memo, tensions about narcotics at Tomah had reached a boiling point. A pharmacist had been fired for refusing to fill large prescriptions. A clinical psychologist received a written reprimand at Houlihan's direction after he raised concerns that too many opiates were being prescribed.

Ellinghuysen addressed the memo to Ben Balkum, president of another local AFGE chapter. In it, she asked that he share its contents with Wisconsin's congressional delegation during an upcoming trip he was taking to Washington.

Tomah VA union president Lin Ellinghuysen made notes on a memo about problems at the facility. (Photo: Slack, Donovan)

Three months later, Dr. Christopher Kirkpatrick, the Tomah clinical psychologist who had been disciplined, was fired and then committed suicide. Ellinghuysen headed to the local sheriff's office, armed with copies of her correspondence about the issues at Tomah, including her memo to Balkum and another she had written in 2008 about Houlihan treating staff poorly and writing prescriptions without seeing patients.

RELATED:Read the 2008 memo

She entered those memos into the official police report. On the 2008 memo, she had written "one of several handouts given to reps. For Congressman Kind, Sens. Feingold and (former senator Herb) Kohl." On the April 2009 memo, she had written, "Hand-delivered to: Congressman Kind, Congressman Obey, Senator Feingold."

It's unclear when she made the notes. She declined last week to answer questions about them.

But Ellinghuysen was an obsessive recorder of her work for the union, detailing what happened at every meeting she attended, down to exact quotes, according to her file on Kirkpatrick that she shared earlier this year with USA TODAY for a story about his death.

Balkum, from the Iron Mountain VA, could not be reached for comment for this story. No one answered the phone at his union office, and attempts to reach him through other union officials were unsuccessful.

Obey said Friday he had called former staffers and none recalled the memos or handling complaints about narcotics at the Tomah VA. He said there would be no physical records of such correspondence at this point because it would have been destroyed after he retired in January 2011.

"There's a requirement that we get rid of casework when we retire because of privacy considerations," he said.

A former staff member of Kohl's, who spoke on the condition of not being identified by name, said she and other former staff members also did not recall the memo or complaints about opiates at Tomah. The former staff member also said such memos would not have been preserved after Kohl left office in January 2012.

RELATED:TOMAH: Trail of secrecy and missed opportunities

A spokeswoman for Kind, Amanda Sherman, said his office also could not confirm receiving the documents.

"Over the years Congressman Kind has helped hundreds of veterans deal with issues they have had with the Tomah VA medical facility, including helping to initiate the investigation into over-prescription of opioids," she said in a statement. "He remains committed to fixing the problems at Tomah VA and ensuring Wisconsin veterans are receiving the care they earned and deserve."

Buy Photo In this Gannett Wisconsin Media file photo, Ryan Honl waits to meet with the VA investigators at the Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center. (Photo: Megan McCormick/Gannett Wisconsin Media)

Former VA employee Ryan Honl, who tried to blow the whistle last fall on over-prescription of narcotics at the facility with emails to Baldwin and others, said he attended a meeting with Kind and Ellinghuysen at his church in Wisconsin in January.

He said she brought up Kirkpatrick's death and her years-long quest to get officials to address the problems in Tomah. Honl, a onetime Democrat who soured on the party after the VA failures he tried to expose, wants voters to know about Ellinghuysen's efforts.

"Every elected official had ignored her," he said.

Contact dslack@usatoday.com. Follow @donovanslack.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1LyF23W