Madison lawmakers max out hometown perk
The dome of the capitol building in Madison. (Photo: Mark Hoffman / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

MADISON - By repeatedly tapping a pot of state tax dollars set aside for travel expenses, a handful of Wisconsin lawmakers have been able to boost their pay without traveling far from home.

The practice relies on a decades-old law that lets lawmakers claim daily allowances when they work in Madison, home of the state Capitol. The law has proven to be a boon for those who live in Madison. Some have boosted their pay by more than 20 percent in a year.

Three state representatives from Madison claimed travel allowances 153 times last year — the maximum allowed under Assembly policies — receiving $10,500 on top of their $51,000 salaries. No other lawmakers claimed the maximum last year. The rules have since been changed to reduce the number of days for which the pay, known as per diems, may be claimed.

RELATED: Lack of receipts hides legislator expenses

RELATED: 5 lawmakers benefit from expanded per diem rule

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos in January changed the rules to limit payments to 80 days to control costs. He said the decision stemmed from some legislators submitting per diem claims three or four days per week. He said it stretched the intent of allowances, which are intended as travel reimbursements.

“If you live in Madison, I have no problem with you working every day. More power to you," Vos said. "But it’s supposed to be reimbursement for expenses, not auxiliary pay.”

Lawmakers can collect the money as income without spending a dime on meals, lodging or gas. No receipts of expenses are required to get paid.

Assembly representatives from Madison may claim up to $69 daily while working in their hometown and they typically take that full amount, records reviewed by USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin show. Legislators from elsewhere also typically take their maximum amounts.

Melissa Sargent, who represents northern and eastern neighborhoods in Madison and the village of Maple Bluff, claimed so many days of per diems in the spring that she hit an 80-day annual limit. Another Madison representative, Terese Berceau, hit the mark in June and Sondy Pope of Mt. Horeb made it there in November. Another Madison legislator, Lisa Subeck, nearly reached the limit last month.

Madison lawmakers are part of a select group who must pay federal income taxes on per diems because they live within 50 miles of the Capitol. No legislators are required to pay state income taxes on the money.

Few others in the Assembly, including those in leadership positions, have come close claiming as many allowances as Madison legislators in recent years, state records show. Though the chamber officially adjourned in mid-February so members could prepare for elections in August and November, Madison lawmakers continued to collect per diems for time in the Capitol.

Earlier this month, after Vos increased his annual limit on per diems to 90 days, Berceau and Pope were the among the first to benefit. They immediately submitted claims seeking hundreds of dollars in allowances that were previously unavailable to them.

Pope did not respond to messages this month seeking comment on her per diems. Berceau, Sargent and Subeck told USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin earlier this year that they take allowances only when working in the state Capitol building. In separate interviews, each declined to provide an example of how their thousands of dollars in allowances were used, citing a lack of receipts.

The range of work they described doing in the Capitol included researching bills, meeting with constituents and answering emails. That's the same routine work performed by legislators statewide, but for which others don't receive allowances if they work in their home districts.

Sargent empathized with that disparity. While stressing that her claims have complied with state law, she said the current system of distributing allowances doesn't fully cover legislator job expenses or compensate them based on how hard they work.

“I think everyone could point to an example within the current system that it doesn’t feel fair,” she said. “Maybe there needs to be a more transparent process about it.”

Berceau also voiced frustration with the allowance system.

“All legislators who are in Madison tend to conduct more of our business in our offices," she said. “It’s not a system that makes any kind of sense.”

Pay boost

Per diems are a relatively small part of the Legislature's annual budget. But the costs add up when legislators repeatedly claim the cash. The average representative billed taxpayers about $9,300 last year while the average senator took home $8,600.

Many states provide lawmakers with similar allowances on top of their salaries. But the amount allowed per day and other rules vary, according to surveys by the National Conference of State Legislatures.

Wisconsin legislators, compared to their peers elsewhere, rank high with their $51,000 salaries but rank low in per diems. Some states allow legislators to receive more than $120 per day, regardless of overnight travel.

Wisconsin's Assembly allows members to claim up to $69 for daily visits to Madison and up to $138 for overnight trips. The Senate allows up to $88 per day regardless of lodging needs.

Sargent said the overall package ends up being a good deal for taxpayers considering how many hours she and other legislators work. But she also believes the state could better cover work-related expenses so elected officials can support their families.

“I think it’s important to realize that folks that are state lawmakers and legislators are often times living a lifestyle as opposed to performing a job. It’s a calling. It’s a duty," she said. “I certainly am not being compensated for how it is that I’m working. I think we need to create a system that allows people to do that."

Is the system abused?

Do lawmakers ever abuse taxpayer trust and claim allowances while working outside Madison or not working at all?

That’s been an occasional question in the Capitol but current record-keeping practices provide the public with few tools to investigate. While some records appear to raise questions, record-keeping is too inconsistent to provide an answer.

Office calendars, for example, are of little help. In reviewing three months of Sargent's calendars from this year, we found many days where she had claimed per diems but her calendar contained no record of her working in the Capitol. Sargent chalked that up to incomplete records.

“If I’m here interviewing staff or meeting with interns, sometimes that’s on the calendar, sometimes it’s not,” she said. “Constituent letters is not a line item on my calendar.”

Parking records are another example. We found scores of cases this year where legislators had claimed to be working in Madison but there was no proof of them parking in a state garage with assigned spaces. Again, legislators dismissed these discrepancies as a product of incomplete records. Subeck, who has a reserved space in the garage, said she sometimes carpools to the Capitol or parks elsewhere in downtown Madison.

“Certainly there are times that I don’t drive downtown. I take a bus," she said.

Keegan Kyle is an investigative reporter for USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin. He enjoys writing about powerful people, injustice and what the government does with your money. What should he write about next? Send tips to kkyle@gannett.com or reach him on Twitter @keegankyle.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/2iNPgmd