New Free Online Course from eDriving Helps Immigrants Get First Driver's Licenses Under New California Law
OAKLAND, Calif., March 12, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- The estimated 1.4 million immigrants now eligible for driver's licenses in California have a new, free online course and resource center available to help them pass their license exam and complete the licensing process. Developed by online driver education leader eDriving under its DriversEd.com brand, this entirely free, self-paced, fully narrated online course is available in Spanish to help California residents obtain driver's licenses regardless of legal status in the United States following passage of California Assembly Bill 60 (AB 60). AB 60 took effect earlier this year.

"Hundreds of thousands of Californians will seek their first driver's licenses in the coming months and our free online course and resources will help them successfully navigate the licensing process, pass their knowledge tests at the DMV, and become safe, legal drivers," said Celia Stokes, CEO of eDriving. "Each year, less than half of license seekers pass the knowledge exam the first time but Spanish-language license seekers pass the test at substantially lower rates. As a California company and the largest driver's ed provider both in California and nationwide, we are committed to making drivers smart and roads safe—and this compelled us to provide these resources completely free. We want to ensure maximum access to what could be a life-changing opportunity for these Californians."

The course covers information necessary to pass the California DMV's knowledge exam, including: rules of the road, principles of safe driving, licensing regulations, insurance requirements, and more. The narrated, self-paced course is available in clear, easy-to-understand Spanish and can be completed in one to two hours. Information about the licensing process, the course, and other resources to help license seekers can be found at https://driversed.com/california/ab60/ or www.facebook.com/AB60informacion.

In 2013, the California legislature passed AB 60, which requires the DMV to issue driver's licenses to California residents who cannot prove legal presence in the U.S. but can otherwise meet the state's licensing requirements. These AB 60 licenses allow holders to drive legally, although they cannot be used for certain federal purposes such as passing through security at airports or federal buildings. The law took effect on January 2, 2015 and the DMV began issuing licenses. During the program's first two months, the state issued an estimated 129,000 AB 60 licenses, according to California DMV data. The legislation was authored by California Assemblymember Luis Alejo (D-Salinas).

"Expanding access to licenses will improve safety, mobility, and economic opportunity for all Californians," stated Alejo. "It's great to have a free, trustworthy resource from driver training experts to help people get through the licensing process successfully and make their first contact with the DMV simpler and more productive."

The law took effect at the start of the year and DMV began issuing licenses on January 2, 2015. During the program's first two months, the state issued about 129,000 AB 60 licenses, according to California DMV data. In all, the DMV reports that 236,000 people applied for AB 60 licenses during the first month and are at various stages in the licensing process.

California joins nine other states and the District of Columbia in issuing licenses to people independent of their immigration status. Most of these state laws have taken effect during the last two years, with similar legislation introduced in additional states this year.

About eDriving

eDriving is the leading provider of online driver education and behind-the-wheel training solutions serving teenagers, adults, contract drivers, and corporations nationwide. eDriving brands include DriversEd.com, the largest provider of online and behind-the-wheel novice driver training in the United States, and I Drive Safely, the largest provider of online driver improvement courses nationwide and a leading provider of online fleet driver training. The company also partners with leading brands to help them deliver relevant products and services within the rapidly expanding marketplace connecting drivers to new business models dependent on road safety. For more information, visit www.edriving.com.

SOURCE eDriving LLC

Related Links

http://www.edriving.com