The National Coalition for Safer Roads Responds to Recent Yellow Light Timing Myths in Florida
WASHINGTON, May 15, 2013 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Recent media attention surrounding yellow light timing in Florida has prompted the National Coalition for Safer Roads (NCSR) to address common red-light safety camera myths in response. Fallacies regarding shortened yellow light duration and rear-end crash increases are often cited in reference to red-light safety cameras without proper investigation of their validity.

Myth #1 : "Yellow light timing is shortened to increase red-light camera tickets."

Fact: A news report from WFTV in Orlando examined yellow light times at camera intersections in five Florida cities to determine whether timing was shortened after red-light safety cameras were installed. In Orlando, Apopka, Orange County, Winter Park and Daytona Beach, all yellow light times met or came within one-tenth of a second of meeting the state standard for amber time duration – proving this commonly-cited myth false.

Myth #2 : "Red-light cameras increase rear-end crashes."



Fact: Traffic crash reports were examined from four cities to discover whether rear-end crashes increased after cameras were installed. In every case the answer was no. Rear-end crashes decreased 57% in Orange County, 30% in Daytona Beach, 21% in Apopka and 15% in Orlando. Another myth proven false – on the contrary the cameras are significantly decreasing rear-end crashes in these Florida cities.

"Often people get wrapped up in the myths and false claims, clouding the true safety benefits that this crucial technology provides," said Melissa Wandall, President, NCSR. "Red-light safety camera programs are effectively changing driver behavior here in Florida and throughout the country."

WFTV reported a 22% drop in red light tickets in Orange County – proving these cameras are truly changing the behavior of drivers. For more information on the Florida findings visit CNET Car Tech and Exhaust Notes on MSN.com.

For more information on red-light safety cameras, visit NCSRsafety.org.

The National Coalition for Safer Roads helps save lives and protect communities by demonstrating how red-light safety cameras can improve driver behavior. NCSR brings together policymakers, community leaders and concerned citizens in support of red-light safety cameras, advocating for their use in cities and communities across the country. The National Coalition for Safer Roads is a 501 (c)(6) industry trade association. To learn more, please visit www.NCSRsafety.org, follow @SaferRoadsUSA on Twitter and on Facebook at http://www.facebook.com/SaferRoadsUSA

SOURCE National Coalition for Safer Roads