Obama Proposes Health Care Bill Fully Funding Abortion
WASHINGTON, March 3 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Today the White House unveiled new health care legislation that leaves the Senate abortion funding intact. When confronted with this fact by Minority Leader John Boehner, President Obama dismissed fact as mere talking points and "untrue." Speaker Pelosi continued this falsehood when she insisted that the health bills do not fund abortion. Family Research Council President Tony Perkins had this to say about the President's new proposal and the claims on abortion funding:

(Logo: http://www.newscom.com/cgi-bin/prnh/20080930/FRCLOGO)

"This new White House health care statement completely undermines President Obama's claim last week dismissing charges that the Senate bill would fund abortion as mere 'talking points.' President Obama's legislation not only maintains the Senate abortion funding provisions; it would make them worse by increasing federal funding for community health centers that could be used directly to kill unborn babies.

"Ignoring the only bi-partisan provision that passed, the Stupak amendment that prevents abortion funding, the President's bill to amend the Senate bill leaves several abortion provisions in place. In Section 1303 it allows tax credit subsidies for plans that include abortion and leaves the abortion surcharge in place. It maintains the proposal to create a multi-state plan that includes abortion in Sec. 1334. Even worse, it would increase the Senate bill funding from $7 billion to $11 billion for community health centers in Sec. 10503 without any abortion funding restrictions. If this bill becomes law, this Congress will oversee the largest ever expansion of abortion on demand at taxpayer expense.

"No one who claims to be remotely pro-life can vote for this legislation. This legislation would be the greatest expansion of abortion we have ever seen in this country, all paid for and subsidized by the American taxpayer. While perhaps well intentioned the President today has taken full ownership of health care legislation that would lead to more death than the current system that he condemns."

SOURCE Family Research Council