Sen. Barack Obama's Record on Choice
NARAL Pro-Choice America PAC endorses Sen. Barack Obama for President! Sen. Obama is fully pro-choice. In his own words: "A woman's ability to decide how many children to have and when, without interference from the government, is one of the most fundamental rights we possess. It is not just an issue of choice, but equality and opportunity for all women. "I have consistently advocated for reproductive choice and will make preserving women's rights under Roe v. Wade a priority as President. I oppose any constitutional amendment to overturn the Supreme Court's ruling in this case. "I believe we must work together to reduce the number of unintended pregnancies. I support legislation to expand access to contraception, health information, and preventative services to help reduce unintended pregnancies. That is why I co-sponsored the Prevention First Act of 2007, which will increase funding for family planning and comprehensive sex education that teaches both abstinence and safe sex methods. It will also end insurance discrimination against contraception, improve awareness about emergency contraception, and provide compassionate assistance to rape victims. "Finally, I support the enactment and enforcement of laws that help prevent violence, intimidation, and harassment directed at reproductive health providers and their patients."

[Statement submitted on NARAL Pro-Choice America's request, May 14, 2007] More on Sen. Obama's pro-choice record Voting Record:

Sen. Obama received the following scores on NARAL Pro-Choice America's Congressional Record on Choice. 2007: 100 percent 2006: 100 percent 2005: 100 percent Public Statements about Choice:

A selection of Sen. Obama's public statements on this issue is below. "Thirty-five years after the Supreme Court decided Roe v. Wade, it's never been more important to protect a woman's right to choose... Throughout my career, I've been a consistent and strong supporter of reproductive justice, and have consistently had a 100% pro-choice rating with Planned Parenthood and NARAL Pro-Choice America... I believe in and have supported common-sense solutions like increasing access to affordable birth control to help prevent unintended pregnancies... As President, I will improve access to affordable health care and work to ensure that our teens are getting the information and services they need to stay safe and healthy."

[From a statement by Sen. Obama on the 35th anniversary of Roe v. Wade, January 22, 2008. Full statement is available here: http://www.barackobama.com/2008/01/22/obama_statement_on_35th_annive.php ]





"You know, I think that most Americans recognize that this is a profoundly difficult issue for the women and families who make these decisions. They don't make them casually. And I trust women to make these decisions in conjunction with their doctors and their families and their clergy."

[Transcript from Democratic Presidential Debate in South Carolina, MSNBC, April 26, 2007.]





"I strongly disagree with today's Supreme Court ruling, which dramatically departs from previous precedents safeguarding the health of pregnant women. As Justice Ginsburg emphasized in her dissenting opinion, this ruling signals an alarming willingness on the part of the conservative majority to disregard its prior rulings respecting a woman's medical concerns and the very personal decisions between a doctor and patient. I am extremely concerned that this ruling will embolden state legislatures to enact further measures to restrict a woman's right to choose, and that the conservative Supreme Court justices will look for other opportunities to erode Roe v. Wade, which is established federal law and a matter of equal rights for women."

[Statement from Sen. Obama on Supreme Court Decision upholding Federal Abortion Ban, April 18, 2007, http://hotlineblog.nationaljournal.com/archives/2007/04/obama_decision.html (accessed May 4, 2007).]





"I explained my belief that few women made the decision to terminate a pregnancy casually; that any pregnant woman felt the full force of the moral issues involved and wrestled with her conscience when making that decision; that I feared a ban on abortion would force women to seek unsafe abortions, as they had once done in this country."

[Barack Obama, excerpt from The Audacity of Hope published in Time Magazine, October 15, 2006, http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1546298,00.html (accessed April 28, 2008).]

In the News:

Obama signs order creating Council on Women and Girls., Chicago Sun Times, March 11, 2009 Obama Gets Strong Support in Poll, The Wall Street Journal, March 4, 2009 US Abortion Debate Altered by Obama Presidency, Associated Press, January 23, 2009 Let's Fight Bush's Assault On Women's Health, Hartford Courant, December 28, 2008 The politics of the federal bench, Washington Post, December 8, 2008