NARAL Unveils New Radio, Online Ads Calling Out Gov Greitens, GOP for Wasteful Emergency Session :: NARAL Pro-Choice Missouri
Contact: Kirstin Palovick, kirstin@prochoicemissouri.org

NARAL today announced an ad buy to call out Gov. Eric Greitens (R-MO) and his GOP allies for calling a wasteful and unnecessary emergency legislative session to further restrict abortion access in the state. The ads, which are running on radio and online this week, focus on Gov. Greitens and the GOPís plan to undermine rules that protect women from discrimination based on their reproductive health choices. Earlier this year, NARAL Pro-Choice Missouri spearheaded passage of a local ordinance in St. Louis that prohibited bosses and landlords from discriminating against women for thing like using birth control, having an abortion, or choosing to get pregnant with IVF. Gov. Greitens called the special session in-part to overturn those anti-discrimination protections.

"Instead of working on solutions to real problems Missourians face, Gov. Greitens and his GOP allies are wasting time and taxpayer money to pursue a extreme ideological agenda. This emergency session only seeks to make it okay for bosses and landlords to discriminate against women,Ē said Alison Dreith, executive director of NARAL Pro-Choice Missouri. "This has nothing to do with the health and safety of Missourians and everything to do with pleasing an extreme base. Gov. Greitens is trying to advance his own political aspirations at the expense of the health and freedom of MIssouri women and families. That is unacceptable.Ē

Missouri Republicans will also use the emergency session to consider legislation that would funnel taxpayer money toward deceptive anti-choice "crisis pregnancy centersĒ and impose medically unnecessary restrictions on the only clinic that provides abortion care in the state.

Listen to the radio ad here, and find a transcript below:

Narrator: Do you think your landlord should be able to evict your family because you had an abortion? Or your boss should be able to fire you for using birth control?

Narrator: Governor Greitens and Republican leaders think so. Theyíve just announced an emergency session to pass laws that discriminate against women and families.

Narrator: Thatís just wrong.

Narrator:

How can politicians justify this when Missouri faces so many real problems? Governor Greitens, stop attacking women and our families.