Coalition of R.I. lawmakers, advocates push for quick legalization of marijuana + Poll
Supporters of legalizing recreational marijuana say Rhode Island is running out of time to realize a potential windfall in tax revenue — up to $58 million — and economic activity from being the first state in New England to allow use of the drug.

At a State House news conference Thursday to introduce the latest round of legalization legislation, a coalition of state lawmakers and advocates said Rhode Island may only have until 2016 to regulate and tax marijuana before voters in Massachusetts do so, allowing the Bay State to dominate the market. A campaign for a general election ballot question in Massachusetts has been organized.

"Rhode Island has a small window of opportunity to be that leader and become the first state in New England to take a more sensible approach to cannabis," said Rep. Scott Slater, D-Providence, lead sponsor of the House version of the bill.

"We will not only have a tremendous competitive edge in the region, meaning more jobs, more businesses and more revenue for our state, but we can also say we were among the states on the right side of history when future generations look back on us."

Based on marijuana-consumption estimates from a 2014 White House report, Regulate Rhode Island, a group that organized the news conference, estimates that the Slater bill would generate $58 million in new annual revenue from marijuana taxes. The bill is sponsored in the Senate by Sen. Josh Miller, D-Cranston.

Nearly identical to legislation previously sponsored by Miller and Rep. Edith Ajello, D-Providence, the bill would make it legal for anyone at least 21 years old to possess 1 ounce or less of marijuana and grow up to two marijuana plants (one flowering) indoors and out of public view.

Smoking or vaping the drug would also be legal, although not in public places.

New additions to the 2015 bill include protections for landlords who don't want marijuana on their property, a new retailer registration timeline, a quality-control testing procedure and prohibitions on marijuana-infused products.

State revenue would come from a $50-per-ounce excise tax on marijuana wholesalers and a 10-percent sales tax on retail transactions.

Despite the enticing revenue estimates and encouraging poll numbers for legalization, the Slater-Miller bill, like its predecessors, faces a difficult path to passage.

House Speaker Nicholas A. Mattiello, D-Cranston, remains cool to legalization. In a statement through spokesman Larry Berman, Mattiello declined to address the potential economic impact of legalization, but said he will "assess this issue on its merits."

“It is currently not on my agenda for this session, but ... I will keep an open mind,” Mattiello said.

Senate President M. Teresa Paiva Weed played down the fiscal aspect.

"Ultimately, this is a conversation not about revenue but about public policy,” she said in an email statement.

Governor Raimondo appears the most receptive to legalization.

"[Raimondo] believes that if there’s a way to do it with proper regulations so Rhode Islanders don’t get hurt in the process, then it’s something we should look at and get right for the state,” said spokeswoman Marie Aberger in an email.