Edward Fitzpatrick: Look! Up in the air! The 'Superman building' is vacant another year!
As the sun set on 2015, Rhode Island's tallest building stood empty, concluding another year of vacancy.

As the city below lit up with New Year's Eve revelry, the former Industrial Trust building's 1,500 windows remained dark.

And as golden doors etched with art deco eagles reflected the soaring heights of the 26-floor building's storied past, Scotch tape held in place flimsy signs reflecting today's street-level reality: "No Loitering."

Earlier in the day, the principal owner agreed to lead a tour of the tower that many call the "Superman building" because it resembles the Daily Planet building in the old "Superman" TV show. (On TV, it was actually Los Angeles City Hall). The tour began in the former Bank of America lobby — a grand space where marble floors, dark columns and high ceilings recall another era but where a counter-top calendar recalls the day that the bank moved out: April 12, 2013.

David C. Sweetser, founder and principal of Massachusetts-based High Rock Development LLC, said he hopes to secure some sort of public support in the new year to spur redevelopment of the iconic skyscraper — either as apartments, offices, graduate student housing or some mix of uses. His New Year's wish for the property: "We would like it to be contributing to the local economy. We would like it to be tenanted."

But in Rhode Island these days, subsidy can be a four-letter word. While New Year's Eve produced quite a few headaches, perhaps no hangover was as epic as the one that Rhode Islanders felt following the 38 Studios debacle. And while that ball was dropped five years ago, High Rock ran into opposition just last year when it sought $39 million in state money, plus city tax breaks and historic tax credits, to try to convert the Superman building into 278 apartments.

On the other hand, 2016 will begin with work under way to convert the old South Street Power Station into Brown University offices and a state college nursing education center, and that project relied on some $50 million in state and federal tax credits, plus state lease payments that will total an estimated $6 million a year.

Sweetser said he is "encouraged by the vision" shown by Governor Raimondo and Providence Mayor Jorge O. Elorza, who just completed their first years in office, and by House Speaker Nicholas A. Mattiello and Senate President M. Teresa Paiva Weed. He noted, for example, that the state has adopted new economic development "tools," such as the Rebuild Rhode Island tax credit program, and that officials are trying to attract developers to the former Route 195 land in Providence. And he said that, in general, people are expressing more interest in the building's future than they have in years.

"In previous years, we were somewhat on the defensive. Now, I don't feel on the defensive," Sweetser said. "It has taken us four years of discussions, education, planning, negotiations, to be where we are today, and we can just feel a vibrancy that we have not felt before, with people acknowledging there needs to be something done with 111 Westminster Street."

But why can't something be done with 111 Westminster without public aid?

Sweetser, who lives in Wellesley, Massachusetts, said the reality is that Boston is just 60 minutes away and it's offering subsidies to developers who can charge higher rent than you can get in Providence, while construction costs are more or less equal. As a result, the Boston skyline "is completely dominated by the cranes," he said.

"With subsidies — you mention that word and everyone kind of cringes," Sweetser said. "We wish we didn't need subsidies. I'm sure the state wishes we didn't need them. But unfortunately, it's an economic reality. So either you have no subsidies and nothing will happen, or everybody has to compromise, including me."

With public support, "you will have a contributing building with employees or tenants, paying taxes, contributing to the economic welfare of the city and the state," he said.

High Rock spokesman William Fischer said, "Inactivity is not neutral. It is a negative. We have a hole in the skyline. If it were to be residential, you'd have an influx of 450 people here, going to restaurants, working, paying taxes." Without subsidies, "think about what this town would look like — there would be no Renaissance Hotel, no Arcade, no G Building, no Westminster corridor," he said. "They used to call it the Renaissance City — it's time for a new renaissance."

But Samuel W. Bell, state coordinator of the Rhode Island Progressive Democrats, isn't buying it, and his comments are one indication of the opposition that could come from both the right and the left.

"They bought it for more than it was probably worth," he said of High Rock's $33.2-million purchase in 2008. "But I don't think it's the role of the public to bail out businesses that make decisions that aren't good."

High Rock could sell the building at a loss, Bell said. "But I think they are sitting on it, waiting for a big subsidy. So this is a case where the culture of subsidies is discouraging development, and it's creating this large eyesore."

Bell, who helped lead a successful battle against a Providence baseball stadium proposal that called for public funding, said, "The people of Rhode Island are fed up with the culture of corporate welfare. To me, it is symbolic of developers refusing to accept what the market has said and asking for a big state handout." Also, he said he's concerned the project could end up producing "luxury apartments" and "severely exacerbate the affordable-housing crisis that Providence faces."

Providence Foundation leaders recently wrote an opinion piece calling for a "feasible reuse" of the building. "The building presents an opportunity to create an asset for the community similar to public-private projects such as the Shepard/University of Rhode Island building, the Masonic Temple/Renaissance Hotel and South Street Landing," chairman William F. Hatfield and executive director Daniel A. Baudouin wrote. "City and state leaders and the developer should come together in a public process in early 2016 to identify a creative and exciting solution for this iconic building. Like all historic restoration projects, this redevelopment will require state assistance."

Cliff Wood, the Providence Foundation's director of public advocacy, said, "We are still reeling from other bad decisions in the past, but this one is a lot more solid, both literally and figuratively." And having the state's tallest building out of commission "smack in the middle of the capital, between City Hall and the federal building, is a symbolic as well as literal detriment to our goals," he said.

In 2015, talk of Citizens Bank moving into the Superman building surfaced and faded. So does Sweetser have specific plans and requests that he plans to bring to the governor and legislative leaders in 2016? "We will have those," he said, "but we don't have those today."

He did mention Raimondo's Rebuild Rhode Island tax credit program — and the $15-million cap that the legislature placed on credits for any one project. "We are enthused that the program was reinstituted," he said. "The problem is it has a cap of $15 million. That's OK for the majority of buildings. It's unfortunately a constriction on a building this big."

While developers have walked away from other projects in Providence, Sweetser said, "Let's say I walked away. Whoever comes in has the same challenge. Even if they get the building for zero, you cannot build for the uses given previously without subsidies. It has nothing to do with me. It has nothing to do with our plan. Period. Subsidies are a requirement for the building to go forward."

What about knocking the building down, as some have suggested? Fischer said, "That is the wrong crane to bring in here. This building should be celebrated and its rehabilitation should be heralded. This is part of our history. It's been part of our skyline. You are never going to build another one like this."

From top to bottom, the building contains some unique features. For example, the basement houses a safe with a 17-ton steel door hanging from enormous hinges that holds some 5,000 safe-deposit boxes. And the penthouse level contains the "Gondola Room," said to resemble the gondola of a dirigible, with cracked leather covering the doors, a built-in wooden wine rack standing empty and an oval window providing a bird's-eye view of the city.

Speaking of birds, a nesting box for peregrine falcons can be seen from the windows of the 29th-level penthouse. And as 2015 came to a close, you could see that while they don't pay rent, these birds of prey are now the Superman building's only tenants.

—efitzpat@providencejournal.com

(401) 277-7368

On Twitter: @FitzProv