GE: R.I. made great pitch for headquarters; may bring some jobs here
General Electric Co. will move its headquarters to Boston after a dispute with Connecticut over tax increases prompted the industrial giant to leave its home of more than 40 years, the company confirmed.

The company announced the decision after informing the city’s mayor and the Massachusetts governor Wednesday morning. The announcement said the new headquarters will be located in the Seaport District of Boston.

A move would put an exclamation point on a period of dramatic change for GE, which relocated to Fairfield from a Manhattan skyscraper in 1974. Since April, GE has sold more than $100 billion of finance assets and closed one of its largest-ever acquisitions as Chief Executive Officer Jeffrey Immelt reshapes the company around industrial equipment and data analytics.

Political leaders from states including Rhode Island, Massachusetts and New York have courted GE since the maker of locomotives, jet engines and oilfield equipment said last year it would consider moving.

Responding to an inquiry from The Providence Journal about Rhode Island's efforts to woo the company here, GE spokesman Seth Martin said, “Rhode Island’s was one of the strongest pitches of any state’s, and they were a finalist in our process.

"The governor and her team, along with Rhode Island’s delegation in Washington, led an outstanding process," Martin said. "Although GE has decided to locate its corporate headquarters in Boston, we remain in discussion with Rhode Island about locating GE jobs in the state in the future.”

Governor Raimondo said Wednesday afternoon, “We worked diligently to recruit GE’s headquarters to Rhode Island – and we'll remain relentless in our efforts to bring jobs to the state.

"We are thrilled by the great interest GE expressed, particularly in our new economic development tools. We remain in active discussions with GE about the potential to locate other operations jobs in Rhode Island, and we are hopeful that the company's move just up the road will improve the chances of that happening.”

While a relocation is significant symbolically, it may not result in a major shift in personnel. Only about 800 of GE’s more than 300,000 employees work at the Fairfield campus. Most workers in Connecticut are in the GE Capital lending unit, which is shrinking as the company’s focus shifts to manufacturing.

GE will begin moving employees in 2016 in a process that could take several years, the Globe reported. As many as 600 may work out of the new space, according to the report. Boston may offer as much as $20 million in property tax relief over the next two decades, while state incentives could be valued at $120 million, the newspaper said.

GE has been expanding in Boston, where it announced plans in October to locate a newly formed energy division known as Current.

The company publicized its frustrations with Connecticut in June, when state lawmakers approved a two-year, $40 billion budget that raised levies on businesses and wealthy individuals.

Governor Dannel Malloy revised some of the corporate income-tax increases and held meetings with GE to try to persuade it to stay put.

Connecticut ranks near the bottom in the Tax Foundation’s annual list of state business tax climates. The state’s codes have become more complex and are particularly unfavorable for large corporations as Connecticut has imposed a surtax on some businesses, said Jared Walczak, a policy analyst at the Washington-based research group.

“For a company like GE, Connecticut has a very high top corporate income rate,” he said.

Journal staff reporter Kate Bramson contributed to this report