My Turn: Hans von Spakovsky: Serious questions surround Uranium One
While the media’s attention has shifted to the indictment of Paul Manafort, the Obama administration’s handling of the Uranium One “bribery plot” (as The Hill called it in a startling expose) raises serious, critical questions that must be answered about the Justice Department’s handling of the investigation.

These questions can only be answered if Congress fulfills its oversight obligation by conducting an intense, serious investigation, and if the current leadership in the Justice Department cooperates by providing all of the information needed to fully explain what happened, and doesn’t try to obstruct the investigation.

First, a short timeline.

According to the website The Hill, the FBI gathered substantial evidence in 2009 (when the bureau was under the direction of Robert Mueller) that officials in the Russian nuclear industry were using bribery, kickbacks, extortion, and money laundering to grow their “atomic energy business inside the United States."

That included routing “millions of dollars to the U.S. designed to benefit former President Bill Clinton’s charitable foundation during the time Secretary of State Hillary Clinton” served on the federal government’s Committee on Foreign Investments.

In 2010, the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, which included representatives of Hillary Clinton and then-Attorney General Eric Holder, approved the purchase by the Russians of the Uranium One mining company, giving them control of about 20 percent of U.S. uranium production.

In 2011, the same committee approved the sale of commercial uranium to U.S. nuclear power plants by Tenex, a subsidiary of Rosatom, a Russian nuclear company controlled by the Russian government.

This sale to a hostile foreign government occurred despite the fact that the U.S. only produces about one-fifth of the uranium it needs for its nuclear plants.

The FBI even had a U.S. businessman as an informant who was making kickback payments (with the permission of the FBI) at the direction of Vadim Mikerin, the key Russian official overseeing the expansion of the Russian nuclear industry into the U.S. through Rosatom.

Yet none of the evidence that the FBI had about this “racketeering scheme” — which is what it was called in an affidavit by an Energy Department agent assigned to assist the FBI in the case — was brought to the attention of the Committee on Foreign Investment in 2010 or 2011 by Holder.

Recall that as attorney general, Holder was responsible for overseeing the FBI and its investigations.

Mikerin was not indicted until 2014. He was only charged with a single count of money laundering, not with paying multiple bribes or soliciting multiple kickbacks.

All this raises important questions:

Why didn’t Holder or Mueller brief the Committee on Foreign Investment about the bribery and kickbacks being engineered by Rosatom when it was seeking approval of its purchase of Uranium One in 2010 or its sale of uranium to American nuclear plants by Tenex in 2011?

Why weren’t the House or Senate intelligence committees informed? The FBI and the Justice Department already had evidence of the corruption.

Why was the indictment and prosecution of Mikerin delayed, and why did the Justice Department allow this racketeering enterprise that corrupted the American uranium industry to continue for five years?

Why were the possible charges against Mikerin reduced?

Why was the evidence of attempted influence peddling suppressed and not made a part of the prosecution or mentioned in the plea agreement?

Why did the FBI force a nondisclosure agreement on its informant?

Without a credible explanation, it is hard to come to any conclusion other than it was a political decision intended to cover up what happened.

The bottom-line question that needs to be answered is this: Why did the Obama administration approve the transfer of 20 percent of America’s uranium industry to a company owned by the government of a hostile country headed by a dictator when our Justice Department and our FBI knew that government had engaged in a corrupt, criminal conspiracy to get that foothold in America?

It is up to Congress to find out.

Hans von Spakovsky is a senior legal fellow in the Heritage Foundation’s Edwin Meese III Center for Legal and Judicial Studies. A longer version of the piece originally appeared at dailysignal.com.