Vulnerable GOP Senators Split on Gun Bills
Republican senators in difficult re-election fights split their support Thursday between two differing measures to prevent suspected terrorists from obtaining guns, showing the difficult politics of a gun debate in an election year.

Three of the senators in the most competitive campaigns this year – Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, Mark Kirk of Illinois and Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania – supported a bipartisan compromise sponsored by moderate GOP Sen. Susan Collins of Maine. Her proposal would prevent people on the no-fly and selectee lists from obtaining guns. (The latter designation applies to people singled out for extra security screening before being allowed to board an airplane.)

Sens. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, Rob Portman of Ohio and Marco Rubio of Florida all opposed that measure, but supported one sponsored by Johnson that would have similarly blocked people on those lists from obtaining guns, but through a different, more intensive process. Toomey supported both measures.

Republican senators on both sides of the issue were attacked by their Democratic opponents this week, showing how much the debate over guns and terrorism has filtered into campaigns after the mass shooting in Orlando earlier this month. It’s indicative of the difficult tightrope the vulnerable incumbents have to walk, aiming to seek concrete legislative solutions while being wary of political attacks back home on a divisive issue.

The Collins measure – an amendment to an appropriations bill that would fund the Department of Justice, among other agencies -- had the support of the vast majority of Democrats. It would permit the attorney general to block gun sales to anyone who appears on either the no-fly or extended-screening list, with an appeals process in place for those who believe they’ve been wrongly blocked. The Johnson amendment would use the same lists, but delay the sale for 72 hours while an investigation takes place, and for 10 additional days if there’s a “reasonable suspicion” that the person is involved in terrorist activity. It would then require a hearing before a judge to block the sale permanently.

In test votes to gauge support for the two amendments Thursday, the Collins bill received backing from 52 senators – including eight Republicans – while the other was rejected by two-thirds of the chamber.

Ayotte, who helped craft the bipartisan Collins legislation, said Thursday that her constituents were supportive of the balance they had struck.

“If you’re too dangerous to get on a commercial flight, you shouldn’t be able to purchase a firearm,” Ayotte said. “[My constituents] also believe strongly that if you think you’ve been wrongfully put in that position, that the burden of proof has to be on the government because it’s their constitutional rights, and I think our bill does that."

Ayotte’s work helping to draft the bill, however, didn’t stop her opponent, Gov. Maggie Hassan, from criticizing her on the issue. Hassan’s campaign said that she would have voted in favor of the Collins amendment as well as a more comprehensive bill that failed earlier this week that Ayotte also supported – though Ayotte voted against the same bill in December. Hassan’s campaign manager, Marc Goldberg, told a local TV station that Ayotte’s support of these amendments was “political maneuvering.”

Minority Leader Harry Reid also singled out Ayotte’s position on the gun issue this week, accusing her of being a “hypocrite” and “not logical.”

“She’s doing everything but yoga on the Senate floor to try to justify what she’s doing,” Reid said.

Sen. Lindsey Graham, who also helped craft the Collins legislation, defended Ayotte, saying she was approaching the problem looking for a solution that could actually become law. Graham brushed off the idea that an attack from Reid would in any way hurt her campaign.

“I think the best thing that can happen to Kelly Ayotte is to be criticized by Harry Reid,” Graham told RCP. “I would wear that as a badge of honor."

Toomey, the junior senator from Pennsylvania, has a long history on the gun issue. He joined Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin in 2013 to sponsor legislation expanding gun-purchase background checks after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, and has remained supportive of new background checks even after that vote failed. He supported Collins’ solution, but also backed Johnson’s alternative measure.

Still, his opponent, Katie McGinty, criticized Toomey for voting against two gun control measures earlier this week that would have more widely blocked terror suspects from getting guns and also expanded background checks. She accused him of “head fakes toward gun safety” and running “as fast as he can from the issue.”

Toomey, for his part, has been working this week to find a compromise solution, and introduced his own measure that took a different route to preventing terror suspects from getting guns, though it has not received a vote in the chamber. He expressed frustration with the votes earlier in the week, calling them a “partisan charade” and an “outrage.”

“There should be a sensible middle ground on issues such as expanded background checks and keeping guns out of the hands of terrorists, but today’s votes mark another missed opportunity to find it,” Toomey said on Monday.

Kirk, who represents the blue state of Illinois, has been an outspoken advocate for gun control measures and voted in favor of both the terror suspect bills and the background check measure that Democrats pushed for this week, saying in a short statement that there had been “bipartisan momentum” on the issue.

On the flip side, however, Johnson, Portman and Rubio voted against the Collins amendment in favor of Johnson’s version. Portman said in a statement that he supported the latter because of the “strong due process protections for law-abiding citizens.” He added that he was disappointed the votes had been scheduled for Thursday because there had been some bipartisan momentum on the issue, and he preferred continuing negotiations.

Even though Portman’s statement took credit for voting to block terror suspects from getting guns, his opponent, former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland, slammed the Ohio Republican for not backing the Collins amendment, calling it an “outrageous” vote that “places him far outside the mainstream of even his own Republican Party.”

Rubio, who announced Wednesday his intention to seek re-election, told reporters before the vote that he wanted to make sure senators took care to not rush into a bad solution.

“It’s a difficult balancing act,” he said of barring terrorists from getting guns while protecting constitutional rights. “They’re trying to do it all in a hurry here and I think we need to get it right.”

Still, Rep. Patrick Murphy, Rubio’s likely opponent in the general election if both win their primaries in August, criticized the incumbent for voting against the Collins measure so soon after the shooting in their home state of Florida.

"Less than two weeks after reconsidering his political future at the scene of the tragic mass shooting in Orlando, Marco Rubio sided with the special interests instead of doing what’s right to protect the people he is supposed to represent,” Murphy said.

Ultimately, Thursday’s vote made clear that though some vulnerable Republicans are working hard to find legislative compromises – and that they’re split on the best path forward – they’ll face a barrage of attacks on the campaign trail whether the new measures pass the chamber or not. And the issue isn’t likely to go away – shortly after the test vote showed the Collins compromise was short of the 60 votes it would need to pass, Democrats urged Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to bring it up again anyway.

“Our plan is to push for something meaningful to be enacted into law, and that would be the best-case scenario,” said Hawaii Sen. Brian Schatz. “If we can’t, then it’s appropriate and expected that we’d take our case to the voters."