Is Child to Adult as Victim Is to Criminal? (PDF Download Available)
and inability to master the finer points of dressing and

carrying themselves properly in public and in bed. This

business model based on managing women in their early

20s is corroborated by our data (see Fig. 1) from interviews

with sex market providers, who are less likely to report

having a pimp before the age of 18 and after the age of 24.

Nomad and the other self-described pimps were initially

quite perplexed and alarmed when we told them that we

wanted to interview “ underage ” youth involved in prosti-

tution, which they seemed to equat e with pedophilia.

Nomad was arrested in late 2010 on drug charges, but we

continued to communicate with him through weekly

letters from prison. In one of them, he wrote that much

of what people say and write about pimps “ suffe rs from

misunderstanding and misrepresenta tion of the role of a

pimp. ” He worried that the people making judgments

about pimps have not actually met pimps or gotten to

know what they do. After we sent Nomad our abstracts

about pimping for the upcoming American Society of

Criminology meetings in November 2011, he ur gently

wrote back and insisted that academics have got it all

wrong. According to him,

The only thing a pimp prey (sic) on is money, but

chasing after under age girls is sick! If a man deals in

supplying kids to other adults for sex, then he ’ s not a

pimp, he ’ s a C.S.M. (Child Slave Master). Y ou cannot

confuse the two, a C.S.M. and a pimp is (sic) two

different occupations. A C.S.M. thrives off the

innocents, as well as the naivety of children. A pimp

provides assistance to adults who consentually (sic)

engage in acts of prostitution. Where ’ s the crime in

that?

Nomad and his friends were particularly insistent that

the common view of pimps recruiting the women they

manage through guile or violence was a Hollywoo d

fantasy and that many times they had been actively

recruited by women who had heard about their good

reputation, or that partner ships had been initiated in a

mutual way.

Some sex workers that we met in their late 20s a nd early

30s who saw their work as a career corroborated Nomad ’ s

vision of mutuality and conveyed stories about winning

over “ good pimps. ” One woman in her late 20s, whose

mother was the manager of a brothel, told us that until she

could save enough to start her own brothel, she would

rather work with a “ real pimp ” than for a madam in an

escort service. When asked what a real pim p is, she

succinctly stated, “ A real pimp is not trying to get money

from a girl, she wants to give it. ” She described somebody

who is strong, makes sure you do the right thing with your

money, introduces you to the right customers, gives you

advice about how to play men, and forces all the creeps out

there to show you some respect. When asked if such people

really exist, she said yes, of course, “ but there are only

maybe six of them in this whole city and most of them are

already taken up with their girls. ”

Commercial Sexual Exploitation

Finally, researchers did encounter a small number of

situations that seemed to fit the pattern of abuse covered

under the TVPA and described in the CSEC literature. One

of these cases involved a 17-year-old girl who identified as

black and heterosexual and who had been born and raised

in Atlantic City with her older brother and her mother. She

reported completing her eleventh year of school a mere

month or so before the interview. She was interviewed in

front of a two-story house with a porch on both floors.

During the interview, a man who researchers believed to be

the girl ’ s pimp remained nearby , but he was asked to

move when it became clear that his presence was

hindering her ability to answer questions. He went

upstairs to the second-floo r porch, but the girl was still

clearly uncomfortable, repeatedly looking up at the

porch. It became increasingly clea r that the girl was

giving little thought to her responses and was merely

attempting to finish the interview as quickly as possible.

Rather than seriously considering her responses, she

offered one-word responses with no elaboration. Finally ,

the interviewer asked the girl if she w as scared and told

her to just write yes or no on the paper. The girl took the

pen with what the interviewer remembered as a shaking

hand and wrote down the word “ Yes . ”

In anothe r case, we interviewed a 16- and a 19-year-old

at night in a pizzeria. They had been referred by a spot

pimp, who had convinced them to be interviewed despite

their concern that their pimp did not want them speaking to

us. They said that he was out of town that night and figured

that the interview would be an easy way to make $40. As

the older one put it, “ I need some cigarettes and some

diapers, and there ain ’ t no money around the house. ” She

was a Latina, had a young child, and claimed to be the

pimp ’ s girlfriend. She said that she prostituted herself and

gave him the money. She insisted that he was a decent guy

and that he spent most of the money on her.

The 16-year-old, who was African American and quite

heavy, seemed to be somewhat disassociated. She indicated

that her pimp was her foster father and said she did not like

having sex with strange men. She boasted that her pimp

never touched her sexually and seemed proud to say that he

did not let her stay out late on school nights. The interview

had a strange furtive feel with both women keeping an eye

out, as if they were afraid that their pimp or one of his

friends might see them. When asked if she needed any help,