Manufacturing and Agriculture Credit Common Questions
What is the manufacturing and agriculture credit? The manufacturing and agriculture credit is available to claimants that derive qualified production activities income from property located in Wisconsin that is assessed as either manufacturing or agricultural.

What happened to the Wisconsin qualified production activities credit? The qualified production activities credit was renamed the manufacturing and agriculture credit as a result of 2011 Act 232.

Who is eligible to claim the credit? An individual, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company (LLC), or corporation can compute the credit if the claimant owns or rents and uses in Wisconsin, real property and improvements assessed as agricultural property under s. 70.32(2)(a)4., Wis. Stats., or owns or rents and uses in Wisconsin, real and personal property assessed under s. 70.995, Wis. Stats.

Who may not claim the credit? Insurance companies cannot claim the credit. Partnerships, LLCs treated as partnerships, and tax-option (S) corporations cannot claim the credit; however, the eligibility for claiming the credit and the computation of the credit is based on the amount of qualified production activities income generated by the pass-through entity. The credit computed by those entities can pass through to the partners, members, or shareholders. Additionally, trusts and estates may pass the credit through to their beneficiaries based on the income allocable to each.

What is the rate of credit? The credit is a percentage of eligible qualified production activities income. The credit is calculated by multiplying eligible qualified production activities income by one of the following percentages: For taxable years beginning after December 31, 2012, and before January 1, 2014, 1.875%

For taxable years beginning after December 31, 2013, and before January 1, 2015, 3.75%

For taxable years beginning after December 31, 2014, and before January 1, 2016, 5.526%

For taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015, 7.5%

Is there a maximum amount of credit that may be claimed? There is no maximum dollar limit; however, the maximum amount of credit that may be claimed is up to the gross tax computed from the business operations that were used to claim the credit on the corporate franchise or income tax return.

How is the credit computed? If a claimant is eligible for the credit based on both manufacturing and agricultural activities, the credit must be computed separately for each activity. The credit is computed as follows: Production Gross receipts1

Less: Cost of goods sold2

Production Gross receiptsLess: Cost of goods sold Direct Costs3 Indirect Costs4 multiplied by production gross receipts factor5 = Qualified production activities income6 Multiplied by manufacturing property factor 7 or agriculture property factor8 = Eligible qualified production activities income9 Multiplied by credit rate in effect for the taxable year10 = Total credit

1 Production gross receipts are the receipts from the lease, rental, license, sale, exchange, or other disposition of qualified production property. Footnotes 7 and 8 describe what is qualified production property. 2 Cost of goods sold are the production costs associated with the production gross receipts. 3 Direct costs are the costs associated with the production gross receipts and include all the claimant's ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year to carry on a trade or business that are deductible under section 162 of the Internal Revenue Code and identified as direct costs in the claimant's managerial or cost accounting records. 4 Indirect costs are the costs associated with the production gross receipts and include all the claimant's ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year to carry on a trade or business that are deductible under section 162 of the Internal Revenue Code, other than cost of goods sold and direct costs, and identified as indirect costs in the claimant's managerial or cost accounting records. 5 The production gross receipts factor is a fraction consisting of the production gross receipts (numerator) divided by the gross income from all sources except those specifically excluded under the Internal Revenue Code or excluded under Wisconsin law (denominator). Items included in the denominator include: gross sales, gross dividends, gross interest income, gross rents, gross royalties, the gross sales price from the disposition of capital and business assets, gross income from pass-through entities, and all other gross receipts that are included in income before apportionment. 6 Qualified production activities income is the amount of the claimants production gross receipts for the taxable year that exceeds the sum of the cost of goods sold that are allocable to the receipts, the direct costs allocable to the receipts, and the indirect costs, with the result multiplied by the production gross receipts factor.



Qualified production activities income does not include any of the following:



Income from film production Income from producing, transmitting, or distributing electricity, natural gas, or potable water Income from constructing real property Income from engineering or architectural services performed with respect to constructing real property Income from the sale of food and beverages prepared by the claimant at a retail establishment Income from the lease, rental, license, sale, exchange, or other disposition of land 7 The manufacturing property factor is the average value of the claimant's real and personal property assessed under s. 70.995, Wis. Stats., that is owned or rented and used in Wisconsin by the claimant to manufacture qualified production property (numerator), divided by the average value of all the claimant's real and personal property owned or rented during the taxable year and used by the claimant to manufacture qualified production property (denominator).



Qualified production property is tangible personal property manufactured in whole or in part by the claimant on property that is assessed as manufacturing property under s. 70.995, Wis. Stats.



The property owned by the claimant is valued at its original cost and property rented by the claimant is valued at an amount equal to the annual rent paid by the claimant, less any annual rental received by the claimant for sub-rentals, multiplied by 8.



The average value of the property is determined by averaging the values at the beginning and ending of the taxable year. 8 The agriculture property factor is the average value of the claimant's real property and improvements assessed under s. 70.32(2)(a)4., Wis. Stats., that is owned or rented and used in Wisconsin by the claimant during the taxable year to produce, grow, or extract qualified production property (numerator) divided by the average value of all the claimant's real property and improvements owned or rented during the taxable year and used by the claimant to produce, grow, or extract qualified production property (denominator).



Qualified production property is tangible personal property produced, grown, or extracted in whole or in part by the claimant on or from property assessed as agricultural property under s. 70.32(2)(a)4., Wis. Stats.



The property owned by the claimant is valued at its original cost and property rented by the claimant is valued at an amount equal to the annual rental paid by the claimant, less any annual rental received by the claimant from sub-rentals, multiplied by 8.



The average value of the property is determined by averaging the values at the beginning and ending of the taxable year. 9 The amount of the eligible qualified production activities income that a corporate claimant may claim in computing the credit is the lesser of the following: The eligible qualified production activities income determined using the computation above Income apportioned to this state under s. 71.25(5)(6), and (6m), or Income determined to be taxable under s. 71.255(2)

For non-corporate claimants, the credit computed and any credits carried over from prior taxable years may only offset the tax imposed upon the business operations that were used to compute the credit.

For shareholders of a tax−option (S) corporation, the credit may only offset the tax imposed on the shareholder's prorated share of the tax−option (S) corporation's income.

For partners of a partnership, the credit may only offset the tax imposed on the partner's distributive share of partnership income. 10 The manufacturing and agriculture credit rate is as follows:



1.875% for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2013 and before January 1, 2014.

3.75% for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2014 and before January 1, 2015.

5.526% for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2015 and before January 1, 2016.

7.5% for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016.

How is the qualified production activities income limited for corporations? For a corporation, the eligible qualified production activities income is the lesser of: Eligible qualified production activities income,

Income apportioned to Wisconsin, or

Income taxable to Wisconsin as determined by Wisconsin's combined reporting law, if the corporation is a member of a Wisconsin combined group

How is the credit limited for non-corporate claimants? For non-corporate claimants, the credit is limited as follows: For non-corporate claimants, the credit computed and any credits carried over from prior taxable years may only offset the tax imposed upon the business operations that were used to compute the credit.

For shareholders of a tax−option (S) corporation, the credit may only offset the tax imposed on the shareholder's prorated share of the tax−option (S) corporation's income.

For partners of a partnership, the credit may only offset the tax imposed on the partner's distributive share of partnership income.

What income producing activities do not qualify for the credit? The following activities do not qualify as qualified production activities income for purposes of the manufacturing and agriculture credit: Income from film production

Income from producing, transmitting, or distributing electricity, natural gas, or potable water

Income from constructing real property (except that income from producing real property can qualify for the credit. See example in number 11)

Income from engineering or architectural services performed with respect to constructing real property

Income from the sale of food and beverages prepared by the claimant at a retail establishment

Income from the lease, rental, license, sale, exchange, or other disposition of land

Does income received from producing and installing real property qualify for the credit? Income received from producing/manufacturing materials or products on property that is assessed as manufacturing property qualifies for the manufacturing and agriculture credit; however, income received from constructing real property does not qualify for the credit. In order to qualify for the manufacturing and agriculture credit, a claimant must derive qualified production activities income from the sale, lease, rental, license, exchange, or other disposition of tangible personal property that is located in Wisconsin and assessed as manufacturing or agricultural. However, qualified production activities income does not include income from any of the following activities: film production; producing, transmitting, or distributing electricity, natural gas, or portable water; constructing real property, engineering or architectural services performed with respect to constructing real property; food and beverages prepared by the claimant at a retail establishment; and income from the lease, rental, license, sale, exchange, or other disposition of land. In situations where a claimant receives gross receipts from manufacturing the property and installing the manufactured product as real property, the claimant must maintain adequate records in order to allocate the receipts between the manufacturing and installation of the property. In addition, the pricing used to determine the value of the product manufactured must be the fair market value that unrelated third party would pay for the same material. For a detailed example, see the tax release in Wisconsin Tax Bulletin #179: revenue.wi.gov/ise/wtb/index.html

Is the credit refundable or nonrefundable? The credit is nonrefundable so any amount not used to offset the current Wisconsin income or franchise tax liability may be carried forward for 15 years.

Is the credit includable in taxable income? The amount of credit computed (not claimed) is income and must be reported as income on the claimant's Wisconsin franchise or income tax return for the taxable year immediately after the taxable year in which the credit is computed. This is true even if you cannot use the full amount of the credit computed this year to offset tax liability for this year and must carry over part or all of it to future years.

Should the MA credit be included in income in the year following the year of computation even though the credit is not used and is carried forward? Yes, the credit computed must be included in income following the year in which it is computed regardless of whether or not the taxpayer uses the credit.

Is the MA credit reported as income on the 2014 return considered qualified production income? No. Qualified production activities income is only income that results from the sale of tangible personal property.

Is the manufacturing credit added to income on the pass-through entity's return where the credit was originally calculated, or at the individual level where the credit was claimed? The entire credit must be added to the pass-through entity's income for the year following the year in which the credit was computed to the extent not included in federal ordinary business income, regardless of whether the partner, member, or shareholder was able to use the entire amount.

The credit is income in the year following the year computed. If a partner leaves the partnership in the year following the computation of the credit, is the partner required to include the credit in his or her income? No. The amount of credit computed is added to the partnership's income. If the partner leaves the partnership following the year the credit is computed, the income from the computation of the credit will never be allocated to the former partner.

If a partner leaves the partnership in the year following the computation of the credit, is the partner able to use the credit? Yes. The credit is computed by the partnership based on the partnership's business activities and allocated to the partners in proportion to their ownership interests. Once the credit is allocated to the partner, it becomes the partners' credit to use, regardless if the partner leaves the partnership.

Can the credit be shared with other members of a Wisconsin combined group? The credit may not be shared with other members of the combined group.

When must the credit be claimed? The credit must be claimed within four years of the unextended due date of the tax return.

Where can I find this credit in the Wisconsin Statutes? The credit is in the following sections of Chapter 71—Income and Franchise Taxes for State and Local Revenues:



Section 71.07(5n), Wis. Stats., at https://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/document/statutes/71.07(5n)

Section 71.28(5n), Wis. Stats., at https://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/document/statutes/71.28(5n)

When is a tax-option (S) corporation with a fiscal year beginning October 1, 2012 and ending on September 30, 2013 eligible to claim the manufacturing and agriculture credit? The manufacturing and agriculture credit is available for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2013. A tax-option (S) corporation cannot claim the credit, but the eligibility for and the amount of the credit is determined by the tax-option (S) corporation's business operations and taxable year. The tax-option (S) corporation's 2012 taxable year begins on October 1, 2012 so it would not be able to compute the credit until its fiscal year beginning October 1, 2013.

I was subject to LIFO recapture (or similar change in accounting method) and as a result my cost of goods sold increased. How does this affect the computation of the manufacturing and agriculture credit? A change in accounting method made for federal income tax purposes must also be made for Wisconsin franchise/income tax purposes if the method is authorized under the internal revenue code. An increase in the cost of goods sold as a result of an accounting change for federal income purposes will also result in an increase in the cost of goods sold for Wisconsin franchise/income tax purposes, and the increased cost of goods sold amount will be used in computing the qualified production activities income portion of the manufacturing and agriculture credit.

Can the manufacturing and agriculture credit offset Wisconsin alternative minimum tax? Yes. 2013 Act 145 changed the order of computation for the manufacturing and agriculture credit retroactive to taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2013. The credit can now be claimed after the alternative minimum tax. If the manufacturing and agriculture credit was claimed on an individual income tax return that was filed prior to the law change, and the claimant was subject to Wisconsin alternative minimum tax, the claimant should file a 2013 Wisconsin Form 1X (amended return) in order to reflect the law change. For information on how to claim the credit based on the law change for 2013, refer to the following article: http://www.revenue.wi.gov/taxpro/news/2014/140325b.html.

What are examples of direct costs? Direct costs include all of the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in carrying on the trade or business that are deductible under sec. 162 of the IRC and identified as direct costs in your managerial or cost accounting records. This includes depreciation expense computed under the IRC in effect for Wisconsin that are classified as direct costs. Although depreciation is detailed under sec. 167, IRC, depreciation is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense under sec. 162, IRC, and is therefore included as a cost of generating production gross receipts. There are no specific examples of direct costs provided in the statutes because not every business operation will account for direct and indirect costs in the same manner. Because of this variability, the determination of direct costs relies, in part, on the taxpayer's accounting records. In general, direct costs are those costs that directly benefit one specific project or good that is being produced. Examples of direct costs may include: production employee wages, supplies consumed directly in the production process, and costs of consultants used in producing the finished product.

What are examples of indirect costs? Indirect costs include all ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in carrying on the trade or business that are deductible under sec. 162, IRC, other than cost of goods sold and direct costs, and identified as indirect costs in your managerial or cost accounting records. This includes depreciation expenses computed under the IRC in effect for Wisconsin that are classified as indirect costs. Although depreciation is detailed under sec. 167, IRC, depreciation is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense under sec. 162, IRC, and is therefore included as a cost of generating production gross receipts. Similar to direct costs, there are no specific examples of indirect costs provided in the statutes because not every business operation will account for direct and indirect costs in the same manner. Because of this variability, the determination of indirect costs relies, in part, on the taxpayer's accounting records. In general, indirect costs are costs that benefit more than one specific project or good that is being produced and cannot be easily traced to a single project or good being produced. Examples of indirect costs may include: building rent, legal expenses, business insurance, advertising expenses, accounting and administrative salaries, office supplies, and certain utilities.

Is the five-year subtraction modification for the difference in basis of assets considered a depreciation expense for the MA credit? No. The subtraction modification is not considered a direct or indirect expense in computing the MA credit. Only amounts that are currently deductible under the IRC in effect for Wisconsin are a direct or indirect expense. The Wisconsin subtraction modification is not an expense under the internal revenue code. For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2014, Wisconsin depreciation is computed using the IRC in effect on January 1, 2014. Note: For taxable years beginning in 2014, the 50% bonus depreciation provided by the federal Tax Increase Prevention Act of 2014 (enacted December 19, 2014) does not apply for Wisconsin.