Southwest Movers Association Endorses Gov. Perry
AUSTIN – Gov. Rick Perry today received the endorsement of the Southwest Movers Association (SMA) for re-election.

“The household goods industry is proud of the work that the governor has done to ensure the state of Texas remains a prime destination to move to,” said SMA Executive Director John Esparza. “The moving business is small business enterprise at its best and we recognize the measures taken to keep Texas number one in economic growth. Small businesses are the engines that drive our state’s economy. Those of us that make our living on the state’s highways can appreciate and share in the governor’s vision for keeping our infrastructure safe while addressing our future needs.”

The mission of SMA is to aggressively promote and protect the interests of its members by enhancing the professionalism and standards of the industry through creating and maintaining one consistent standard for all movers.

“I am pleased to receive the endorsement of the Southwest Movers Association, which plays a key role in supporting the more than 1,000 people who move to Texas every day,” said Gov. Perry. “As our state continues to grow, I look forward to working with members and stakeholders of SMA to ensure that Texas remains a top destination for job seekers.”

SMA joins the following individuals and organizations in their endorsement of Gov. Perry:

Former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin

Texas Municipal Police Association

Texas Chemical Council

Texas Society of Professional Engineers

Republican National Committeewoman Cathie Adams

Texas Right to Life

Houston Realty Business Coalition

Texas Apartment Association

Texas Republican County Chairman Association President Linda Rogers

Heidi Group Founder Carol Everett

Texas Alliance for Life

Texas Department of Public Safety Officers Association PAC

Texas Home School Coalition PAC

Texans for Life Coalition President Kyleen Wright

Conservative Republicans of Texas President Dr. Steve Hotze

Free Market Foundation President Kelly Shackelford

Texas Chiropractic Association

Americans for Prosperity* State Director Peggy Venable

Texas State Association of Fire Fighters

Texas Association of Realtors

Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani

Texas Civil Justice League PAC

Texas Oil and Gas Association President Rob Looney

Concerned Women for America State Director Ann Hettinger

Texas Optometric Association PAC

Texas Pest Control Association

Energy Entrepreneur T. Boone Pickens

Texas Recreational Vehicle Association

Texas Poultry Federation

Justice at the Gate Founder Alice Patterson

Former Republican Party of Texas Chair Tina Benkiser

Texas Cattle Feeders Beef-PAC

Eagle Forum Founder Phyllis Schlafly

Texas Pharmacy Business Council

Justice Foundation President Allan Parker, Jr.

Texas Podiatric Medical Association

Texas Association for Interior Design

Former Texas Republican Party Chair Susan Weddington

Former U.S. Secretary of Education Bill Bennett

Family Research Council Action PAC Chairman Tony Perkins

WallBuilders President and Founder David Barton

Mississippi Governor Haley Barbour

Texas Association of Builders HOMEPAC

Manufacturers PAC of Texas

Texas Medical Association TEXPAC

Former Republican Party of Texas Chair George Strake

Texas Society of Anesthesiologists PAC

Texas Restaurant Association PAC

Vision America Founder Dr. Rick Scarborough

Wholesale Beer Distributors of Texas PAC

Recreational Fishing Alliance

Texas Recreational Fishing Alliance

Texas Nursery and Landscape Association PAC

Career Colleges and Schools of Texas

Two-Thirds of the State Republican Executive Committee

Republican National Committeeman Bill Crocker

Former Republican Party of Texas Chair Tom Pauken

Texas Motor Transportation Association TRUCKPAC

Empower Texans PAC

Texas Ambulatory Surgery Center Society PAC

Texas Nurses Association

Coalition for Nurses in Advance Practice

Texas Association of Nurse Anesthetists

Texas Nurse Practitioners

Combined Law Enforcement Associations of Texas

Medical Defense PAC

Outdoor Advertising Association of Texas

Texas Chapter of American College of Cardiology HeartPAC

Associated Builders and Contractors of Texas PAC

Associated General Contractors of America Texas Building Branch PAC

Texas Construction Association PAC

Texas Retailers Association PAC

C Club of Houston

Texas Building Owners and Managers Association

Texas Burglar and Fire Alarm Association

*Organization listed for identification purposes only, Americans for Prosperity itself does not endorse candidates.