Russ Feingold's Very Weird Announcement
We know it's early and that this will be a long campaign, but several things jumped out at us about the Return of Russ.

1. He announced from California, not Wisconsin. And via videotape rather than with actual real people.

This is particularly odd, given the early Russ's very folksy I'll-visit-all-72-counties persona. He was first elected to the senate, in part, by writing his platform on his garage door.

He lost because of the impression that he was out of touch, aloof, and more than a tad bit arrogant. His listening tours famously became Feingold's I'm-Not-Listening-Tours as he prepared to ram Obamacare down voters' throats.

But there he was, all the way across the country. As The NRSC noted:

WASHINGTON – In what may be the oddest move of the campaign season thus far, Stanford Professor and failed 2010 candidate Russ Feingold announced his Wisconsin Senate run today from…California.

Professor Feingold clearly didn't want to miss teaching his "Law 791" class last night from 4:15 PM - 7:15 PM PST.

Today's announcement reeked more of the Clinton Restoration Style announcement than early Russ...

2. He wouldn't take any questions from reporters. In fact, his campaign kept him hidden.

Reported Politico:

Feingold’s campaign would not make the former senator available for interviews.

Really? The normally chatty Russ didn't want to answer questions? Any questions? This is also odd because Feingold enjoyed compliant, friendly, even fawning media throughout most of his career.

What exactly did he not want to be asked about?

3. His fellow Dems really don't want an outbreak of democracy do they?

Within minutes of his announcement, Russ was embraced and endorsed by the DSCC, Tom Barrett, Mike Tate and just about everyone else you could imagine. The point is (obviously) to clear the field for Feingold to run unopposed in the Democrat primary. Instead of a primary, however, we got today's anointing.

We're old enough to remember when Democrats' actually liked to let voters decide.