Did Allen Boyd Trade North Florida Jobs for Support from Organizing for America?

RPOF ICYMI - August 06, 2010

Text Size A A A Print

Here’s a question for Allen Boyd to answer during his town hall meetings this weekend. Did he trade a vote in favor of Obamacare for support from President Obama’s political organization?

Earlier this year, Allen Boyd turned his back on his constituents, sacrificing hundreds of jobs in his district to support President Obama’s government-run health care experiment– a government takeover of our health care system that the majority of Floridians oppose. And now President Obama’s political team has mobilized grassroots support for Boyd in his Democrat primary race.

Call Allen Boyd today and tell him to stop trading jobs for political support! Tallahassee Office: (850) 561-3979/ Panama City Office: (850) 785-0812



Timeline: Congressman Allen Boyd Trading Jobs for Political Support

November 11, 2009: Congressman Boyd visits Sallie Mae, wears t-shirt that says “Protect Florida Jobs.” http://www.thenewsroom.com/details/3837637

March 19, 2010: “Sometimes I feel like the Lone Ranger in the night, fighting to save those jobs in Panama City.” Congressman Boyd (Northwest Florida Daily News)

March 21, 2010: Congressman Boyd votes for the health care bill that will kill 700 jobs in Panama City.

March 22, 2010: Sallie Mae Plant Facing Layoffs: “Unless the U.S. Senate acts, the Sallie Mae facility in Lynn Haven likely will start “immediate” layoffs due to health care legislation that keeps private loan providers from originating student loans, officials said Monday. (Panama City News Herald, 3/22/10)

April 21, 2010: Sally Mae Closing: “Sallie Mae will close its Lynn Haven facility by the beginning of next year, eliminating about 700 jobs in Bay County. “It’s just not a very good day for a lot of families in Bay County,” county Economic Development Alliance Executive Director Janet Watermeier said.… “We’ve been warning about the impact of this legislation, and this is a direct result of that,” Sallie Mae spokesman Conwey Casillas said.(Panama City News Herald, 4/21/10)

August 4, 2010: Organizing for America Supporting Boyd In Race. “President Obama's political operation is rallying behind U.S. Rep. Allen Boyd in his heated re-election fight with veteran state lawmaker Al Lawson….Boyd, a "Blue Dog Democrat" with 14 years in the U.S. House, voted against national health care last year, but switched when the final package came back from the Senate. The White House, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and other national leaders have tried to help Democrats — especially those in conservative districts like the Florida Panhandle and Big Bend — who backed Obama on health care….Organizing for America, Obama's political organization, mobilized a canvassing and phone-bank effort for Boyd at Florida Democratic Party headquarters next Monday night." (Tallahassee Democrat 8/4/10)