Chuck Sweeny: It's time for Pritzker to unveil tax plan
Gov. Bruce Rauner is the most vulnerable governor running for re-election on Nov. 6, says the Cook Political Report. At the University of Virginia Center for Politics, political scientist Larry Sabato says the governor race in Illinois leans Democratic.

Roll Call agrees that the gubernatorial race in the Land of Lincoln leans Democratic. Another political mag, Politico, also thinks Rauner is the most vulnerable governor in America.

Now, I know it's only April and the election is half a year away, but the prognosticators I cited are knowledgeable and reputable and don't like to be wrong. Still, anything can happen between now and Nov. 6.

A further problem for Rauner is that whenever the Illinois Republican Party is split over its candidate for governor, the Democratic candidate has an excellent chance of winning.

And the party is indeed split. State Rep. Jeanne Ives, R-Wheaton, nearly defeated Rauner in the GOP primary on March 20. The economically and socially conservative Ives then declined to endorse Rauner. Conservative enthusiasm for Rauner has definitely waned, and the movement conservatives are the ones who do the party's campaign legwork to get out the vote. Chamber of commerce Republicans don't do that sort of thing.

So, we may get a Democratic governor. I think we should start to examine what Democratic candidate J.B. Pritzker, the $3.5 billion man, might do if he is elected. (I have nothing against Pritzker's being a billionaire. I'm sure his dad and uncle earned the money fair and square, building Hyatt hotels.)

The main thing Pritzker wants to do is raise taxes.

Pritzker wants to convert Illinois' flat 4.95 percent income tax to a "progressive" income tax, which would have several rates.

Pritzker says he only wants to raise taxes on wealthy people and that most people would actually see a tax reduction under his plan.

So, what are the rates? And who would be labeled as wealthy? Pritzker wouldn't tell us during the Democratic primary campaign. And he won't tell us now.

"Really, you’d have to negotiate with the legislature over what those rates are and look at the budget for that year you’re putting it in place for,” Pritzker told the Chicago Tribune. “So then you really couldn’t name the rates until you had that negotiating process.”

Buy that man breakfast at Waffle House.

While we can only guess what Pritzker's "progressive" tax rates would be, we can look at nearby states for an idea.

In Iowa, the highest of nine tax rates is 8.98 percent, which kicks in at $70,785. You'll pay 6.12 percent if you earn just $14,157.

Wisconsin has four rates: If you earn up to $11,230 you'll pay 4 percent. You'll pay 5.84 percent if you earn up to $22,470. You'll pay 6.27 percent if you earn more than $22,470 and 7.65 percent if you earn more than $247,350.

Missouri has 11 tax rates; the highest is 6 percent, which kicks in at $9,000.01.

Indiana has a flat, 3.3 percent tax rate, but most of its counties also charge income taxes.

It would be difficult for Illinois to make the switch from a flat income tax to a "progressive" one. Voters would have to pass an amendment to the 1970 Illinois Constitution, which says we are to have a flat income tax. Whether the General Assembly will put such an amendment on the Nov. 6 ballot — it takes a three-fifths majority in both the House and Senate to do so — we don't know.

Pritzker has said he thinks it will take two years to put his "progressive" income tax in place. One thing we know: He promised to eliminate immediately the new program that provides $75 million worth of tax credits for private school scholarships.

“We’re going to get rid of them. I think diverting money away from public schools right now to private tuition tax credits seems like a really bad idea. We need to make sure we’re funding our public schools before we start talking about anything," Pritzker told the Chicago Sun-Times.

We are making sure we are funding our public schools. Rockford schools are getting $8.6 million more in state funding as the result of the new evidence-based school funding reform bill passed in 2017. Belvidere schools will receive $2.5 million in new funds this year. North Boone will receive about $400,000 more. South Beloit will see an additional $430,000 and Freeport schools will get an additional $1.1 million.

Pritzker wants to raise the state's flat income tax while he waits for his "progressive tax" to be enacted. He won't say how much he'd raise the flat tax. He also would provide unspecified tax breaks to low and moderate wage earners.

To help us to survive Pritzker's tax increase he would legalize recreational cannabis and tax that, too. He reckons that would raise $500 million to $750 million.

Smoke 'em if you got 'em. It's going to be a dismal campaign between the evil of two lessers.

Chuck Sweeny: 815-987-1366; csweeny@rrstar.com; @chucksweeny