John Bolton Is Right! Obama’s Iran Deal Is an Act of Surrender

RUSH: John Bolton has it right on this whole, you know, the 47 Republicans sent a letter to Iran. You know the media writing about that, isn’t it convenient they’re forgetting all the letters written by all the Democrats to the Soviet Union led by Ted Kennedy trying to undermine Ronaldus Magnus. They’re not talking at all about the Democrat Party’s effort to undermine Reagan in Nicaragua. For crying out loud, practically the whole Democrat House of Representatives was aligned with the Soviet communists in Nicaragua.

“Dear Comandante,” some of the guys, John Kerry, some of the people that wrote that letter or signed that letter are still in government in one way, one capacity or another. The Democrats own this. Look at what the Democrats did during the Iraq war. They did everything they could to undermine the entire war effort and secure defeat. So here come the Republicans, God bless ’em, they grew a gonad, and they wrote a letter, and 47 of ’em signed it in the Senate, warning the Iranians: Hey, just remember this, whatever deal you sign with Obama can be changed in less than two years when Obama is gone.



Oh. And that reminds me. A guy by the name of Jack Coleman, who is at the Media Research Center’s NewsBusters site, happened to be listening the other day. We had a caller here asking what I thought if Obama decided to blow up the 22nd Amendment and serve a third term, and I answered it with due respect for the caller and so forth, and took it seriously as a premise and asked you to. And I need to go through this again, because as I read my own transcript, you know what happened, I said, “I should have said this, and I should have said that, and I was on a roll anyway. It wasn’t bad, but, man, I thought of things I should have added to it, so we’ll do that before the program ends today.

The Iranians now are thinking that the US government’s corrupt and they can’t be trusted. John Bolton was on Fox News recently. I’m getting the audio of this assembled even as we speak. John Bolton, did you hear what he said, Snerdley? He said (imitating Bolton), “Letter schmetter. I mean, a letter’s fine, but that’s not what the story is. The story is Obama, with this deal with Iran, is surrendering to Iran. That’s what Obama’s Iran deal is, and I was immediately reminded of what Dr. Sowell said to me in an interview with the Limbaugh Letter. We have a Limbaugh Letter interview today, don’t we? (interruption) I’ve got it on my calendar. Did I get the date wrong? I thought we did. Hey, if it’s not, if you don’t… (interruption) Good, my memory — and it’s with one of the FCC commissioners on net neutrality, Ajit Pai. Really looking forward to it.

Anyway, I was talking to Dr. Sowell, previous issue of the Limbaugh Letter, and he told me — I still can’t believe this — he said, “Imagine we wake up one day and New York or Chicago has been devastated by an Iran nuclear weapon.” He said, “Obama would surrender.” What do you mean, surrender? Obama’s not gonna fight?



That’s what he said was his number one concern. So when I saw Bolton essentially characterize the deal Obama wants to do with Iran, securing them a nuclear weapon, giving them permission, giving them time to do it, Bolton said (paraphrasing), “Obama’s surrendering. The letter is fine and dandy for what it is, but that’s not the story. The reason for the letter is precisely that Obama’s surrendering.”

BREAK TRANSCRIPT



RUSH: Now, this group of Republicans. “A group of 47 Republican senators has written an open letter to Iran’s leaders warning them that any nuclear deal they sign with President Barack Obama’s administration won’t last after Obama leaves office. Organized by freshman Senator Tom Cotton and signed by the chamber’s entire party leadership as well as potential 2016 presidential contenders Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz and Rand Paul, the letter is meant not just to discourage the Iranian regime from signing a deal but also to pressure the White House into giving Congress some authority over the process.”

Well, this is not sitting well with the Democrat Party. It’s not sitting well with the White House. It’s not sitting well with Dingy Harry. Dingy Harry says that Republicans are empowering the ayatollahs. Other Democrats are calling this treason. The New York Daily News, front cover, has a picture of a bunch of Republican senators, accusing them of committing treason by trying to undermine the Obama-Iran nuke deal.

Let’s get to the truth of the matter. The letter is one thing, but it’s peanuts, says John Bolton. This morning Fox News Channel’s America’s Newsroom, Bill Hemmer speaking to Bolton about this letter the 47 Republican Senators sent to the leaders of Iran. He said, “Mitch McConnell signed the letter. He is one of the 47. Interestingly that Senator Corker, head of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee out of Tennessee did not. The left is up in arms over this. The New York Daily News front page cover today calling these Republicans traitors. What do you say to that, Mr. Bolton?”

BOLTON: That’s ridiculous. Senators and members of the House opine on foreign policy all the time. There’s a long tradition of it in this country. And in any event we’re arguing about the wrong thing. Let’s talk about Iran’s nuclear weapons program, and the fact that the deal the administration is very close to signing will essentially legitimatize politically this terror-supporting regime. It will legitimatize Iran’s ability to enrich uranium and get itself involved in other aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle. It will not address weaponization. It will not address ballistic missile delivery systems. This deal is act of surrender. That’s what we ought to be talking about.



RUSH: And there it is on the table. The deal that Obama is negotiating with Iran is surrender. Exactly what Dr. Thomas Sowell said he feared from Obama in this Iranian nuke deal. Now, his definition of Obama surrender was a little different. He created a scenario in which we wake up one day and find a major American city obliterated by an Iranian nuke. And he said he feared that rather than retaliate, Obama would surrender. And here Bolton is calling the whole thing a surrender. Everybody’s up in arms about the letter, and these guys have every right to send this letter.

By the way, this letter, this letter pales in comparison to all of the similar times or the similar techniques that Democrats have engaged in. Ted Kennedy sent a letter to then Soviet leader Yuri Andropov apologizing for Ronald Reagan and begging the Soviets not to overreact, essentially saying that Reagan was a reckless cowboy and worse, that the Democrats are gonna do their best to rein him in. The Soviets were reminded he’s not gonna be president forever. Just be patient. We’re doing everything we can here.

And then there were all of the efforts by the Democrat Party, primarily in the House, but the Senate as well, back in the eighties where they were practically aligned in the mind and heart with the Soviets in Nicaragua. This was front and center, this was the prelude to the entire Iran-Contra subject matter and scandal. First there was a Boland Amendment in the House, which forbade any foreign aid going to the Nicaraguan Contras, and Reagan found ways around it, Ollie North actually did. And when that happened, the Democrats just went ballistic.

They would go down there and they would have joint press conferences with Daniel Ortega or Ortega would come to New York. You want to talk about traitors, the Soviet sponsor in Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega would come to New York, and Peter, Paul, and Mary would take him out on a trip to buy sunglasses with your favorite Democrats. And George Miller, congressman from the Bay Area, was the point man whenever Ortega did anything to embarrass the Democrats — and there were many.

Give you one example. The Democrat House of Representatives successfully voted down an aid package to the Contras. Reagan often referred to them as the moral equivalent of our Founding Fathers, the Contras in Nicaragua trying to kick the Soviets out of the country, prevent a beachhead from being established. So when that vote was defeated, Daniel Ortega got on a plane for Moscow and came back with 500 or $600 million dollars of his own from the Soviet Union and ended up bragging about it and waving it around.

So they sent George Miller down there, “You can’t embarrass us this way. You don’t do this. If you’re gonna go to the Soviets and get money, do it on the down low, but you certainly don’t go on TV and wave it around. Don’t embarrass us. We’re your friends.” At the time one of the ranking members in the Democrat House was a man named James Jones. He was from Oklahoma. He went on later to run the American Stock Exchange. He was one of the architects of the “Dear Comandante” letter. The “Dear Comandante” letter to Daniel Ortega urging him and teaching him and telling him how to behave so as not to embarrass the Democrats, because the Democrats were clearly on the side of the Soviet Union.



And you want to talk about treason? They were trying to undermine Reagan, who was arranging, trying to arrange freedom for the Nicaraguan people, vis-a-vis the freedom fighters there who were called the Contras. John Kerry was part of this. April 18th one year in 1980-some-odd, 1985,

John Kerry and Tom Harkin traveled to Nicaragua to meet with Daniel Ortega. And through Kerry and Harkin, President Ortega offered a ceasefire agreement on the condition the US stop aiding the Contras. Reagan denounced the offer as a transparent propaganda initiative designed to influence an upcoming House vote on $14 million of Contra aid. But Kerry said, “I am willing to take the risk in the effort to put to test the good faith of the Sandinistas.”

The Democrats aligned themselves with the Soviet sponsors in Nicaragua, and they were embarrassed time and time again, because the Sandinistas were unable to hide their loving relationship with Moscow. Anyway, the point is, you got Ted Kennedy writing letters to the Soviet Union begging them to, “Hey, hey, hey, we got Reagan under control here, don’t worry about things,” promising that Kennedy and the Democrats would do everything they could to make sure Reagan — oops, gotta take a break.

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Okay. You want to hear what Ted Kennedy wrote? Actually, what he did, he sent his close friend and trusted confidant, a guy named J. Tunney, who was in Moscow, he charged Tunney to convey the following message through confidential contacts to Yuri Andropov. It was in 1983. This was the message to the Soviet leader…

“Senator Kennedy, like other rational people, is very troubled by the current state of Soviet-American relations. Events are developing such that this relationship coupled with the general state of global affairs will make the situation even more dangerous. The main reason for this is Reagan’s belligerence, and his firm commitment to deploy new American middle range nuclear weapons within Western Europe. According to Kennedy, the current threat is due to the President’s refusal to engage any modification on his politics.

“Kennedy asks Y.V. Andropov to consider inviting the senator to Moscow for a personal meeting in July of this year.” This is 1983. “The main purpose of the meeting, according to the senator, would be to arm Soviet officials with explanations regarding problems of nuclear disarmament so they may be better prepared and more convincing during appearances in the USA.”

Kennedy wanted to coach Andropov on how to deal with Reagan. Kennedy wanted to assist the Soviets in prevailing against United States and Ronald Reagan in nuclear arms talks with Ronald Reagan. So the New York Daily News and these Democrats, they can run around and belly ache and whine and moan all they want about this letter that the Republicans have written the leaders of Iran and call it traitorous, while they conveniently forget all of the multiple occurrences of things worse than this by the Democrat Party. And remember, John Bolton called this Iran deal what it is: surrender. Okay, your telephone calls are coming next when we get back, folks.

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Have to say, I like this new senator from Arkansas, Tom Cotton. He organized the letter, by the way. He organized the letter to the Iranian ayatollahs, led by Ayatollah Khamenei, telling them that whatever deal they do with Obama’s not gonna last much longer after Obama’s presidency lasts. Tom Cotton is now firing back at Vice President Bite Me, who has criticized his letter to Iran. Tom Cotton said, “What does he know about foreign policy?” I love this.

We finally have some people that don’t appear to be intimidated by Democrats and the media. “Joe Biden, as Barack Obama’s own secretary of defense has said, has been wrong about nearly every foreign policy and national security decision in the last 40 years,” Cotton said today. That was a reference to Robert Gates, the former secretary of defense who ripped Bite Me in his memoir after leaving office. He said that Biden “has been wrong about nearly every foreign policy and national security decision in the last 40 years.”

So Biden’s been out there complaining and whining and moaning about this letter, and Cotton said, what does he know about foreign policy? “Moreover, if Joe Biden respects the dignity of the institution of the Senate he should be insisting that the president submit any deal to approval of the Senate, which is exactly what he did on numerous deals during his time in Senate.” Of course, Obama is gonna go around Congress on this, like he is on as much as he can.

The Senate has to ratify, but if Obama doesn’t send it to ’em, if he just implements it himself — which he claims he’s gonna do. The Republicans have said that they’re not gonna do anything to stop Obama in all this, so Obama is just gonna keep doing it, which reminds me. Gotta get to this. Jack Coleman at NewsBusters wrote up any reaction to a caller last week asking me to analyze a hypothetical, the hypothetical being Obama not leaving office after two terms and blowing up the 22nd Amendment.