rvmracine
Meet the Staff of RVM

James Schatzman Executive Director

As the founder of the Racine Vocational Ministry, James served as the primary case manager from 2002 (the agency's inception) until approximately 2007. His current role as Executive Director involves developing relationships with potential funders, employers and board members to strengthen the agency's capacity to provide greater service to community businesses by helping to prepare potential workers for workplace needs and by helping participants become more civically engaged. When he is not leading RVM, James can usually be found conducting the Choral Arts Society of Wisconsin.

Heather Bennett Second Chance Program Coordinator

Heather began her work at RVM in 2014. She formally worked with women in recovery at META House in Milwaukee. She is passionate about serving her participants and enjoys working alongside her colleagues to help transform lives.

Nakeyda Hamer Second Chance Case Manager

Nakeyda comes to RVM with a strong education and a rich work experience in the fields of criminal Justice and social services. She has worked as a Correctional Sergeant for the Wisconsin Department of Corrections and as a site monitor in a transitional living environment, for Genesis Behavioral Services. Her education includes an Associate Degree in Criminal Justice from Baker College, of Muskegon, MI. Nakeyda has a deep passion and desire to serve others.

Lorianne Life Program Director

Lori conducts participant intake assessments and provides employment readiness training through the Solutions for Success workshop. She has been with the organization since 2005. She holds a BA degree in Mathematics with experience in data management in both the corporate and non-profit sectors and has experience working in GED and ABE settings. She aspires to earn a master's degree in social work and social ministry.

Michelle Lussmyer Walk-In Case Manager

Michelle comes to us with a wealth of experience in helping people. She received a bachelor’s in social work from UW-Whitewater and a master’s in management from Cardinal Stritch. Her knowledge of local resources and her enthusiasm for making lives better is a valuable asset to our team!

Barry Uhlenhake RVM Case Manager

Barry brings to RVM extensive education, training, and management experience in the public, non-profit, and private sectors, including development and management of Racine County's first YouthBuild construction training program. He has also conducted soft skills training for incarcerated youth and their parents. He holds a BS degree in Secondary Education from the University of Dayton and a MA degree in Political Science from University of Pittsburgh.

Cynthia Vasey Adminstrative Assistant