Even though it never happened, politicial group praises Rep. Darrell Issa for replacing Obamacare
Commercial thanks Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Vista, for replacing the Affordable Care Act with a different health care plan. The issue, however, is that no such thing ever happened. Commercial thanks Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Vista, for replacing the Affordable Care Act with a different health care plan. The issue, however, is that no such thing ever happened. SEE MORE VIDEOS

A political organization recently praised Rep. Darrell Issa in a commercial ad for repealing Obamacare. That’s not exactly what happened.

The American Action Network television ad that aired on Friday afternoon asked viewers to “Thank Congressman Darrell Issa for replacing the Affordable Care Act with better health care.”

The problem is that Issa and other House members did no such thing. On Friday afternoon, a scheduled vote on a bill that would have replaced the existing system with the Trump administration-backed American Health Care Act was canceled after it became clear that there wasn’t enough support for it to pass.

What’s not clear is how the political action committee apparently jumped the gun or misrepresented Issa’s position on the bill, because it wouldn’t discuss the specifics of why the ad ran with the Union-Tribune.

As a part of an ongoing effort to change healthcare policy, the American Action Network made commercials praising at least 11 Republicans in Congress for replacing the Affordable Care Act. It’s uncertain if each of the advertisements made it to the airwaves, or only appeared on the political action committee’s YouTube channel.

The ads thanking members for the repeal appeared on the groups’ website weeks before the vote that didn’t happen. At the time the most recent ad, a commercial that that asked viewers to thank Issa for repealing the ACA, debuted, Issa did not support the AHCA but rather said he planned to fix the ACA current policy.

“The current bill is not in a form that I approve of,” Issa, a Vista Republican, said at a town hall meeting on March 11, the day after the political organization told voters to thank Issa for replacing the ACA. “I am trying to change it. But ultimately the Affordable Care Act has problems that need to be fixed. My intention is to keep working on the fixes.”

Two days later, Issa reiterated his concern about the Republican bill.

“You know I am not prepared to vote for (how) it is right now and I think that’s not because of a specific, this is unacceptable, but because I think we can do better,” Issa said in an appearance on “Fox and Friends”.

Early last week after changes were emerging in the bill, Issa told reporters that he was leaning toward voting in support of it. Issa has not said which amendments to the bill caused his opinion to change, nor has he publicly identified any specific problems he saw in the legislation.

After the vote was canceled on Friday, Issa called the legislation “an imperfect approach and I believe that we can do better. We will go back to the drawing board and get this right for each and every American concerned with high costs in their health care and ever-dwindling choices and access to care.”

Issa said he will continue to try and make changes to the healthcare system, but Trump said he plans to focus on other priorities on his agenda.

House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wisc., did not express optimism that there would be another repeal-and-replace effort soon.

“I don't know what else to say other than Obamacare's the law of the land,” he said after the vote was canceled.

Even if Issa and other members passed the bill through the House, the American Health Care Act would not, at least immediately, replace the Obamacare because the legislation would still need Senate approval and a signature from President Donald Trump to become law. The Senate was viewed as an even tougher hurdle for the bill than the House.

Twitter: @jptstewart

joshua.stewart@sduniontribune.com

(619) 293-1841