Scott Rigell for Congress 2010
SCOTT RIGELL GIVES COMMAND PERFORMANCE AT SECOND CONGRESSIONAL DEBATE

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE:

RIGELL EMPHASIZES JOBS AND THE ECONOMY FOLLOWING YET ANOTHER TROUBLING UNEMPLOYMENT REPORT

VIRGINIA BEACH, VA – Scott Rigell, Republican nominee in Virginia’s Second Congressional District, gave a command performance at the second debate sponsored by Second Calvary Baptist Church in Norfolk. The questions asked during the debate came from everyday citizens and conveyed a range of topics, including health care legislation passed by Democrats in Congress, plans for saving the Joint Forces Command (based in Norfolk), offshore drilling, spending, and immigration.

Throughout the debate, Scott focused on his expertise and proven track record in job creation. Scott was the only candidate who spoke about holding accountable those employers who knowingly hire illegal immigrants.

The second debate came on the heels of the troubling news that unemployment rates are rising. In Norfolk, where the debate was held, unemployment rose to 9.9%, meaning that one out of every ten people in Norfolk is unemployed. Nationally, the unemployment rate rose to 9.7%, a clear indication that the $800 billion stimulus bill that was passed by Democrats, with the support and vote of freshman Democratic incumbent Glenn Nye, has failed to create the jobs that Americans desperately need.

Congressman Nye was on the defensive regarding his first vote in office, which was to make Nancy Pelosi the Speaker of the House. Congressman Nye claimed that Scott’s latest television ad regarding that vote and Congressman Nye’s vote for the $800 billion stimulus bill was a negative attack ad, but the ad merely stated the facts. To view the ad, please click on the following video link:

Scott released the following statement today:

“Congressman Nye likes to tout that he voted against the health care legislation because it was ‘too expensive.’ Yet during the debate, he was forced by the moderator to admit that he would vote against a discharge petition which would force a vote to repeal the Democrats’ recently enacted health care reform legislation and restore over $500 billion in Medicare cuts.

Furthermore, on June 24, 2010, Congressman Nye voted against a bill which would have defunded the $5-10 billion required by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to implement and enforce the health care legislation, including thousands of new IRS agents and employees. The health care mandate requires all Americans to purchase health insurance.

Congressman Nye’s inability or unwillingness to stand by his decisions and maintain a firm, consistent position shows that he lacks the core convictions necessary to be a leader in Congress.

In addition, Congressman Nye stated that he got right to work on the issue of saving our carriers, which he now claims is a problem he inherited. However, the records show that Congressman Nye waited over a year after he took office to form a commission to coordinate our region’s response to the continuous efforts by Florida and other states to move our military assets and commands.

Now more than ever, we need proven leadership in Washington. If I have the high privilege to represent the people of the Second District, I will work tirelessly to create jobs and a strong economy that will generate the tax revenues needed to improve our schools, strengthen social security, and meet the deep obligation we have to the men and women who proudly serve in our military.”