Grassley Cruz
Summary of Grassley/Cruz Gun Substitute • Increases resources and tools for prosecuting criminals (Gun prosecutions have

declined under President Obama and current proposed legislation does not address this issue) o Resources:  National Project Exile Expansion. Provides $15 million per year for 3 years for more Assistant U.S. Attorneys and Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms agents. Applies to fifteen jurisdictions with highest violent crime rates and three tribal jurisdictions with highest rates.  Cruz Task Force. Task Force and $10 million per year for 5 years to prosecute felons and fugitives who try to get guns. Created task force and proposes funding of $10 million per year for five years to prosecute felons and fugitives who fail National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) – funded through the Asset Forfeiture Fund. o Tools:  Criminalizes straw purchasing. In targeted, responsible way that doesn’t sweep in innocent conduct.  Criminalizes trafficking. In a responsible way that doesn’t turn minor gun offenses into arms trafficking offenses. • Increases resources for school safety (President Obama’s budget cut school safety funding) o Secure Our Schools grants. Provides $30 million per year for 10 years under Title III funds. • Addresses mental health. o Increases resources for mental health.  Reauthorizes Mentally Ill Offender Treatment and Crime Reduction Act. This provides $40 million per year for five years for mental health courts, crisis intervention teams, veteran treatment courts, police academy curricula, and transitional services in prison.  Allows Byrne and COPS grants to be used for mental health purposes. o Gives states incentives to provide mental health records to NICS federal database.  Reauthorizes NICS Improvement Amendments Act grants at $20 million per year for 5 years, so states can implement systems to report these records.  Increases Byrne grant penalties for states’ failure to provide mental health records. o Clarifies which records must be submitted NICS.

 Codifies Obama executive order requiring the Attorney General to issue guidance to federal agencies.  Requires federal court information to be made available to NICS. o Fixes the definition of adjudicated mentally incompetent so single doctors can’t infringe on 2nd Amendment rights. • Includes pro-gun provisions. o Allows interstate firearm sales. o Allows military members to buy guns in state of residence or where stationed. o Allows firearms dealers to access NICS to do background checks on employees (with notice and their consent). o Allows interstate transportation of firearms if certain conditions are met (e.g., in vehicle, unloaded, locked or in trunk), and preempts state law to the contrary. • Increases executive branch accountability. o Federal agencies must submit a report to Congress on how many records they submit to NICS. o Attorney General must report to Congress on gun prosecutions. o Top official at DOJ must personally approve any Fast and Furious programs (selling guns to criminals). o Clarifies that ATF can’t collect information on purchases of certain rifles in southwest border states. o Requires report to Congress regarding ammunition purchases by federal agencies. • Initiates a study by National Institute of Justice and National Academy of Sciences to solve mass shootings.