PR 13 10 07
Patrick Campaign Launches First Television Ad Statewide AUSTIN – Today the Dan Patrick for Lieutenant Governor campaign launched its first television ad “Fight.” The ad will air in all major markets and select smaller markets in Texas on Fox News, where most conservative Texans get their news. The ad will air in media markets covering over 80% of all Republican Primary voter turnout.

Patrick Campaign Launches First Television Ad Statewide AUSTIN – Today the Dan Patrick for Lieutenant Governor campaign launched its first television ad “Fight.” The ad will air in all major markets and select smaller markets in Texas on Fox News, where most conservative Texans get their news. The ad will air in media markets covering over 80% of all Republican Primary voter turnout.

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: Contact: Allen Blakemore Monday, October 7, 2013 713-­‐526-­‐3399 Patrick Campaign Launches

First Television Ad Statewide AUSTIN – Today the Dan Patrick for Lieutenant Governor campaign launched its first television ad “Fight.” The ad will air in all major markets and select smaller markets in Texas on Fox News, where most conservative Texans get their news. The ad will air in media markets covering over 80% of all Republican Primary voter turnout. “Fight” is the first ad from any of the Republican campaigns for Lieutenant Governor to air on television. It highlights Dan Patrick’s commitment to secure the border and that Patrick is the only candidate for Lieutenant Governor to actively oppose in-­‐state tuition for illegal immigrants.

click to play Attachments: 1. TV Script 2. White paper documentation

###

pd pol ad  Texans for Dan Patrick  www.DanPatrick.org

Texans for Dan Patrick “Fight” TV :30 10/07/13 VISUAL VOICE Graphics, historic Dan Patrick: photos DP to camera Desert images VO: SUPER DP to camera Dan Patrick: SUPER Desert images VO: SUPER Disclaimer

AUDIO TRACK If Sam Houston, Travis, Bowie, and Austin were here today, they would be proud of Texas, but they’d be ashamed of Washington. Illegal immigration is Washington’s responsibility but it’s our problem.” Dan Patrick is the only candidate for Lieutenant Governor to oppose in-­‐state tuition for illegal immigrants.” I’ll do what Washington won’t do: I’ll secure our border and I’ll end sanctuary cities. And I’ll never stop fighting against Obama’s attacks on Texas.” Secure the border. Fight Obama. Dan Patrick for Lieutenant Governor.”

In-State Tuition: Lt. Governor Candidates on the Record

David Dewhurst

While running for U.S. Senate in 2012, Dewhurst claimed he would have vetoed in-state tuition if he had been governor in 2001. However, during his tenure as Lt. Governor, Dewhurst has foiled efforts to repeal in-state tuition for illegal immigrants, and even allowed the program to be expanded. An Austin American-Statesman report suggested, “there is little evidence to suggest he has worked in that time [since 2003] to repeal the tuition law” (Austin American-Statesman, 09/27/2011). Dewhurst passed an expansion of the program in 2005. Dewhurst allowed the Senate to pass Senate Bill 1528 (79-R). This bill expanded the in-state tuition program by changing the residency definitions. The bill allowed residency to be determined by the student’s status, rather than their parents’ status, and it only required students to live in the state for 1 year to establish residency. (Texas Tribune, 10/25/2011). Dewhurst said the Senate supported in-state tuition. When a repeal of in-state tuition was proposed in 2007, Dewhurst said the Senate historically supported offering in-state tuition to every resident. A bill by Rep. Zedler (80-R: HB 159) to repeal in-state tuition failed in the House, and Dewhurst said the bill would not have passed the Senate, even if it had survived in the House. (Fort Worth Star-Telegram, 05/10/2007). Dewhurst killed another reform bill by sending it to a liberal Democrat’s committee. Another reform bill – Senate Bill 1631 (82-R) – was proposed by Sen. Birdwell in 2011. Dewhurst referred the bill to the Senate Higher Education committee, which was chaired by liberal Democrat Sen. Judith Zaffirini. By referring the bill to her committee, Dewhurst ensured the bill would not receive a vote. Birdwell attempted to attach the education finance bill, but his efforts were stymied by Republicans and Democrats. (Austin AmericanStatesman, 09/27/2011; Blue Dot Blues, 09/27/2011).

Ted Cruz pointed out Dewhurst’s hypocrisy during the 2012 U.S. Senate campaign. During the

campaign, Dewhurst said he would not have signed the in-state tuition bill. Based on Dewhurst’s actions as Lt. Governor, Ted Cruz said: "This is another Republican primary year conversion by David Dewhurst. He was for in-state tuition for illegal immigrants before he was against it. The next Senator from Texas needs to be a strong conservative who knows what he believes. I strongly oppose in-state tuition for illegal aliens, and categorically oppose amnesty or preferential treatment for illegal immigrants" (Corpus Christi Caller Times, 09/27/2011).

In-State Tuition: Lt. Governor Candidates on the Record

Jerry Patterson

Patterson said lawful status should be given to illegal immigrants to avoid in-state tuition issues. In an interview with the El Paso Times, Patterson stated support for giving illegal immigrants some form of legal status so they would be granted in-state tuition as a legal resident:

Q. Gov. Rick Perry sought to make that argument with the Texas Dream Act, which grants instate tuition to qualifying undocumented immigrants at Texas colleges and universities. What is your position on the Texas Dream Act? A. I don't support the idea of saying, "We're going to ignore the law and let you do that." I support the idea of fixing their status as opposed to trying to just sweep the status under the rug. I would not support an in-state tuition bill for illegals. I would support a method of providing them a lawful status where in-state tuition for illegals wouldn't be a problem. We're Band-Aiding. (El Paso Times, 02/07/2013). Patterson said he opposed in-state tuition and instead supported granting illegals “lawful status,” making instate tuition irrelevant.

Todd Staples

Staples supported the in-state tuition bill as a state senator. Staples supported House Bill 1403

(77-R) which granted in-state tuition to the children of illegal immigrants (WFAA, 02/23/2013). Opponents of the bill said it would turn a blind eye to individuals living in the U.S. illegally. (House Research Organization, House Bill 1403 Bill Analysis). Staples voted to support rewarding people who violated our laws and entered the country illegally.

Dan Patrick

Patrick supported efforts to end in-state tuition for illegal immigrants. In 2011, Patrick joined

Sen. Birdwell in offering Floor Amendment 2 to Senate Bill 1581(82nd Legislature, Senate Journal, pp. 209192). The amendment prohibited illegal immigrants from receiving in-state tuition. (Austin AmericanStatesman, 05/09/2011).

On the Record

Of the four candidates running for office, only one has taken action on in-state tuition. While

Dewhurst, Patterson and Staples have all supported in-state tuition for illegal immigrants, Patrick joined other conservative Senators in attempting to repeal the law. We need a leader who will provide conservative leadership on immigration issues. The other three candidates for Lt. Governor have already demonstrated they will not offer conservative leadership.