Friday Round-Up: Seahawks Cornerback Richard Sherman Visits Local Hospital
When @RSherman_25 found out Ellie lost her beloved Shermie doll, he drove all the way to Tacoma to make her smile. #Seahawks pic.twitter.com/dHeKavM3yU — Mary Bridge (@Mary_Bridge) October 12, 2017

Good morning, 12s.

Here's a look at what's "out there" for today - Friday, October 13 - about your Seattle Seahawks: Read

Sherman Visits Local Hospital

It recently came to the attention of Richard Sherman that Ellie, a 4-year-old patient at Mary Bridge Children's Hospital, had lost her prized Richard Sherman doll, 'Shermie,' and after the hospital reached out to the Seahawks cornerback, Sherman was quick to take action.

“I think she got it when she was around 18-months old,” Ellie's mother, Megan Carter said of the Sherman doll, via MyNorthwest.com. “… I don’t know why she glommed onto it, but she has carried it around everywhere; every surgery she has ever had, every hospital stay, every appointment. So she really depends on it. On Monday, she had a procedure at Mary Bridge and he got misplaced, or lost when she was moved to recovery. She was devastated. That’s how this whole thing got started.”

https://twitter.com/RSherman_25/status/917808369167089665

On Thursday, the seventh-year pro made a surprise visit to the Tacoma-area hospital to see Ellie, who according to MyNorthwest.com was born premature and has dealt with medical issues ever since.

“She kept saying, ‘I can’t believe you’re alive, I can’t believe you’re alive,'” Carter said. “She doesn’t really care about football, but every time he comes on the screen she freaks out and cheers for him. And every time he gets tackled or falls down, she says, ‘Oh no, Shermie, is he OK?'”

While Sherman didn't have a new 'Shermie' doll on hand, Carter said he plans to give a replacement doll to Ellie at an upcoming Seahawks practice. Video from Sherman's visit with Ellie is embedded for you above. Read

Social Post Of The Day

Today's "Social Post of the Day" comes from Seahawks strong safety Kam Chancellor, who recently had his high school jersey number retired.

https://www.instagram.com/p/BaK50C6jgjc/ Read

More From Around The Web

Here at Seahawks.com, digital media reporter John Boyle shares Part II of his bye-week Q&A with 12s, discussing everything from future Hall of Famers on Seattle's current roster to the running back rotation to options at left guard with Luke Joeckel expected to miss time after the bye week.

Scott Engel from RotoExperts.com helps you find your bye-week fantasy football fill-ins.

In his latest Football 101 video, Dave Wyman at 710Sports.com breaks down Earl Thomas' interception in this past weekend's win over the Rams.

Bob Condotta at the Seattle Times revisits the Seahawks' 1987 season that saw a players' strike and teams fill roster spots with replacements players.

Brady Henderson at ESPN.com assesses the Seahawks' philosophy that has shaped their offensive line.

And with the Seahawks on bye, here's a look at which teams NFL.com is predicting to win the rest of this weekend's games.