Politics podcast: Hamilton Elector’s anti-Trump plot and Inslee’s $4 billion tax bump, on The Overcast
Bret Chiafalo explains the "Hamilton Electors" on The Overcast. The Democratic elector from Washington hopes to unite with Republican electors in other states to deny Donald Trump the White House when the Electoral College votes on Dec. 19.

What’s the longshot “Hamilton Electors” movement? Bret Chiafalo explains.

The Democratic elector from Washington state hopes to unite with Republican electors in other states to deny Donald Trump the White House when the Electoral College votes on Dec. 19.

He says he and others in the movement are taking their cues from the Founding Fathers, including Alexander Hamilton, who wrote about the Electoral College in The Federalist Papers.

At 12:30, Chiafalo says, “They didn’t want a demagogue to come into power. They didn’t want someone who was influenced by foreign powers to come into power … They didn’t want the tyranny of the majority or someone with the low arts of popularity and the base arts of intrigue to get into the presidency. And we firmly believe that Donald Trump fails on all those tests.”

We call Seattle Times state government reporter Joe O’Sullivan at 23:30 to discuss Gov. Jay Inslee’s budget plan, which includes more than $4 billion in proposed new taxes to pay for public schools, mental-health system fixes and more.

Senate Republicans are calling the plan dead-on-arrival.

“This is kind of the governor’s opening bid,” O’Sullivan says. “He’s saying, ‘This is all the stuff that the state should go ahead and do,’ probably knowing he’s not going to get there on all of it.”

This week’s winner in local politics: Seattle City Councilmember Kshama Sawant. The council voted unanimously to pass her legislation capping the move-in money that landlords are allowed to charge renters and giving renters the right to pay such costs in installments.

This week’s loser: U.S. Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers. Earlier this month, the Spokane Republican was considered a top contender to lead the Department of the Interior under Trump. But the president-elect has instead picked Ryan Zinke, a Montana congressman and former Navy SEAL.

Subscribe to The Overcast on iTunes, TuneIn or via RSS. If you listen on iTunes, leave us a review there (and please be nice — we’re new at this).

Find and listen to past episodes of The Overcast here.

Send us your feedback and your nominations for next week’s winner and loser in local politics. Leave a comment on this post, tweet at us (@Jim_Brunner, @DBeekman and @Gina_Cole_), email us (seattletimesovercast@gmail.com) or drop us a voicemail at 206-464-8778.