New Jersey Legislature
Legislation sponsored by Senators Joe Pennacchio (R-26) and Anthony Bucco (R-25) to pay tribute to former Morris Plains Mayor and Morris County Freeholder Frank Druetzler for his many years of laudable public service, by ceremoniously renaming a local rail station in his honor, has passed the New Jersey Senate. “Frank Druetzler’s legacy exemplifies all that makes Morris Plains ‘the Community of Caring,’” said Pennacchio. “From his 15 years as freeholder to his 32 years as mayor, he has dedicated decades of his life to public service. Frank always put people before politics. Renaming the train station in his honor is a fitting tribute.” Continue Reading…

The New Jersey Senate has passed a resolution sponsored by Senate Republican Leader Tom Kean (R-21) urging the federal government to enact legislation that would permit students to use savings plans to cover the cost of apprenticeship programs. According to the Employers Association of NJ, nearly 60 percent of their members reported that their primary recruiting obstacle is a lack of skilled applicants, necessitating the need for Sen. Kean’s legislative efforts to encourage more students to pursue apprenticeships. “Professional apprenticeships open doorways for students who choose a skills-based career path, including on-the-job training, mentors, and nationally-recognized industry credentials. There’s a reason why the rate of job placement for those who seize these opportunities is exceptionally high,” Kean said. “Expanding 529 savings accounts to cover apprenticeship costs will encourage more young New Jerseyans to pursue skilled labor training, so they can get a great job and help us grow New Jersey’s innovation economy.” Continue Reading…

Legislation sponsored by Senator Robert Singer (R-30) and Senator Kristin Corrado (R-40) to aid and honor deceased military members and their families has passed the New Jersey Senate. “All veterans and their families deserve to be laid to rest with dignity,” Singer said. “Knowing that there are unclaimed remains of deceased veterans, their spouses, and their dependents sitting in funeral homes or being buried without honor is heartbreaking. This legislation would ensure the remains of veterans’ loved ones can be claimed by a qualifying veteran’s organization, so they can receive the proper burial they deserve.” Continue Reading…

Senator Mike Doherty’s (R-23) resolution designating the month of May as “Civil War Veterans Recognition Month” has passed the New Jersey Senate. “The Civil War was the bloodiest and deadliest war in our nation’s history,” Senator Doherty said. “More than 620,000 soldiers lost their lives right here on American soil. Our young nation emerged bruised but not broken; fragile yet indivisible. To honor the Grand Army of the Republic and the Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War, it is fitting that we designate the month of May as ‘Civil War Veterans Recognition Month.’” Continue Reading…

Any public employee or elected official who is convicted of committing a sex offense while on the job would be required to forfeit their state pension, under legislation sponsored by Senator Kristin Corrado. The bill, A-3766/S-2595 cleared the New Jersey Senate on May 30, 2019 and now heads to the Governor’s desk for final approval. “Anyone who has the audacity to use their taxpayer-funded position of power to assault a coworker doesn’t deserve a state pension,” Senator Corrado (R-40) said. “Public service is about helping people and making the state you work for a better, safer place for all. Anyone who commits a crime that is contrary to that mission, whether it’s an ethics violation or a sex offense, shouldn’t be paid by the state for life. We need to confront this crisis head-on and ensure that people know there are real consequences for committing crimes in the workplace.” Continue Reading…

Second Bill Added to ‘Code Blue’ Package Would Allow Healthcare Providers and Social Workers to Deliver On-Site Services to the Homeless During Cold Weather Emergencies The New Jersey Senate has passed legislation sponsored by Senator Robert Singer (R-Monmouth, Ocean) and Senate Republican Leader Tom Kean (R-Union, Morris, Somerset) to ensure at-risk individuals who turn to a warming center for shelter during a Code Blue alert have access to lifesaving services during their stay. “Although shelters often experience a higher demand during Code Blue season, more often than not, a person in crisis will show up during a snowstorm, and leave without knowing where to go next. We may not get another chance to help that person. That’s unacceptable,” Singer said. “People should have access to the support they need, when and where they need it. This bill will solve that problem, by ensuring the right personnel are on the ground, ready and willing to answer any questions and provide quality care to those in need, before the storm ends,” Singer added. Continue Reading…

Senator Declan O’Scanlon (R-Monmouth) today voted ‘yes’ on a critical bill to expand New Jersey’s medical marijuana program. The bill passed the Senate by a vote of 33-4. “I am proud to be a prime sponsor of this legislation and vote ‘yes’ on its passage. However, I do believe there are some areas of the bill we can improve upon,” O’Scanlon said. “I would like to see us phase out the tax on medical cannabis completely within two years – if not immediately – and certainly not add another tax. I don’t believe we should be taxing medication at all.” Continue Reading…

Senate sponsor, survivors, & advocates laud final Legislative passage of bill inspired by child sex abuse survivor & national advocate, Erin Merryn. The New Jersey General Assembly has passed “Erin’s Law,” legislation long-sponsored by Senator Anthony Bucco to require all school districts to incorporate age-appropriate sexual abuse prevention and awareness education into the NJ Student Learning Standards, formerly known as the core curriculum, for students in grades Pre-K through 12. S-1130/A-769 passed the State Senate on March 25, 2019 and now heads to the Governor’s desk for final approval. If signed, Erin’s Law would take effect in the first school year following the date the law is enacted. Today’s advancement of the bill follows a years-long effort by Senator Bucco, Erin Merryn – the survivor for whom the bill is named– and a number of other local advocates, who have worked together to ensure every child in New Jersey has the tools they need to recognize and report sexual abuse. “Every child should understand how to recognize and report sexual abuse. Teaching kids not to talk to strangers isn’t enough when their abuser could be hiding in plain sight. 93 percent of kids know their attacker. They need age-appropriate safe-touch education,” Senator Bucco said. “We have spent years fighting for Erin’s Law, and we won’t stop until every child, in every New Jersey classroom, has access to this lifesaving information. Governor Murphy – please do not let another school year go by without helping us get this signed into law.” Some private schools in New Jersey are already voluntarily providing safe-touch educational resources that are similar to those that would be mandatory under Senator Bucco’s Erin’s Law. In one New Jersey case, the availability of this critically-important knowledge is already having an impact. “What makes me feel good about this law getting passed is that other kids, like me, can speak up about what is happening to them by any unsafe adult, or anyone. This law being passed will allow all children in New Jersey to see, and more likely to help them understand the importance of where it is safe & unsafe to touch. This will help kids going through abuse not be afraid to say something about it. Thank you Senator Bucco for helping all New Jersey children,” a child, who after receiving a “safe-touch” lesson at a New Jersey private school subsequently reported her abuser, said. (The child is choosing to remain anonymous in this statement, due to their status as a minor and a survivor of sexual assault.) Continue Reading…

Senate Republican Leader Tom Kean, a member of the Port Authority Bus Terminal Bi-State Elected Officials Working Group, released the following statement on today’s announcement regarding plans to expand the Port Authority Bus Terminal: “After years of advocacy, I am relieved to finally see plans for an expansion of the Port Authority Bus Terminal move forward today. It’s the right and essential thing to do for the tens of thousands of commuters who rely on the terminal to get to and from work safely. “We will continue to fight for the infrastructure upgrades that are critical to keeping our region a beacon of opportunity and a national engine of economic growth, including this long overdue expansion, and the Gateway Tunnel. Continue Reading…