Highlights of exit poll in the California Democratic primary
HISPANICS RISING

Hispanics constituted a much larger proportion of voters than in earlier primaries, and they went for Sen. Hillary Clinton by a margin of about 2-1. Nearly two-thirds of Hispanics ages 18-29 picked Clinton. Bucking a national trend, Sen. Barack Obama enjoyed only a slight advantage among all voters under 30. Hispanics are largely Roman Catholic, a group that overwhelmingly backed Clinton in California.

ECONOMY SINKING

Clinton benefited from a gloomy mood about the economy, which was rated the No. 1 issue by nearly half of Democratic voters. Overwhelmingly, they said the nation's economy is in poor or not-so-good shape, and those voters slightly preferred Clinton. Very few reported their families are getting ahead financially; those who are holding steady or falling behind favored Clinton.

NON-ELITES FOR HILLARY

Obama ran strong among the richest and best-educated voters. Less affluent and less educated voters favored Clinton.

INDEPENDENTS FLOCK TO OBAMA

Obama benefited from a rule that allows California voters registered as "decline to state" to cast ballots in the Democratic primary. Nearly one in five of those surveyed identified themselves "independent or something else," and they preferred Obama about 2-1 over Clinton.

IDEOLOGY: SPLIT

Obama has enjoyed an advantage among self-described liberals in other states, but Clinton and Obama fought to a draw among this group, the biggest ideological chunk of California Democratic primary voters. Clinton was favored by a wide margin of moderates.

TEDDY LOOMS LARGE

Nearly half of Democratic primary voters said Sen. Ted Kennedy's endorsement of Obama was very or somewhat important to their selection — and more than half of those said they voted for Obama. Roughly a third said they made up their minds about whom to support this week or last, underscoring the power of the Massachusetts senator's announcement Jan. 28, and his subsequent burst of campaigning in California.

STRONG WOMEN

Women voters significantly outnumbered men, and they decisively preferred Clinton. Obama ran especially strong among white men, but among Hispanic men, it was the opposite.

CHANGE VS. EXPERIENCE

In a year in which voters said they hungered for change, California Democratic primary voters rated Obama the better agent of it by a 2-1 margin. It was the top quality cited by Democrats in shaping their pick. But Obama's edge was blunted by Clinton's image as the candidate of experience: A quarter said she had the right experience, and almost all of those voters went for her.

___

Results were from interviews of 1,811 Democratic primary voters conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International in 38 precincts across California on Tuesday. Margin of sampling error plus or minus 3 percentage points for each primary. The samples include 361 Democratic voters who voted early or absentee and were surveyed in the past week by telephone.

___

On the Net:

Methodology details: surveys.ap.org/exitpolls/feb5method.html