Dr. José Espinoza
The Socorro Independent School District is a remarkable school district leading the way with inspiring and innovative instruction and a strong commitment to the children in our community. The district covers more than 130 square miles and serves more than 47,000+ students at 49 schools in East El Paso, the city of Socorro and Horizon City.

As one of the fastest-growing districts in the state, SISD remains dedicated to ensuring we offer the highest caliber education in a safe learning environment and state-of-the-art facilities. During my first year as superintendent, I sought the input of the students, parents, educators, administrators and community members who deserve nothing but the best in SISD.

As a result, their feedback along with the vision of the Board of Trustees was instrumental in the creation of the District Strategic Plan, which is our pathway to academic achievement. This plan guides us to provide high quality instruction with transparency and accountability. Our five strategic directives ensure we provide: A Safe and Supportive Learning Environment; College and Career Readiness; Highly Qualified, Effective Faculty and Staff; Home, School, Community Partnerships; and Accountability for ALL.

Every member of Team SISD is critical in ensuring we meet our goals of high student achievement and quality customer service for our stakeholders. Therefore, we will continue with our commitment to safe schools, academic excellence, parental involvement, and community engagement. In addition, Team SISD remained true to our bond motto of “Promises Made, Promises Kept” and delivered all of our Bond 2011 projects on time and within budget to ensure our students are learning in top-notch facilities. These are the things that matter when it comes to making sure we are dedicated, equipped and prepared to educate our children.

I am delighted to be part of Team SISD and to have tremendous community support. Together, we will lead, inspire and innovate to ensure our students are Tomorrow’s Leaders Learning Today!

Sincerely,

José Espinoza, Ed.D.

Superintendent of Schools