Nobody can forget a big-cat encounter

By TERRY TOMALIN

Published May 1, 2005

DEAD RIVER - Talking with Jack Coleman, a ranger at Hillsborough County Wilderness Park on U.S. 301, the conversation turned to panthers.

"I saw one about 20 years ago on the upper Hillsborough," I said. "I remember that at the time, people thought I was crazy."

Coleman, who has lived on the river since 1985, said he had seen a big cat in the area on more than one occasion.

"They're around," the ranger said. "No doubt about it."

When I saw what could have been a panther, my friend Rich Berube and I had put our 15-foot aluminum canoe in at State Road 39 shortly before dawn. We paddled several miles, and at sunrise we saw several small feral pigs scampering along the riverbank.

Less than 15 feet away, a cat of about 110-pounds vaulted through the clearing and took two swipes at a screaming piglet. Although it has been more than two decades I remember Berube's words as if he had uttered them yesterday:

"Was that what I think it was?" he asked.

"I think so," I replied.

The animal looked like a cat, moved like a cat and sounded like a cat. But growing up in New Jersey, I had never seen a cat quite that large.

"Do you think it was a panther?" I asked.

"I don't know," Berube said. "There aren't supposed to be panthers up this far."

The next day we told the story to my roommate, Dave Sumpter, a wildlife biologist.

"Were you drinking," he asked.

"No," I said. "It was six o'clock in the morning."

For the next decade or so Sumpter and I had several discussions about whether Berube and I had actually seen one of the rare animals.

Years later there were several reports of a panther spotted around Hillsborough River State Park, a few miles north of Dead River.

I hadn't thought about the encounter in quite a while until Dr. Gary Mormino, co-director of the Florida Studies Program at the University of South Florida St. Petersburg, passed along a newspaper clip from an 1899 edition of the Tampa Tribune. The headline screamed: "Fought Wildcat: Desperate Encounter Between Beast and Man."

The story said F.D. Biggs of Thonotosassa was enjoying a picnic lunch with his wife and 2-year-old when a "big catamount" pounced upon his baby. In the ensuing battle, "... the cat bit Mr. Smith terribly on the arm, and, fastening its claws in his clothing, tore his coat and shirt almost completely from his body."

Luckily, the story states, Biggs was a big man and got a good grip on the animal's throat, which he tightened "until he choked the cat to death."

Biggs subsequently took the body of the animal to his general store, where it was displayed, drawing large crowds, the story concluded.

According to state wildlife officials, there has never been a documented Florida panther attack on a human being. And there is no way to corroborate a newspaper article from more than 100 years ago.

But for those lucky enough to have seen a panther in the wild, the experience is unforgettable. Coleman can't give you the exact time and date of his sightings, but he can tell you the exact circumstances of each encounter.

I called my old friend Berube last week to ask him if he remembered seeing the big cat chasing the little pigs.

"Oh yeah," he said. "That is something I'll never forget."

More than 10 years after our encounter, the Times ran a story about a panther spotted by several people in the Hillsborough River State Park area.

The sightings were not verified. Then in March 2003, a 112-pound panther was struck and killed by a car as it tried to cross I-4. I couldn't help but feel a little sad.