News
June 23 is the 12th Annual Swim Across America Greenwich-Stamford Open Water Swim

On Saturday, June 23, 2018, more than 300 swimmers and 100 land volunteers, boaters and kayakers will make waves in the fight to against cancer in the 12th annual Swim Across America Greenwich-Stamford Swim. The Greenwich-Stamford Swim Across America event is held on the border of Old Greenwich and Stamford, Connecticut, at 96 Cummings Point Road, Stamford, that is home to the Swim’s beneficiary, the Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy (ACGT). Swimmers, boaters, kayakers, paddle boarders and land volunteers interested in participating in the June 23, 2018, 12th annual Swim Across America Greenwich-Stamford Swim, should register at swimacrossamerica.org/greenwich. For more information, email greenwich@swimacrossamerica.org or call 203-570-9195.

More







Bigelow Tea becomes Benefit Corporation



Bigelow Tea is proud to announce the recently attained distinction of becoming a Benefit Corporation. The family company is the #1 Specialty Tea market leader, manufacturing “Constant Comment”® and more than 150 tea varieties sold nationwide. Now officially registered as a Benefit Corporation, it is one of a select group of companies that has designated corporate social responsibility as a core business goal in the pursuit of a positive social and environmental impact.

Bigelow Tea is proud to announce the recently attained distinction of becoming a Benefit Corporation. The family company is the #1 Specialty Tea market leader, manufacturing “Constant Comment”® and more than 150 tea varieties sold nationwide. Now officially registered as a Benefit Corporation, it is one of a select group of companies that has designated corporate social responsibility as a core business goal in the pursuit of a positive social and environmental impact. More





State Bonding Awarded to Women’s Center



The Women’s Center is pleased to announce we are the recipients of an award from the State of Connecticut bonding commission in the amount of $991,056 for overdue critical repairs to our headquarters. These repairs will include replacement of the rubber roof, new wiring and other electrical upgrades, replacement of damaged HVAC units, installation of energy efficient doors and windows, and increased security measures.

The Women’s Center is pleased to announce we are the recipients of an award from the State of Connecticut bonding commission in the amount of $991,056 for overdue critical repairs to our headquarters. These repairs will include replacement of the rubber roof, new wiring and other electrical upgrades, replacement of damaged HVAC units, installation of energy efficient doors and windows, and increased security measures. More







The Center for Sexual Assault Crisis Counseling and Education Awarded New Canaan Community Foundation Grant

In late May, at an awards ceremony at the New Canaan Library, The Center for Sexual Assault Crisis Counseling and Education (The Center) received a $5,000 grant from the New Canaan Community Foundation. A recognition that sexual violence is a problem in every community, this generous grant will fund The Center’s prevention education programming in New Canaan and surrounding communities. An ongoing goal of The Center’s education department is to reach different audiences in the community to raise awareness of the problem as well as the resources available to those affected by sexual violence. Part of that initiative includes instructing police officers, social workers, health teachers and parents, in addition to our in-school programs. Prevention education delivered by trained professionals is especially important given that 70% of Connecticut residents report that their parents did not discuss sexual assault with them, and nationally one in four (1:4) women and one in six (1:6) men will experience sexual assault in their lifetime.

More





Summer Tea Party with Abigail Adams



Have tea with a former first lady! Join the Norwalk Historical Society on Sunday, July 15, 2018 at 2:00pm for a Summer Tea with Abigail Adams at the Townhouse at Mill Hill Historic Park. Abigail Adams reenactor Carol Bielefeld will delight with a lively performance as history’s most fascinating first lady while guests enjoy a unique summer tea party. Instead of hot tea, this summer party will feature a variety of iced teas, including Iced Liberty Tea. Traditional tea party fare of scones, tea sandwiches and sweets will be served along with some Colonial themed surprises. Delightful gift baskets featuring tea and spirits will be raffled off. Reservations required as there is limited seating. Tickets: $40.00 before July 9 and $45.00 after July 9 and at the door. Purchase tickets at www.norwalkhistoricalsociety.org . Mill Hill Historic Park is located at 2 East Wall Street in Norwalk, CT. Handicapped and limited mobility parking on site only. For general parking, follow parking signs to lot across the street.

Have tea with a former first lady! Join the Norwalk Historical Society on Sunday, July 15, 2018 at 2:00pm for a Summer Tea with Abigail Adams at the Townhouse at Mill Hill Historic Park. Abigail Adams reenactor Carol Bielefeld will delight with a lively performance as history’s most fascinating first lady while guests enjoy a unique summer tea party. Instead of hot tea, this summer party will feature a variety of iced teas, including Iced Liberty Tea. Traditional tea party fare of scones, tea sandwiches and sweets will be served along with some Colonial themed surprises. Delightful gift baskets featuring tea and spirits will be raffled off. Reservations required as there is limited seating. Tickets: $40.00 before July 9 and $45.00 after July 9 and at the door. Purchase tickets at www.norwalkhistoricalsociety.org . Mill Hill Historic Park is located at 2 East Wall Street in Norwalk, CT. Handicapped and limited mobility parking on site only. For general parking, follow parking signs to lot across the street. More







CT Landmarks Hosts Vintage Baseball Game at Nathan Hale Homestead on June 30th

Over a century has passed since the last baseball game was played at the Nathan Hale Homestead, but two teams will take the field once again on Saturday, June 30th at 1 pm! Connecticut Landmarks is excited to welcome the Bouckville Summits and the Providence Grays, two teams from the Mid-Atlantic Vintage Base Ball League, to the Homestead’s playing field. Hay bales will mark the field used by the Coventry Farmers’ Market every Sunday, and the name of this game is authenticity – the rules, uniforms, bats and balls will be true to 1864.

More





Pequot Library's Miss Susan's Potluck and Campout kicks off summer reading challenge



The public is invited to Pequot Library’s Great Lawn on Friday, June 8, 2018, for the 13th annual potluck, outdoor concert, and campout to kick off its summer reading program. This favorite community event is now held in memory of Susan Ei, long-time Children’s Librarian at Pequot Library. It is free, open to all, and takes place on Pequot Library's one-of-a-kind expansive front lawn. Throughout the evening attendees can sit and listen to the music or roast s'mores by a campfire, tell ghost stories, and enjoy fun lawn activities including badminton and playing with a huge spinnaker from a sailboat.

The public is invited to Pequot Library’s Great Lawn on Friday, June 8, 2018, for the 13th annual potluck, outdoor concert, and campout to kick off its summer reading program. This favorite community event is now held in memory of Susan Ei, long-time Children’s Librarian at Pequot Library. It is free, open to all, and takes place on Pequot Library's one-of-a-kind expansive front lawn. Throughout the evening attendees can sit and listen to the music or roast s'mores by a campfire, tell ghost stories, and enjoy fun lawn activities including badminton and playing with a huge spinnaker from a sailboat. More







Malloy announces $7.5 million to fund clean air projects from VW settlement

Governor Dannel P. Malloy on Wednesday announced that the State of Connecticut is making available $7.5 million dollars from the national legal settlement in the Volkswagen (VW) Corporation emissions cheating scandal to fund clean air projects. Administered through the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP), eligible projects must reduce nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions across the state and meet other program requirements.

More





National Donut Day, Made Possible By The Salvation Army

As many people celebrate National Donut Day, it’s important to remember that the warm, delicious treat also serves as a symbol of hope. Started by The Salvation Army on the first Friday in June in 1938, National Donut Day was created to honor the Donut Lassies who served the sweet treats to soldiers on the frontlines of WWI.

More







Enter the Magical World of Fairies on Father’s Day Weekend at the Bellamy-Ferriday Annual Fairy Festival



Calling all fairies, elves, pixies, and woodland and mystical creatures – as well as regular folk – for a day of enchantment and delight at Connecticut Landmarks’ Bellamy-Ferriday House & Garden! Get your passport to the land of magic, art, and music and join us at the maypole on Saturday, June 16th from noon to 4 pm (rain date: June 17th).

Calling all fairies, elves, pixies, and woodland and mystical creatures – as well as regular folk – for a day of enchantment and delight at Connecticut Landmarks’ Bellamy-Ferriday House & Garden! Get your passport to the land of magic, art, and music and join us at the maypole on Saturday, June 16th from noon to 4 pm (rain date: June 17th). More





Deadline Extended To June 15: SilverSource Award Nominations

SilverSource announced last week that it is extending the deadline for 2018 SilverSource Award nominations. All nominations must be submitted by 5pm on Friday, June 15.

More







Chicago Blackhawks Skills Coach to Lead Summer Camps

NHL Chicago Blackhawks Skating & Skills Development Coach Kevin Delaney will bring two exciting camps to Stamford Twin Rinks from June 25-28, 2018. Delaney is in his seventh season with the Blackhawks, developing skating and game skills for Blackhawks players and players in the Blackhawks development system. Also an experienced youth hockey coach, Delaney is Director of Hockey and Player Development for the Chicago Young Americans, a dominant U.S. Tier 1 AAA youth hockey program.

More





Malloy announces major investment to revitalize New London state pier

Governor Dannel P. Malloy today announced that the state will make a $15 million investment as a first step toward revitalizing the Connecticut State Pier in New London for potential use in the deployment of equipment and workers for the seven offshore wind projects currently planned in the northeast. The funding, which is subject to approval from the State Bond Commission on June 1, will include demolition of selected structures, site improvements, storm water treatment and drainage improvements, upgrades to increase laydown capabilities, construction of a heavy lift pad, improvements to load bearing capacity, and replacement of mooring dolphins.

More







Get involved, inspired and dive into Mystic Aquarium's conservation events this June

Mystic Aquarium’s June conservation events kick-off with World Oceans Day and continues with a variety of fun, family-friendly outdoor happenings all month long. From mud pies to pizza pies, each Mystic Aquarium conservation program is designed to be as informative as it is fun.

More





Blumenthal, Murphy announce resolution establishing "National Gun Violence Awareness Month"

U.S. Senators Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) and Chris Murphy (D-Conn.) joined 14 Senate colleagues and 25 Representatives, led by U.S. Senators Dick Durbin (D-IL) and Tammy Duckworth (D-IL) and U.S. Representative Robin Kelly (D-IL), in introducing a resolution in the House and Senate establishing the weekend of June 1-3, 2018 as “National Gun Violence Awareness Weekend” and designating June as “National Gun Violence Awareness Month.” Every day in America, an average of around 300 men, women, and children are shot, nearly one-third of them fatally. Establishing a month to bring attention to the issue of gun violence honors the thousands of Americans who are victims of gun violence every year, including Hadiya Pendleton who was shot and killed in Chicago, Illinois on January 29, 2013. The resolution also urges citizens and community leaders to concentrate heightened attention on gun violence during June, when gun violence typically spikes at the start of the summer months, and to work together to make our communities safer from this violence.

More







Malloy announces restoration of agricultural sustainability account funding for Connecticut's dairy farmers

Governor Dannel P. Malloy today announced that through his administrative authority, he has fully restored funding to the state’s Agriculture Sustainability Account by reversing a $1.4 million cut to Connecticut’s dairy farmers that was made in the October 2017 bipartisan, biennial state budget. While the budget adjustment legislation that was signed into law earlier this month partially restored some of the funding beginning in fiscal year 2019, the cut still remained for fiscal year 2018. By making reductions in other areas, the Governor has been able to restore funding for 2018, fully reversing the scheduled cuts.

More





Connecticut Council on Problem Gambling Announces New Executive Director

The Connecticut Council on Problem Gambling (CCPG) is pleased to announce the appointment of Ms. Diana Goode as their next Executive Director. Ms. Goode brings 25 years of leadership experience and passion in the non profit sector to the important work of raising awareness about problem and responsible gambling. Diana previously held executive-level positions with Foodshare, Gifts of Love and Operation Fuel. Community participation and involvement is key to Diana; she has previously served as a board member for the Community Farm of Simsbury, Gackstatter Family Foundation, Avon Land Trust, and Farmington River Watershed.

More







State awards $100,000 to cleanse Hoyt Island



Connecticut is set to approve a $100,000 state grant to the Norwalk Land Trust to clean up contamination on Hoyt Island, preserving the three-acre tract as a sanctuary for migrating birds and other wildlife.

Connecticut is set to approve a $100,000 state grant to the Norwalk Land Trust to clean up contamination on Hoyt Island, preserving the three-acre tract as a sanctuary for migrating birds and other wildlife. More





CFA Society Hartford Holds Successful Financial Summit



The CFA Society Hartford recently hosted over 40 investment professionals and their clients at the local chapter’s 2nd Annual “Putting Investors First” Conference and Networking Event, held at the Hartford Club. The non-profit organization’s event was open to the public and offered local residents a chance to hear from four highly esteemed experts in the investment and wealth management field. It also provided an opportunity for wealth managers to connect with investors.

The CFA Society Hartford recently hosted over 40 investment professionals and their clients at the local chapter’s 2nd Annual “Putting Investors First” Conference and Networking Event, held at the Hartford Club. The non-profit organization’s event was open to the public and offered local residents a chance to hear from four highly esteemed experts in the investment and wealth management field. It also provided an opportunity for wealth managers to connect with investors. More