Sidelined by insurance law changes, consumer lawyer faces pink slip

Office of public counsel's supporters say he should keep job, get more powers.

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Rod Bordelon, director of the Office of Public Insurance Counsel, used to have his fingers in almost every pocketbook in Texas.

As the head of a state agency charged with representing insurance consumers in the regulatory process, Bordelon often battled with the insurance industry, pushing the state insurance commissioner to take his side instead of industry's in the rate-setting process, securing lower rates for Texas and saving them hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

But legislation passed in 2003 changed the way Texas regulates insurance, and Bordelon has seen his influence over the rate-setting process lessened.

In the aftermath of those changes, the state's Sunset Advisory Commission — which reviews state agencies every 12 years to determine if they are still needed — is debating whether to act on its staff's recommendation that the insurance counsel's office be eliminated. Sunset staff members say that the office's role could be more efficiently handled by the Department of Insurance in the new regulatory scheme.

That recommendation has been met with concern by consumer advocates and some legislators, who say that OPIC, as the agency is known, is a vital safeguard for consumers that should be preserved and strengthened.

"OPIC is a crucial component to ensure that consumers are treated fairly in the insurance market," said Alex Winslow, executive director of Texas Watch, which is part of a coalition of consumer advocacy groups pushing for the continuation of the agency. "We need to go back to ... a process where OPIC has real authority and teeth to advocate for consumers."

Supporters of the office, including state Sen. Kirk Watson, D-Austin, are voicing their opposition to the recommendation that the office's functions be absorbed by the Insurance Department. The opponents say doing so would give the responsibility for consumer advocacy to an agency that they accuse of being too friendly to industry interests.

"It's like having the fox watching the henhouse," said state Rep. Ruth Jones McClendon, D-San Antonio, a member of the sunset commission. "I think you completely take away the independence when you do that."

However, state Rep. John Smithee, R-Amarillo, chairman of the House Insurance Committee, said that whether the consumer advocacy role is handled by an independent agency is irrelevant. What's important, he said, is that consumers continue to have a voice.

The adjustments made to the office's regulatory power stem from legislation passed in 2003 that decreased regulation of Texas' insurance market, with the intention of lowering insurance rates and encouraging market competition. Before the bill passed, Bordelon and industry representatives would appear before the insurance commissioner, who leads the Insurance Department, to set a range of prices that insurers were allowed to charge for auto and homeowners insurance. If insurers charged a rate that fell outside of the approved range, Bordelon could force a hearing to contest the rate.

Under the new rules, the state enacted a "file and use" system, which allows insurers to set whatever prices they want, provided that they file the rates with the insurance commissioner. The rates stand unless a complaint is filed. Under the new system, Bordelon can no longer force a hearing to contest an individual rate, having to rely on the commissioner to approve his request for a hearing. In 2007, Bordelon filed 22 objections to individual rate filings. Half of those resulted in a hearing.

Bordelon, who was appointed by then-Gov. George W. Bush, hesitates to describe his regulatory powers as weakened. Although having the ability to force a hearing would "improve things somewhat," he said, not having that ability is not a problem. Bordelon said his office often negotiates informally with insurers for lower rates without resorting to formal rate hearings. Nonetheless, at a meeting of the sunset commission last month, Bordelon asked legislators to grant him the power to force a hearing.

Whether the "file and use" system is actually better for consumers has been hotly debated. Both Democratic and Republican legislators at the sunset meeting said they were frustratedthat "file and use" had not led to significant rate decreases for Texans, who continue to pay the highest homeowners insurance premiums in the nation, according to data from the Insurance Information Institute, an industry trade group.

Insurance Commissioner Mike Geeslinsaid rates have dropped 6 percent in the past five years and should continue to drop as competition increases, but he added that Texans' premiums will probably remain among the highest in the nation because the state has so much coastal land, which is costly to insure.

Consumer advocates called for a return to a more strictly regulated insurance market and for the office to regain its regulatory power. Industry representatives agree with sunset commission staff members that the office should be dissolved and that regulation should be loosened even further.

"OPIC has generally not trusted the market enough. They've pushed into the rate-making process more than they should have," said Beaman Floyd, director of the Texas Coalition for Affordable Insurance Solutions. "I would make the same criticism of the Department of Insurance — the idea of a market-based system is to let the market take the first crack at the rate."

The sunset commission is scheduled to issue its final recommendation on the office in September. The Legislature will vote on the recommendations during the 2009 session.

dshieh@statesman.com; 445-1712