Austin school board begins work on facilities master plan, calls for leaving transfer policy alone
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Austin school district officials have begun revising a task force's proposal for a long-range facilities master plan that has stirred controversy throughout the community.

Though board members today plan to approve a timeline for completing the plan, the district has acted promptly on at least one of the task force's recommendations: selling the district's West Sixth Street headquarters.

Other ideas — such as closing schools and overhauling the open transfer policy — got a cool response from some board members.

The trustees met for four hours last week to discuss the plan, which will guide spending on facility construction, repairs and improvements for the next 10 years. It was the first at-length discussion the board has had since the task force completed its work and presented the proposal in March.

In coming months, administrators will devise a new plan using the task force's recommendations, proposals made by schools, district policy and census data.

"There were some things that the committee went further than we expected them to do, work that we as a board should be doing and not a committee," said Trustee Vince Torres, who facilitated the meeting.

Recommendations in the March draft of the 10-year Facilities Master Plan included:

• Realigning grades at some campuses to ease crowding.

• Holding bond elections every four years.

• Selling district properties, including the headquarters.

• Expanding energy conservation programs.

• Redrawing school boundaries and making changes to the district's open-enrollment school transfer policy.

In their discussion, trustees made it clear that they didn't want to touch the open-enrollment transfer policy.

In recent months the policy has been criticized as a cause for overenrollment and underenrollment at various schools. In February, Superintendent Meria Carstarphen told parents concerned about school closures that the policy "has been wearing on certain schools in the district. It is a huge problem." Others have praised it, saying it has helped keep Austin's middle class from fleeing to the suburbs.

Some trustees said last week that the district has too many other issues to tackle and that it didn't need to address the matter now.

The task force's proposal calls for shuttering up to nine underenrolled or underused schools — saving about $11.3 million in annual operating costs — beginning as early as 2012-13 . Schools were not identified in the final draft. Some trustees said they didn't want to close any schools and said that if closures are necessary, they want the academic performance of a school to be considered.

Trustee Lori Moya said at the meeting that she didn't trust the data on the conditions of buildings used by the committee to guide its closure recommendations. "It needs to be completely redone," she said.

Administrators said they already have identified the errors.

Trustees will vote today on a timeline that probably will require the administration to work through the summer on an analysis to back its own recommendation.

That recommendation would be vetted by the community by the end of September and would go before the board in October for review. After making their changes, trustees would approve the final master plan in November.

mtaboada@statesman.com; 445-3620