To keep up with rising costs, Austin may raise property taxes for coming year
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Despite Austin's rosy economic outlook — continued job growth, robust sales tax receipts and rising property values — the City of Austin may raise property taxes to cover its costs next year.

Budget staffers told the City Council on Wednesday that to raise roughly the same amount of money next year as this year, they could lower the tax rate to 47.79 cents per $100 of property value from the current 48.11 cents. But because of cost increases expected next year that are mostly beyond the city's control, such as for fuel and health insurance, the city would be short nearly $18 million at the lower rate, they said.

The staffers' financial forecast also assumes the city will give 3 percent pay raises to all city employees next year.

To avoid a shortfall, the city would have to cut costs or raise the tax rate to 49.95 cents, budget staffers said. That would mean a city bill of $910 for the owners of a median-value home of $182,198, about $33 more than this year.

City departments will soon suggest possible cuts to city services and jobs.

City Manager Marc Ott will consider those ideas before he proposes a 2012-13 budget on Aug. 1. Residents can offer input at public meetings this spring and summer before the council OKs a budget in September.

Austin has fared better than many other cities during the economic downturn of the past few years, with more stable property values and some job growth, economist Jon Hockenyos told the council Wednesday.

Consumers are spending more, so Austin's sales tax revenue, which makes up about one-fifth of the money that pays for parks, libraries, police and other basic city services, is on the rebound.

Budget staffers also predict that property values will rise 5 percent next year. City officials see that as a good sign because property taxes are a large chunk of the city budget.

Expected to decrease or stay flat next year: fees the city collects for things such as traffic tickets and library book fines, money from the city-owned water and electricity utilities that helps pay for other city services and federal grants that the city receives for affordable housing programs.

The city is required by contracts to pay 3 percent raises to police, firefighters and paramedics next year. The forecast also assumes 3 percent raises for civilian employees, who make up the bulk of the city workforce but have no bargaining rights. Ott could decide by August not to recommend that raise in the budget.

Public safety employees received 3 percent raises this year; civilian workers got 2 percent.

The forecast assumes that most city services will stay the same. But it adds in money to cover cost increases that the city can't avoid or had previously agreed to pay, such as bolstering the city's three pension funds, hiring 22 new police officers to keep pace with the city's standard of two officers per 1,000 residents and adding four more firefighters under the city's staffing model for firetrucks.

The city would have an extra $400,000 to work with next year if it chose the highest tax rate possible under state law before residents could petition for an election to limit the increase. That rate would be 50 cents per $100 of property value, or a city tax bill of $911 for the median-value home.

"I will be scrubbing the budget to look for other ways to cut spending because I do not want to see an increase in property taxes," Mayor Lee Leffingwell said in a statement.

In recent years, city officials have made conservative revenue predictions in the spring, then painted a cheerier picture by mid-summer after a few more months of sales tax and property tax data had rolled in.

The gloomiest city budget in recent memory was enacted in 2009, when the city cut more than 100 vacant jobs, raised the property tax rate and gave no employee pay raises but avoided layoffs.

For the current fiscal year, the city scaled back a summer playground program for kids, reduced the hours at John Henry Faulk Central Library and closed a few city pools during the winter months to save money but kept most programs intact.

City department officials hope the council will add some city jobs in the coming year and have written a wish list that totals nearly $25 million and includes more than 200 new jobs, such as staffers to take 911 calls, maintain city parks and review plans for construction projects.

Budget staffers will present the financial outlook for the city's utility departments, Austin Energy and Austin Water, next week.

Contact Sarah Coppola at 912-2939