Perry heads to New York, Connecticut to drum up business for...
By Jonathan Tilove

American-Statesman Staff

It’s back into the blue yonder for Gov. Rick Perry, whose office announced Monday that he will embark on a five-day trip Sunday to New York and Connecticutto lure jobs to Texas. The trip is being advanced this time by a far larger ad buy than similar forays earlier this year to California and Illinois.

The announcement came as Perry rejected the premise of a call from the editorial page of The Wall Street Journal that he veto the budget the Legislature sent him, and seek deeper cuts in business taxes, unless he “wants people to start comparing him unfavorably to (California Gov.) Jerry Brown.”

“They may have read the budget faster than we’ve read the budget, but I’m not sure that those who are making that criticism have a really good handle on the Texas budget process,” said Perry, when asked about the editorial at a signing ceremony for HB 5, the major education reform initiative of the session.

The Journal, in its editorial, contends that the budget actually represents a 26 percent spending increase for the biennium.

‘That’s just not right,” said Perry, who said the increase in spending had been held to below the level of inflation plus population growth. “I don’t understand their math.”

The Journal cites as its source the Texas Public Policy Foundation, which has effectively been Perry’s think tank during his years as governor — and promoted his Texas economic model — but which has parted company with him on the use of rainy day money for infrastructure investments.

Perry will launch his latest barnstorming campaign for other states’ businesses on the last day he can veto legislation from the regular legislative session, which ended May 27. There are no details yet on his itinerary, except that, according to his office, he will meet with “business leaders in the firearm, pharmaceutical and financial industries.”

In the 30-second cable TV ads, Perry and a host of Texans pitch the state as a place booming with newcomers — “1,400 people move in every day” — limitless possibilities and no personal income tax. In one of the ads, Emmitt Smith, the NFL’s all-time rushing leader, calls Texas the “land of opportunity,” followed by director Robert Rodriguez describing it as the “home of creative renegades.”

The week-long $1 million ad buy, like the governor’s trip, is being paid for by the economic development marketing group TexasOne, so no tax dollars are expended, except for the usual cost of the governor’s security detail.

New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, and New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, a Republican-turned-independent, offered no immediate comment on Perry’s plans to visit.

But Andrew Doba, spokesman for Connecticut Gov. Daniel Malloy, a Democrat, said, “Since being elected, Governor Malloy has brought in companies from Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Maine, and elsewhere, companies that have created good paying jobs with good benefits for our residents. That’s part of the reason Connecticut has grown more than 26,000 new private sector jobs under the governor’s watch. While Gov. Perry focuses on lame publicity stunts, Gov. Malloy is focused squarely on results.”

With the addition of New York, Perry will have made these missions to the three largest states with Democratic governors. The next largest states with Democrats at the helm are Washington and Massachusetts.