Perry sounds like a White House candidate as he fires up New York GOP
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

— Gov. Rick Perry sounded as if he was tuning up for a presidential campaign Tuesday, touting his economic record in Texas and hurling criticisms at the Obama administration before a few hundred Manhattan Republicans.

Perry says he has not decided whether he will run for president. But he asked his audience Tuesday to send him a one-word text message ("leadership"), which is how he collected cellphone numbers from the crowds he spoke to during his 2010 gubernatorial re-election campaign.

"We'll let you know what we're going to be doing every day to send a message to Washington," Perry told the New York Republican County Committee over dinner at the Grand Hyatt in midtown Manhattan.

In his speech, Perry recounted a number of bills passed in this year's legislative session, such as new photo identification requirements for voters and new abortion restrictions. But he focused on the robust growth of jobs in Texas during his tenure.

"I'm proud to be conservative not only because I'm from Texas, but because conservatives have won the war of ideas," Perry said.

He did not mention the current field of announced Republican candidates, trying instead to create a contrast between the way he's run Texas and the way President Barack Obama has run the country. He did not directly mention his own possible entry into the presidential race, either.

In an interview earlier in the day on Fox News, host Neil Cavuto asked Perry why he had softened his resistance to a White House run.

"It was a number of conversations that were had with people I trust, including my wife, that basically said, 'Listen, our country's in trouble, and you need to give this a second thought,'\u2009" Perry said, adding that it could be more than a month before he decides whether to run.

"We have some time," he said. "I'm not sure you have to make a decision in a month."

Perry received a predictably warm reception from New York Republicans.

Daniel Isaacs, chairman of the New York Republican County Committee, the official GOP organization for the borough of Manhattan, heaped lavish praise on Perry, especially for the state's economic policies.

Perry, he said, "may well be the person that New York and the rest of America desperately need."

Michael Fandal, a retired police officer and lifelong New Yorker, was impressed by Perry's economic message and said he thinks the governor could become president.

"People are attracted to something that's working well — a Broadway hit," Fandal said. "He's on the top of the mountain. Everybody's hungry, and we want a piece of that."

But the economic picture in Texas isn't as rosy as Perry portrayed.

For one, state lawmakers have spent much of the year grappling with a budget shortfall that left them $27 billion short of the money needed to continue current state services.

In addition, while the national unemployment rate is 9.1 percent and the Texas unemployment rate is 8 percent, some 23 states, including New York, have lower unemployment rates, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Perry often talks about the robust growth of jobs during his tenure. But jobs grew at about the same rate during Democrat Ann Richards' four years as governor. And they grew at a much faster rate during Republican George W. Bush's six years in the office than they have in Perry's 10. Even before the national recession hit in 2008, jobs grew at a slower rate in Texas under Perry than under Bush.

The New York speech, an invitation that Perry accepted after celebrity real estate developer Donald Trump pulled out of the event, put the governor before potential donors to the presidential campaign he might launch. And his prepared remarks contained only one brief mention of his staunch opposition to the Troubled Asset Relief Program for the financial sector.

Earlier Tuesday, Perry starred at a lunch with about 30 people from the city's business community, and he plans to meet today with former New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, whom Perry endorsed for president in 2008.

"Two friends meeting," Perry spokesman Mark Miner said.

This weekend, the Texas governor will speak to the Republican Leadership Conference in New Orleans as part of a lineup that includes numerous presidential candidates.

Perry's gubernatorial campaign account is paying for this week's travel to New York and New Orleans, and it paid for him to fly to an anti-abortion event Sunday in California.

jembry@statesman.com; 445-3572

Additional material from staff member Angela Grayson.