Watson talks budget reforms
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

State Sen. Kirk Watson has set out to inject a little sunshine into Texas' often opaque budgeting process.

The Austin Democrat, fresh off re-election to a second term, recently laid out an "honesty agenda" that would crack open the state's budget and finances for all to see and set a course for future budget stability.

And Watson sees no better time than now, when Texas is staring at a gaping budget shortfall of more than $24 billion, for legislators of all political stripes to embrace his reforms.

His suggestions include:

• Requiring the Legislative Budget Board, a group of leaders from both legislative chambers, to receive regular updates on the state's fiscal position in meetings open to the public.

• Suspending the collection of any dedicated tax or fee if it is not being spent for its intended purpose.

• Creating a special commission to create a plan for fixing the state's long-term budget imbalances.

Watson sat down with the American-Statesman last week to discuss his budget reform package. Here is an edited account:

What prompted the 'honesty agenda'?

I was somebody who paid pretty good attention to what goes on at the Legislature, but in my first legislative session, I was very surprised by how the budget process functioned. It may be the old mayor in me, but the openness and transparency that goes on in putting together a city budget is significantly greater than what you see at the state.

Why push these reforms now?

It's becoming harder and harder to balance the budget in a sustainable way. As a result of that, it is becoming more difficult for Texas to invest in things that are patently good for Texans and for our economic growth in this state. This may be the last chance we have to start making the kinds of fundamental changes that will help us make investments for the good of Texans.

You call for more budget and finance information to be made available to the public when the Legislature is not in session. Legislative leaders and the state comptroller are in regular communication about the state's revenue outlook during that period.

If the key decision makers have that information, why is it important for the public to be privy to it, too?

The leadership is talking to each other. But they ought to be talking to the public.

It is also important that the legislators who are not part of the leadership but are elected to be a voice for voters know what is going on so they can serve as advocates.

If nothing else, it would force more information to be talked about. I think government does a better job when the public is aware of what is going on.

The November election was, to some extent, a referendum on fiscal and economic issues. Are the election results not an indication that Texans are happy with the fiscal stewardship of the state?

The last election cycle proved that we need greater transparency. That is one of the reasons I wanted us to have the numbers out there (referring to a letter he sent to Comptroller Susan Combs in September calling for an updated revenue estimate).

I think that Texans believe they're getting something that they're not getting.

I'm not sure Texans are aware that they pay taxes and fees to their state that are supposed to go for specific purposes and then that money is not appropriated for those purposes.

A decade ago, there was a little bit over a billion dollars of general revenue dedicated for a purpose. But at the end of this decade there will be more than $3.5 billion. That's a lot of broken promises to people in this state.

If you were to eliminate that $3.5 billion of dedicated revenue, that would significantly reduce available revenue. It would harm the same areas that you say require investments, such as education and public safety. How do you balance the need for process reform and the need for available revenue?

The scar tissue of some bad practices has built up and is so dense that it is not the kind of thing that you can responsibly do away with overnight. It is going to require a weaning off of these practices to avoid really significant crisis.

It has to happen in order to be honest with Texans, but we have to do it in a smart way.

By calling your reforms an 'honesty agenda,' are you not implying that decisions in the past and the leaders behind those decisions have been dishonest?