Hutchison: To get our financial house in order, we must focus on cutting spending
House and Senate Republicans recently took a historic step and voted to support a moratorium on congressional earmarks. I supported that effort because it will give Congress the opportunity to make our nation's budget process more transparent and accountable and allow us to focus on cutting spending.

As a U.S. senator, I am charged with protecting Texas and keeping our taxpayers on an even playing field with others. To fulfill that duty, I have fought hard to bring federal resources to projects that are priorities for communities in Texas and where there is a national service.

At Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, I was able to direct spending to build infrastructure so it could attract a new mission; that made it attractive when the Army decided to move its headquarters for Army South Command. Fort Hood and Fort Bliss were in danger of being diminished or closed, but now, thanks to the ability to direct federal resources, they are two of the largest and most important training installations in America. Administration decisions to shutter these bases with their unusually large land space for training would have been detrimental to the requirements we need today but were unanticipated at the time.

Congressionally-directed support to deepen and widen the Houston Ship Channel ensures that the Port of Houston remains globally competitive. Through congressional designations, I have helped Houston Metro and DART establish robust mass transit systems, allowing our metropolitan centers to operate on par with other major U.S. cities that have received federal support.

Scores of other Texas initiatives have been equally important, and by supporting them, I have done the right thing for our state — and helped create jobs for Texans that contribute to the economic prosperity of America.

However, overall government spending is out of control, and we must focus on cutting spending across the board.

On Nov. 2, American voters repudiated President Barack Obama's big government agenda — particularly the health care reform bill, the stimulus, overregulation and the push for more deficit spending. Voters are demanding that Congress get the nation's financial house in order, and Republicans are willing to take steps large and small to achieve results.

Our reform efforts in Congress will be inconsequential if we aren't also stringently overseeing executive branch earmarks. If Congress does not direct any spending, the president will have total discretion over all federal programs and priorities for spending taxpayer dollars.

In just two years, the Obama administration has proven to be a poor steward of funding. The $800 billion stimulus — allocated solely at the discretion of the Obama administration — is teeming with examples of waste. Standout projects include $3.4 million to the Florida Department of Transportation to build an "eco-passage" for turtles to cross under a roadway; $325,000 to study the mating decisions of female cactus bugs; $300,000 to buy a helicopter equipped to detect radioactive rabbit droppings; and $500,000 to study the impact of global warming on wildflowers in Colorado.

Further, it has been reported that, on average, Democratic congressional districts received 81 percent more stimulus funds than Republican districts.

Unelected bureaucrats in Washington are not accountable to the people. They shouldn't be empowered to distribute taxpayer dollars with little or no intimate knowledge of a state or community's need — or, worse, guided by a political agenda that will serve some and neglect others.

Texas could be severely affected if the Obama administration has complete control over agency budgets.

It is critical that we eliminate the waste and abuse of earmarks both in Congress and the executive branch, and Republicans are starting the process of reform to address the crushing national debt.

The best way is to set spending caps at 2008 levels. At a recent meeting of Senate Republicans, I offered a resolution that was unanimously adopted to make it our policy to return all unspent stimulus funds.

I will be working on that and other proposals to restore fiscal sanity in Congress.