Koons: Liberal bias evident in simplistic narrative in which powerful federal government is sole engine of progress and equality
The State Board of Education's proposed revisions for K-12 social studies curricula have come under fire from a coalition of left-leaning politicians and their academic allies. Contrary to what an irresponsible media campaign would lead you to believe, the state board has taken a few, small steps in the direction of promoting objectivity in our educational standards, and it is the board's critics who are seeking to perpetuate a biased and one-sided treatment of our nation's history.

Studies have revealed how unbalanced America's humanities departments are. Democrats and Greens outnumber Republicans by 9 or 10 to one (according to The New York Times). In the history department at the University of Texas, out of 50 registered voters, only one is a Republican. Moderate and conservative Democrats are also rare.

This political slant is reinforced by the economics of scholarship: Academic historians have been trained and have invested their careers in a profession that counts as legitimate only those subfields that support the leftist orthodoxy. Military history, for example, has almost entirely died off: Not a single professor of history at UT lists military history as a specialty, while dozens list sexuality, ethnicity and anticolonialism.

This bias expresses itself in the selection of events, persons and movements by textbook authors, who tell a simplistic narrative in which an ever more powerful federal government is the sole engine of progress and equality. Thus, robber barons, the New Deal, and the civil rights movement are in, but the contributions of inventors and entrepreneurs, the decline of the family, and the failures of welfare programs and public education are out.

The board has strengthened the curriculum standards in ways that any scholar should recognize, adding the following:

Inclusion of neglected founders, including John Jay, Charles Carroll, John Peter Muhlenberg, John Witherspoon and John Trumbull, representing the religious diversity of early America.

Inclusion of the fine arts and culture and the contributions of scientists and inventors.

Emphasis on our common-law tradition, epitomized by the Commentaries of William Blackstone, the most commonly used textbook in our country for more than a century (used by everyone from Hamilton to Lincoln).

The opposition is relying on the Big Lie. This cynical effort will fail to influence the vast majority of Texans for one simple reason: the Internet. Texans can go to the Texas Education Agency website and read the new standards for themselves.

Opponents claim that the new standards neglect the contributions of women and ethnic minorities. The opposite is true: in every subject and at every level, the new standards increase their prominence. Just a few examples of the names added include Crispus Attucks, Jose Bernardo Guillermo de Lara, Wentworth Cheswell, Bernardo de Galvez, Juan de Onate, W.E.B. DuBois, Carmen Lomas Garza, Henry B. Gonzalez, Raul A. Gonzalez, Maria Mitchell, Ellen Ochoa, Jose Antonio Navarro, Irma Rangel, Juan Seguin, Phillis Wheatley, Lulu Belle White, Diane Gonzales Bertrand, Bessie Coleman, Tomie de Paola, Marcus Garvey, Lydia Mendoza, Kadir Nelson, Danny Olivas and Raymond Telles.

The opposition has claimed, most preposterously of all, that the new standards eliminate Thomas Jefferson. To the contrary, the new standards place greater emphasis than ever on Jefferson's drafting of the declaration. In fact, Jefferson's political philosophy is covered in U.S. government instead of world history, a sensible change that critics have distorted.

Much has been made of the board's substitution of "free enterprise system" for "capitalism" and of "representative" or "constitutional republic" for "democracy." The board's language is more precise in both cases. The term "capitalism" was introduced by Karl Marx, referring to a system in which the owners of capital control absolutely both the government and culture. Whether America is or ever has been "capitalist" in that sense should be an open question.

Similarly, scholars on both the right and the left will agree that the founders did not intend to create a "democratic" system, defined as a system in which the government always and immediately reflects the will of the majority. Our Constitution includes many counter-democratic institutions, including the Senate and appointed federal judges.

This artificially inflated controversy points to a larger issue: The people must not develop the habit of blind deference to academic experts. Just as war is too important to be left entirely to the generals, so history education is too important to be left to the historians. It is through our conception of our history that we define ourselves as a country. The fundamental question is this: Shall we continue to have a government ruled by the people, or shall we instead yield to a self-perpetuating caste of "experts"?

Koons is a professor of philosophy at the University of Texas. The opinions expressed here are his and do not reflect the views of the university.