Cancer research bonds pass easily

Voters also approve 15 other constitutional amendments on ballot.

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

In a victory for bicyclist and cancer survivor Lance Armstrong, Texas voters Tuesday approved a $3 billion bond proposal for cancer research and prevention.

Voters approved all 15 other constitutional changes, including proposals authorizing bonds for highway improvements, college student loans and water and wastewater services. They also agreed to require legislators to record final votes on legislation, with results accessible online.

"Texas, we've done it tonight," Armstrong told whooping supporters in Austin. "The time has come to renew our national commitment to fight cancer, and Prop. 15 is going to make that happen. We will beat this dreaded disease, and we will win."

Proposition 15 will establish the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas to distribute up to $300 million a year in grants for 10 years. Public and private educational institutions and medical research facilities in Texas could apply.

Supporters hope the initiative will lure top scientists to research cancer, which kills 35,000 Texans a year.

Gov. Rick Perry said in a statement, "We will look back on this day as a turning point. "

State Sen. Jane Nelson, R-Lewisville, who carried the measure putting the proposal before voters, compared the approval to giving birth: "I've had five children, and this feels like when they're born and you finally find out how beautiful they are."

Though politicians have touted the bonds as a way to cure cancer, scientists have noted that cancer is not a single disease, but many, and that there's no guarantee that cures will be found.

Opponents said the proposal posed too much of a burden for taxpayers and objected to what they said could be as much as $1.6 billion in interest. They also questioned why the money should be used for cancer, suggesting that there are other diseases that also deserve research money.

Michael Quinn Sullivan , president of Texans for Fiscal Responsibility, a group that advocates limited government, said, "My concern is, this is going to be a lot of money spent without any real success. But we should all hope for the best."

Texas is among several states taking a larger role in cancer research as federal funding has stagnated in recent years.

The Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas will award grants to investigate cancer causes, cures and treatment. For every dollar received from the institute, recipient organizations must put up 50 cents.

"Tonight, we as a state chose to lead; we chose to lead the world in the fight against cancer," Rep. Patrick Rose, D-Dripping Springs, told supporters at the historic Driskill Hotel. Rose was a co-author of the legislation that got the proposal on the ballot.

Supporters sipped wine and rocked to an '80s cover band, the Spazmatics. Photos of Lance Armstrong's pro-Proposition 15 bus tour flashed on huge screens: Armstrong signing autographs for young cancer patients; Armstrong's bus, Survivor One, in front of the Alamo.

"Because of what happened tonight, Texans are going to be the epicenter of cancer research on the planet, period," said former state Comptroller John Sharp, who has championed the proposal.

In January, Perry and Armstrong joined lawmakers in announcing the cancer initiative, saying it could stimulate the state's biotech industry and make Texas a world leader in cancer research. Perry initially suggested that the plan be funded by selling the state lottery. Instead, lawmakers turned to a bond proposal.

Armstrong, the seven-time Tour de France champion and testicular cancer survivor, spoke at a key hearing at the Capitol in the spring, giving emotional testimony about his experiences. He rolled around Texas in a bus promoting the initiative. His Lance Armstrong Foundation — along with Susan G. Komen for the Cure, the American Cancer Society and the Texas Medical Association — was instrumental in the campaign, which secured $1 million in donated TV ad time, among contributions. Opponents raised a fraction of that.

Armstrong's political work this year, including presidential debates that he moderated on cancer, have generated questions on whether he'll run for office, an idea he didn't embrace.

"I don't know that public office is the place for me right now," he said recently.

Armstrong sounded much like a candidate Tuesday night and, in remarks prepared by a former speechwriter for California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, called on presidential candidates to improve health care.

"We must make health care accessible and affordable for every American," he said.

Armstrong has credited Austinite Cathy Bonner, who worked with Gov. Ann Richards, with the idea for the cancer research proposal. Bonner said she was inspired by Richards, who died last year of cancer of the esophagus.

Armstrong said, "I've got to think that wherever Gov. Richards is, she's looking down smiling on us."

cmaclaggan@statesman.com; 445-3548

wgselby@statesman.com; 445-3644