Tia Mitchell: Hurricane Hermine left behind a political storm in Tallahassee
The effects of Hurricane Hermine have been chilling, and I'm not talking about the high winds and rain that blew across Tallahassee in the wee hours of Sept. 2. I'm not talking about the fallen trees and power lines, but damage that is more man-made.

What I watched unfold in the days after Hermine was infighting, defensiveness and finger-pointing among state and local officials tasked with spearheading the recovery effort.

Tallahassee Mayor Andrew Gillum faced criticism almost immediately for how the city handled returning power to tens of thousands of homes, and he accused political opponents of spreading lies and rumors.

Gov. Rick Scott initially backed Gillum, but eventually began to openly question why it was taking so long to restore the grid while holding photo ops and press conferences.

The social media echo chamber fueled by party politics (even if no one will admit it) perpetuated some nasty rumors, especially about Gillum. People accused him of getting his power restored immediately while neighbors remained without. Others said he refused help from for-profit electric companies like Florida Power & Light because the employees weren't unionized.

Those things weren't true, but that didn't stop the spread of misinformation. Not even 48 hours after the storm, people on Facebook and Twitter were calling for Gillum's head on a platter.

Meanwhile, there were thousands of folks at home who were literally in the dark. A few of them still are, even a week after the storm. None of this served them much.

The truth is that Hermine did a number on Tallahassee. The city prides itself on preserving mature trees and canopy roads, but that made the near-direct hit from the hurricane cause damage to power lines that were difficult and time-consuming to repair.

The city's preparedness for the hurricane and its response afterward will be studied and dissected, as it should be. I'm sure the results will be a mixed bag of bad luck and bad government. No bureaucracy is perfect, and I don't think anyone assumes there won't be room for improvement and maybe evidence that mistakes were made.

However, politics has made it harder for the capital to recover from this natural disaster.

When I tried to track the source of some of the social media rumors, for example, it often came back to GOP political operatives who perhaps have a different kind of interest in Gillum's performance as mayor.

In case you didn't know, Gillum is a Democrat and a rising star in the party who spoke at the national convention this summer and is one of Hillary Clinton's main Florida surrogates. He is politically ambitious and seen as a potential gubernatorial or congressional candidate in the years ahead, and so far there are no blemishes on his political record.

Gillum has been in politics a long time, and political attacks are something he will have to get accustomed to responding to. However, asking him to shoulder all of the blame from Hermine is a bit of a stretch.

Gillum would be described in political science course as a "weak" mayor. That isn't an indictment of his political acumen; it's how the city of Tallahassee is structured. Unlike the "strong" mayors in Jacksonville, Gillum is largely a figurehead who provides leadership over the city but has no unilateral powers.

Gillum is one of five members of the Tallahassee City Commission who collectively hired the city administrator.

That guy, Ricardo Fernandez, is who manages the city government and administers day-to-day operations of all its departments, including the utility company. When the complaining about power outages commenced the evening of Sept. 3, I only saw Gillum named. When I asked GOP operatives why they were targeting Gillum alone and not the other four members of the city commission or the seven members of the Leon County Commission, they initially said it was because Gillum was the figurehead who took center stage. Days later, they were casting a wider net in lodging their criticisms.

Gillum and Scott appeared to be working together at times, but later the mayor accused the governor of undermining city efforts by saying help had been refused when it was not. Scott started to question the time it was taking the city to recover and made it clear he wasn't happy with the answers he received.

None of this appeared to be particularly helpful in repairing damaged power lines and replacing blown transformers.

If that wasn't enough politics for you, there are hints that the storm will be used as a launch pad to larger conversations about city-owned utility companies. That should be of particular interest because Jacksonville is home to the state's largest municipal utility, JEA.

Remember, much of the blame about Tallahassee's response to Hermine focused on whether it had fully prepared for a hurricane and if help from for-profit companies that may have helped restore power more quickly was turned down. Gillum, other Tallahassee leaders and the executive director of a trade group that speaks for the state's 34 publicly owned utilities tried to defend the city's actions.

However, legislators' ears perked up at the critics. There have been long-standing concerns about municipal utilities and whether the state should have more oversight of them.

Consider this statement that Senate budget chairman Jack Latvala, R-Clearwater, sent to Florida Politics: "… There are several issues that have come to my attention with regard to municipal power agencies. Their members' ability to repair their utilities after a storm is only one part of it."

I think this is a conversation worth having. But I find it interesting that this discussion started just days after Hermine blew across Florida and while the recovery was still under way.

Remember, this is the same Legislature that refused to address questions about gun control and gun policy days after 49 people were killed and 53 wounded in the Pulse Nightclub shooting in Orlando.

It was "not the appropriate time to create or debate public policy" in the emotional aftermath of the shooting, the GOP members of the Northeast Florida delegation told me in a joint statement.

Yet, just days after a hurricane where the loss of life was much more limited - we've heard reports of two deaths - the Legislature is already hinting it may move quickly to find answers.

The gun debate is much more difficult politically with competing special interests and a Republican-controlled Legislature that doesn't want to do anything that can be interpreted as chipping away at the Second Amendment.

Whether a Category 1 hurricane gets more attention in Tallahassee than a mass shooting will tell us a lot about legislators' priorities.

Contact Tia Mitchell at tia.mitchell@jacksonville.com or 850-933-1321.