3 Shot, 1 Dead After Big Brawl In NW Miami-Dade
Follow CBSMIAMI.COM: Facebook | Twitter

MIAMI (CBSMiami) – Miami-Dade police working well into the night as they continue to investigate a fatal shooting that also sent two men to the hospital.

It happened shortly after 6:30 p.m. off NW 22nd Avenue and 66th Street.

“The incident initiated here in this corner where a man and a female were involved in a verbal dispute. The female told the man she was going to let her boyfriend know about the dispute that had occurred,” said Det. Argemis Colome.

Moments later, Miami-Dade police said a vehicle with three men inside drove up to a nearby residence.

Police are not saying who exactly lives there but a physical fight took place between the man who lives there and one of the men in the vehicle.

“A passenger came out of the vehicle. A male came out of the residence. These two males began a verbal altercation and it turned physical,” explained Colome. “Once it started fighting, one of the passengers from the vehicle began shooting at the male that had come out of the residence.”

Police said the man who lives at the residence ran back inside the home, grabbed his gun and began shooting at the three people who arrived in the vehicle.

People in the neighborhood said they took cover after the shots rang out.

“I ran in the store. They kept shooting after that,” witness Sam Taylor said.

According to police, the three men who came up to the home all ended up being shot by the man who lives at the home.

One of the men died at the scene.

“Two of the people were injured and they were transported in critical condition to Jackson Memorial Hospital and the other person was fatally shot here on scene,” Colome said.

No one is in custody as police continue talking to the people on scene.

Authorities have not said what the argument was about between the man and the woman.

Police have not released names or ages of the people involved.

Anyone with information is urged to contact Miami-Dade Crime Stoppers at (305) 471-TIPS.