Nelson urges Iran to help find Bob Levinson
Iran should help find a missing Coral Springs father of seven who is the longest-held hostage in American history, a U.S. Senate Committee agreed Wednesday.

Robert Levinson, now 67, disappeared from Iran's Kish Island in March 2007. The former FBI agent was working for the CIA to recruit a fugitive American-born assassin as an intelligence source inside Iran.

"It's been nearly nine years since Bob went missing," Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., said in a prepared statement, "And it's time for the government of Iran to follow through on its repeated promises to help us find him."

Nelson's resolution was approved by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and eventually will be heard by the Senate for a vote.

The resolution urges the government of Iran "as a humanitarian gesture, to act on its promises to assist in the case of Robert Levinson." The resolution also encourages President Barack Obama "to continue to raise with officials of the government of Iran the case of Robert Levinson at every opportunity."

The family said in a prepared statement Wednesday that they were grateful to all the members of Congress who have made efforts in their case. "They have given a very powerful voice to the message that Bob needs to be returned to the people who love him," his family said. "We know it will be heard."

On Thursday, a second effort was introduced to Congress.

U.S. Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, R-Fla., co-authored a resolution to a subcommittee also asking Iran to cooperate. The Levinson family was in Washington D.C. for the vote.

“We will continue to demand that Iran honor its commitments and we will continue to press the administration to bring Bob home,” she told his wife, son and sister-in-law.

The FBI is offering a $5 million reward for information. In a broader effort to appeal to Iranians, the FBI recently launched a Facebook page in Farsi to solicit tips on Levinson's whereabouts.

Levinson's family said they were devastated when he was not part of a prisoner swap between the U.S. and Iranian governments that last month. Four Americans, including a Washington Post reporter, were released.

Secretary of State John Kerry said at the time that officials did not know whether Levinson was still alive.

But The New York Times reported that recently disclosed documents suggest that Iranian officials did have information. In late 2011, a top Iranian diplomat acknowledged that his country was holding the American and would release him if the United States helped delay an assessment criticizing Iran's nuclear activities, the documents say.

Even the city of Coral Springs said it would help; commissioners agreed last month to write a letter to Iran directly appealing for them to release Levinson.

City Attorney J. J. Hearn said the city is awaiting permission from the U.S. State Department.

lhuriash@sunsentinel.com or 954-572-2008