Cuban tourists who never leave U.S. get easy immigration path
Waves of Cuban immigrants are pouring into the United States on rickety boats or via eight-country treks through Central America. But others are taking a faster, safer route: Flying to Miami on visitor visas and then staying — and the United States allows it.

Other foreigners who overstay visitor visas face deportation and can't legally work or receive public benefits. But Cuban tourists have a quick path to legally remain in the U.S.: They just don't leave. And some even collect welfare.

The disparity underscores the unique treatment Cubans receive over every other immigrant group, a special status ever-more easily exploited as U.S.-Cuba relations thaw.

The annual number of visitor visas the U.S. awarded to Cubans more than doubled from 2011 to 2014, from about 14,000 to 35,000. U.S. officials declined repeated requests to identify how many of those visitors overstay, but one Cuban affairs expert estimated as many as 40 percent have.

Cuban immigration overall has increased dramatically since President Obama announced renewed diplomatic relations last December. Experts suggest the rush is driven by fear among Cubans on the island that the U.S. may soon revoke its special immigration rules for Cubans.

Even before Obama's historic announcement, changing rules in both countries were already easing travel restrictions for Cubans. In 2013, Cuba stopped requiring exit visas, allowing its citizens to more freely leave and stay abroad for up to two years while still keeping their homes and benefits on the island. That same year, the U.S. broadened its rules for visitor visas for Cubans, making them good for five years and for multiple trips instead of just one, six-month visit.

The United States issues visitor or B-2 visas for family visits, tourism, medical treatment or personal travel. To obtain one, Cubans must demonstrate to a U.S. Foreign Service officer that they do not intend to stay for good in the U.S.

Most are denied. Two-thirds of the applications from Cubans for visitor or business visas were rejected in 2014, according to the U.S. State Department.

Interviewers look for ties to Cuba, such as family or assets on the island, that make the applicants more likely to return. Older people with deeper roots in Cuba may have a better chance making their case. For those who are approved, if they stay and apply for residency later, the U.S. does not penalize them.

One elderly Cuban couple who used the visitor route, Pura Espinosa and Pablo Marichal of Hialeah, came to see their daughter five years ago. Marichal suffered two heart attacks, and the couple stayed, said daughter Maria.

After a year, they became legal residents and qualified for Supplemental Security Income (SSI), welfare for poor seniors and the disabled. Now in their 80s, they receive $510 a month from the federal government, food stamps and free health care through Medicaid.

"They're in a much better situation here,'' Maria Marichal said. "We're very grateful to God and the U.S. government for the help they've given us.''

Most Cubans streaming into the United States now are arriving without visas at all. More than 46,000 arrived in Florida in the fiscal year ending in September, up from 29,758 the year before, according to the Florida Department of Children and Families. Most are traveling overland through Central America to Mexico and entering Texas, arriving in the United States illegally, without visas.

Cubans who use tourist visas as an immigration path are not considered refugees, yet they get many of the advantages America extends to most Cuban immigrants under policies dating back to the Cold War.

Cubans who make it to U.S. land — including visitors who overstay their visas — are eligible after just a year to become legal residents under the Cuban Adjustment Act, a 1966 law meant to provide refuge to Cubans escaping the communist government. With residency, these new immigrants can work legally, obtain a driver's license, and — thanks to Miami's Congressional representatives — collect Supplemental Security Income, or SSI.

The most generous of government welfare programs, SSI is not available to most immigrants until they become U.S. citizens. Congress carved out Cubans as an exception in the 1990s welfare reform.

But the Social Security Administration in about 2000 began denying SSI claims for Cubans who came as visitors. That prompted court challenges and intervention by two influential Cuban-American lawmakers, U.S. Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen and her colleague at the time, Lincoln Diaz-Balart.

The decision "has caused confusion and concern in our community,'' Diaz-Balart wrote to the Social Security commissioner in April 2005. The next month, the agency reversed the policy.

Since then, Cuban visitors who remain and become legal residents have been eligible for SSI, which in turn entitles them to Medicaid.

Diaz-Balart and Ros-Lehtinin did not respond to requests by the Sun Sentinel for comment.

Jorge Duany, director of the Cuban Research Institute at Florida International University, estimates as many as 40 percent of Cubans who come on visitor visas have stayed in the U.S.

"If you do get this type of visa, you know you're only allowed to come for a period of time,'' he said. "It's not supposed to be used to get a benefit.''

Most Cuban-Americans think Cubans who overstay tourist visas should not then be eligible for public benefits, according to a December poll of 423 Miami-Dade County residents by the Sun Sentinel / Florida Atlantic University.

Sixty-nine percent said Cubans who overstay should not be allowed to apply for public assistance. Only 16 percent said they thought Cubans who immigrated as visitors should be eligible for benefits; the rest were not sure. The poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 4.8 percent.

Mireya Agnoli of Naples, Florida, is one Cuban-American who thinks its wrong for Cubans to assure the United States they are coming only to visit, but then stay. She came to the U.S. from Cuba as a youth and right away began working to help her father, a house painter. She now owns a cleaning company.

"I have been working … paying into Social Security. I am 59 years old and I am still working," she said.