Scott takes first step to reduce testing in schools
Florida's 11th graders can breathe a sigh of collective relief: they will all have one less test to take this school year.

Gov. Rick Scott on Tuesday issued an executive order suspending a new language arts test that more than 175,000 high school juniors were expected to take next month. He called it unnecessary because students meet the graduation requirement for language arts in the 10th grade.

Scott's decision comes after state Education Commissioner Pam Stewart this month recommended reducing the number of tests students are mandated to complete.

Students for the first time this year will take a series of standardized exams tied to tougher education standards known as Common Core. Many parents, teachers and school districts have complained of too much testing in classrooms and say the slew of changes were happening too fast.

It's now up to lawmakers during the session starting in March to consider repealing the law that requires the 11th grade exam.

"I applaud the governor for following through on his promises to address this issue," said Broward Schools Superintendent Robert Runcie. "I think it's also appropriate that he put it to the Legislature to consider permanent legislation to eliminate this mandate."

Phil Sears / AP Florida Gov. Rick Scott speaks Tuesday Feb. 10, 2015 at Keeping the Promise: A Florida Education Summit, sponsored by former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush's Foundation for Florida's Future, at the Florida State University Alumni Center in Tallahassee, Fla. Florida Gov. Rick Scott speaks Tuesday Feb. 10, 2015 at Keeping the Promise: A Florida Education Summit, sponsored by former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush's Foundation for Florida's Future, at the Florida State University Alumni Center in Tallahassee, Fla. (Phil Sears / AP)

Runcie, however, remained concerned about students in grades 3-10 who face longer, more rigorous and mostly online tests this spring. "Having the appropriate time to transition is still an issue on the table," he said.

"We welcome the governor's actions and agree that we are over-testing our students in Florida," said Palm Beach County Schools Superintendent Wayne Gent. "It's a move in the right direction, as it puts our focus where it needs to be — on teaching and learning in our classrooms."

kyi@tribpub.com, 954-356-4528 or Twitter @karen_yi