Governor Crist and entourage traveled in style across Europe as businesses and taxpayers footed the bill
Drumming up sales

Travel upgrades

Burnishing his image

This summer, as the state's economy plunged, Gov. Charlie Crist took an entourage to Europe on a 12-day trade mission.The business development trip to London, Paris St. Petersburg and Madrid was supposed to cost taxpayers $255,000. The actual tab was far higher — in excess of $430,000, the Sun Sentinel found in a detailed review of the July trip's costs.Taxpayers paid for more than two dozen people to accompany Crist, including a photographer, a spokeswoman, four aides, two agency heads and nine bodyguards. The bodyguards alone spent more than $148,000 on meals, hotels, transportation and incidentals, including nearly $630 in dry cleaning.Their boss, Florida Department of Law Enforcement Commissioner Gerald Bailey, went along to sign a crime-solving agreement with British police, billing taxpayers $5,135 for less than 12 hours of official duties over four days. Bailey stayed an extra week at his own expense and brought his wife. His spokeswoman said he was on call around the clock and complied with state travel and vacation policies.Crist's expenses, totaling more than $30,000, were not paid by taxpayers but by business executives who went on the trip. The governor did not scrimp.His London hotel suite, originally estimated to cost $1,800 a night, actually was $2,179, the Sun Sentinel found.He flew first class for about $8,000 round trip, courtesy of a Miami travel agency. He ran up room service and minibar tabs of more than $1,300. And he spent $320 on electric fans to keep him cool while giving speeches.Crist defended the trip, saying: "I think it's important to promote free trade.""You want to have it be as economical as you can, and when you consider that it should produce hundreds of millions of dollars in investments in Florida, I think it's important to do," he said recently.Former Gov. Jeb Bush used tax dollars to cover his costs on similar trade missions.Crist, a Republican who calls himself the people's governor, chose to lessen the burden on taxpayers by having businesses pay his expenses.But that kind of arrangement can pose conflicts, said Nova Southeastern University law professor Bob Jarvis, a public policy expert."It looks like you're buying influence and access to the governor, or to any elected official, when any part of the trip is paid for by outside interests," Jarvis said. "If the trip is important enough to do, then it should be built into the government budget."The trip was arranged by Enterprise Florida, a public/private agency created to help Florida businesses sell products and services overseas, and attract foreign investment with tax credits and other incentives.The purpose: drumming up sales and jobs in aviation and clean energy. Meeting topics also included insurance, tourism and citrus sales.Backers say the taxpayers' investment has already paid off. Florida corporations made $5.5 million in sales and laid the groundwork for another $96 million in deals and 2,245 new high-tech jobs, according to Enterprise Florida. The agency will release few specifics, however, citing corporate confidentiality.During the trip, the Spanish company Renovalia said it would negotiate to build a solar energy plant in Florida. And numerous officials signed agreements promising greater cooperation between Florida and European companies, universities and law enforcement."Many times you don't really see the effects of a mission like this until months or even a couple of years later," said Enterprise Florida spokesman Stuart Doyle. "It's very important that we establish these ties and relationships with other nations because we are in the business of promoting Florida globally."Taxpayers covered the airfare, lodging and meals for the state employees who went on the trip. The other participants paid their own way and a fee of up to $1,500 each for additional costs, including the governor's expenses.In all, about 65 Florida business executives accompanied Crist, including real estate agents, aviation industry representatives, lawyers, lobbyists and two people with ties to the sugar industry. At the time, the state was negotiating a $1.75 billion deal to purchase large tracts of sugar fields for Everglades restoration.Also joining Crist were his fiancée, Carole Rome of Miami, and her sister, Michele Oumano.Photos show Crist and Rome meeting Prince Andrew at Buckingham Palace; meeting Prince Charles at Clarence House; attending an air show; visiting soldiers' graves at Normandy; having finger sandwiches with the bishop of Liverpool; consulting with Britain's foreign secretary; and sipping cocktails with the British Foreign Office minister.In meetings with Boeing and Lockheed Martin executives, Rome sat next to the governor. She and Crist are scheduled to marry Friday.Throughout the trip, the governor was protected by a security contingent of nine FDLE agents, split up among the four countries. Records show the bodyguards arrived days, and as much as two weeks, before the governor to prepare. FDLE spokeswoman Heather Smith would not discuss specifics but said protecting the governor in foreign nations is more complex than at home.The governor traveled in style in each country he visited, booking suites so he had room to conduct meetings.In London, he stayed in the Presidential Suite at the Hilton London Metropole, near Hyde Park, for $2,179 a night. Over four days, he spent $440 on minibar and room service charges.From London, Crist took a high-speed Eurostar train to Paris. Enterprise Florida upgraded his $193 leisure-class ticket to a $457 business-premier fare so he could check in faster and wait in an executive lounge. The governor's security detail did not want him standing on a train platform, said Doyle, the Enterprise Florida spokesman.In France, Crist's suite at The Westin Paris cost $1,385 a night and overlooked the Tuileries garden and Louvre museum. The bedroom had a view of the Eiffel Tower, a hotel manager said. Room service and minibar charges totaled $420 over three days.From Paris, the governor and four Florida power executives flew to Normandy on a private plane provided by AREVA, a French nuclear energy company. The trip's corporate sponsors and Enterprise Florida paid $13,509 to charter a second plane to carry the governor's staff and guests.The group toured AREVA's nuclear reprocessing plant in the area before visiting the famed World War II American cemetery in Normandy. Enterprise Florida reimbursed the French energy company $98 for the governor's plane ride.In St. Petersburg and Madrid, Crist stayed in hotel suites costing about $1,200 a night and spent nearly $500 on room service and minibar items.By European standards, the hotel costs were not extraordinary, said Enterprise Florida executive Manny Mencia. The agency "negotiated to the last cent" but the weak dollar posed a challenge, he said.At the time of the trip, Crist was widely seen as a potential running mate for Sen. John McCain Images of the governor meeting with heads of state helped bolster his credentials, said Florida political expert Robert Watson, director of American studies at Lynn University in Boca Raton "This was a way of increasing his gravitas, his bona fides in foreign policy," Watson said. "Charlie can say that even though he's governor, he's met with all of these world leaders."While in London, Crist gave TV and newspaper interviews and repeatedly answered questions about whether he would be the Republican vice presidential nominee."Let's see what happens," he told a British television station . "I think it's important for me to stay focused on Florida. That's why I'm here in Europe to try to promote more tourism, more climate change."Crist is now facing a deepening economic crisis in the state and a budget deficit of more than $2 billion.Last month, Crist hit the road on another climate change mission. He joined other governors in Los Angeles for a two-day summit on reducing greenhouse gases and attended a political event.He flew on a private plane and stayed overnight, courtesy of the Republican Party of Florida, at the historic Beverly Hilton, a favorite of Hollywood stars and national politicians.Megan O'Matz can be reached at momatz@SunSentinel.com or 954-356-4518.