Gloves off, Wasserman Schultz responds forcefully to charge from challenger Tim Canova
U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Weston has mostly ignored or brushed off attacks from Tim Canova in the six months since he announced he’s challenging her in the Democratic primary.

No more.

With less than eight weeks until the Aug. 30 primary, Wasserman Schultz is changing her approach, at least on one issue, calling a charge by Canova “laughable” and pledging she’ll continue to work “while my opponent just continues to talk."

The congresswoman’s comments came via her campaign spokesman in response to Canova’s charge that she bears some responsibility for the blue-green algae disaster along the Treasure Coast because received campaign contributions from the sugar industry. Environmental activists blame the sugar industry for conditions ultimately lead to this kind of crisis.

Here are highlights from the Canova campaign’s statement after he traveled to Martin County to see (and smell) the algae bloom:

"It's rotten, it's toxic," Canova says as he puts on a face mask. A face mask was recommended because the algae contain cyanobacteria, which produces the neurotoxin BMAA. BMAA has been connected to neurological disorders like Alzheimer's and Lou Gehrig's disease, also called amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS.

"I came here to see the environmental damage that's been done by Big Sugar," Canova said.

In order to maximize profits, Big Sugar uses massive amounts of fertilizers and pesticides containing nitrates and phosphates, which find their way into Lake Okeechobee. These chemicals create environments where blue-green algae thrive. Big Sugar farms block natural water flow from Lake Okeechobee to the Everglades. When there are heavy rains, like we've had this year, the excess water has to go somewhere, so the Army Corps of Engineers releases water into the St. Lucie River. That algae-polluted water makes it way to our South Florida shores, causing all kinds of problems. Florida relies on water for jobs, tourism, agriculture and recreation….

"Let's also thanks Debbie Wasser[man] Schultz and every one of the politicians that take care of Big Sugar for bringing this catastrophe."

Canova continued, "I've been around water all my life. I grew up right there on a bay. And this is awful. I've never seen anything like it. And it's brought to us by politicians like Debbie Wasserman Schultz who have been taking a lot of money from Big Sugar interests, big corporations. She's been protecting them, allowing them pollute for years, and it's caught up."

Wasserman Schultz has accepted more than $133,000 from Big Sugar during her tenure in the U.S. House of Representatives.

Here is Wasserman Schultz’s response:

“My opponent's suggestion that because he lived near a body of water in another state, that is a substitute for the more than two decades I've fought for Everglades restoration and for toughening water quality standards is laughable.

"People who truly understand, care about or have worked on the issue know that Governor Rick Scott and Republicans in Tallahassee are the reason Floridians are suffering through another algae bloom crisis. Rick Scott and the leadership of the Legislature have dithered, delayed and derailed responsible steps to restore our famed Everglades.

“While the failures of Republicans in Tallahassee have led to these disastrous results, I have worked on multiple fronts at the federal level as an Appropriator to provide resources for key Everglades restoration projects. I’m proud to have worked with President Obama to bridge Tamiami Trail to increase historic water flows to the South through the Everglades. We also took action to restore water quality through dike restoration and the Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan.

"I will continue to walk the walk on fighting to restore our precious River of Grass while my opponent just continues to talk."

On Friday, Canova sent out a fundraising email linking Wasserman Schultz and Republican Gov. Rick Scott on the issue. He wrote that both “have taken large contributions from corporate special interest groups in the Big Sugar industry.

Some context: The $133,000 Wasserman Schultz received from the sugar industry over her 12 years in Congress amounts to slightly more than $11,000 a year, far less than the sugar industry gave to Scott – and many other Democratic and Republican politicians.

Since early 2014, for example, U.S. Sugar of Clewiston gave more than $400,000 to Scott’s political committee, including $100,000 last month.

The Center for Responsive politics reports the sugar industry’s No. 1 recipient of political money for the 2016 election is U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla, who received $55,895. Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential candidate, was a distant second, at $35,227.

The top Florida recipients in the U.S. House were Lois Frankel, D-West Palm Beach ($31,900), and Carlos Curbelo, R-Miami ($31,300).