Rick Case donation helps Habitat for Humanity's 77-home Pompano project
Habitat for Humanity of Broward says a $500,000 cash donation from Rick Case Automotive Group will allow the nonprofit agency to move forward on a 77-home affordable housing community in Pompano Beach.

After a decade of planning, Habitat now has the $1.5 million it needs to build roads, sewers and water lines on 9 acres at the corner of 15th Street and Sixth Avenue, said Nancy Daly, a Habitat board member.

"This project has been on the table a long time, and we believe in the Habitat mission," said Rita Case, who runs Sunrise-based Rick Case Automotive with her husband.

Groundbreaking for A Rick Case Habitat Community is expected in fall 2017, and the first residents would move in during 2018.

The nearly $10 million project will be the largest Habitat has ever built in Broward, Daly said, and it will take about five years to build all the homes.

"There is a huge, huge shortage of affordable homes in Broward County," she said. "We're happy to fill a part of that need."

Aside from Rick Case Automotive, Habitat said it received donations from the Hudson Family Foundation; the estate of Lauderdale-by-the-Sea resident Elizabeth Peters; and Ed Ansin, owner of Sunbeam Television Corp., which owns WSVN-Ch. 7 in North Bay Village. The agency continues to solicit donations and sponsors for the project.

Habitat, which is still seeking city approvals, will select families for the program in September. Information should be available at HabitatBroward.org, starting Sept. 1.

Daly said Habitat acquired the first 3 acres from Abyssinian Baptist Church in 2006 and waited to buy the remaining 6 acres from the church in 2015. The total land cost: $2.95 million.

The community will be a mix of one- and two-story homes with three or four bedrooms, Daly said. The homes will range from 1,200 to 1,300 square feet.

Habitat will give qualified residents 30- or 40-year, zero-interest mortgages to buy the homes, Daly said.

Millard and Linda Fuller started Habitat for Humanity in 1976 in Americus, Ga. The Broward agency launched in 1983 and has built homes for 388 families, Daly said.

To be eligible for the program, buyers must be Broward residents for at least one year; be legal residents of the United States; and make 50 percent to 80 percent of the $60,000 area median income for Broward, according to Daly.

Selected families also must put in 300 hours building homes or working in Habitat offices.

"It is by no means a free program," Daly said. "If you work for it, it works every time."

Powers@Sun-Sentinel.com, 561-243-6529 or Twitter @paulowers