House GOP votes to defund Planned Parenthood with help of John Katko
WASHINGTON, D.C. - The House of Representatives voted Friday to cut off federal funding for Planned Parenthood for a year, reacting to a series of controversial videos from abortion opponents.

U.S. Rep. John Katko, R-Camillus, joined the majority of Republicans in voting 241-187 to pass the mostly symbolic measure, which would cut off about $500 million in aid to Planned Parenthood.

Democrats have enough votes to block the bill in the Senate, and President Barack Obama has threatened a veto if the legislation reaches his desk.

Katko's fellow Republican from Central New York, Rep. Richard Hanna, R-Barneveld, split with the party and became one of three GOP House members to oppose the legislation.

Before the vote, Hanna accused hard-line conservatives in the Republican caucus of pandering and engaging in political theater.

"The fact is this bill to defund Planned Parenthood has zero chance of becoming law today," Hanna told syracuse.com. "It will be vetoed by the president and Congress will never override that veto. Anyone who states differently is just wrong."

Katko had promised during his 2014 campaign for Congress that he would not vote to defund Planned Parenthood.

But this summer Katko called for Congress to investigate undercover videos from abortion opponents. Abortion opponents claimed the videos showed a Planned Parenthood official discussing the sale of fetal tissue from abortions, which is illegal.

In August, Katko said the heavily-edited videos were "deeply disturbing."

After the vote Friday, Katko said he had hoped that Congress would have finished its investigation before the House took up the funding issue.

"In the past, I have taken the position that I would support federal funding for Planned Parenthood to continue to provide these important services," Katko said. "However, like many of my constituents, I am concerned by the gruesome and potentially illegal content of the recently released videos exposing some of the practices of this organization."

Katko added that he until congressional investigations are complete, he can't support providing taxpayer dollars to Planned Parenthood.

"It is critically important, however, that we redirect these funds to other federally qualified Community Health Centers so that the vital programs that support the health of women and families throughout our nation will remain available," he said.

Democratic opponents of the bill said the Republican-controlled Congress focused on the wrong priorities, with only five legislative days remaining before a potential government shutdown at the end of the fiscal year.

Congress has not yet started considering a funding bill, and some hard-line conservatives have pushed for a government shutdown over the Planned Parenthood issue.

Katko said he remains adamantly opposed to using the Planned Parenthood funding debate to force a government shutdown.

Eric Ferrero, a spokesman for the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, said before the vote that the opponents in Congress were using the video controversy to advance their agenda against abortion.



"It's clear those behind these attacks have always had a clear agenda: to ban abortion, and cut millions of women and men across the country from necessary reproductive health care," Ferrero said. "They're continuing to push that agenda no matter how many they hurt in the process."

A Retuers/Ipsos poll in August found 54 percent of Americans support federal funding of Planned Parenthood, with 26 percent opposed to continued federal aid for the group.

Contact Mark Weiner anytime: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751