Welch Allyn to shrink global workforce by 275 people over three years
Welch Allyn, the Skaneateles-based medical device maker, intends to shrink its global workforce by 275 people as part of a 10 percent reduction over the next three years, according to a source briefed today about the company's plans.

The global restructuring will include 45 involuntary layoffs and 75 voluntary buyouts in Skaneateles over the next 18 months, according to the source, who asked not to be identified because the information had not been made public by the company.

Employees of the privately-held company were to be told of the plans this morning. As part of the restructuring, no direct manufacturing jobs will be lost. At the start of the year, Welch Allyn employed 2,750 people worldwide in 26 nations, including about 1,300 at its headquarters in Skaneateles.

U.S. Rep. Ann Marie Buerkle, R-Onondaga Hill, confirmed through a spokesman this afternoon that the company planned to reduce its global workforce by 10 percent, but did not have specific numbers or details on the timing.

The company had a change of leadership earlier this year when Stephen F. Meyer took over as president and chief executive officer. He replaced Julie Shimer, who announced in January that she planned to leave the company to spend more time with her family.

It was not immediately clear if the global restructuring is related to a new federal excise tax on medical devices due to take effect Jan. 1. The 2.3 percent tax was passed as part of the Affordable Care Act, and had been opposed by local representatives in Congress.

Eric Allyn, one of the company’s owners and a board member, said in June the new tax will cost Welch Allyn millions of dollars. “It’s not going to put us out of business, but it’s the most material speed bump that we’ve come across in at least a generation,” Allyn said. “If another company in this area were being hit with a tax as big as that, it would be front-page news for a long time.”

Buerkle joined Republican House members who passed a bill in June to repeal the medical device tax. The bill did not make it through the Democratic-controlled Senate.

“Welch Allyn is an excellent employer and a vital asset to our community," Buerkle said in a statement after she was briefed by the company. "Today’s announcement is a devastating blow to our economy in Upstate New York. Washington should be creating a reasonable business environment so that employers can operate and do business here without going overseas."

Buerkle joined Republican House members who passed a bill in June to repeal the medical device tax. The bill did not make it through the Democratic-controlled Senate.

In an interview Monday, Buerkle raised the issue as a political matter, saying that it separates her from Democrat Dan Maffei in their congressional campaign: We've been saying this all along," Buerkle said. "This (medical device tax) is a job killer. It's going to hurt the middle class."

Earlier in the day, Buerkle's campaign released a statement, blaming Maffei for the job losses: "Dan Maffei’s vote to raise taxes on Welch Allyn and other local employers is nothing short of irresponsible."

Maffei's campaign said he fought against the tax when the House was considering the Affordable Care Act. The House reduced the amount from 2.5 percent to 2.3 percent, and Maffei ultimately voted for President Obama's signature health care law.

"Dan has always opposed this provision, fought against it, and strongly supports its repeal," Marc Brumer said Monday, speaking for Maffei's campaign. During the debate over the Affordable Care Act, Welch Allyn's Shimer wrote a letter to The Post-Standard praising the efforts of Maffei and former Rep. Michael Arcuri in their fight against the excise tax.

Update



Welch Allyn confirmed this afternoon that it will "reshape its business and realign resources" over the next three years by shrinking its workforce by 10 percent and establishing three new product development and technology centers.

Those centers will be located in Skaneateles; Beaverton, OR; and Singapore. The company also will create a Global Finance Shared Service Center in Tijuana, Mexico. As part of the plan, the company's North American manufacturing and related support functions will be consolidated at Skaneateles and Tijuana, Mexico.

The company said it will perform a "90-day evaluation of its European operations to determine the optimal deployment of the business in that important market" and reorganize its Latin America business.

“We firmly believe this restructuring program is the right thing to do for the long-term success of the business, however, we also fully recognize the hardship it will cause some of our colleagues in the short term,” Welch Allyn President and CEO Steve Meyer said in a statement.

Meyer said affected employees will receive a "generous" severance package that includes outplacement assistance and continuing education assistance of up to $4,000 for up to a year. The statement did not specify the number of voluntary and involuntary layoffs that will take place at the Skaneateles headquarters.

Meyer did not offer any specific projections of the impact on the company's bottom line, nor did he say whether Welch Allyn would try to pass the tax along to its customers. The family-owned company does not publicly disclose its profits.

Contact Mark Weiner at mweiner@syracuse.com or 571-970-3751. Follow him on Twitter @MarkWeinerDC