Bernie Sanders' plan to win New York: Get highest voter turnout in primary history
SYRACUSE, N.Y. -- Bernie Sanders believes he can win the New York primary, but only if there is a huge voter turnout.

In a speech in Syracuse Tuesday, the Vermont senator recognized the importance of the impending Democratic primary in New York and said that his odds are much better when voter turnout is high.

"A week from today there's going to be an enormously important Democratic primary in New York State," Sanders said toward the end of his speech. "What we have found is we win when voter turnout is high, we lose when it is low. Next Tuesday, let us come out in large numbers. Let us have the highest voter turnout in Democratic primary history in New York."

Sanders trails rival Hillary Clinton by double digits in most polls with a week until New York votes. He's in the midst of an increasingly tight and increasingly hostile race with the former senator from New York.

Sanders attacked Clinton over her high fees to speak at Wall Street functions and told listeners that he has refused to take money from political action committees during his campaign.

But during the 75-minute stump speech at the Oncenter Convention Center, Sanders reserved his most pointed criticism for the Republican front-runner, Donald Trump.

Sanders dedicated about five minutes of the speech to taking on Trump, who is campaigning in Rome, N.Y. today. He recited a tirade against the billionaire New Yorker that ended with a catchphrase of his campaign:

"The reason Trump won't become president is the American people understand in their hearts what every religion tells us," Sanders said. "And that is, at the end of the day, love always trumps hatred."

He also reminded the audience of Trump's involvement in the birther movement several years ago. He accused Trump of singling out President Obama because he is the first black president.

"Obama's father was born in Kenya, my father was born in Poland," Sanders said. "Nobody ever asked me for my birth certificate. Do you think just maybe that might have something to do with the color of my skin versus the President's?"

The majority of Sanders' speech highlighted positions on which he's built his underdog campaign: Wealth inequality, tuition-free public college and campaign finance reform.

He championed a $15/hour minimum wage, paid family leave and universal healthcare as a right for every American. He condemned the "greed of the billionaire class" and argued that this nation incarcerates too many people.

Sanders drew a crowd of just more than 5,000 to the Oncenter, according to an on-site campaign aide. Many arrived hours early and waited outside in a line that spanned two city blocks.

Inside the venue, the crowd occasionally burst into "Bernie" chants or did the wave while waiting for the event to begin.

Prior to Sanders' speech, Syracuse musician Joe Driscoll performed a handful of songs and actors Rosario Dawson and Kendrick Sampson made speeches in support of Sanders.