Sex offender danger level: How NY ratings are like an AP or Regents exam
Syracuse, NY -- Last month, a former Syracuse police officer who molested young boys was rated the most dangerous type of sex offender.

Today, a Lysander serial child porn collector was rated a mid-level sex offender.

How are these ratings determined?

Each day, judges across New York state decide how much of a risk a certain sex offender is of re-offending. The most dangerous are rated Level 3 offenders. The least likely to re-offend are rated Level 1 offenders. Level 2 offenders fall somewhere in-between.

Lawyers and a judge debate what level to rate a sex offender.

But a surprisingly small amount of the outcome is actually up to them. In fact, the system is based on a points scale, not unlike an Advanced Placement or Regents high school test.

A sex offender is assigned points for different aspects of their crime, their history and other factors. Those points are added up and graded to reach the final outcome:

Level 1 offenders: 70 points or fewer

Level 2 offenders: 70 to 110 points

Level 3 offenders: More than 110 points

The levels impact how the offender will be listed the rest of his or her life.

Level 1 offenders are not listed in the public registry and leave the state offender database in 20 years.

Level 2 offenders are listed in the public registry and can petition to be removed after 30 years.

Level 3 offenders are listed in the public registry and can never be removed.

While the ultimate outcome is based on a points system, that doesn't prevent lawyers from arguing for or against points.

In the Lysander child porn case, for example, there was lengthy discussion over whether victims who appeared in the pornography that the man possessed should be counted the same as victims who were abused by an offender. The judge ultimately ruled that victims could be counted for the sake of the sex offender rating.

Related: Lysander serial child porn collector avoids being rated most dangerous sex offender



Here's a list of the risk factors and the number of points assessed if warranted:

Use of violence (choose one):

1. The offender used forcible compulsion. (10 points)

2. The offender inflicted physical injury. (15)

3. The offender was armed with a dangerous instrument. (30 points)

Sexual contact with victim:

1. The offender/victim contact was over clothing. (5 points)

2. The offender/victim contact was under clothing. (10 points)

3. The offender engaged in sexual intercourse, oral sexual conduct, anal sexual conduct or aggravated sexual abuse with the victim. (25 points)

Number of victims:

1. There were two victims. (20 points)

2. There were three or more victims. (30 points)

Duration of conduct with victim:

1. The offender engaged in a continuing course of sexual misconduct with at least one victim. (20 points)

Age of victim:

1. The victim was 11 through 16 years of age. (20 points)

2. The victim was 10 years old or less, or 63 years of age or more. (30 points)



Other victim characteristics:

1. The victim suffered from a mental abnormality, mental incapacity, or physical helplessness. (20 points)

Relationship between offender and victim:

1. The offender's crime (i) was directed at a stranger or a person with whom a relationship had been established or promoted for the primary purpose of victimization, or (ii) arose in the context of a professional or avocational relationship between the offender and the victim and was an abuse of that relationship. (20 points)

Age of offender's first sex crime:

1. The offender committed a sex offense, that subsequently resulted in an adjudication or

conviction for a sex crime, at age 20 or less. (10 points)

Number and nature of offender's prior crimes:

1: The offender has a prior criminal history, but no convictions or adjudications for a sex crime or felony. (5 points)

2: The offender has a prior criminal history that includes a felony conviction or adjudication but not for a violent felony or sex crime. (15 points)

3: The offender has a prior criminal history that includes a conviction or adjudication for murder, kidnapping or arson; or a violent felony, a misdemeanor sex crime, or endangering the welfare of a child, or any adjudication for a sex offense. (30 points)

Recency of prior felony or sex crime:

1. The offender has a prior conviction or adjudication for a felony or sex crime that occurred less than three years before the instant offense. (10 points)

Drug or alcohol abuse:

1. The offender has a history of drug or alcohol abuse. (15 points)

Acceptance of responsibility for current crime:

1: The offender has not accepted responsibility for his sexual misconduct. (10 points)

2: The offender has refused or been expelled from treatment subsequent to sentencing. (15 points)



Conduct while confined or under supervision:

1: The offender's adjustment to confinement or supervision has been unsatisfactory.

(10 points)

2: The offender's adjustment to confinement or supervision has been unsatisfactory and has included inappropriate sexual conduct. (20 points)

Supervision after conviction:

1: The offender will be released under the supervision of a probation, parole or mental health professional who specializes in the management of sexual offenders or oversees a sex offender caseload (0 points)

2: The offender will be released under the supervision of a probation, parole or 'mental health professional, but not one who specializes in the management of sexual offenders or oversees a sex offender caseload (5 points)

3: The offender will be released with no official supervision (15 points)

Living or employment situation:

The offender's living or employment situation is inappropriate. (10 points)

Overrides allowing a judge to raise the level of dangerousness:

Prior sex felony conviction: The offender has a prior felony conviction for a sex crime.

Serious physical injury or death: The offender inflicted serious physical injury or caused death to the victim.

Recent threat: The offender has made a recent threat that he will re-offend by committing a sexual or violent crime.

Mental abnormality: There has been a clinical assessment that the offender has a psychological, physical, or organic abnormality that decreases his ability to control impulsive sexual behavior.

Dispelling a common sex offender rating myth:



The sex offender registry does not prevent a sex offender from living near a school, a park or around children.

A sex offender on probation or parole may have restrictions on where he or she can live, but after that supervision ends, there are no residency restrictions, said prosecutor Jeremy Cali, head of the Onondaga County District Attorney's Office sex crimes unit.

Once an offender has been let go from supervision, he or she can live anywhere. The only requirement is that he or she report their address each year and any change of address, Cali said.



Read the official court document explaining the sex offender rating system:

Sex offender guidelines