NY Safe Act: See what makes an assault weapon illegal (video)
VAN BUREN, N.Y. - Semi-automatic rifles with detachable magazines are banned from being sold in New York if they have a protruding pistol grip.

That's because the NY Safe Act redefined what constitutes an assault weapon.

But remove the pistol grip with an Allen wrench and certain models of an AR-15 rifle - the same style gun that Adam Lanza used in the Newtown, Conn., school shootings - become legal. That simple change does nothing to lessen the lethality of the gun, according to critics of the New York's gun laws.

"It's the same gun, it's just got some different cosmetic features," said David Simmons, president of the Baldwinsville Rod & Gun Club and the Onondaga County Federation of Sportsmen Clubs.

Gun control advocates don't buy that argument. "If they are so cosmetic, then why are they so upset?" says Leah Gunn Barrett, of New Yorkers Against Gun Violence.

The Safe Act, signed into law by Gov. Andrew Cuomo in January 2013 just one month after the Newtown shootings, narrowed the definition of legal assault weapons. The new laws banned certain characteristics - such as a protruding pistol grip or adjustable stock - off of newly purchased semi-automatic guns with detachable magazines.

People who legally owned guns with those features prior to Jan. 15, 2013 had until April 15 to register their firearms and legally keep them. New York State Police say the new gun laws prohibit them from saying how many gun owners complied with the registration requirement.

Some of these features - like the pistol grip, a second hand grip or a muzzle shroud (which allows someone to hold a muzzle heated from fired bullets) - make it easier for a shooter to aim, fire and spray ammunition at targets, gun control advocates like Barrett say.

"They are designed to make these guns more effective," she said. "The pistol grip, specifically, gives the shooter much more control."

Other banned features, like a bayonet mount and a flash suppressor, are "sort of bells and whistles," Barrett acknowledged.

Simmons also acknowledges that the banned features (listed below) do serve a purpose for hunters and shooters. An adjustable stock makes it easier for people of different sizes (and different arm lengths) to use the same rifle. The protruding pistol grip - unlike the newly manufactured ones with a more flush hand grip - make the gun easier to stablize.

But to Simmons and other gun owners, the Safe Act merely strips away added features and does nothing affect the lethality of rifles like the AR-15. Pre-Safe Act and post-Safe Act AR-15s both take the same cartridges - either .223-calibar or 5.56 millimeter cartridges, Simmons says.

Under the new law, magazines can only hold a maximum of 10 bullets.

Putting any one of these features on a semi-automatic rifle with a detachable magazine will qualify the firearm as an "assault weapon" under the Safe Act:

Folding or Telescoping Stock

Protruding Pistol Grip

Thumbhole Stock

Second Handgrip or Protruding Grip that can be held by non-shooting hand

Bayonet Mount

Flash Suppressor

Muzzle Brake

Muzzle Compensator

A threaded barrel designed to accommodate attachments to the barrel

Grenade Launcher

403 Forbidden 403 Forbidden

Contact Teri Weaver at tweaver@syracuse.com, 315-470-2274 or on Twitter at @TeriKWeaver.