Former Army Col. Mike Derrick to challenge Rep. Elise Stefanik in 2016
WASHINGTON, D.C. -- A retired Army colonel and missile defense expert said Wednesday he will seek the Democratic nomination to challenge U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik, R-Willsboro, in the 2016 election for the 21st Congressional District seat.

Mike Derrick, a native of Peru in Clinton County, said he moved back home after ending his 28-year military career and decided he wants to continue the North Country tradition of looking out for your neighbors.

The married father of four said he will focus his campaign on issues such as education, jobs and farming that affect middle class families.

"The North Country where I grew up was a place where families looked out for each other, kids got a great education, and we all believed that, with hard work, a bright future was possible," Derrick said in a statement. "That's my vision for our future and that's what I'll fight for in Congress."

The West Point graduate will try to build support within the large military community surrounding Fort Drum near Watertown. Fort Drum, one of the state's largest employers, could shrink in size in the next few years as the Army cuts its force by 50,000 or more.

Stefanik, 30, serves on the House Armed Services Committee, like her two previous predecessors who represented the 21st District in Congress. She became the youngest woman ever elected to Congress in 2014 when she defeated Democrat Aaron Woolf. Woolf said this week he will not seek a rematch against Stefanik.

Derrick said he has deep roots in the North Country, where he attended Peru Junior High School and Mount Assumption Institute in Plattsburgh.

While in the Army, Derrick said, he commanded a mechanized infantry company with the 1st Armored Division on the German border and in Desert Storm. He also earned two graduate degrees from Indiana University, and later served as an associate professor of history at West Point.

During the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, he commanded two training battalions at Fort Carson in Colorado, Derrick said. He went on to lead a 22-nation missile defense war game for U.S. Strategic Command, and after retiring advised the State Department about international missile defense cooperation.

"I'm running for Congress to make sure that my hometown of Peru and all of the communities in New York's 21st District have the opportunity to thrive and grow," Derrick said. "Unfortunately, with the paralysis and stagnation in Congress right now, that's not happening. Politicians are more concerned with their own political interests than the interests of the people they represent. I'm going to change that."

Contact Mark Weiner anytime: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751