Our Opinion: Saying no
When it came to the final hour, as financial markets worried and the world wondered whether the United States could be trusted to pay its debts, Congress did the responsible thing and voted to reopen the government and lift the debt ceiling.

But our representative in the House, Steve Southerland, R-Panama City, as well as our Republican Sen. Marco Rubio, voted against the legislation - and for continuing the standoff.

They should be ashamed.

Americans knew that, if House Speaker John Boehner would allow a vote, the shutdown and the risk of a federal default would end. Indeed, on Wednesday the legislation passed 285-144 in the House (198 Democrats and 87 Republicans voting yes; zero Democrats and 144 Republicans voting no). In the Senate, the vote was 81-18 (52 Democrats, 27 Republicans and two independents voting yes; zero Democrats and 18 Republicans voting no).

Mr. Boehner had his hands full with his Republican colleagues, wondering as did others what exactly the tea party faction wanted.

First there was talk about defunding Obamacare, but the chances of that passing through the Senate and then getting the signature of President Obama - who claims it as his major achievement - were nil.

In a My View published in the Oct. 6 Tallahassee Democrat, Rep. Southerland seemed to be saying that the battle was really about health care subsidies for members of Congress. For that we shut down the government? Sen. Rubio, meanwhile, said he voted no on the agreement "because it postpones any significant action on pro-growth and spending reforms and does nothing to provide working class Americans even one shred of relief from Obamacare's harmful effects."

Raising the debt ceiling was about honoring existing obligations. Shutting down government not only ruined vacations to national parks but, according to a Wall Street Journal blog, slowed the economic recovery and could cost almost a million jobs.

The government now is funded through mid-January, and partisan battles will continue. There will be opportunities to debate Obamacare - a law some want to declare a disaster before it even takes effect. There will be chances to trim the federal budget.

Rep. Southerland put our nation's economy and good standing in the international community at risk in order to fight those battles now.

He did lead a House GOP conference meeting on Tuesday morning in singing "Amazing Grace." That's not the leadership we were looking for.