Gillum attacks President Trump's 'sanctuary cities' executive order
Buy Photo Mayor Andrew Gillum speaks at the city’s annual retreat, held at the Tallahassee International Airport, where goals were outlined for the year ahead on Wednesday, Jan. 11, 2017. (Photo: Joe Rondone/Democrat)Buy Photo

Tallahassee Mayor Andrew Gillum went on a Twitter takedown of President Donald Trump’s executive order against so-called “sanctuary cities” Thursday afternoon.

“President Trump’s immigration Executive Order attacking cities is not a projection of strength, but a reflection of weakness,” Gillum tweeted just before 3 p.m.

Gillum’s Twitter tear went on to call Trump’s actions “inconsistent with our highest values.” Gillum said the U.S. can “protect national security interests and have a secure border without criminalizing people who are here undocumented.”

The executive order goes beyond people who qualify for deportation because they have committed crimes. “It criminalizes individuals based on their status as undocumented,” Gillum tweeted. “These are working people who pay taxes in our country.”

(1/8) President Trump’s immigration Executive Order attacking cities is not a projection of strength, but a reflection of weakness. — Andrew Gillum (@AndrewGillum) January 26, 2017

His tweets came a day after Trump signed an executive order vowing to halt federal funding to cities that don’t help immigration enforcement officials and join a chorus of mayors across the country who have vowed to oppose Trump.

Four states, 39 cities and 364 counties — including Leon County — have policies limiting local law enforcement from helping federal immigration officials arrest and detain people suspected of being in the country illegally.

As he read through the executive order, Gillum said, he realized that Trump didn’t want to just round up rapists and murderers. “I don’t think anyone would object to those kinds of heinous crimes, but an all-out attack on all 20 million of them? These are people who live in our communities, go to our schools and pay taxes.”

They’re also students at Florida State University, FAMU and Tallahassee Community College who enjoy protections under President Obama’s DACA Act, he said.

Washington has a responsibility to fix the system so that those 20 million can be fully functional members of society, Gillum said.

Tallahassee is not officially a ‘sanctuary city” but Gillum’s comments are consistent with statements has made in the past about welcoming immigrants. In the wake of the Paris terrorist attacks two years ago, after Gov. Rick Scott vowed to prevent Syrian refugees from coming to Florida until their threat to national security was evaluated, Gillum said Syrian refugees would be welcome in Tallahassee, and that Scott’s remarks were politically divisive.

"I believe strongly that we cannot turn our backs on the refugee community in their time of greatest need," Gillum said. "The U.S. vetting process for refugees is extremely rigorous, extensive, and comprehensive, and allows us to aid those that pose no threat to our country."

He later went on CNN to defend his position that Tallahassee will welcome Syrian refugees fleeing the war-torn country.

Gillum, who many suspect is planning a run for Governor, gained more national attention earlier this year when he launched a plan to get local governments to fight outside meddling from state and federal governments.

The Campaign To Defend Local Solutions is waging a battle against state “pre-emption” rules that strip power away from local governments on a variety of issues including gun safety, banning plastic bags and styrofoam, and restricting where people can smoke.

Evan Power, chairman of the Leon County Republican Party, said he wondered why Gillum would characterize the president’s executive order as an attack on cities. “He’s only going after cities that are ignoring federal immigration laws,” Power said.

That brings to mind the question, “Is this the direction Tallahassee is going? Are we going to choose to ignore immigration law and threaten our federal funding, too?” Power asked.

Gillum is using this as a platform to run for higher office, Power said. “And that is my real concern as a city resident who cares about the needs of the city,” he said. “He is not governing as a mayor who wants to take care of the needs of its residents. He’s governing through a prism of what helps his political ambition.”

The Leon County Republican Party has started a petition to get Gillum to stop commenting on national issues and get back to local governance.

“We have enough problems,” Power said. “He needs to focus on those issues and not national issues that get headlines.”

Immigration is a local issue, Gillum said.

“When you enlist cities to round up people in their communities, that is then a local issue,” he said. Those people are servers and cooks in local restaurants, neighbors and fellow church members, he added.

It also undermines the ability of local law enforcement to build trust in a community, he said.

The Tallahassee Police Department participates with state and federal authorities on solving crimes, Gillum said. “We don’t round up citizens because they happen to be undocumented.”

Contact Schweers at jschweers@tallahassee.com. Follow him on Twitter @jeffschweers.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/2k946Ii