Florida graduation rate jumps to 74.5 percent, dropout rate steady
The Florida Department of Education announced this afternoon that the four-year high school graduation rate for the class of 2012 is 74.5, and that the 3.9 oercentage point jump was the highest in nearly a decade.

African-American students had the biggest increases of all racial groups, although Hispanic students also saw significant gains, the news release said.

Meanwhile, the dropout rate for remained steady at 1.9 percent and has decreased a full percentage point over the past four years.

Gov. Rick Scott praised the good news Friday.

“Floridians want to know that they have access to high quality-education that prepares them for college and careers,” he said via the news release. “The increase in graduation rates speaks to the effort and commitment of students and educators and shows that our state is moving in the right direction.”

For more information about high school graduation rates, click here.

Here is the full news release:

Florida’s federal graduation rate rose by an unprecedented 3.9 percentage points in 2012, moving to 74.5 percent of students graduating from high school within four years. According to data released today by the Florida Department of Education, this is the largest single-year increase our state has seen in the federal graduation rate since 2003. The rate has climbed 18 percentage points overall since then.



“Floridians want to know that they have access to high quality-education that prepares them for college and careers,” said Governor Rick Scott. “The increase in graduation rates speaks to the effort and commitment of students and educators and shows that our state is moving in the right direction.”

Florida’s African-American students showed the biggest increase over the past five years, rising from 50 percent graduating in 2008 to 63.7 percent this year. Hispanic students also performed at significantly higher levels, with 72.9 percent of students graduating in 2012 – up from 59.8 percent in 2008 – an increase of more than 13 percentage points.



“My thanks and congratulations to Florida’s teachers, parents, and school leaders for their dedication and hard work to ensure more students achieve academic success and graduate with a diploma,” said Commissioner of Education Pam Stewart. “We are committed to making sure students are ready to take the next step and pursue college or a career.”



Beginning in 2011, federal regulations required states to calculate a four-year graduation rate that includes only standard diplomas. Previously, Florida’s official graduation rate included both standard and specia

l diploma recipients. Students who earn a special diploma, a GED-based diploma, a certificate of completion, or have been retained and are still in school are not included in the federal graduation rate.



Florida is noted for having some of the most rigorous graduation requirements in the country. In some states, students who qualify for a standard diploma in their state’s accountability system would not meet Florida’s requirements.



The graduation rate measures the percentage of students who graduate within four years of their first enrollment in ninth grade. The rate is calculated for an adjusted cohort of students, a group of students on the same schedule to graduate, taking into account those who enter or exit the group. The federal graduation rate is used in calculating high school grades and allows comparison among states.



Florida’s 2012 single year dropout rate of 1.9 percent of students is unchanged from the previous year and a decrease of close to one percentage point since 2008. Single-year dropout data for students in ninth through twelfth grades from 2007-08 through 2011-12 is below.



Florida’s 9th – 12th Grade Single-Year Dropout Rates, 2007-08 through 2011-12



For more information and to view state and district graduation and dropout data, visit Graduation Rates.