Tim Pawlenty press-palooza. Prez candidate barnstorms FL, explains record
From gay marriage to global warming to immigration and taxes, Republican presidential candidate Tim Pawlenty doesn't flinch from a chance to sit down and answer questions about his record and his candidacy (unlike many candidates). Pawlenty sat down yesterday afternoon with the St. Petersburg Times on camera and then after a day of fundraising, did the same with the Miami Herald. Here's a partial transcript:

Q: You’re racking up endorsements from top Florida legislators, but stuck at the bottom of the polls. Why?

Pawlenty: “The early days of campaigning in a state like Florida are retail…..Early polls don’t predict anything, ultimately. If they did, Hillary Clinton or Rudy Giuliani would be president today. National polls basically always misinterpret the final outcome or mis-predict the final outcome.”

Q: Explain Florida’s role in your campaign and the election?

Pawlenty: “Florida plays a pivotal role not just in the general election, but more often than not in the primary. This can be kind of the state where the putative nominee is selected. So we take that very seriously.”

Q: What do you think of the debt ceiling?

Pawlenty: “The debt ceiling agreement was really disappointing. This is an agreement that doesn’t really fix the problem….But they didn’t really fix the underlying structural problem of the country.”

Q: Are you letting the perfect become the enemy of the good? Why not accept something mediocre?

Pawlenty: “I don’t think underwhelming or disappointing or mediocre or below average or flat-out pathetic is good enough for America anymore. We are in deep trouble. And the standard shouldn’t be: What are those things that we can do that are mediocre, disappointing, underwhelming, uninspiring or lacking in courage? The standard should be: What can we do to continue this country to be the greatest country on the face of the earth. We should have a president who’s leading the debate on these issues? And instead he’s hiding, he’s ducking, he’s bobbing, he’s weaving. You can’t even find him on the major financial issues of our day. How he would reform Social Security. How he would reform Medicare. How he would reform Medicaid and so on.

"Most of the things that they’ve now promised are in the future. They’re contingent upon future action. And guess what? A future president and a future Congress could undo or duck all of those as well…."

Q: What would you do with Social Security?

Pawlenty: “If you’re on the program now or anywhere near eligibility, you shouldn’t have your benefits impacted. But if you’re in the next generation, we’re telling you now with several decades of warning, we’re going to gradually raise the retirement age over time. If you’re lower income or middle income, you should still get your cost-of-living adjustment. But in the future, if you’re real wealthy, we’re going to have to slow that down or take it away. That’s the way it is. This thing is drowning. And what people don’t realize, if we don’t make these kinds of changes, in current law, Social Security gets automatic cuts for everybody. So anybody who’s in favor of doing nothing is in favor of cutting Social Security. And there are similar answers for Medicaid and Medicare.”

Q: Some of the increased spending happened in the Bush years, when two wars, a new Medicare prescription drug entitlement program and tax cuts were approved. Why not scale back all of that, including the tax cuts?

Pawlenty: “You have to look back at what got is into the mess. And, again, revenues kept up with the private economy. It’s the government spending that went way beyond that…

“While it’s fair to say that parties in Congress and both parties in the White House contributed to this problem, it’s also absolutely true that President Obama has made it exponentially worse. When President Bush left office, the deficit was approximately $500 billion. It is now approximately now $1.5 trillion. In other words, president Obama has essentially tripled the deficit. To make matters worse, he promised in the first few months of his presidency, that he would cut the deficit in half during his first term, which has turned out to be a broken promise.”

Q: Part of the Obama deficit was the stimulus, but a number of Republican governors such as yourself both bashed it and took the money at the same time. How do you explain that?

Pawlenty: “There’s a lot of reasons for it. If the federal government is dumb enough to give it to us, we’ll be smart enough to take it. In Minnesota’s case, we are not a net taker of money from the federal government. According to the Tax Foundation, for every dollar Minnesota sends to the federal government, we get approximately 73 cents back…. We more than pay for our share of federal spending.”

Q: The Club for Growth gave you credit for stopping more than $7 billion in proposed tax increases and for holding down spending from a liberal legislature, but it expressed concern about what it called your “nanny-state” solution to cut down on smoking and fund public healthcare by hiking taxes on cigarettes. Can you explain?