Senate continues session after House's abrupt sine die
Moments before House Speaker Steve Crisafulli gaveled the session to a close more than three days early, he left a message on the cell phone of Senate President Andy Gardiner, alerting him of the decision.

Gardiner said that despite the news, he continued navigating the Senate through a series of bills, including a series of claims bills devoted to authorizing payments to people who have been injured by government negligence, and sent them to the governor. He then announced the Senate would return again on Wednesday because "we have a job to do."

Addressing the chamber, nearly two hours after the House abruptly adjourned sine die, Gardiner experessed his disappointment.

"Nobody won today," Gardiner said. "Nobody won. Taxpayers lost. It's an unfortunate turn of events."

Gardiner said he was proud of the Senate, disappointed in the House and determined to return on Wednesday. He ticked off the bills that had died, casualties of the House’s decision to leave early amid the budget impasse.

"The corrections bill that Sen. Evers brought forward to this chamber, and this body with an oversight committee -- that bill's not going to make it," he said.

He also mentioned a sweeping water bill, a priority of Crisafulli

"There are so many good issues," Gardiner said. "Sadly those expecting post- secondary options for children with unique abilities will not have that option. It died in the House.”

Gardiner said he "couldn't be prouder of the Senate."

“We didn’t have all the answers. We never said we did but we didn’t fear the debate,’’ he said. “While I’m disappointed in the House, we have a job to do. We will be professional” and will return to finish the agenda on Wednesday.

He urged senators to decide which bills they will “lay on the front door” of the Senate, in a symbolic gesture, and which will be sent to the governor.

“We will look at each issue,’’ he said. “We will look at it in terms of good policy and not getting even.”

When he finished, the Senate stood in a minute-long applause, in standing ovation.

Sen. Jack Latvala, R-Clearwater, was more pointed in his criticism of the House. He scolded the House leaders for being “immature” and blasted House GOP members for following their leaders “like lemmings.”

“The immaturity that they’ve shown in the House today is a testimony to term limits,’’ he said. “There’s no check and balance on leadership…I’m embarrassed to be a part of a process that works like that.”

He asserted that there are “probably 20 members of the House who would stand up on this Medicaid issue unless they were scared.

“Talk about being threatened. You talk about the governor threatening people. I can tell you there are House members who have been threatened if they leave on this issue. “

Sen. Tom Lee, R-Brandon, the Senate Appropriations Committee chairman, said the House’s decision to leave early would “be hard to explain back home” and will undoubtedly deepen the divide between the two chambers.



"Think of the psychology of being jilted at the alter?" he said. "How many people recover from that?"



He said the "I think it is so ill-advised that I'm surprised they would go down that path," said Senate Budget Chairman Tom Lee.



Lee said he believed the legislature still had work to do.



"There's no reason that we need to have collateral damage from our budget differences," he said.

Staff writer Kathleen McGrory contributed to this report.