Bombing suspect is registered to vote in Miami-Dade, voted in August GOP primary, 2016 election
Cesar Sayoc, identified by law enforcement officials as the bombing suspect Friday, is a registered Republican voter in Miami-Dade County and he cast a ballot in Florida's primary election in August, records show.

Despite nine arrests since 1991, Sayoc is not a convicted felon, according to records from the Florida Department of Law Enforcement.

Sayoc's voting history, including a 2016 voter registration application, was released by the Miami-Dade Supervisor of Elections office Friday in response to a public records request by the Times/Herald.

Suzy Trutie, a spokeswoman for the Miami-Dade elections office, said that Sayoc is eligible to vote. Multiple news accounts Friday said Sayoc, a 56-year-old resident of Aventura in Northeast Miami-Dade, has a criminal record dating to the early 1990s.

According to a Florida Department of Law Enforcement file of Sayoc's criminal history, Sayoc has been arrested nine times.

Sayoc pleaded guilty to second-degree felony charges of threatening to throw and discharge a destructive device in 11th Circuit Court in Miami in November, 2002. Adjudication was withheld, meaning he avoided a felony conviction.

He also pleaded guilty to a felony charge of grand theft in the third degree in 1991. Adjudication was withheld. He has also been arrested in drug and battery charges that were either dropped or where adjudication was withheld.

Convicted felons are not eligible to vote in Florida unless their right to vote is restored by the governor and Cabinet. A spokesman for the state said on Friday that Sayoc has not petitioned to have his civil rights restored.

On his latest voter registration application, dated March 4, 2016, Sayoc swore under penalty of perjury that he was not a convicted felon or, if he was, that his right to vote had been restored.

Sayoc's voting history report shows that he voted at an early voting site in the Aug. 28 primary. The references to "not eligible" in the voting history report mean that Sayoc was not a resident of the jurisdiction holding that election.

"He's still eligible to vote," Trutie said in an email.

Records show that he has no apparent local ties and that several businesses associated with he and family members are or were located in South Florida.