Plant City proposal would prohibit medical marijuana sales unless federal law changes
PLANT CITY – Medical marijuana may or may not be approved by voters in November.

Plant City may be ready either way.

City commissioners are expected to vote soon on an ordinance banning the cultivation, processing and sales of marijuana for medical purposes in the city unless the federal government changes its law on the drug.

City Attorney Ken Buchman wrote in a report to commissioners that federal law “makes no distinction between medical and recreational use of cannabis and it is treated as every other controlled substance, such as cocaine and heroin.”

If the ordinance is approved, Plant City wouldn’t allow dispensaries to sell medical marijuana, nor could it be cultivated or processed in the city limits, unless pot is legalized for such uses under federal law. City commissioners will hold public hearings during their next two meetings at City Hall, at 7:30 p.m. Monday and 7:30 p.m. May 9.

Buchman said he’s trying to get “ahead of the curve,” since medical marijuana is on the November ballot, and the Legislature has cleared the way for doctors to prescribe marijuana low in the active ingredient, THC.

The proposed ordinance would also set up zoning regulations for medical marijuana, should the federal law be changed. Marijuana dispensaries would have to be located in medical districts, such as around South Florida Baptist Hospital, and cultivation and processing could only take place in light industrial zoning districts.

In his report to city commissioners, Buchman included a March Florida Bar Journal article about the inconsistencies between federal law and the laws in states that have approved marijuana for medical or recreational use. The writer warned lawyers of legal pitfalls they face if they offer advice to businesses interested in selling or cultivating marijuana.

“Marijuana is still illegal every where in the United States, even for medicinal purposes,” attorney Bruce E. Reinhart wrote.

Twitter: @dnicholsonTBO

[email protected]

(813) 394-5103