Early Childhood Education in Texas
The agency supports high-quality early learning that promotes kindergarten school readiness for Texas children. The state of Texas is invested in the identification and dissemination of well researched early childhood education instructional strategies. Supported through key partnerships with the Regional Education Service Centers, the Texas Early Learning Council, numerous licensed child care programs, including Head Start, Texas continues to raise the bar for quality early learning. These key partnerships laid the foundation for all investments through the adoption of the Texas Prekindergarten Guidelines (PKG), which emphasize research-based instructional strategies that are developmentally appropriate. Intended to support all students, these guidelines also work to inform teachers in addressing the specific needs of English language learners and students with disabilities.

Latest Developments

Check for the current early childhood education information:

Tuition-supported and district-financed prekindergarten (TEC, ยง29.1531) (June 2014)

Compliance with Kindergarten Reading Assessment Data Submission (TEC ยง28.006) (May 2014)

Related Agencies

The following are agencies that provide support for early childhood education:

2-1-1 Resource and Referral Agencies (outside source)

2-1-1 Texas, a program of the Texas Health and Human Services Commission, is committed to helping Texas citizens connect with the services they need.

Directory of Texas Workforce Centers and Services (outside source)

The Texas Workforce Commission, 28 local Workforce Development Boards and their service contractors work together to provide workforce solutions for Texans.

Early Childhood Intervention (ECI) (outside source)

ECI is a statewide program for families with children, birth to three, with disabilities and developmental delays.

Texas Agricultural Commission, National School Lunch Program (NSLP) (outside source)

The NSLP is a federally assisted meal program that provides nutritionally balanced, low-cost or free lunches.



Texas Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS) (outside source)

DFPS Licensing Informs parents and the public about child care and about the histories of specific homes, child-care operations, and child-placing agencies in complying with minimum standards of care.

Texas Head Start Collaboration Office (outside source)

The purpose of the Texas Head Start Collaboration Office (THSSCO) is to create partnerships that support the development of multi-agency and public/private collaborative action.



Texas Workforce Commission (outside source), TWC is the authority for child care provider licensing, rules and programs.

Related Links

The following links provide support for early childhood education:

Professional Mentoring and Coaching Toolkit, Partners in Action (outside source); Additional Tools and Resources (outside source)

Texas' Early Learning Pathways (outside source) Alignment document of the Infant, Toddler, and Three-Year-Old Early Learning Guidelines

Contact:

Howard Morrison, Statewide Coordinator, Early Childhood Education

howard.morrison@tea.state.tx.us

Texas Education Agency

1701 North Congress Avenue

Austin, Texas 78701-1401

512-463-9581



Curriculum Division

curriculum@tea.state.tx.us

(512) 463-9581