MO Lt. Gov: Student Unrest Caused by 'Decades of Leftist Control'
(Breitbart) – Missouri Lt. Governor Peter Kinder says we’re seeing the “fruits of decades of Leftist control” play out at the University of Missouri this week.

Kinder joined Breitbart News Daily on Sirius XM Patriot channel 125 (6AM to 9AM ET) Thursday morning to discuss recent events at Mizzou with host and Breitbart News Executive Chairman Stephen K. Bannon.

Saying many Conservatives have “allowed this to happen” by “averting our gaze as tenured radicals have taken over the university,” Kinder added, “We could not avert our gaze from the appalling events at the University of Missouri in the last week.”

Kinder then cited an item by Heather MacDonald in City Journal: Racial Hysteria Triumphs on Campus, pointing out how the Left can now, in effect, weaponized athletic teams in what she called “the boorish, hate-filled Cultural Revolution come to America.”

Missouri, Yale, and America’s Cultural Revolution According to the New York Times, the university could have lost more than $1 million had it forfeited its football game with Brigham Young University on Saturday. The precedent set here is monumental. Any student protester who can convince his college’s football or basketball team to threaten a strike will be able to bring administrators to their knees even more quickly than usual.

Kinder, who is running for governor, also cited Ronald Reagan, who took on “the radicals at Berkeley” in his first campaign for governor, adding that current events create an opportunity to display to taxpayers and voters “the totalitarian mindset that is at work on our campus and how far it has gone and how entrenched” it’s become.

Host Bannon said Breitbart’s own investigations had failed to turn up any solid facts behind recent claims of racism at Mizzou – see here and here – leading Kinder to claim this was an example of people looking to grasp at “any reed, no matter how thin to support their claim to victimhood status.”

Kinder also made it clear that there are in fact instances of racism on college campuses and they need to be dealt with when they arise; however, he also cited a piece by Clay Travis at Fox Sports: Mizzou Protest Is Total Charade to point out that the alleged causes of current events at Mizzou don’t rise much above the level of rumor.

You should be ashamed of yourself, Mizzou. This is what happens when today’s delicate flower children grow up believing that college should be a place where no one ever says anything to make them sad and those of you on campus with working brains don’t stand up and call them out for being pathetic losers.

Kinder also expressed significant displeasure with Mizzou football coach Gary Pinkel, saying he should have called players bluff. Kinder pointed out that most get free food, free housing and tuition and in return are expected to play football “and if you don’t then you have jeopardized your scholarship.” Of course, that didn’t happen as Punkel actually sided with his 4 – 5 football team become social justice warriors. Perhaps they just needed to try something different for a win, as opposed to playing BYU?

Kinder also said now former college president Timothy Wolfe had spent much of his time at MIzzou criticizing the state’s Republican legislature and “taking the side generally of the Left” to appeal to “this peanut gallery on the Left” and “they devoured him” for his trouble. Wolfe was “one of them,” said Kinder and they simply threw him aside.

The full audio of Kinder’s appearance on Breitbart News Daily on Sirius XM Patriot channel 125 (6AM to 9AM ET) is below.

http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2015/11/12/missouri-lt-gov-kinder-blames-left-calls-missouri-events-appalling/