Reporter-News Online: Texas News -- Kirk, Cornyn debate defense amid national wrangling over issue
PRINT THIS PAGE | E-MAIL THIS PAGE Sunday, September 29, 2002 Kirk, Cornyn debate defense amid national wrangling over issue By SUZANNE GAMBOA

Associated Press Writer WASHINGTON (AP) - As debate rages between Congress and the Bush administration over a possible war with Iraq, the Texas candidates for U.S. Senate are trying to separate themselves over who would better guard national security interests. Republican John Cornyn and Democrat Ron Kirk have bickered for weeks over attacking Iraq and who most supports President Bush's preference for launching a pre-emptive strike, acting unilaterally if needed. Both candidates say they back Bush's plans for war with Iraq and say making that decision requires careful deliberation. Both say they want to protect Texas interests when it comes to defense spending and that defense spending should depend on military needs. "I believe the United States of America should always reserve our right to act in our national security interests. However, though, the president made a compelling case before the United Nations that the United Nations should act to enforce its own resolutions. The risk of not doing that is irrelevance," said Cornyn, the state's attorney general. Kirk, former mayor of Dallas, said the president made "an extraordinarily compelling case" before the United Nations and "essentially threw the gauntlet down" in asking it to enforce its resolutions. "If he believes Saddam Hussein has access to chemical weapons and biological weapons and plans to deploy those and the U.N. falters in responding to the presidents call, I would support him" in a unilateral decision to attack Iraq, Kirk said. The Senate race heated up this month when Kirk said Cornyn is more comfortable with the idea of military action against Iraq because those who would do the fighting would be would be middle-class and disproportionately minority. Cornyn demanded Kirk apologize for the comments. "I regret it came out the way it did. I was responding to concerns made to me by mothers and dads all over, to do everything we can to give those going to fight that war every chance to come back safe. My main concern is for those willing to put their lives at stake to protect us," Kirk said. Statistics on the income-levels of families that military personnel come from were not available from the Defense Department. In 2000, about 34 percent of the four service branches' members were ethnic or racial minorities. Kirk says what separates him from Cornyn is his understanding of the great moral weight the United States carries as it decides whether to go to war. "At the end of the day, we are asking somebody's son to go risk their life for freedom. If we are going to do that, how do we give ourselves the best chance to be successful?" Kirk said. Answering his own question, he said the way to do that is build support among allies. Kirk said the decision about striking Iraq is also a decision of changing the United States' century-old standard on when to flex its military might. The standard has always been to do so to defend the country's security, and that standard has helped keep other countries from flexing their military muscle, he said. With a decision to attack Iraq, the U.S. could move to a pre-emptive strategy, attacking before being attacked, he said. "We have to do something about Iraq, but how do we do it and maintain that moral standing in the world?" Kirk said. Cornyn questions Kirk's commitment to maintaining the United States' military strength, in part because Kirk participated in a fund-raiser for a group known as the Council For a Livable World and accepted its endorsement. The group's Web site says it focuses on "halting the spread of weapons of mass destruction, opposing a national missile defense system, cutting Pentagon waste and reducing excessive arms exports." Cornyn accuses Kirk of changing his views as the Iraq debate has progressed, which Kirk denies. Cornyn said where he and Kirk differ is he does not believe the United States needed permission from the United Nations to act. "I believe my views take into account the national security interests of the people of the United States," Cornyn said. "I certainly would not lightly commit our troops and our personnel to war because it is literally deadly serious. I think it is the responsibility of our nations' leaders to protect our country, to protect our freedom. That means we must be willing to use our military might to reduce our threats to national security." There's no doubt about the importance of military strength to Texas, a state with 17 military installations. The Texas Department on Economic Development estimates the military and defense industries have a $49.3 billion annual impact on the state's economy. Texas' desire to keep building its military backbone was emphasized when the state landed U.S. Army South's headquarters for Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio. Neither Kirk nor Cornyn has any military service experience, although both are sons of veterans. Both were in college during the Vietnam War. Cornyn, now 50, said he registered for the draft and his number was 28, which meant he was likely to go to war. Cornyn had a college deferment all four years of college. In his senior year, the draft ended, he said. "I thought college was important and I think certainly I would have been willing to go if we had continued to have a draft at the end of my college deferment," he said. Kirk, 48, said he registered for the draft in January 1973 with 12 of his fraternity brothers. His number was 001, a guarantee he would go. He said he recalls watching the drawing of draft numbers on television. Months after he registered, then-President Nixon decided not to commit any more troops to Vietnam. "So every night I say a little prayer for Mr. Nixon" in gratitude, Kirk said. ------ On the Net: John Cornyn campaign: http://www.johncornyn.com Ron Kirk campaign: http://www.ronkirk.com

from the Reporter-News Send the URL (Address) of This Story to A Friend: Enter their email address below: