Criminal Justice Reform

MICAH’s ROC Wisconsin Task Force

Restoring our Communities beyond 11 x 15 (ROC Wisconsin) is a statewide campaign of WISDOM. It began in 2011 as “11 X 15 For Safer, Healthier Communities” with a goal of reducing Wisconsin’s prison population by half — to 11,000 — by the end 2015. During those four years, we advocated for prison reform through health impact studies, Power Point presentations, actions, events, and media coverage.

In 2016 we renamed our campaign “ROC Wisconsin: Restoring our Communities beyond 11×15.” Our goals are to:

Restore communities that have been harmed by mass incarceration;

Restore families to wholeness and health;

Restore balance, fiscal discipline and humane priorities to our state’s criminal justice system;

Restore people to health through increased treatment alternatives to incarceration, decreased use of solitary confinement, and better support for those who return from jail or prison;

Restore men and women back to the community who do not need to be

During 2017-2018, MICAH will be highlighting the issue of Crimeless Revocation. Presently people on probation, parole, or extended supervision can be revoked and re-incarcerated for violating rules of supervision even though they have not committed new offenses.

A health impact assessment entitled “Excessive Revocations in Wisconsin” shows that Wisconsin incarcerated 3,000 individuals for crimeless revocations in 2015 alone. Thousands of others, who were never revoked, were held in county jails and state detention facilities while the Department of Corrections considered alleged rule violations.

Statewide, MICAH with ROC Wisconsin is working:

To expand funds for Treatment Alternative and Diversion (TAD). TAD funds drug treatment courts, family courts, mental health courts and other interventions–which have proven more effective than incarceration in reducing recidivism. Evaluation of TAD-funded programs shows they save taxpayers $2 for every $1 the state has invested.

To pass the Second Chance This bipartisan legislation wouldreturn most 17-year-olds to the juvenile justice system. Concerns about the fiscal impact of the measure have been delaying passage.

To reduce and/or eliminate solitary confinement — now called segregation, administrative confinement, or restrictive Eliminate such isolation for mentally-ill prisoners and juveniles. End use of long-term confinement and document the number of days inmates spend in all levels of segregation.

To realize parole release for those eligible who can be released safely, and compassionate release for elderly and/or very ill prisoners who are no longer a danger to society.

Join us on the second Wednesday of every month at 5 pm for our task force meeting at the Project Return conference room, Welford Sanders Enterprise Center, 2821 N 4th St Suite 221, Milwaukee