Our Story

As the super PAC focused on holding Republicans accountable and helping to hold the newly won Democratic majority in the House, House Majority PAC combines innovative new approaches with time-tested strategies to do battle with Republican outside groups and make a difference.



Formed in April 2011, House Majority PAC’s goal was to answer the barrage of GOP outside spending and ensure that never again would groups funded by Karl Rove, the Koch Brothers, Sheldon Adelson and the like be able to drown out Democratic candidates.



Over the course of the 2012 cycle, House Majority PAC built on that record of success, coordinating extensively with progressive groups to compete, fight back and elect Democrats to the House.



During the 2012 cycle, House Majority PAC spent $36 million, amassing a record that independent observers called “impressive” and “winning.” The Democrats won in 63 percent of the races in which House Majority PAC spent a significant sum. And of the 10 races in which House Majority PAC spent the most money, Democrats won eight.



During the 2014 cycle, House Majority PAC spent $38 million and focused on leveraging resources and strategic investments to assist Democrats in winning 11 of 12 races that were “too close to call” on Election night. House Majority PAC’s unprecedented effort in 2014 was called “devastatingly effective” by pundits.



After a challenging mid-term, House Majority PAC redoubled its efforts in 2016. The group was touted by pundits as the “go-to Democratic group for House races,” raising a record $56 million for the cycle and playing an “instrumental” role in picking-up six House seats and re-electing incumbents in tough races.



In 2018 House Majority PAC was focused on winning back the House for Democrats. HMP along with the group’s C4 ally spent approximately $113 million to help elect this Democratic majority by making sure voters knew about the toxic GOP agenda, which hurt hardworking families – increasing health care costs and raising taxes on the middle class. HMP also played a critical role to help coordinate with a number of outside groups to strategically invest over $220 million in crucial races from coast to coast. These efforts allowed Democrats to outspend its Republican counterparts in key races from Labor Day until Election Day.

Looking ahead to 2020, HMP is looking to defend and expand this new Democratic majority.