Crist Endorses 5% Boost In Tuition
TALLAHASSEE | Gov. Charlie Crist on Friday endorsed a 5 percent tuition hike for universities and community colleges and rejected a plea to veto a plan to cut $20 million in water projects from the state budget.

The action came as Crist signed into law a $1.1 billion budget reduction approved by lawmakers in a special session earlier this month. Lawmakers had to make the budget cuts to balance the $71 billion state budget after a slumping economy undermined state revenue collections.

Reversing a position he took earlier this year, Crist signed a bill (SB-8C) that will let universities and community colleges raise their tuition by 5 percent beginning in January. The increase will amount to a $55 boost for university students taking 15 credit hours in the spring semester and about $29 for community college students taking 12 credit hours.

The bill will also let universities, beginning in the fall of 2009, impose a technology fee up to 5 percent of the tuition rate. And for the first time, the law will automatically boost tuition based on an inflation index.

In his message, Crist said he changed his position on tuition, after vetoing a similar 5 percent boost in the spring, because he thinks lawmakers are providing Floridians with other financial relief, including a pending property tax-cutting amendment that may be on the Jan. 29 ballot.

"I also will approve this legislation because many students have told me that they want a quality education and they have said that they are willing to help pay for it," Crist wrote.

On the water projects, some lawmakers, including Sen. Paula Dockery, R-Lakeland, had urged Crist to veto a bill (SB-24C) that cut $20 million in water projects from the state budget.

With the state facing another water crisis, Dockery said it was the wrong time to make the cuts, which she said would amount to a continuing $30 million annual cut in future years if it was not restored.

"We are in a period of drought and forward thinking water policy and committed funding is more important than ever," Dockery said in a letter to Crist last week.

But Crist signed the bill.