The Political Insider
One of the most incredible things about Hillary Clinton running for President is that there is an extraordinary long list of scandals that younger voters have never heard of. Just trying to keep up with the multiple decades of corruption and criminal activity of Bill and Hillary Clinton which happened long before the recent email scandal is overwhelming. And it will be the job of her Republican opponent to educate America about them all.

Bill Clinton has always treated women in a disgusting manner, and when he was initially running for President, his wife Hillary ran a “war room” to crack down on so called “bimbo eruptions.” This was the name given to the countless stories of infidelity and sexual assaults committed by Bill Clinton over the years.

One of the most famous of Bill’s victims was Kathleen Willey, and she is speaking out against Hillary in a big way!

Kathleen Willey, one of the women caught in the cross-fire of alleged sexual harassment by former President Bill Clinton and what she characterizes as acts of intimidation to silence her, told Aaron Klein’s Investigative Radio Sunday she expects a “scandal a day” with Hillary Clinton’s bid for the presidency and proclaimed she has no accomplishments worthy of being considered for her run for the office.

Willey reminds us why Hillary’s treatment of her and other victims is why Hillary could never be considered a pro-woman candidate. Statements to the contrary are laughable:

As to Mrs. Clinton’s announcement emphasizing herself as a champion of women and the downtrodden, Willey called it “a joke.” “What has she done, what has she accomplished to run for president, to become the president of the United States?” Willey asked. “I can’t find, for the life of me, one thing. And if I could find one thing, I would acknowledge that fact. But I haven’t seen one single accomplishment that would give her the credentials to be president of the United States.” As to Mrs. Clinton’s focus on her womanhood, Willey said: “Well, that’s a joke, if that’s her one credential for running for president, then why don’t I run. I’m a woman. It makes absolutely no sense. … There are a lot more women out there way more qualified than she. The only thing Hillary has been successful on is riding in on the coattails of other men – like Obama and her husband. That’s it.”

via World Net Daily

Willey met Bill as a volunteer at the White House. She requested a paying job, but instead of Bill helping her he allegedly harassed her sexually. Later on that day, her husband Ed committed suicide. And she describes Hillary’s efforts to keep her silent as “mob like tactics.”

Read this Next on ThePoliticalInsider.com Politicians Are Calling For A Ban On Silencers. Here’s What You Need To Know

Kathleen Willey is bravely speaking out about Hillary’s shameful actions. Please share her important words on Facebook and Twitter!