Trump fans rally above interstate
Peering over the Tucker Street overpass Tuesday, Barry Brown and roughly a dozen other Donald Trump supporters waved flags at the passing motorists below.

“I’m out here today because we as Americans have taken God out of America,” said Brown, of Liberty, who said he began his “Flagging 40” initiative on Alamance County Interstate 40/85 overpasses in February.

“I believe that a Trump America would be great for America.”

As he did Tuesday afternoon, each of those times since February, Brown has flown both a Christian and an American flag. On Tuesday, he was joined by other conservative demonstrators holding “Trump” and Gadsden “Don’t Tread On Me” flags, along with more Christian and American flags.

Brown’s estimate of how many times he has waved flags over I-40/85 since February was “15 to 30.”

He said the initiative has grown organically, as other local conservatives learned about and saw what he was doing and decided to join him, each time showing up with their own flags.

Nievelis Bittman, there representing the Alamance County Republican Party, was among those who wanted to join Brown in supporting the cause.

“We’re fighting for freedom,” said Bittman, a Cuban immigrant to the United States wearing a pin on her chest that read “GOP: God’s Official Party.”

“I came from Cuba looking for freedom.”

“She’s a woman for Trump,” Brown said of Bittman as the two stood on the overpass holding flags.

“Oh, definitely,” Bittman said. “I was there yesterday in Raleigh.”

Brown said reactions to the demonstrators had been mixed, though as the group continued Tuesday, vehicles were continually honking at them both from the interstate below and the road where they stood.

“I’ve got people that are waving, people that are giving us thumbs up,” Brown said. “I’ve had people give us one finger gestures. Whether they can’t get all their fingers up at once or not — I don’t understand, holding the Christian flag and the American flag, what exactly they’re flipping off. Either they’re flipping off Jesus Christ or they’re flipping off America.”

Though other supporters briefly stood on the University Drive overpass, Brown said he went out to Tucker Street around 2:30 p.m. and would be staying there “’til dark.”