Claims about Zika Virus Turning Fetus Brains to ‘Liquid’ Completely FALSE
Earlier this week, The Weekly Observer aggregated an article from various sources online, saying that Zika Virus is responsible for turning Fetus brain into liquid.

The original article on Uproxx.com ‘New Data Shows That The Zika Virus Can Turn Fetal Brain Into Liquid’, as well as several others, turned out to contain false claims as the study was misinterpreted by various sources.

In our initial article we wrote: “A recent study published by the New England Journal of Medicine shows that the Zika virus kills developing fetal brain cells. According to the doctors, the study was performed on a woman who got infected by the virus while she was 3 months pregnant. Her fetus was monitored through blood tests and MRIs, and the doctors watched as the baby’s brain was basically liquefied within 9 weeks. The woman underwent an abortion at 21 weeks.

To add to this terrifying evidence, the CDC are now warning American citizens and telling them to brace themselves for an outbreak on American soil. Within the next several months, zika virus is expected to spread in the region of Texas and Florida, as the virus is carried by the same mosquito species that transmits dengue and chikungunya. The CDC is preparing a coordinated response along with hundreds of government officials to deal with the coming mosquito season.”

UPDATE:

Adre du Plessis, a lead authors and director of the Fetal Medicine Institute at the Children’s National Health System in Washington, D.C stated “This is absolutely NOT what we said.“

Rita Drigger, a professor of gynecology and obstetrics at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, called the description a “false interpretation” of the case and Olli Vapalahti at the Department of Virology at the University of Helsinki, Finland, told us some reporter might have misunderstood him during an interview.

Politifact.com reported this misinterpretation saying ” The claim is completely wrong, and has the barest connection to any actual research. Seeing as it showed up in quick succession in Australia and the United Kingdom, we thought we should move quickly to squash it.”