Richard Plotts says he is ready to plead guilty to Delaware County hospital shooting
An Upper Darby man accused of killing his mental health caseworker during a July shooting at Mercy Fitzgerald Hospital attempted to plead guilty during a pretrial conference before Common Please Judge Mary Alice Brennan on Tuesday.

“Actually, I want to plead guilty to the charges, and I have a right to do so,” Richard S. Plotts said via closed-circuit television from the county prison in Concord.

“You absolutely do, and we are going to set a date for you to do so,” the judge replied.

The exchange occurred as defense attorney Chuck Williams was explaining that psychiatrist Dr. Stephen Mechanick is in the process of performing a psychiatric evaluation on his client. Williams told Plotts and the court that he cannot submit a guilty plea as “knowing, intelligent and voluntary,” as required by law, until that evaluation is complete.

Advertisement

Plotts is charged with first- and third-degree murder, criminal homicide, possessing an instrument of crime and related charges for the July 24 shooting inside the Sister Marie Lenahan Wellness Center on Mercy Fitzgerald Hospital’s Yeadon campus.

Plotts, who has a history of weapons charges going back to 1990, is accused of shooting and killing caseworker Theresa Hunt, then turning the gun on psychiatrist Dr. Lee Silverman. Silverman allegedly returned fire with a firearm he keeps in his desk drawer, critically wounding Plotts and allowing for his capture.

District Attorney Jack Whelan said when the defendant was captured, investigators found more than 30 additional rounds of ammunition in his pockets and believe he was prepared to kill more people.

The alleged shooter was treated at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, where he stayed under guard by Delaware County Prison personnel until his transfer to the prison in August. He has been incarcerated there since that time.

Williams said he discussed Tuesday’s hearing with Plotts at the prison Monday and that he is in the process of obtaining 20 years of medical records that are just now beginning to come in. The defendant interrupted the hearing several times, at one point saying Williams has had five months to obtain those records.

“I’d like to plead guilty to the charges today, change my plea from ‘not guilty’ to ‘guilty,” said Plotts, who then directed his comments to Williams. “We talked about this, you didn’t want me to do it, and I understand that you didn’t want me to do it, but I want it done.”

Judge Brennan set a trial date of Feb. 9, when Mechanick’s evaluation and the task of collecting medical records is expected to be complete. Assistant District Attorney Michael Mattson clarified for Plotts that a “trial date” is a procedural term used to track the status of cases and does not necessarily mean a trial will occur on that day.