Tonko, Gibson, Stefanik divided on fast-track trade
Washington

Most of the time, U.S. Rep. Paul Tonko plays the part of mild-mannered ex-engineer, deliberative and measured in Congress and back home in New York's 20th Congressional District.

But mention "trade deal'' or "fast-track'' and the generally unflappable fourth-term congressman becomes a fiery soap-box orator.

"We want corporations to make it, but want workers to make it, too!'' he said. "Folks in upstate New York know what happens when the industrial economy crumbles. We're making some progress retrofitting and retooling, but we don't want to pull the rug out from under them now.''

Rugs are, in fact, why the trade issue is personal for Tonko. A century ago, his ancestors left Poland to work in the burgeoning carpet industry in Amsterdam, Montgomery County. Work in the mills began drying up after World War II — decades before the free-trade wave — as carpet makers sought cheaper labor elsewhere.

But much-vaunted trade deals like the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993 hastened the decline, Tonko said, pointing to Fiber Glass Industries Inc.'s decision last year to close its Amsterdam plant because of Chinese competitors' underpricing. About 120 workers lost their jobs.

Trade deals like the yet-to-be-finalized Trans-Pacific Partnership "hurry the slide to the bottom,'' Tonko said. "Now is not the time to be the voice for special interests. It's time to be the voice for the American worker, who is my special interest.''

From Capitol Hill to the Capital Region and beyond, the politics of trade are making for some strange bedfellows. In Washington, President Barack Obama is in rare alliance with House Speaker John Boehner and other Republicans against an equally unusual coalition of Tea Party Republicans and progressive-leaning Democrats like Tonko.

In fact, Tonko is in charge of keeping tabs on which way Democrats are leaning as a vote on trade fast-track looms in the House. Fast-track, a crucial prelude that authorizes the president to negotiate a trade deal that Congress must vote on up-or-down with no amendments, passed the Senate May 21.

Tonko isn't the only Capital Region lawmaker opposed to fast-track. U.S. Rep. Chris Gibson, the iconoclastic Republican from Kinderhook who is eyeing a possible gubernatorial run in 2018, sees it as undercutting the constitutional responsibilities of Congress.

"It's my responsibility to give my constituents a voice in the process,'' Gibson said. "Congress must be able to listen, to provide a voice in committee and on the floor, and have the ability to offer amendments so that we have a trade agreement that reflects the will of the American people.''

To the extent they have been formulated, the details of TPP — the underlying trade deal that would lower barriers between the U.S. and 11 Pacific-rim nations including Chile, Canada, Japan, Malaysia, Vietnam, New Zealand and Australia — are shrouded in secrecy.

"But what I know about TPP, I oppose,'' said Gibson, citing the possible danger to his district's dairy industry from competitors in Canada and New Zealand.

Gibson, who eschews the Tea Party and prides himself on working across the aisle, said his judgments were formed in part by a look-back at NAFTA.

"I think NAFTA hurt us here in New York, I really do,'' he said.

On the other side, U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik, a center-right Republican in her first term, supports fast-track and cites dairy among other industries in her North Country district as potential beneficiaries of lowered trade walls.

"I believe in free trade,'' Stefanik said. "Overwhelmingly, the dairy farms I represent support (fast-track) because they want to increase exports.'' Others helped by trade include medical device manufacturers in "catheter valley'' near Glens Falls, and International Paper in Ticonderoga.

Fears of Congress ceding authority to the White House are unfounded, Stefanik said, because lawmakers will have ample time to review the trade deal both before the president signs it and before Congress must vote on it. And also there is an "off-switch,'' enabling lawmakers to short-circuit fast-track if the deal doesn't conform to congressional standards, she added.

In New York as elsewhere, the debate over the arcane details embedded in the trade debate reflects the competing interests of business, which argues trade deals are a net plus for U.S. jobs and economic growth, and progressives, labor and some Tea Party conservatives, who see them collectively as a race to the bottom.

The two sides are quick to point accusatory fingers at each other. Progressives and unions accuse business of masking its hunger for ever-cheaper labor and minimal environmental restrictions in soaring rhetoric about the benefits of economic "globalization.''

And business says the liberal left and its labor allies are stuck in the past, blind to the realities of the 21st-century economy that is proceeding at lightning speed in the Internet age. And in any case, they argue, many of the jobs manufacturing cheaper goods already are gone and not coming back.

"This is the 'it's too late, baby,' claim and it's a lie,'' said Zephyr Teachout, who ran an ultimately unsuccessful insurgent campaign last year against Gov. Andrew Cuomo. "I'm pro-trade but I think the worst way to go about it is doubling down on a system that's already failed.''

Teachout also points to the "investor state'' provision, which subjects disputes over trade-linked U.S. restrictions to the jurisdiction of an international tribunal. "Alexander Hamilton would be rolling over in his grave at a trade deal used to override domestic law,'' said Teachout, a constitutional law professor at Fordham University law school.

Between 1994 and 2014, New York state lost 106,689 jobs due to trade, said Bob Cohen, Albany-based policy director of Citizen Action, citing U.S. Department of Labor data.

Cohen said that while progressives have faith in Obama, they worry that a fast-track vote could also authorize a future president — maybe a Republican — to negotiate a trade deal on terms with even fewer protections.

The Business Roundtable, which supports fast-track and TPP, argues that trade has been a net plus for New York and future trade deals promise more of the same. Trade supports 2.6 million New York jobs and trade-related employment grew 2.3 times faster than total employment in New York between 2004 and 2013, the roundtable said.

Among its proponents upstate is dairy farmer Eric Ooms, whose family farm is in the Kinderhook-Chatham area of Columbia County. Ooms, who also is vice president of the New York Farm Bureau, said exports make a huge difference in the farm's bottom line, going from 12 percent in 2008 to 3 percent the next year during the financial crisis, and back up to 17 percent last year.

"We cannot ignore the international world we live in, OK?'' he said. "As Asia becomes more affluent, there's more room in their diet for dairy and we as a country are well-situated to satisfy that.''

Ooms traces his family's dairy roots back to the Netherlands in the 16th century. With about 400 milking cows, the farm ships 12 million pounds of milk annually.

Yes, he said, he's aware of trade's pitfalls and dairy competition from New Zealand, which exports all or most of its dairy products.

Nevertheless, "I just think trade is necessary in the world we live in,'' he said. "I don't want to say good or bad, just that it's necessary.''

dan@hearstdc.com