The Death of Lexington,Mo
C_Butler “13 Questions with ME!!” Since: Jan 10 Grew up in Fleming, Mo Please wait... Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #1 Jun 18, 2010 Judged: 1 1 1 My personal opinion is Lexington is working on becomming the next Henrietta (minus the jail that keeps that town afloat). I appreciate the Mom and Pops stores of lexington, unfortunately these same stores do not employ a large number of individuals, nor do they offer any type of benefits, like insurance, dental, vision, like a Walmart (had the chance but they denied it it), or any other large company could provide.(Please dont make any mention of S&K that place is just ridiculous). Lexington needs to think long and hard about the people who live there and pay there taxes to this city, if people have to travel 30+ mins for a decent job, that tends to me a large percentage of their money is not spent in Lexington. I like how quite Lexington is, but the refusal to allow your town to grow, and prosper is just stupid. Your townsfolk must drive 15 min to a walmart where they spend all there money to benefit a different town... your townsfolk arent offered any type of security if they wanted to be employed in town, so 90 percent of us must drive to provide our families security and peice of mind. If you dont change your minds and thinking ...Lexington will be the next Henrietta, speed trapts to keep you in business, and people have no real reason to come to lexington anymore...( You dont offer anything)....Just my opinion =} My personal opinion is Lexington is working on becomming the next Henrietta (minus the jail that keeps that town afloat). I appreciate the Mom and Pops stores of lexington, unfortunately these same stores do not employ a large number of individuals, nor do they offer any type of benefits, like insurance, dental, vision, like a Walmart (had the chance but they denied it it), or any other large company could provide.(Please dont make any mention of S&K that place is just ridiculous). Lexington needs to think long and hard about the people who live there and pay there taxes to this city, if people have to travel 30+ mins for a decent job, that tends to me a large percentage of their money is not spent in Lexington. I like how quite Lexington is, but the refusal to allow your town to grow, and prosper is just stupid. Your townsfolk must drive 15 min to a walmart where they spend all there money to benefit a different town... your townsfolk arent offered any type of security if they wanted to be employed in town, so 90 percent of us must drive to provide our families security and peice of mind. If you dont change your minds and thinking ...Lexington will be the next Henrietta, speed trapts to keep you in business, and people have no real reason to come to lexington anymore...( You dont offer anything)....Just my opinion =}

born in the usa Lexington, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #2 Jun 19, 2010 you are so right . s&k sold out and than that place closed down . i drive an hr to work and an hr back . the two clothing stores here in lex. are very high price. i get my check and cash it and shop in indep. or indep walmart . gormans is the bomb ! lexington closes up at 5 pm and not a mouse is stirring . i see so much land that is just not being used and that is sad . lexington is a dying town . we moved back to lex. in 2005 , all three of my kids lives in the city now . they said lex. is dead and backwards . if i didnt own my home i wouldnt be here today , i only sleep here . my one kid got an apt here in 2007 and his house was robbed while he was at work , i guess some theif saw him bringing in new tv and computer. nothing was done about it , so that sent him back to the city . so i guess you have to bring your new things in at night so no one can see what you bought .

C_Butler “13 Questions with ME!!” Since: Jan 10 Grew up in Fleming, Mo Please wait... Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #3 Jun 21, 2010 I just feel alot of people in lexington live with blinders on, well atleast the ones who are well of and who just happen to be in control. Something needs to change, I myself drive 1hr each way..NKC..I make good money, just moved my family out to Lexington last Feb. not sure if we will be here another year. I coach Soccer for the Parks and Rec program, I truly enjoy it, and the kids have better friends here than they did in Excelsior ... its really the only thing keeping us here is Soccer, and New Friends...nothing the Town is really providing.

born in the usa Lexington, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #4 Jun 22, 2010 lets look at the big picture here ... our mayor is 82 yrs old . no luck with new jobs being created , i am sure . i know the hr i drive to work and back is tearing my car up . my car is leaking oil now , so thats a repair i have to do . the inn isnt doing good ,cause of the cops alway waiting to pull ya over after you leave there . bottoms up isnt doing good neither . i own a house in lex, but am going to sell within two yrs to move somewhere else , closer to the jobs. its sad but lexington is fading off the map.

razor Lenexa, KS Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #5 Jun 22, 2010 This has been talked about in length on here (just scroll down on some of the other threads). i agree. however there are a LOT of people who either a., have their head in the sand or b., like it this way. i dont have a dog in this hunt really, but i am very familiar with the town...and it seems to be dying to me compared to odessa, higginsville, richmond and even concordia for example. odessa has a huge school district that keeps things afloat along with top notch new ballfields, tennis courts etc., a new school..h'ville has a sparkling new preschool at the school, robust parks, vibrant downtown, long standing pillars of the community john knox village and walmart, and richmond seems to be keeping pace as well

Interested Observer Boulder, CO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #6 Jun 22, 2010 One bright spot is Lexington voters recently approving acqusition of the local water company, something that was badly bungled by the Dickmeyer administration back in 1992. It could have been purchased then for $3 million, rather then $5 million now in 2010.



Anyway, this will provide the sort of revenue into city coffers that neighboring towns have long enjoyed from their municipal utilities.



Absolutely critical: Annexing property along the new Highway 13 corridor and developing a public-private partnership to build an industrial park.

Without that, Lexington has no future.

Comment Lexington, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #7 Jun 29, 2010 Judged: 2 2 1 razor wrote: This has been talked about in length on here (just scroll down on some of the other threads). i agree. however there are a LOT of people who either a., have their head in the sand or b., like it this way. i dont have a dog in this hunt really, but i am very familiar with the town...and it seems to be dying to me compared to odessa, higginsville, richmond and even concordia for example. odessa has a huge school district that keeps things afloat along with top notch new ballfields, tennis courts etc., a new school..h'ville has a sparkling new preschool at the school, robust parks, vibrant downtown, long standing pillars of the community john knox village and walmart, and richmond seems to be keeping pace as well The Lexington school district is turning around under the new superintendent. The community recently passed a bond issue that allows the district to renovate all the buildings, with new floors, bathrooms, windows, heating and cooling, roods, and cosmetic upgrades. Regardless of the state of the City of lexington, I believe the schools are on the rise again. The Lexington school district is turning around under the new superintendent. The community recently passed a bond issue that allows the district to renovate all the buildings, with new floors, bathrooms, windows, heating and cooling, roods, and cosmetic upgrades. Regardless of the state of the City of lexington, I believe the schools are on the rise again.

sam Higginsville, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #8 Jul 5, 2010

1. Lexington needs to get some kind of hardware chain like homedepot, lowes etc. There is none closer then about 40

2. With the school district rising (hopefully) they can have lot more tournaments and that will bring additional tax dollars to city.

3. It needs a small golj course of something like that. Kenny Welch owns lot of land and pretty sure he can do it, bnbut not sure if he has interest in it.

4. City needs to stop giving any new permits for restaurants - the ones that are there are not making it, so let city support those. Or if 1 goes down, only then other can come up.

5. buying water company was good but how it affects the bill that would be a major part. If this city administration has some sense and can integrate water company correctly, they need to buy the electric as well for town. Hopefully it wont be as stupid integration as they did with the sewer.

6. Getting better schools, better parks and getting something for tennagers to do so they can be be busy and creative instead of being a nuisance in town and tearing things up. i think lexington has much more bigger issues then that and much better alternatives as well.1. Lexington needs to get some kind of hardware chain like homedepot, lowes etc. There is none closer then about 40 miles.com munity lumber is just too expensive and not enough material is carried.2. With the school district rising (hopefully) they can have lot more tournaments and that will bring additional tax dollars to city.3. It needs a small golj course of something like that. Kenny Welch owns lot of land and pretty sure he can do it, bnbut not sure if he has interest in it.4. City needs to stop giving any new permits for restaurants - the ones that are there are not making it, so let city support those. Or if 1 goes down, only then other can come up.5. buying water company was good but how it affects the bill that would be a major part. If this city administration has some sense and can integrate water company correctly, they need to buy the electric as well for town. Hopefully it wont be as stupid integration as they did with the sewer.6. Getting better schools, better parks and getting something for tennagers to do so they can be be busy and creative instead of being a nuisance in town and tearing things up.

idears Higginsville, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #9 Jul 6, 2010 the golf course comment is interesting. the sand putting "greens" on wentworth's course are ridiculous. that said i wish higginsville would have added another 9 to their golf course long ago. great idea about the lumber company as well

C_Butler “13 Questions with ME!!” Since: Jan 10 Grew up in Fleming, Mo Please wait... Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #11 Jul 13, 2010 I like the idea of a Industrial Park, think about the revenue...that allows business to open here, closer jobs, and more money. I would like to see a Quiktrip, here as well as the Lowes/Home Depot... Once again, I understand the family run business but also take into consideration the families who can work in town their children are in, and the town they have to pay taxes too. I really think this town needs to stand up for itself and stop letting the people who have money run it. Those people are already well off, and just dont want to see their pockets change. Parks and Rec have alot of potential to bring outsiders in, hell i have tons of ideas but a golf course would def be a nice addition. Stop relying on the Battlefield and start looking towards a future for your kids to continue to have in this town.

sam Centerview, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #12 Jul 13, 2010 unless and untill the rich people in town dont buy in idea it wont be implemented. It is sad but honest truth. Rich peoples or their dummies are the ones who are running city and council, so for changes to happen, rubber stamp is needed from this people. quicktrip would be better off on new 13 and 24 junction but if word is right, that's where casey's is moving. too start with - industrial park, golf course, home depot/lowes then putting a board walk or something on river to take advantage of water (ofcourse with this kind of rain, that would be a waste but is is mother nature, just bow to it and it will pass).



city still need to integrate the water company and if successful run to get electric company. that's huge huge revenue for the city.



This is antic town, get some antic car shows to trade or just for car junkies to come and watch. and for goodness's sake, it needs some decent store to buy clothings which are not used at reasonable cost. costs has to be where going and buying from the city cannot be cheaper then buying from here.

american Lexington, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #13 Jul 14, 2010 i go to gormans in indep or walmart in richmomd to buy clothes . we have an 82 yr old mayor , not much is going to change , still stuck in the 1930s ...lol .

Homegrown Lees Summit, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #14 Sep 1, 2010 Judged: 1 If you want benefits or local jobs you need to support local business. It was Walmart that killed the donut shop. If you remember there was a time where there were lots of places of business in Lexington. Kennys Grocery, shoe shop, paint store, and downtown was alive. Independence started to get the big box stores and everyone starting running up there to buy everything, instead of buying the necessities at home and the extras up there. The only people to blame are ourselves and each other. Everyone complains that Harolds or now Daves is so expensive, but when you run to Walmart- which 95% of the time does not give benefits nor fair pay- you add gas to your 3 items and you are at a loss. Plus Harold always gave to community groups and hired the young and the old of the community. Now I don't see a gap coming to Lexington soon but if you bought from lexington first giving the sales tax to our town then getting those extras elsewhere maybe would be someplace... just my 5 cents. If you want benefits or local jobs you need to support local business. It was Walmart that killed the donut shop. If you remember there was a time where there were lots of places of business in Lexington. Kennys Grocery, shoe shop, paint store, and downtown was alive. Independence started to get the big box stores and everyone starting running up there to buy everything, instead of buying the necessities at home and the extras up there. The only people to blame are ourselves and each other. Everyone complains that Harolds or now Daves is so expensive, but when you run to Walmart- which 95% of the time does not give benefits nor fair pay- you add gas to your 3 items and you are at a loss. Plus Harold always gave to community groups and hired the young and the old of the community. Now I don't see a gap coming to Lexington soon but if you bought from lexington first giving the sales tax to our town then getting those extras elsewhere maybe would be someplace... just my 5 cents.

sam Salem, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #15 Sep 1, 2010 Agree with you on supporting local business. Question for you though? Dont you work hard to make more money? if you do, I am sure you work as hard to cut down on some of your expenses there by you can stretch a dollar. Same principle applies and thereby people go to Walmarts of the world. Everyone wants to stretch their dollar as far as possible.



Walmart does not pay good and benefits, so why do people work there? The workers can go and find another job, cant they? Walmart hires more workers in US then the Federal Government. Walmart can do that and still get workers and they do it because that's how capitalism works. If walmart starts paying everyone top dollars and benefits and that, it would reduce their top margin and thereby reduce the salaries of top execs and that's not possible in CORPORATE CAPITALIST AMERICA.



Point of getting big box store to town is so that people can shop (not only locals but other town people as well) and the town can make money via sales tax. And that money can be used to support mom and pop store or in school district or parks or roads or less crimes and thereby making it affordable and attractable for people to come in. So wont that be a better option then?

Homegrown Lees Summit, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #16 Sep 1, 2010 I am not sure what you are getting at? Pro big corp or small business? Costco is one box store that is actually humane. The CEOs have and will always make no more than 300,000 and all their full time employees which triples the amount of full time employees at walmart get full benefits. They work hard but they don't believe in 21 century slavery of their workers. But back to the fact Lexington citizens could give the community cleaner/ better schools, parks, toursism, events... etc if people bought local first. I am not opposed to buying the things you want, just buy it in your local town first. You are no better than your neighbor, and in this day in age we have forgotten that. Better schools, less poverty, less petty crime and substance abuse. Now I dont think everyone should be at the top but no one should be impoverish. A box store is not going to save Lexington lets face it. Its just one more walmart in one more small town. But local families supporting each other in their enterprises could actually make a change. I think a lot more jobs with a lot more substance could be made by small local businesses than going to work with a blue vest on.

Homegrown Lees Summit, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #17 Sep 1, 2010 By the way the only reason people work at walmart is that walmart got rid of the jobs they could have had at local businesses. That happened because people of your sub-species could not resist the pretty blue illuminating walmart sign thinking you could save a dollar. Really you lost the dollar, and now your down is dead. Who won?

sam Salem, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #18 Sep 1, 2010 i am individual offering my opinion. Big box stores brings in lots of jobs with them even if they are low paying, but they are still job and so less people on unemployement, food stamps and welfare.



If Local businesses would think about local people, they would keep their prices competitive. But they dont - doesnt matter it is because they dont have pricing power, but they keep it higher so they can meet their ends meet and pay their bills. So if the local businesses are thinking about themselves and not about local people, why does local people have to think about local business? I am all about spending locally and spend most of my money locally but I do understand where other people go to walmarts. It is their money and their choice and I cannot judge whether they are right or wrong.



I am just playing a devils advocate an giving opinion on both sides but I do understand why the walmarts of the world work and the small businesses wont, it is all about PRICING.



And as for the who's town and not - since the day humans have stepped on the world, they have always kept on moving towards greener pastures. My parents were from this town, but my grand parents were not. So may be my children wont be. ALWAYS REMEMBER HOME IS THE PLACE WHERE YOUR FAMILY IS. It dont mean I dont want lexington to suceed, i have tried my best to do what I can and pay my taxes on time and no welfare and crap. But truth is what truth is and I dont like to move away from truth.

Caleb Columbia, MO Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #19 Apr 18, 2011 Judged: 1 1 1 Listen folks, if you do not like the drive move away to the city, it is "tit for tat" Corporations bringing in min wage jobs is not the cure all. If we would try to buy in town more the prices would be lower. This is why Wal-Mart is cheap, they buy large qty cheap and thus pass on the savings. If people think wal-mart is the saving grace they are looking at this wrong. I understand that these small shops are expensive but it is because they do not get enough business due to Wal-Mart being so close. We also need to make the town less desirable to welfare recipeints by making some of these properties in town condemed. Last point, people in Lexington on welfare are on it because they want to be not because they cannot find work. Bring all the industry you want and they will still be in a run-down property collecting a check. Listen folks, if you do not like the drive move away to the city, it is "tit for tat" Corporations bringing in min wage jobs is not the cure all. If we would try to buy in town more the prices would be lower. This is why Wal-Mart is cheap, they buy large qty cheap and thus pass on the savings. If people think wal-mart is the saving grace they are looking at this wrong. I understand that these small shops are expensive but it is because they do not get enough business due to Wal-Mart being so close. We also need to make the town less desirable to welfare recipeints by making some of these properties in town condemed. Last point, people in Lexington on welfare are on it because they want to be not because they cannot find work. Bring all the industry you want and they will still be in a run-down property collecting a check.

smarts Lenexa, KS Reply » | Report Abuse | Judge it! | #20 Apr 21, 2011 oh really? why are richmond, higginsville and oak grove thriving small communities still, in lieu of having walmarts?



Homegrown wrote:

"By the way the only reason people work at walmart is that walmart got rid of the jobs they could have had at local businesses. That happened because people of your sub-species could not resist the pretty blue illuminating walmart sign thinking you could save a dollar. Really you lost the dollar, and now your down is dead. Who won?"