Transportation Security Administration
Notify me when there are updates to this page!



For the safety and security of the traveling public, TSA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and/or airlines have prohibited certain items from being brought onto airplanes in carry-on and/or checked bags. To help you plan ahead and avoid the potential of additional screening, be sure to check out the prohibited items list below and pack accordingly.

When I Fly, Can I Bring My...? Enter Item Name through the security checkpoint?

As an added information source for passengers, you can also use the "Can I Bring…?" tool from the My TSA iPhone and mobile app to get information on an item you want to bring on a plane. Simply type the name of the item in the box and you'll get information on whether or not it's prohibited and other information to help you speed through security. You can also access the tool from your mobile device if it has a web browser.

It’s important to know that even if an item is generally permitted, it may be subject to additional screening or not allowed through the checkpoint if it triggers an alarm during the screening process, appears to have been tampered with, or poses other security concerns. The final decision rests with TSA on whether to allow any items on the plane. Also, please note that some dangerous items below are illegal in certain states and passengers will be subject to state law. It is a passenger’s responsibility to be aware that origination and destination cities may have local laws prohibiting the possession of these items.

Sharp Objects

Item Prohibited Carry-on? Checked? Box Cutters NO OK Ice Axes/Ice Picks NO OK Knives - except for plastic or round bladed butter knives NO OK Meat Cleavers NO OK Razor-Type Blades - such as box cutters, utility knives, and safety razor blades (disposable razors and their cartridges are permitted) NO OK Sabers NO OK Scissors - metal with pointed tips and blades shorter than 4 inches are allowed, but blades longer than 4 inches are prohibited NO OK Swords - cutting or thrusting weapons, including fencing foils NO OK NOTE: Any sharp objects in checked baggage should be sheathed or securely wrapped to prevent injury to baggage handlers and inspectors.

Back To Top

Sporting Goods

Item Carry-on? Checked? Baseball Bats NO OK Bows and Arrows NO OK Cricket Bats NO OK Golf Clubs NO OK Hockey Sticks NO OK

Lacrosse Sticks NO OK Pool Cues NO OK Skates (including ice skates and rollerblades) OK OK Ski Poles NO OK Spear Guns NO OK

For more information, please read our Traveling with Special Items section.

Back To Top

Guns & Firearms

Item Carry-on? Checked? Ammunition - Check with your airline or travel agent to see if ammunition is permitted in checked baggage on the airline you are flying. Small arms ammunitions for personal use must be securely packed in fiber, wood or metal boxes or other packaging specifically designed to carry small amounts of ammunition. Ask about limitations or fees, if any, that apply. Read our Firearms & Ammunition section. NO OK BB guns NO OK Compressed Air Guns (to include paintball markers) - Carried in checked luggage without compressed air cylinder attached. NO OK Firearms - firearms carried as checked baggage MUST be unloaded, packed in a locked hard-sided container, and declared to the airline at check-in. Read our Firearms & Ammunition section. As defined by 49 CFR 1540.5 - "A loaded firearm means a firearm that has a live round of ammunition, or any component thereof, in the chamber or cylinder or in a magazine inserted in the firearm." NO OK Flare Guns - May be carried as checked baggage MUST be unloaded, packed in a locked hard-sided container, and declared to the airline at check-in. Read our section on Camping and Firearms & Ammunition section. NO OK Flares NO NO Gun Lighters NO NO Gun Powder including black powder and percussion caps NO NO Parts of Guns and Firearms

Read our Firearms & Ammunition section. NO OK Pellet Guns NO OK Realistic Replicas of Firearms NO OK Starter Pistols - can only be carried as checked baggage and MUST be unloaded, packed in a locked hard-sided container, and declared to the airline at check-in. Read our Firearms & Ammunition section. NO OK NOTE: Check with your airline or travel agent to see if firearms are permitted in checked baggage on the airline you are flying. Ask about limitations or fees, if any, that apply.

Back To Top

Tools

Item Carry-on? Checked? Axes and Hatchets NO OK Cattle Prods NO OK Crowbars NO OK Hammers NO OK Drills and drill bits (including cordless portable power drills) NO OK Saws (including cordless portable power saws) NO OK Tools (greater than seven inches in length) NO OK Wrenches/Pliers/Screwdrivers (seven inches or less in length) OK OK NOTE: Any sharp objects in checked baggage should be sheathed or securely wrapped to prevent injury to baggage handlers and Security Officers.

Back To Top

Martial Arts & Self Defense Items

Item Carry-on? Checked? Billy Clubs NO OK Black Jacks NO OK Brass Knuckles NO OK Kubatons NO OK Self Defense Sprays - One 4 ounce (118ml) container of mace or pepper spray is permitted in checked baggage provided it is equipped with a safety mechanism to prevent accidental discharge. Self Defense Sprays containing more than 2% by mass of Tear Gas (CS or CN) are prohibited in Checked Baggage. For more information visit www.faa.gov., click on Passengers, then Preparing to Fly. NO OK Martial Arts Weapons NO OK Night Sticks NO OK Nunchucks NO OK Stun Guns/Shocking Devices NO OK Throwing Stars NO OK NOTE: Any sharp objects in checked baggage should be sheathed or securely wrapped to prevent injury to baggage handlers and Security Officers.

Back To Top

Explosive & Flammable Materials, Disabling Chemicals & Other Dangerous Items

Explosive Materials Carry-on? Checked? Blasting Caps NO NO Dynamite NO NO Fireworks NO NO Flares (in any form) NO NO Hand Grenades NO NO Plastic Explosives NO NO Realistic Replicas of Explosives NO NO Flammable Items Carry-on? Checked? Aerosol (any except for personal care or toiletries in limited quantities) NO NO Fuels (including cooking fuels and any flammable liquid fuel) NO NO Gasoline NO NO Gas Torches NO NO Lighter Fluid NO NO Common Lighters - Lighters without fuel are permitted in checked baggage. Lighters with fuel are prohibited in checked baggage, unless they adhere to the Department of Transportation (DOT) exemption, which allows up to two fueled lighters if properly enclosed in a DOT approved case. If you are uncertain as to whether your lighter is prohibited, please leave it at home. OK NO Torch Lighters - Torch lighters create a thin, needle-like flame that is hotter (reaching 2,500 degrees Fahrenheit) and more intense than those from common lighters. Torch lighters are often used for pipes and cigars, and maintain a consistent stream of air-propelled fire regardless of the angle at which it is held. Torch lighters continue to be banned. NO NO Strike-anywhere Matches - One book of safety (non-strike anywhere) matches are permitted as carry-on items, but all matches are prohibited in checked baggage. NO NO Flammable Paints (See Other Items below for non-flammable paints) NO NO Turpentine and Paint Thinner NO NO Realistic Replicas of Incendiaries NO NO NOTE: There are other hazardous materials that are regulated by the FAA. This information is summarized at www.faa.gov, click on Passengers, then Preparing to Fly. Disabling Chemicals & Other Dangerous Items Carry-on? Checked? Chlorine for Pools and Spas NO NO Small compressed gas cartridges

(Up to 2 in life vests and 2 spares. The spares must accompany the life vests and presented as one unit) OK OK Fire extinguishers and other compressed gas cylinders NO NO Liquid Bleach NO NO Recreational Oxygen (non-medically required, flavored or canned oxygen containers) NO NO Spillable Batteries - except those in wheelchairs NO NO Spray Paint NO NO Tear Gas - Self Defense Sprays containing more than 2% by mass of Tear Gas (CS or CN). NO NO Vehicle Airbags NO NO NOTE: There are other hazardous materials that are regulated by the FAA. This information is summarized at www.faa.gov.

Back To Top

Other Items

Item Carry-on? Checked? Gel-type candles NO OK

Flammable liquid, gel, or aerosol paint NO NO Non-flammable liquid, gel, or aerosol paint Yes - 3.4 ounces (100ml) or smaller container OK Snow globes (unless otherwise

prohibited)* OK OK *Snow globes that appear to contain less than 3.4 ounces (approximately tennis ball size) will be permitted if the entire snow globe, including the base, is able to fit in the same one clear, plastic, quart-sized, re-sealable bag, as the passenger’s other liquids, such as shampoo, toothpaste and cosmetics. **Illegal controlled substances: TSA’s screening procedures, which are governed by federal law, are focused on security and are designed to detect potential threats to aviation and passengers. As has always been the case, if during the security screening procedures an officer discovers an item that may violate federal law, TSA refers the matter to law enforcement. Law enforcement officials will determine if further action is appropriate.

Back To Top