Oklahoma to drop testing consortium, develop own tests, Barresi says
State Superintendent Janet Barresi announced Monday that she is withdrawing Oklahoma from testing through a consortium of 20 or so other states to coincide with the new Common Core curriculum standards.

Original Print Headline: Barresi: State to develop own tests

Education Barnard site housing plan eyed by Tulsa Public Schools Tulsa Public Schools is moving forward with one of five proposals - a residential plan - to redevelop the vacant Barnard school site. Tulsa, Bartlesville schools named National Blue Ribbon Schools Tulsa's Eisenhower International School and Bartlesville Mid-High School were among the six Oklahoma schools named Tuesday as 2013 National Blue Ribbon Schools by the U.S. Department of Education.

COMMENTS Join the conversation. Anyone can post a comment on Tulsa World stories. You can either sign in to your Tulsa World account or use Facebook. Read our commenting policy.

Tulsa World Comments

Facebook Comments

Instead of using new assessments developed through the group, called the Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers, or PARCC, Oklahoma will work with a testing company to develop its own new standardized tests for the 2014-15 academic year."We came to this decision after many months of deliberation, listening to classroom teachers, curriculum directors, superintendents and visiting with legislative leadership and the Governor's Office," Barresi told the Tulsa World.Joining PARCC was one of Barresi's first major decisions upon taking office in January 2011.Many educators and parent groups have been vocal in recent months about their concern about the additional hours of test-taking that would be involved in PARCC assessments. Barresi said their concerns, along with her own about the technological readiness of the state's public schools and higher anticipated costs, were her three primary reasons for backing out.A recent state survey found that only 33 percent of school sites in Oklahoma are technologically prepared for PARCC testing.Barresi said the vast majority of technical problems public schools experienced with online testing this spring are proof that Oklahoma does not yet have the capacity for the volume of online testing required for PARCC tests.She added that many schools don't have the expertise or funds to improve connectivity, increase bandwidth and add enough devices to catch up by 2014-15."If we move ahead with this, we are going to be asking the state to drink a milkshake using a cocktail straw," Barresi said. "If you look at what happened with testing this year - kids getting screen frozen, knocked off the test - those were technical issues that were from the districts' end of things."(The testing vendor) crashed for two days because of server problems, but almost every bit of the rest of it was due to district issues. I'm not pointing fingers, but it is the reality."While the costs of PARCC assessments have not yet been made public, Barresi estimates that Oklahoma could save at least $2 million per year by contracting for its own new English, language arts and math exams for grades three through eight and working with its current vendor to align high school end-of-instruction exams to the new curriculum standards.Through the PARCC alliance, Oklahoma and 21 other states and one U.S. territory had banded together to develop a set of K-12 standardized tests in English, language arts, literacy and math.PARCC received a $186 million grant through the U.S. Department of Education's Race to the Top competition to support the development and design of this "next-generation" assessment system.Sherry Fair, a state education spokeswoman, said Barresi will be consulting with Gov. Mary Fallin's office about whether Oklahoma should remain a participating state in PARCC so that it can still have access to their information and expertise or withdraw as a member in the consortium altogether.Oklahoma needs new tests to coincide with its implementation of new curriculum standards, called the Common Core State Standards.The Common Core State Standards initiative is a state-led effort to provide curriculum standards that are consistent throughout the country, beginning with English and math. Oklahoma is among 45 states and three U.S. territories that adopted the standards.Earlier this year, the state of Alabama withdrew from PARCC and Florida Education Commissioner Tony Bennett made headlines when he said his state, which is a PARCC member, is not yet committed to the consortium's new assessments.Bennett is chairman of a coalition of state school chiefs who are pursuing a similar education policy agenda. The group, which calls itself "Chiefs for Change," is an affiliate of the Jeb Bush-founded Foundation for Excellence in Education.Asked about any connection between the PARCC assessment decision and her commitment to Common Core standards, Barresi responded, "In no way is this a revocation of the new academic standards under math and English."She acknowledged that Oklahoma would lose out on opportunities for direct comparison of tests scores with other consortium states, saying, "That is something I'm very sad about, but we are looking at how we can set up guidelines ... to look at comparability of standards.""The great thing about the core is it ensures kids in Tulsa are learning the same things about mathematics as kids in New Orleans or kids in Minneapolis," she continued. "That same sequence of subject matter will be there; we are just going to test it from Oklahoma's standpoint."