Syria Crisis and Resettlement
UNHCR continues to provide protection and assistance to over 2.3 million Syrians who have fled to neighboring countries, as well as providing aid to an estimated 1.5 million Syrians who are internally displaced. In addition, thousands of Iraqi and other third country national refugees inside Syria remain vulnerable due to the conflict.

In September 2013, UNHCR launched a formal appeal to all states for pledges for resettlement places or other humanitarian migration options. The initial appeal is for states to provide 30,000 places for Syrian refugees in the region (Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Egypt and Iraq) to be made available between October 2013 and the end of 2014. UNHCR will focus resettlement activities for Syrians on highly vulnerable persons (women headed households, victims of torture, persons with serious medical conditions, etc.) As of December 2013, some 20 countries have made pledges or offered resettlement and humanitarian admission places for Syrian refugees.

Further information on UNHCR’s Syrian Resettlement Program can be found here - on the UNHCR Global website.

How does a Syrian apply for resettlement with UNHCR?

Due to the large numbers of refugees and scope of the conflict there is no process for individuals to directly apply for resettlement. Vulnerable individuals will be identified in the course of UNHCR’s on-going protection and assistance functions with refugees registered with UNHCR in the region, and in collaboration with other partner organization working with vulnerable Syrian refugee populations.

Can a Syrian be resettled directly from Syria?

No, UNHCR resettlement activities are limited to persons who are outside of their country of origin. However, Syrians may still be able to benefit from country specific immigration procedures inside Syria. Persons should check with specific country immigration requirements to see what options may be available.

The following information is provided by HIAS (the Hebrew Immigration Aid Society) and gives information on possible non-resettlement immigration options for Syrians. Click here to read the guide.

Are Syrian refugees be resettled to the United States?

The U.S. is among the country that has agreed to receive UNHCR referrals of Syrian refugees. By the end of 2013, a limited number of Syrians refugees had been referred to the U.S. for resettlement. UNHCR is working closely with U.S. authorities on refining procedures and criteria for the referral of additional Syrian refugees to the U.S. resettlement program in 2014.

In addition to UNHCR referral, some Syrians may be eligible for resettlement consideration under the U.S. family reunion category (priority 3) or through a Refugee/Asylee Relative petition (form I-730.) These include parents, spouses, and single unmarried children of Syrians in the U.S. who themselves were resettled as refugees or who were granted asylum in the U.S.

For further information on the U.S. family reunion options or the U.S resettlement program of Syrians, persons in the U.S. are encouraged to speak with a resettlement agency in your area, or consult the websites of the U.S. State Department of the Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM) or the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS.)

Can a refugee from another country who is currently in Syria be resettled?

UNHCR continues to refer a limited number of refugees for resettlement in Syria. However, since March 2011, the US has been unable to interview refugees for resettlement. UNHCR therefore has indefinitely suspended making new referrals to the U.S. UNHCR continues to make referrals to other countries which are still able to process cases inside Syria.

Can a refugee who was being processed for resettlement, continue their processing in another country?

UNHCR understands that due to the security situation in Syria, many refugees are considering leaving Syria for neighboring countries or returning to their country of origin. Depending on what the status of the individual’s resettlement case was in Syria prior to departure, it may be possible to continue resettlement processing, however, this is not guaranteed. Registered refugees who leave Syria should contact the local UNHCR office in the new country to discuss their situation. Normally refugees, who return to their country of origin, will no longer be considered eligible for resettlement. In some cases, however, Iraqis who return to Iraq may still be eligible to complete their resettlement processing.

Are there any other options specifically for Iraqi refugees?

Iraqis may be eligible for the Special Immigrant Visa Program for Afghan and Iraqi Nationals or the Priority 2 (P2) direct access program. More information is available here. Please note that UNHCR is not involved with these processes.

Can a permanent resident or U.S. citizen with immediate family in the region bring their family member to the U.S?

As mentioned above, there are options available for persons who were resettled to the U.S. as a refugee or granted asylum, to petition for their family members to join them.

In addition, permanent residents and U.S. citizens may be eligible to file a Petition for Alien Relative (form I-130) regardless of whether or not they were resettled to the US or granted asylum. For more information on this process, please visit the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services website. Please note that UNHCR is not involved with these immigration processes; they are handled through USCIS and the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs.

What is the status of pending immigrant visa applications at the U.S. consulate in Damascus?

UNHCR has been advised that pending immigrant visas are now being processed by the U.S. Embassy in Amman, Jordan. A request can also be made to transfer a case to another Embassy or Consulate; this request must be made directly to the receiving post. Please note that UNHCR is not involved with these processes.