Governance and environmental degradation in Haiti

Richener Noël, September 2013

Haitian environmental legislation

Haitian environmental law is very rich and covers a range of aspects such as the protection of soil and trees, pollution, buildings, pests, natural resources, territorial planning, etc. The majority of environmental regulations were produced during the 20th century, particularly from the 1960s. The agronomist, Jean André Victor listed more than a hundred laws, decree-laws, decrees and orders promulgated up till 1995, which deal with every aspect of the environment. The Haitian Collective for the Protection of the Environment and Sustainable Development (COHPEDA) produced a compilation of two hundred Haitian legal texts on the environment in 1998. There is also a Chronological Index of Haitian Legislation (1804-2000), which was published in 2002 by the Ministry of Justice and Public Security (MJSP) in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), which lists 140 laws concerning the environment in its Environmental Law section.

More recently, the Decree on Environmental Management and the Regulation of Citizens’ Behaviour for Sustainable Development (2006) has introduced new legislation which makes the state, local authorities, civil society and citizens responsible for protecting the environment. It has made the fight to preserve and restore the environment a shared responsibility that concerns all national, regional, municipal and local institutions and authorities. The environment is seen as a national heritage that needs to be preserved in order for the country to survive.

Institutional management of the environment

A large number of institutions are engaged in the domain of the environment. The Ministry of the Environment was created in 1995. Its fundamental mission is to reduce environmental vulnerability, increase the resilience of communities to natural disasters and external economic crises which affect the environment, improve the housing, hygiene and security conditions of the population, formulate and implement environmental law, and orientate public policy in terms of environmental management. Other ministries such as those of “Public works, Transport and Communications”, “Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development”, “Public Health” and “Planning” also have environmentally-related roles. Their organic laws define roles and subordinate authorities which are more or less directly or indirectly connected to environmental protection.

On another level are institutions with national, regional or local reach which are dependent on these ministries involved in activities directly or indirectly related to the environment. This is the case of the Organisme de surveillance et d’Aménagement du Morne-Hôpital, a local organisation which is responsible for restoring the environment of Morne-Hôpital (OSAMH), the Organisme de Développement de la Vallée de l’Artibonite (ODVA) which acts at a more regional level and the Service d’hygiène publique (national).

At yet another level are local authorities (Municipal Authorities and Boards of Section communales – CASEC), who legally should play a role in the daily management of the local environment. They have broad discretion in terms of territorial, urban and environmental matters.