"HOUSTON" First Word Spoken on the Moon
By HUNTER SCHWARZ, UPP Editor—

Published 05/04/10

If you’ve noticed the billboards reading “Houston, First Word Spoken on the Moon”, you might be surprised to know that they aren’t selling anything. Not to the average consumer anyways. They are actually part of a study to prove the effectiveness of billboards.

Salt Lake City-based Reagan Outdoor Advertising conducted a survey of 300 residents of the Wasatch Front area asking them what the first word spoken on the moon was as well as who the lieutenant governor of Utah was. Nearly five percent of those polled correctly named Greg Bell as lieutenant governor compared with only one percent correctly citing the first word spoken on the moon.

The company then began an advertising campaign to test the effectiveness of billboards as an advertising medium. The billboards pictured an astronaut in space and a website, www.Armstrong11.com, in addition to the words “Houston, First Word Spoken on the Moon”.

The company expected the percentage of people who know the first word spoken on the moon to rise while the percentage of people who know who the lieutenant governor is to stay close to the same.

Sure enough, the number of people polled who knew the first word spoken on the moon rose from one percent to 37 percent in just 30 days. In the same time period, those correctly answering who the lieutenant governor was only rose from five percent to six. After 60 days, nearly 60 percent of those polled could correctly answer “Houston”, and after 90 days, that number rose to 65 percent.

Although Reagan Advertising isn’t trying to sell you anything, their message to companies is clear: billboards work.

Astronaut Neil Armstrong landed on the moon on July 20, 1969 along with Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin, and Michael Collins. Upon landing on the lunar surface, Armstrong said, “Houston, Tranquility Base here. The Eagle has landed.” Armstrong’s most famous phrase, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” was spoken several hours later as he became the first person to set foot on the moon.