SORT :: FAQ
The following list of Frequently Asked Questions is followed by answers and explanations below. Click on a question to view its answer.

The Sex Offender Notification Process

Q: What is "community notification" about sex offenders?

Q: Who determines whether a sex offender is a level 1, 2 or 3 and what criteria are used?

Q: Why are you telling me about this offender and not all of the others being released from prison?

Q: Does the Department of Corrections send out a "Special Bulletin Notification" for every sex offender released from prison?



Community Placement of Offenders

Q: Why is this offender being released into my neighborhood?

Q: What can we do, as concerned citizens, to keep the offender from moving into our community?

Q: Why are you letting him live next door to a park, school, day care center, bus stop etc.?

Q: Are sex offenders required to remain inside their homes?

Q: If this offender requires the notification of law enforcement, why is he being released back into the community?

Q: Aren't all sex offenders easily recognizable as criminals because of how they look or act?



Sex Offender Supervision

Q: What type of treatment do sex offenders receive in prison and in the community?

Q: What is the Electronic Monitoring Program - (EMP)?

Q: What is GPS?

Q: How does an offender who is eligible for parole go about getting parole?

Q: What happens when a Judge sentences someone to prison under the Truth-in-Sentencing law?

Q: What is extended supervision?

Q: What happens if an offender on parole or probation violates his/her rules?

Q: What is revocation?

Q: Should citizens act differently now that a sex offender is living in their neighborhood?

Q: Should citizens follow or watch the offender at all times?

Q: What should parents tell their children about sex offenders?

Q: What happens when an offender gets off supervision?



The Sex Offender Registry

Q: Which offenders are required to register?

Q: What information are registrants required to report and what other information is kept in the registry?

Q: Do juvenile sex offenders have to register?

Q: How long does a sex offender remain on the registry?

Q: Who has access to the registry?

Q: What happens if a registrant fails or refuses to report information?



Victim Assistance

Q: What is the Victims' Bill of Rights and what does it say?

Q: What can a victim who is not being given these rights do about it?

Q: Will a victim's name be associated with a registered sex offender who offended against them? Will the public see a victim's name on the registry information?

Q: Is a victim allowed access to only information about the registered sex offender(s) who victimized them or can they get information on other registered sex offenders?

Q: What information can a victim receive through VOICE/VINE?

Q: Who is able to access VOICE/VINE and how does one enroll to use VOICE/VINE?

Q: Will a victim's VINE number still work with the new VOICE/VINE system?

Q: Does a victim need to notify VOICE/VINE of address or phone changes?

Q: Does a victim need to enroll in VOICE/VINE separately for each offender if there was more than one involved in their case?

Q: How can a victim get the name and phone number of an Offender's Probation/ Parole Agent?

Q: How can a victim learn if the offender(s) in their case escapes?

Q: How will a victim know if the offender in their case is released early on Parole?

Q: If a victim is receiving unwanted contact from an offender, what can they do?

Q: If a citizen is aware that an offender is violating rules of Probation/Parole supervision, whom should I call?

Q: If the sex offender lives in the same home as the victim, will the offender’s AND victim's address appear on the SORP website?



Restitution/ Compensation/ Child support

Q: What is restitution?

Q: How do victims know if they are eligible to receive restitution?

Q: How and where would a person apply for Restitution?

Q: How is restitution paid?

Q: What if a victim believes they should be getting restitution, but are not receiving any checks?

Q: What if an offender is set to be discharged from Probation or Parole and still owes restitution?

Q: What is Crime Victim Compensation?

Q: Will an offender have access to a victim's home address through paying restitution (either Restitution checks or Crime Victim Compensation checks)?

Q: Will an offender still pay child support payments when they are incarcerated?



Sex Offenders in Prison

Q: Are sex offenders incarcerated differently than other offenders?

Q: Are sex offenders given treatment in prison to "cure" them?



The Wisconsin Sex Offender Registry Web site

Q: Why is there a sex offender Web site?

Q: Does the general public have access on this Web site to the same information about sex offenders as victims or law enforcement personnel?

Q: Why is there no information about juvenile offenders on the Web site?

Q: What does the website provide and what does active community supervision, terminated, under DHS supervision and incarcerated mean for Custody/Supervision status on the web site?

Q: How do I report an information error or omission regarding a particular registrant?



Sex Crimes Laws of Wisconsin

Q: What is the difference between 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th degree sexual assaults?

Q: What is a sexual predator?



Sex Offender Apprehension and Felony Enforcement

Q: What does SAFE stand for?

Q: What is the SAFE tip line and email address?



The Sex Offender Notification Process



Q: What is "community notification" about sex offenders?

A: On June 1, 1997, the Sex offender Registration and Community Notification Law went into effect thus giving law enforcement agencies the authority to disseminate information about certain sex offenders to the community if, in their opinion, releasing the information would enhance the protection of the public. Sex offender Registration law established a Special Bulletin Notification (SBN) process in which the Department of Corrections provides detailed information to locale law enforcement on certain sex offenders scheduled to be released in their localities. Special Bulletins also include the offender's physical characteristics including a photo, the offender's offenses and the offense profile, and the offender's release plan including name and phone number of the supervising agent. The Bulletin is used as a tool by law enforcement in their decision making process about the level, scope and method of subsequent community notification. In November of 2015, the Department of Corrections sought a formal legal opinion from the Wisconsin Attorney General on the meaning of the language "on 2 or more separate occasions" found in Wisconsin Statute 301.46 (2m)(am). On September 1, 2017 Attorney General Brad Schimel provided a formal opinion OAG-02-17 in which he concluded a number of items including "separate occasions" in WI Stat. 301.46 (2m)(am) should be interpreted as referring to the number of convictions, consistent with the supreme court's interpretation of the repeater statute in Wittrock and Hopkins. In both statutes, the term is used in a similar way: to count convictions either as a measure of criminality or potential dangerousness to the community. It is the fact of the additional criminality, as measured by multiple convictions that matters. He further concludes that convictions on "separate occasions" in WI Stat 301.46 (2m)(am) refers to multiple convictions, regardless whether they were part of the same proceeding, occurred on the same date, or were included in the same criminal complaint. (The full opinion can be viewed at https://www.doj.state.wi.us/opinions/ag-schimel-issues-formal-opinion-regarding-sex-offenders ).

return