The Company Ed Keeps: Women's Health Edition: Friends of Ed's Who Support the Mandatory Ultrasound Bill
As the saying goes, "You are the company you keep." With less than a month to go before the GOP convention, Ed Gillespie is spending an increasing amount of time pandering to Tea Party leaders in an effort to win the nomination. These are the same people who have spent their careers fighting tooth and nail to turn back the progress in Virginia. As Ed travels the state touting his new allies, we are launching a new, recurring series entitled, "The Company Ed Keeps," to remind everyone that Ed's actions speak louder than words.

In this inaugural edition of, "The Company Ed Keeps," we use National Women's Health Week to take a look to highlight some of the many ways Virginian Republicans have fought to restrict women's right to control their health care decisions. Ed has refused to say where he stands on key issues such as the Virginia GOP's "personhood" bill or whether victims of rape and incest should be allowed to have an abortion.

"Ed Gillespie is embracing members of his party who have crusaded to enact extreme policies which limit the legal rights of women to make their own healthcare decisions," said DPVA Spokesperson Ashley Bauman. “Mr. Gillespie consistently has been reluctant to tell Virginians where he stands on most of the issues, yet his strong personal and political associations with many of the most extreme members of his party make it crystal clear that Ed Gillespie will work to roll-back healthcare access and choices for Virginia's women."

Take a look at some of his recent supporters:

Republican State Legislators

Sixteen Legislators Who Endorsed Ed Gillespie Last Week Were Original Cosponsors Of The Bill To Force Mandatory Transvaginal Ultrasounds. [Gillespie Campaign Email, 5/7/2014]

Mark Obenshain

Obenshain Said “My Values Are [Gillespie’s] Values. He Is Ready To Go To Washington And Fight For Those Values.” “Obenshain, who narrowly lost a bid to become Virginia's attorney general last year, described Gillespie as representing his values. ‘My values are his values. He is ready to go to Washington and fight for those values,’ said Obenshain, who speaks for individual liberty, personal responsibility and economic development.” [Daily Progress, 5/1/14]

Washington Post: Obenshain-Sponsored Personhood Bill Would “Have Banned Abortion, as the Sponsors Clearly Intended, It Also Provided an Opening to Prohibit Common Methods of Birth Control Including the Pill” In September 2013, the Washington Post editorial board stated, “SIX YEARS ago, when Virginia’s General Assembly considered the so-called ‘personhood amendment’ to the state constitution, which granted full rights to ‘preborn human being[s] from the moment of fertilization,’ the list of co-sponsors was short. In the state Senate, five of 40 lawmakers, all Republicans, signed on. Among them were then-Sen. Ken Cuccinelli II and Sen. Mark D. Obenshain, the current GOP candidates for governor and attorney general, respectively. There’s a reason the amendment had relatively few sponsors, and there’s a reason it failed even in the Republican-dominated House of Delegates. Not only would the amendment have banned abortion, as the sponsors clearly intended, it also provided an opening to prohibit common methods of birth control, including the pill and intrauterine devices.” [Washington Post Editorial, 9/4/13]

2009: Obenshain Proposed Measure In Virginia Senate That Would Have Required Women To Report Miscarriages To The Police.“ Democrat Mark R. Herring, a state senator from Loudoun County, has seized on a measure his Republican opponent, Mark D.Obenshain, proposed in 2009 — which would have required women to report miscarriages to police — as an example of government going too far. Herring has described the Harrisonburg state senator as one-third of a Republican statewide ticket that is too ‘extreme’ for Virginia.” [Washington Post, 6/25/13]

Ken Cuccinelli

Cuccinelli Donated $25,000 To The RPV To Defeat Warner. "Today, I decided to contribute $25,000 to the Republican Party of Virginia. I am so appreciative of all of the hard work that so many grassroots Republicans did all over Virginia in 2013 to help me in my race; and I also appreciate the good work that RPV and its leadership did in helping us in last year's election. Due to the Obamacare monstrosity more and more families are seeing their premiums skyrocket, their choices limited, or their health insurance plans being canceled entirely. That's why I think Mark Warner is so vulnerable -- and if our Republican team in Virginia is unified and funded we can send him home!" [Cuccinelli Facebook, 4/2/14]

Cuccinelli Opposed Abortion Even in Cases of Rape, Incest and Health of the Mother. In October 2013, the Washington Post reported, “Cuccinelli opposes abortion in most cases, including rape and incest, but not when the life of the mother is at stake. In the Senate, he co-sponsored a "personhood" bill that would have granted constitutional protection to embryos from the moment of fertilization, which may have outlawed certain forms of contraception.” [Washington Post, 10/14/13]