Leticia Van de Putte tours Border Patrol facilities in the Valley
Democratic Party candidate for Lieutenant Governor Leticia Van de Putte is in the Rio Grande Valley visiting Border Patrol facilities.

This is the first time Texas State Senator Van de Putte has toured the Border Patrol facilities in the Valley.

She witnessed first-hand the influx of immigrants that is taking over.

Monday morning, Van de Putte toured a Border Patrol station in Brownsville where thousands of mothers and children have been processed.

“So first of all, the things I felt as a mother and as a grandmother were one of absolute sorrow and yet a great admiration for their courage,” Van de Putte said. “To be able to brave that very difficult journey just for the chance to live here."

The San Antonio based lawmaker spoke with some of the mothers at the facility.

Many say they're fleeing violence in Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras.

The three countries ranked by the United Nations as among the top five countries with the highest murder rates in the world.

“If you just send these children back, if you listen to what they have to say, they tell me they are going to be murdered like their brother or their sister," Van de Putte said.

Van de Putte said it’s time for immigration reform.

“If they could see what we could see, then they would put their political gamesmanship behind them and sit down at the table and finally do immigration reform," Van de Putte said.

She asked congress to strongly consider accepting President Obama’s $3.7 billion request to deal with the border crisis.

Van de Putte said that to solve the problem the U.S. needs to look at the root of it which she claims is poverty, unstable government, violence and the drug cartels in those countries.

She said that the U.S. is not the only country getting the influx of immigrants from Central America but Costa Rica and Panama are too.

When congress finally decides to discuss immigration reform, she asks of them to think about those children that want to be reunited with their families.

While in the Valley, Van de Putte will meet with local law enforcement officers as well as politicians.

She will also tour other Border Patrol facilities.