The Creation Myth of Prince Alwaleed bin Talal, Saudi Arabia’s Billionaire Investor
Alwaleed’s parents separated in 1962 and divorced in 1968. As a boy Alwaleed split his time between Beirut and Riyadh. In January 1975, while at the prestigious International School of Choueifat, in Beirut, he was caught looking at another student’s test paper and when confronted about it, he berated the teacher. He was expelled and completed his high-school studies with tutors.

Like some other members of the Saudi royal family, Alwaleed enrolled in Menlo College, in Atherton, California, and in 1979 he graduated with a degree in business administration. He completed his formal education, through an off-campus program, in 1985, with a master’s degree in social science from Syracuse University. “He is one of the most driven people I have ever met,” says Michael Barkun, a former professor of Alwaleed’s. “He is a person of extraordinary intensity.”

The official story of how Alwaleed got his start in business is where, many people believe, the myths about him originate. Alwaleed claims his father gave him $30,000. Within a year, he had lost the money. He went back to his father, who gave him $300,000. This time, it took him three years to lose it. He went back to his father again, who refused to give him more money and instead gave him the deed to a house he was building for Alwaleed in Riyadh. “Go work for yourself,” his father admonished. Alwaleed got a $600,000 mortgage on the house from a branch of Citibank in Riyadh. In pictures, the house looks like little more than a ramshackle structure and certainly not one that would serve as collateral for a large mortgage. To raise additional money, Alwaleed says, he sold a $200,000 necklace that his father had given his first wife, Dalal bint Saud, a daughter of King Saud. “She sold it for me and no one knows about this,” he says. As a grandson of the king, he also received a monthly stipend of $15,000.

In any event, his first business break came from managing the construction of a sports and social club that a South Korean company was building in Riyadh. Soon, he was overseeing the construction of a variety of projects. (Saudi law used to require foreign businesses to be partnered with Saudis to develop projects in the country.) He also owned a travel agency. Then, he began to buy small companies in Saudi Arabia through what he calls “hostile takeovers,” one of which was a bank, United Saudi Commercial Bank. By 1988 Forbes was estimating his wealth at $1 billion, but he was virtually unknown outside Saudi Arabia.

All that changed on February 22, 1991, when The New York Times ran a front-page article about how Alwaleed had come to the rescue of Citicorp (the successor to Citibank) by investing $590 million in a preferred-stock issue at a time when the bank was reeling from a series of bad commercial real-estate loans and looking to raise new capital, at the insistence of the Federal Reserve, to shore up its wobbly balance sheet. Throughout the fall of 1990, Alwaleed had been quietly buying Citicorp stock in the open market, spending $207 million on about 16 million shares—just below the 5 percent threshold that would have required him to disclose the stake publicly—and making him the largest single shareholder in the company.

As a result of this investment, Citicorp management asked if he wanted to participate in a private placement of preferred stock, paying an 11 percent dividend. He agreed. His new $590 million preferred-stock stake was convertible into an additional 37 million Citibank shares, giving him a 14.9 percent stake. (When after a lengthy wait, the Federal Reserve did not approve Alwaleed’s application to own that much Citicorp stock he was forced to reduce his stake to 10 percent, an ownership position that did not require Fed approval.)

In 1999 The Economist crunched the numbers and claimed they didn’t add up. As for Alwaleed’s original seed money, “you could barely clothe a Saudi prince for such sums, let alone furnish him with a multi-million-dollar empire.” Furthermore, “he has not earned enough from his investments to pay for all he has spent in the 1990s.” And finally, “Either the prince has a valuable and unrevealed source of income, or his income is much less than [he claims]. . . . Anyone who seeks to present Prince Alwaleed as the face of the new Saudi Arabia needs to explain the mystery that lies at the heart of his empire.” (Needless to say, Forbes also has its doubts about the size of Alwaleed’s fortune.)

Alwaleed is miffed that people don’t believe him about the origins of his vast wealth. When I pointed out that even many people in Saudi Arabia doubt his self-creation myth, he retorted, “That’s their problem. There’s no myth.” He insists that his wealth is self-made. “If I had access to oil, why would I borrow $30,000 from my father, or from Citigroup?” he asked me, incredulously. “I’d just begin from the beginning with $10 million. Why would I do that? Why would I do it twice and go bankrupt? And, by the way, strange enough, the first loan I got from Citigroup, I still have the loan paper. . . . If I was born with a silver spoon in my mouth, why would I have a tin spoon in my mouth?”

In March 1999, he wrote to The Economist about its takedown: “You seem to imply there is something shady in the way my assets have grown. I have never received a single parcel of land from my government, nor have I ever made or received improper payments. The truth is more prosaic. My fortune is due to my belief in God and, quite simply, to my advisers who ‘work smart, not hard,’ as I like to put it.” In 2013, Shadi Sanbar, Kingdom Holding’s C.F.O., wrote in a letter to Forbes that the magazine’s undervaluation of Alwaleed’s fortune “strikes in the face of improving Saudi-American bilateral relations and co-operation. Forbes is putting down the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and that is a slap in the face of modernity and progress.” To me, in Paris, he says, “I’m transparent. I have nothing to hide, a good story to have. You know, there is a lot of weirdness and vagueness about what Saudi investors do, and I like to keep everything open because I have a good story to tell. And I have a responsibility. I’m the only [Saudi] man on the list of Forbes and Bloomberg, so it’s good to open up and show that Saudi businessmen, Arab businessmen, Muslim businessmen, can do what Westerners do.”