How Much Do Marco Rubio’s Boots Cost?
On Monday, New York Times reporter Michael Barbaro’s eye was drawn to a stunning pair of heels on an equally stunning, if somewhat short, set of legs:

Ignoring the entire upper half of Sen. Marco Rubio’s body, clad in what appears to be an ill-fitting Ralph Lauren Polo pullover (regular price $165, now on sale at Macy’s for $64.99), Rubio’s statement footwear jumps out for several reasons. First, people under 5-foot-10 (Rubio’s height) rarely become president. Second, they have a certain panache unseen in a campaign season that is, despite its unusually crowded nature and anti-establishment fury, still kind of frumpy.

So: Where did he get those boots?

After much speculation, we have narrowed it down to the following choices.

These Giorgio Brutini boots from Zappos.com are a fiscally responsible $85, and have an average five-star rating across 124 reviews. Not only do many of the seams appear to match, the shoes themselves are described as having, quite appropriately, a symbolic “Cuban heel”. (Look for Rubio to begin telling stories about how his heels escaped an oppressive regime.)

Rubio could also be wearing these Stacy Adams Santos kidskin boots, a reasonable $90 on Zappos.com. Reviews say that these boots have excellent arch support, which means that, soon, Jeb Bush will attack Rubio for his weak arches.

A more fiscally irresponsible version of Marco Rubio—and, let’s face it, it’s a charge that’s been made before—may be rocking these Maison Margiela boots, made in Italy. To be fair, they are on sale at the moment, a full 40 percent off (from $995 to $597).

If he were truly the spendthrift his opponents would like him to be, Rubio could be wearing these $1,990 Tom Ford boots, so elegant and stylish that they don't even need to be described. At least there's free shipping and returns.

There’s also a chance that Rubio’s wearing these ASOS boots, though the heel doesn’t give him enough Presidential Height.

We reached out to the campaign for word on his boots and will update accordingly.

Update (January 7, 2016): In an attempt to calm the choppy waters of #bootiegate, the Rubio campaign told Politico on Tuesday that the boots are Florsheims, which cost “not much more than $100.” And that would have been the end of that, until presidential campaigns began using the shoes to attack Rubio, think pieces started mushrooming on the Internet, and the political world fixated for a day or so on a pair of decently priced shoes that any professional white-collar worker would buy for themselves.

“This is craziness,” Rubio said during a campaign stop in New Hampshire. “Have people lost their minds?”