mt airy north Carolina nc shopping malls, fine dining, tourism
Welcome to Mount Airy, North Carolina!

Step back to a simpler time when you visit Mount Airy. Actor Andy Griffith grew up here, and it's no coincidence that a stroll down Main Street in the "Friendly City" reminds people of the town of Mayberry on the endearing and enduringly popular '60s hit TV series. Fans of The Andy Griffith Show can visit The Andy Griffith Museum, Floyd's City Barber Shop, Opie's Candy Store, Wally's Service Station, Mayberry Soda Fountain, Mayberry Courthouse, the Old City Jail, Snappy Lunch, Andy's childhood home, the Andy Griffith Playhouse, and take a ride in a Squad Car Tour. You will be sure to relish the generous and caring spirit that you encounter wherever you go.

Mount Airy and Surry County has something for everyone including Children's Activities, Mayberry Attractions, Music Attractions, Mountain Attractions, Historical Attractions, Vine and Wines, Cherries and Berries, Shopping, Casual and Upscale Dining, Lodging, Recreation, Live Entertainment, Walking Tours, Driving Tours and plenty of things you must see while visiting and a array of Free Things To See and Do. Mount Airy is also a perfect place for a wedding, family reunion or Meeting!



Surry County offers something for everyone. Outdoor enthusiasts will enjoy riding down the breathtaking Blue Ridge Parkway, hiking at Pilot Mountain State Park, or canoeing on the Yadkin River. Bluegrass and traditional music lovers can take in a jam session or live radio broadcast every Saturday morning in Historic Downtown Mount Airy. History buffs can delve into the area's colorful past at the Mount Airy Museum of Regional History and by visiting the county's myriad of historic sites.



Old North State Winery In the last few years, Surry County has become fertile ground for a booming vineyard and winery trade. One of the Southeast's largest vineyard estates, Shelton Vineyard is only 15 minutes from downtown Mount Airy. The only Main Street winery in North Carolina, the, is located in Mount Airy. Other wineries within very close proximity include Black Wolf Vineyards, Round Peak Vineyards, Rag Apple Lassie Vineyards and Stony Knoll Vineyards. Mount Airy is located in the Yadkin Valley Wine Region. Surry County offers something for everyone. Outdoor enthusiasts will enjoy riding down the breathtaking Blue Ridge Parkway, hiking at Pilot Mountain State Park, or canoeing on the Yadkin River. Bluegrass and traditional music lovers can take in a jam session or live radio broadcast every Saturday morning in Historic Downtown Mount Airy. History buffs can delve into the area's colorful past at the Mount Airy Museum of Regional History and by visiting the county's myriad of historic sites.

Visit Andy Griffith's Hometown, the ideal American town that was the inspiration for Mayberry. You'll find some things that the television show captured, some great entertainment, shopping, dining, wineries and a peaceful scenic setting. It's Like Coming Home Again.

For a Free Visitors Guide please contact us by telephone at 336-786-6116 and also visit our Area website at www.verysurry.com