About Judithanne

Judithanne McLauchlan is a working mom who knows how difficult it can be to make ends meet and to raise your family. Judithanne teaches at USF St. Petersburg and lives with her husband Ramsay and daughter Peggy in Madeira Beach. As a teacher and as a mother serving on the Board of her daughter’s school PTA, Judithanne believes our children deserve a commitment to their education. That means responsible investment in our schools.

Judithanne is running for State Senate because of that commitment and because middle class families should be able to afford to stay and have the opportunities to succeed in Tampa Bay. She is committed to making government work for the people of Tampa Bay and ending the pay-to-play culture in Tallahassee.

Judithanne was raised by her mother, a public school principal, and her father, a U.S. Army veteran who served two tours in Vietnam. She learned from her parents at an early age the value of hard work, service to our country, to our community and the value of a good education. She has always believed in giving back to her community, and her civic leadership was recognized when she was appointed by Governor Crist to serve on the Florida Commission on Community Service. As a Commissioner, Judithanne worked to promote volunteerism and civic engagement across the state of Florida. She also received the President’s Volunteer Service Award from President Obama in recognition of her service in the Junior League, and she has served on the Board of Directors of the League of Women Voters. As a working mom herself, Judithanne knows how difficult it can be to make ends meet and to raise a family. She also knows what it means to worry about whether you can make ends meet; but she knows that if you work hard and play by the rules, then every opportunity should be open to you.

As a State Senator, Judithanne will put Tallahassee back to work for the middle class.

For Judithanne that begins with a commitment to education. Judithanne serves on the

Board of her daughter’s school’s PTA in Pinellas County and has taught at the University of South Florida St. Petersburg for 11 years. Judithanne is an Associate Professor of Political Science and Founding Director of the Center for Civic Engagement. Judithanne is a Fulbright Scholar and published author. And she is a recipient of the American Political Science Association’s Certificate for Outstanding Teaching in Political Science, the USFSP Chancellor’s Award for Excellence in Teaching, the USFSP College of Arts and Sciences Teacher of the Year, and she was named one of the top 25 women professors in Florida. But she considers the true measure of success to be each student whose life she has impacted.

Previously, Judithanne worked for the U.S. Senate, the U.S. Supreme Court and the White House during both terms of the Clinton Administration. Judithanne graduated with a BA from Rider University and a PhD from Rutgers University.