Washington Health Benefit Exchange :: Washington Health Benefit Exchange Selects Faneuil, Inc. to Operate Call Center in Spokane, WA
Call Center Will Provide Customer Support for Washington Healthplanfinder

OLYMPIA, Wash. – The Washington Health Benefit Exchange today announced it selected Faneuil, Inc. to operate the call center for Washington Healthplanfinder, the state’s new online health insurance marketplace launching this fall. Faneuil, a recognized leader in multi-channel customer care services, will open the call center in Spokane, Wash., in September 2013. They will begin enrolling residents on Oct. 1 for coverage that takes effect on Jan. 1, 2014.

Washington Healthplanfinderwill offer a customer-friendly online marketplace where individuals, families and small businesses can make apples-to-apples comparisons of health insurance plans, determine if they are eligible for low-cost or free options, and choose the plan that fits their needs and their budget. Consumers will be able to access customer service support through the Faneuil-run call center, agents and brokers, and through a network of certified in-person assistance across the state.

“We are proud to partner with Faneuil to bring quality support to our customers,” said Beth Walter, Director of Operations for Washington Healthplanfinder. “The company has extensive experience developing and providing exemplary customer service in highly complex environments – a skill that will be important to our overall success with Washington Healthplanfinder.”

Faneuil’s successful program implementation history was a key factor in its selection. The company’s ability to deploy staff rapidly while remaining flexible to changing conditions allows its call centers to accommodate varying call volumes, which is critical for startup programs with uncertain customer demand.

“We’re honored that the State of Washington recognizes how we have represented and supported our call center clients for the past 20 years,” said Anna Van Buren, CEO for Faneuil. “We have a solid track record of delivering exemplary service, meeting rigorous deadlines and maintaining strong client relationships. We’re excited about the quality workforce available for this call center in Spokane and we are privileged to be asked to be part of this new initiative to help Washington residents.”

Call center representatives will be prepared to answer questions regarding health plans offered through Washington Healthplanfinder, the enrollment process and eligibility for financial assistance to help pay for co-pays and premiums. There will be approximately 60 representatives located in Spokane with overflow staff available, including bilingual representatives for Spanish speakers. Representatives also will have access to a language line with translation capabilities for 175 different languages.

“We are fully focused on the successful launch of Washington Healthplanfinder’s call center. From day one, we want to ensure that Faneuil’s support helps Washington meet the needs of its people in the direct and transparent manner it has defined as its goal,” noted Van Buren. “We know this program will continually evolve, and we have every intention of being an integral part of it for the long term.”

More information about Washington Healthplanfinder and the Washington Health Benefit Exchange is available at http://wahbexchange.org/.

About the Washington Health Benefit Exchange

The Washington Health Benefit Exchange is a public-private partnership established in accordance with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA) with the goal to redefine people’s experience with health care through the creation of a new health insurance marketplace for individuals and small businesses. The Exchange is separate from the state and governed by an independent 11-member board appointed by Gov. Chris Gregoire in December 2011.

About Washington Healthplanfinder

Washington Healthplanfinder will be a new online marketplace for individuals, families and small businesses in Washington to compare and enroll in health insurance coverage and gain access to tax credits, reduced cost sharing and public programs such as Medicaid.Washington Healthplanfinder will begin enrolling consumers on Oct. 1, 2013, for health insurance coverage beginning on Jan. 1, 2014.

About Faneuil, Inc.

Faneuil, Inc. is a nationally recognized leader in technology-enabled in-person and automated service delivery, particularly in complex, highly regulated environments in which precision and mastery of guidelines are of critical importance. The company provides business processing solutions for an extensive client portfolio that includes both commercial and government entities. Utilizing advanced applications and a team of more than 3,300 service professionals, Faneuil delivers broad outsourcing support, always with the goal of building its clients’ brands by providing exemplary customer service. Headquartered in Hampton, Va., Faneuil is a wholly owned subsidiary of Harland Clarke Holdings Corporation, Inc., which also owns Harland Clarke, Harland Financial Solutions and Scantron/GlobalScholar.

# # #