Media see new controversy in something Trump said 7 months ago
The news media are seeing hot controversy in a new remark from Donald Trump, even though the Republican nominee uttered nearly the same thing seven months ago and has several other times since.

During a campaign rally Wednesday in Florida, Trump said that President Obama, with help from Hillary Clinton, is the "founder" of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

"He is the founder of ISIS. He is the founder of ISIS, OK?" Trump said. "He's the founder. He founded ISIS. And I would say the co-founder would be crooked Hillary Clinton."

Trump appeared for an interview on CNBC Thursday morning where the host asked him if it's "appropriate" to call Obama "the founder of an organization that wants to kill Americans."

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

Trump repeated his "founder of ISIS" comment and went on to blame Obama for the way he handled withdrawing troops from Iraq.

"He shouldn't have gotten out the way he got out," he said.

On MSNBC's "Morning Joe," co-host Willie Geist interpreted Trump's remark to be an accusation that Obama is "in league with ISIS."

"Do you believe that President Obama is in league with ISIS?" Geist asked GOP Rep. Sean Duffy, who appeared on the show for an interview.

Though Trump's remarks are being reported as new, he made nearly identical comments about Obama, Clinton and ISIS in January.

"They've created ISIS. Hillary Clinton created ISIS with Obama," he said during a campaign rally in Mississippi.

Trump restated the claim in an interview on CBS in July. "Hillary Clinton invented ISIS with her stupid policies," he said. "She is responsible for ISIS."