Seven times Trump has pledged to repeal Dodd-Frank
Donald Trump has consistently said that he would repeal or significantly roll back the 2010 financial reform law signed into law by President Obama.

On Tuesday, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee told Reuters that he planned something "close to dismantling" the law, known as Dodd-Frank. His statement drew criticism from Democratic presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton and high-level financial reform advocates.

But Trump's stance, which puts him in line with many conservatives in Congress and the Republicans he defeated for the nomination, is nothing new. He has pledged to undo Dodd-Frank numerous times, starting early in his candidacy.

At times, he has made statements critical of the banking industry, and he has never delved into the details of what he dislikes about the financial reform law or how he would replace it. Nevertheless, his record of statements is consistent in that he would mostly or totally repeal Dodd-Frank.

Here are seven other times Trump has stated his intentions to repeal the law or otherwise pare it back:

May 5

In an appearance on CNBC, Trump said that "absolutely, Dodd-Frank has to be either eliminated or changed greatly."

"The regulators are running the banks," Trump explained, blaming the law for cutting off businesses from credit and slowing economic growth.

Jan. 26

Fox News host Bret Baier asked Trump to outline something that government does now that it should not be doing at all.

Trump responded that "we're too involved in regulation of the banks," making it impossible for people to get loans.

"Dodd-Frank is a disaster in so many different ways," Trump said.

Jan. 26

While being interviewed by Fox's Maria Bartiromo earlier the same day, Trump suggested rolling back Dodd-Frank.

"Dodd-Frank is a disaster, I think, and, you know, I think things have to be done with that, and I think Wall Street would like to hear that," Trump said.

In the same interview, however, Trump said that Wall Street has "gotten away with murder," without saying specifically what he was referring to.

Nevertheless, he blamed the financial reform law for decreasing access to credit for all but the wealthy.

Oct. 20

During an interview on Fox Business, host Stuart Varney asked Trump if he would favor breaking up the big banks.

"I disagree, but I also think we have to get rid of Dodd-Frank," Trump responded.

Varney asked him if he would be able to pull off repealing both Obamcare, as he has promised to do, and Dodd-Frank — Obama's top two legislative victories.

"I think so. I'm a leader," Trump said. "I've dealt with politicians all of my life, I know how to get things done."

Oct. 14

In an interview with The Hill, Trump called Dodd-Frank "terrible" and said that he would "absolutely" repeal it.

"Under Dodd-Frank, the regulators are running the banks," Trump told the newspaper. "The bankers are petrified of the regulators."

Aug. 20

During another interview with Bartiromo, Trump was asked about Dodd-Frank. "I would at a minimum roll that back," Trump said, pledging to do it "quickly."

Aug. 18

Time magazine interviewed Trump at Trump Tower and asked him about repealing Dodd-Frank.

"Well Dodd-Frank is probably not a very good thing," Trump said. "There are aspects of it you could leave. But generally speaking, Dodd-Frank stifles business."