SoutheastHEALTH to Close Ellington Hospital
March 11 Closure of Hospital, Clinics Cripples County Healthcare

What began as a desire by lifelong residents of Reynolds County to have a small rural hospital in 1964, and blossomed into reality in 1978 after many years of hard work and planning, and then thrilled area residents when it became Southeast Health Center of Reynolds County in 2013 is a little more than three weeks away from the worst possible outcome – closed doors on the hospital and three area clinics.

SoutheastHEALTH of Cape Girardeau (SEH) has announced the closing of the hospital and its related clinics in Ellington and Van Buren. Operations will cease effective Friday, March 11.

A news release first made public Tuesday, Feb. 9, at a meeting of hospital personnel, revealed that SEH recently was informed by state Medicaid officials of a $6 million liability owed by Advanced Healthcare Management Services LLC (Advanced), the hospital’s previous owners.

As the current operators of the facility, the law states SoutheastHEALTH is responsible for the liability.

When Southeast Health Center of Reynolds County was bought in 2013, the press release said “SoutheastHEALTH has purchased all of the physical assets and assumed management responsibilities for Advanced’s entities which include:

• Advanced Healthcare Medical Center, a 25-bed critical access hospital located in Elllington, Mo.;

• rural healthcare clinics in the southeast Missouri communities of Ellington, Poplar Bluff, Doniphan and Van Buren;

• a 35,000 square foot medical office building in Poplar Bluff that includes Family Practice, Podiatry, radiology services, a retail pharmacy, a medical spa and Advanced’s centralized business office;

• and a Home Health agency based in Ellington that serves Reynolds, Ripley, Shannon and Butler counties and portions of Dent, Iron, Madison, Wayne and Carter counties.”

While SEH did not actually purchase the buildings owned by Advanced, they did assume management of Advanced’s healthcare operation.

According to a Southeast spokesperson, Advanced Healthcare indemnified SoutheastHEALTH for previous liabilities at the time of the purchase, freeing them from any liability from actions performed before their takeover.

Since that time, Advanced Healthcare has indicated it is unable to pay the debt as is called for in the purchase agreement.

Advanced, which owned the hospital and associated clinics prior to the turnover to SEH, was a consortium of five local doctors – one of whom, Dr. Michael Hoja of Poplar Bluff, has since deceased. Other owners were Dr. Paul Rains of Ellington, Dr. George Samuel of Doniphan, Dr. D.L. Davis of Poplar Bluff, and Dr. Zackwrie Parr of Poplar Bluff.

The closing of the Reynolds County facility was not a desperate move, an SEH official said; rather, it was closed because of the specific economics of the single entity. The closure would have been necessary even without the $6 million liability, but that complication may have hastened the decision.

“It was in the purchase agreement to indemnify it, but with their inability to pay, it doesn’t matter. It transfers over, and that’s where we’re at,” Shauna Hoffman, director of marketing at SEH, said.

“We understand that this won’t be an easy time for many patients, providers and staff,” Ken Bateman, SEH president and chief executive officer said in a news release. “However, we cannot compromise the financial strength of the entire health-care system by absorbing losses.”

Bateman said the Reynolds County hospital is not viable regardless of the $6 million in liability owed. One SEH official was quoted as saying SoutheastHEALTH absorbed a $1.5 million loss from the facility in Reynolds County in 2015.

“I’d like to keep a commitment to those hospitals, but I cannot afford to go in excess of half-million on losses per year,” Bateman said. “I just don’t see how this facility (Southeast Health Center of Reynolds County) would ever come under that threshold.

“This isn’t about Southeast struggling and shutting the facility down. It’s just the economics of that facility.”

“We want to continue our commitment in the rural areas, but the economics have to work,” Bateman said.

So, the dream of those who built the hospital with their fundraisers and selfless dedication to providing quality healthcare to Reynolds County residents falls from the chopping block of four doctors unable to settle their debts with Medicaid and a regional hospital unable to successfully manage a small, local facility that has been in existence for 38 years without going under – while the residents of Reynolds County are left with a county health office and one family clinic in Ellington as the only healthcare outlets available short of an hours drive.