Lawmakers Scramble To Save High-Speed Rail
Embed this Video x Email

Digg Reddit Delicious

Link

Florida lawmakers in Washington are working to save a high-speed rail project that was turned down by Gov. Rick Scott.

The lawmakers met with top brass from the U.S. Department of Transportation, and some possibilities emerged that could put the train back on track.

Transportation Secretary Roy LaHood gave supporters one week to come up with an alternative plan to build the bullet train.

"The truth is the cost is too great, and the risk outweighs the benefits," Scott said.

When Scott decided to tell President Barack Obama that he would pass on $2.4 billion to build a high-speed rail train, it left the president stunned.

"It would have created jobs and helped grow businesses in that region," Obama said.

It also left local lawmakers determined to find another way.

"We will explore every option available to us. We were so close here," Rep. John Mica, R-Winter Park, said.

Other state lawmakers are also trying to persuade LaHood to give Florida time to come up with a new rail plan, but they were told they may have as little as one week to circumvent Scott's decision.

Critics of Scott's denial of bullet-train funding said his reasoning makes no sense.

Scott said he wants money to widen Interstate 4, Interstate 95 and make other road, bridge and port improvements, but he failed to point out the rail funding can only be used to build train networks.

"We can't build our way out of congestion," MetroPlan Orlando representative Kelley Teague said.

Teague oversees the spending of federal money locally. She said her agency is open to partnering with other public and private groups to take over high-speed rail from the state.

"We're going to have to have transportation options in the future. This is not just about now. This is about creating a transportation system for the coming decades," Teague said.

Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., and Rep. Corrine Brown, D-Jacksonville, also said there's an urgency now to get the project back on schedule.

"Our enemy at this point is time because the secretary of transportation has given us a week from (Friday)," Nelson said.

"We are going to continue to work for those 60,000-plus jobs for Floridians. With unemployment at 12 percent, we've just got to work this out for the people of Florida," Brown said.

Legal experts will also review the legislation that authorized high-speed rail and was signed by former Gov. Charlie Crist to determine if Scott had the legal right to kill the project.