Florida Democrats Just Voted To Impose Sharia Law On Women
Florida Democrats have declared war on women; but fortunately, their attack on our freedoms was turned back by Republicans who represented America and voted against them.

Anyone who isn’t certain that Democrats are devoted to destroying America need only take a look at their despicable conduct in the Florida Senate. In a vote that never should have had to be taken, every single Democrat voted to force Sharia Law on the people of Florida. By doing so, they placed women and children in very real danger. The vote was 24 votes for America and 14 votes for al Qaeda and the Taliban cast by loathsome Democrats. They voted to deny Americans the Constitutional protections generations of American men and women fought for and died to protect. Democrats have revealed their desire to force Americans to live as slaves to a third world, foreign “justice system.”

Since the liars in the Democrat–controlled media won’t describe what these quislings have tried to force on Americans, here is an outline of the horrors of Sharia Law.

There would be no freedom of religion because Sharia supports only Islam.

There would be no freedom of speech.

TRENDING: LiAngelo Ball Tells Truth About The Day He Said ‘Thank You’ To President

There would be no protection for homosexuals, Christians, or anyone else Islamists don’t like.

Rape victims would be executed, and those who were not executed by the state would legally be murdered by their families as “honor killings.”

Women would not be allowed to vote, drive, go to college, or show their faces in public. Little girls as young as 8 years old would be forced to “marry” men three and four times their age. Many would die when these beasts forced themselves on their “brides.”

Women would not be allowed to be treated by male doctors they were not related to.

Stoning as a form of execution would be sanctioned for women caught in adultery. Women would be forced to wear burkas in public.

There would be no pig farms or dogs, and public schools would be forbidden from serving anything but Halal–style food.

Alcoholic beverages would be forbidden, and cab drivers who suspect a passenger is carrying alcoholic beverages (or Christian or Hebrew bibles) could refuse them service.

Democrats voted to force this on American citizens. If they had the necessary numbers in the Florida legislature, Sharia Law in all its barbarity would be used in Florida courts. Democrats tried this. Keep this in mind next fall.

RELATED: Scalise Remains In Critical Condition Following Shooting

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.