WPT: Wisconsin Hometown Stories: LaCrosse
La Crosse: The River City

Twentieth Century Industry

The development of the internal combustion engine and automotive transportation led to an industrial resurgence at La Crosse.

One person who took advantage of the new automotive industry was Philo M. Gelatt. His Northern Engraving Company was already a successful producer of printing equipment when he purchased the Hans Motor Co. in 1913 and renamed it the National Gauge and Equipment Company to more accurately reflect its products, i.e. gauges and instruments for autos. When the economy boomed in the 1920s, Gelatt sold National Gauge. Later acquired by the Autolite Company, the company grew into one of the largest manufacturers in La Crosse. Autolite remained in town until1958 and took twenty percent of the city’s manufacturing jobs when it left.

Albert Hirshheimer founded the La Crosse Plow Works shortly after the Civil War and the company continued to make farm implements in the city for a century.

Gelatt continued to own Northern Engraving and prosper, passing the business down in his family. Although the original Northern Engraving operation also left La Crosse in the late 1950s, the company maintains branches in several locations in Wisconsin, including one in its home town.

Albert Hirshheimer founded the La Crosse Plow Works shortly after the Civil War and the company continued to make farm implements in the city for a century. Allis-Chalmers acquired the company in the 1920s and stayed in business there until 1969.

Hirshheimer also founded the La Crosse Rubber Mills. With its raw material imported from overseas, the company turned a profit producing waterproof coats, ponchos and footwear. During the 1920s boom the company made up to 40,000 pairs of shoes a year and employed over two thousand people. Its fortunes dipped in the 1930s, but World War II brought a comeback and by the mid-1970s, La Crosse Rubber was the second largest employer in the city.

The largest employer in the 1970s and for many years previous was the Trane Company. Reuben Trane was born in La Crosse in 1886. He graduated from UW-Madison in 1910 and came home to work in the plumbing shop owned by his father John. They incorporated the Trane Co. in 1913 and prospered as manufacturers of steam valves and other plumbing equipment. In 1925, Reuben introduced his fin and tube convection radiator, which proved to be a great improvement over the standard iron radiator. Growth continued as, in the midst of the depression, Trane adapted his convection heater for air conditioning. Now a manufacturer of interior climate control systems, Trane grew to a company of world wide stature by the 1950s. In 1983, the pride of La Crosse industries was purchased by American Standard which retains ownership of the company today.

The president and chair of the new Heileman was Gottlieb’s wife Johanna, who has been identified as the first female corporate president in Wisconsin.

About the same time American Standard acquired Trane, G. Heileman was attempting to grow itself into one of the largest brewing companies in the United States. The brewery began when Gottlieb Heileman and John Gund started the City Brewery in 1858. It was one of at least nine breweries that operated in La Crosse in the 1800s. Gund left the partnership in 1872 to start the Empire Brewery, which eventually spread over five acres on the south side. Heileman also prospered, pausing only briefly when Gottlieb died in 1876. Instead of closing, Heileman incorporated, an unusual move in the family-friendly brewing trade. The president and chair of the new Heileman was Gottlieb’s wife Johanna, who has been identified as the first female corporate president in Wisconsin. With Heileman leading the way, La Crosse became Wisconsin’s largest producer of beer, after Milwaukee, of course, in the 1910s.

The Heileman corporation purchased Gund’s City Brewery shortly after Prohibition was enacted in 1920. Heileman weathered the political ban on alcoholic beverages and reopened with a rush of sales in 1933. By the 1970s, Heileman had not only survived the decades long consolidation of the brewing industry, it had become a avid acquirer of other breweries throughout the United States. Under the management of Russell Cleary in the 1980s and ‘90s Heileman attempted to become the number three brewer in the United States, but was hobbled by federal regulators. Affairs went from bad to worse and Heileman closed its doors in 1999. It reopened as the City Brewery in 2000 and survives with about 500 employees as a brewer of low volume specialty beers.