Hijacking Campaign 2018 - Information on Wisconsin Alliance for Reform
Hijacking Campaign 2018

Wisconsin Alliance for Reform

Posted: February 7, 2018

Updated: June 1, 2018



This is a conservative phony issue ad group created in 2015 by former GOP legislative and state Republican Party staffers Luke Fuller and Chris Martin to support GOP and conservative candidates for legislative and statewide offices.

The Alliance’s decision to sponsor issue ads means that it can secretly raise and spend unlimited amounts of money on its outside electioneering activities.

Less than two weeks before a June 12 special election in northeastern Wisconsin's 1st Senate District, the Alliance purchased $150,360 worth of ads at three Green Bay television stations to support the GOP candidate in the race, Rep. Andre Jacque, of De Pere.

Earlier in 2018, the group purchased about $63,600 in advertising in the Milwaukee and La Crosse radio and television markets during the Wisconsin Supreme Court race. The race featured Sauk County Circuit Judge Michael Screnock, Madison lawyer Tim Burns, and Milwaukee County Circuit Judge Rebecca Dallet. Screnock drew support from conservatives.

Screnock and Dallet survived the primary and went on to the April 3 general election where Dallet won a 10-year seat on the high court.

The Alliance describes itself as an anti-tax and pro-economic growth and small government organization whose members, which it does not identify, are individuals and community leaders. The group has used a Madison post office box and a Milwaukee phone number as its only contact information. The Alliance’s website was initially registered by Lorri Pickens, a former director at Americans for Prosperity (AFP), which is funded by billionaire brothers Charles and David Koch to spend money on Republican and conservative candidates for state and federal offices around the country.

Currently, the group's president is Randy Melchert and it's secretary is Nate Nelson. Nelson worked for the American Majority, which is a group that trains conservative candidates to run for offices across the country. Melchert is a communications consultant and past GOP candidate for legislative and statewide offices.

Last active election: 2016