Wisconsin ACT scores plummet





Wisconsin ACT scores plummet



Newly released information from the Department of Instruction shows a dramatic decline in student ACT results in the past year. Test scores dropped Wisconsin from 2nd in the country to 41st in the nation among states where more than half the students took the exam.

"The latest information released today is another glaring failure of the Walker Administration to make sound, smart policy decisions to improve education in our state," Democratic Party of Wisconsin Chair Martha Laning said on Thursday. "As a parent with children who have recently graduated from high school I've had a front row seat to the destructive changes that have short-changed our children and their futures. When budget cuts force schools to do more with less it's no surprise that the quality of the education our children receive inevitably declines."

In last year's State of the State address, Governor Scott Walker claimed his education policies were working, boasting that "ACT scores are up and Wisconsin now ranks second in the country." Now, five days away from Walker's next State of the State it's clear that the policies of the last six years have failed schools, students, and parents.

Out of a top score of 36, the average test score in the state dropped from 22.0 to 20.0, which pulls Wisconsin to dead last in the Midwest and tied with Kentucky for 41st in the entire country. Due to funding cuts, damage has been made to Wisconsin's traditionally high-quality education system and now our kids, businesses and communities will suffer. Nationally, Wisconsin saw the fourth largest cut to K-12 general school aid funding in 2015-16 according to the nonpartisan research policy institute, the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.

While Wisconsin has traditionally ranked above average in terms of ACT scores, these latest numbers place Wisconsin dead last in the Midwest and among the bottom ten states nationally.

"I can only empathize with the parents across the state who see this news and grow ever more concerned with the direction of our state. Our kids deserve the same high-quality education we had as kids and the choices the legislature has made is stealing that from them.." said Laning. "The state of education in Wisconsin is not strong. The newest numbers should be a wake-up call to the governor and the Republican legislature that their misguided priorities are hurting our education system and, therefore, our kids, businesses and communities."