19-year-old in custody after Marquette robbery, shooting
Marquette University officials say a student was shot during a robbery on campus early Friday morning.

Get our mobile app! Our app provides you with real-time access to breaking news and weather straight from the WISN 12 News team.

More

The university said their public safety office received three calls about a pair of men trying to rob students near 18th Street and Wisconsin Avenue at 2:36 a.m. In the first two incidents, students handed over what one robber demanded and was not hurt.

At the same time, a second robber tried to rob a student outside Parking Structure 3, also at 18th Street and Wisconsin Avenue. There was a struggle, and the robber shot the student in the hand.

VIDEO: Marquette student shot, two others robbed in campus crime spree

After hearing the shots, the first robber gave back what they'd taken from the student in the second robbery and ran off. Police arrested the suspect they said was involved in the shooting. They are still looking for the first robber.

VIDEO: Marquette student shot during robbery attempt



Officials said a 19-year-old man, a student at Marquette, was injured in the shooting. He was taken to Froedtert Hospital where he was treated and released.

The other two robbery victims, both 18-year-old Marquette students, were not injured.

Police recovered the gun near the Pabst Mansion.

Police said the robber who was apprehended is a 19-year-old man and is not a student at the university. Officers said the man has an "extensive criminal record." Officers are still searching for the second robber.

University officials sent text alerts to warn students about the robberies within 10 minutes of receiving the first report. They sent follow up alerts and emails after learning of the arrest, and after getting more details from the scene.

"There's been a lot of robberies lately, too, so it's just something you have to watch out for," Marquette University student witness Emily Costello said.

The school has ways students can also reach out for help. There's an emergency phone on nearly every corner on campus in case a student needs help.



VIDEO: Marquette University has safety systems in place for students

"We're up to 400 blue light phones both on campus and in the near off-campus area," Marquette Public Safety Lt. Paul Mascari said.

WISN 12 News has learned police believe the same two men are responsible for two other armed robberies last month near campus. The suspect arrested is believed to be the shooter, and he and was released from prison seven weeks ago.

Police late Friday afternoon arrested a suspect for some other armed robberies in the area and are still trying to determine if he's the second suspect in the shooting at Marquette.

Marquette officials said all dormitories were open and classes continued went on as usual Friday.