UPDATE: Number of WI layoff notices has already topped 2014 tota - WKOW 27: Madison, WI Breaking News, Weather and Sports
MADISON (WKOW) -- At the halfway point of 2015, Wisconsin employers have already notified the Department of Workforce Development (DWD) of more planned layoffs than in all of 2014.As of June 30, state employers have notified DWD they will be laying off a total of 6,685 employees. That is higher than the total number for both 2012 (6,511) and 2014 (6,186).At the current pace Wisconsin would see more than 13,000 planned layoffs announced in 2015, the highest of any year under Gov. Scott Walker (R-Wisconsin). The previous high during the Walker administration was just over 9,000 in 2011, his first year in office."We want to do everything we can to help these individuals. I know in Milwaukee we've had a couple," said DWD Secretary Reggie Newson.Layoffs at a Wells Fargo mortgage office and at Assurant Health insurance services in Milwaukee are putting over 2,100 people out of work.While industry experts say the Assurant Health job losses came because the company did not adjust to changes brought on by the Affordable Care Act, Rep. Mandela Barnes said the fact that 45 percent of the statewide layoffs have impacted employees in the Milwaukee area is no surprise."When Wisconsin gets a cold, Milwaukee gets the flu," said Rep. Barnes. "When you look at the number of layoff notices that are being offered, but with no solution coming out of Madison, that's a problem."Rep. Barnes blamed Gov. Walker for implementing weak job creation policies early in his administration, followed by little focus on jobs the past few years."We're seeing a whole host of economically unsound policies being put forth by the Governor," said Rep. Barnes."Well, let me talk about the unemployment rate here in Wisconsin, which is at 4.6%, the lowest it's been since the fall of 2008," Secretary Newson said in response to such criticism.Newson points to that data and the fact that overall job growth is up. Wisconsin added 35,759 jobs in 2014. He did not offer any explanation for rapid spike in layoffs this year."What I'm hearing from employers is they have job openings and opportunities," said Newson.The state records the notifications on the date when they are informed about the layoffs, which can then sometimes take effect over the course of a year or several years afterwards. In some instances, impacted employees are brought back if a company comes under new ownership. Such cases are denoted in DWD records.South Central Wisconsin employers have accounted for just 5 percent of the layoff notices, with none recorded in the southwestern corner of the state.You can find the data through June 26, 2015 and the earlier years here: http://worknet.wisconsin.gov/worknet/downloads.aspx?menuselection=da&pgm=pcml