Updated: New voting statistics show 6,540 people registered to vote in NH last year using out-of-state driver’s licenses as IDs
Report also shows 196 people may have voted in two states in November general election

Updated: New voting statistics show 6,540 people registered to vote in NH last year using out-of-state driver’s licenses as IDs

More than 6,500 people registered to vote on Election Day 2016 using out-of-state driver’s licenses and, as of last week, more than 5,300 of them still had not received New Hampshire licenses, state voting and safety officials said in a new report.

New Hampshire House Speaker Shawn Jasper Thursday released data that responded to a letter he sent to Secretary of State William Gardner and Commissioner of Safety John Barthelmes in mid-August seeking information derived from a new system that matches voting and driving records for the purpose of “verifying the accuracy of the information contained in the voter database.”

Jasper’s letter can be viewed here. The response from the two department heads can be viewed here.

Jasper, R-Hudson, and state Sen. Regina Birdsell, R-Hampstead, who chairs the Senate Election Law Committee, said the most troubling piece of information turned up by the report is that the state’s recently approved participation in an Interstate State Voter Registration Crosscheck Program showed a potential for nearly 200 cases of double-voting.

“We are further analyzing 196 names that appear to have been marked on a New Hampshire checklist and one other state as having voted in the November 2016 general election,” Gardner and Barthelmes wrote. “We will be working with the attorney general to determine next steps and to transfer those cases which are appropriate to the attorney general for investigation.”

Jasper had asked the two department heads for details on individuals who registered to vote compared with individuals who have New Hampshire driver’s licenses.

Among those who registered to vote on Election Day, Nov. 8, approximately 92 percent had a New Hampshire driver’s license as of Aug. 30 of this year, the report said.

The officials wrote that 6,540 individuals registered to vote on Nov. 8 using an out-of-state driver’s license. As of last week, 1,014 of them had received New Hampshire licenses while 213 of the remaining 5,526 individuals had registered a motor vehicle in the state.

But 5,313 of those who registered to vote on Nov. 8 using an out-of-state driver’s license as an ID had neither obtained a New Hampshire license nor registered a motor vehicle in the state as of a week ago. State law requires people who come to live in the state and have a motor vehicle to register that vehicle in the state and obtain a New Hampshire driver’s license within 60 days.

Kobach criticism

(Update:) Those facts prompted Kris Kobach, vice chairman of President Donald Trump's Advisory Commission on Election Integrity, to charge that in last year's close U.S. Senate race in which Democrat Maggie Hassan defeated Republican Kelly Ayotte, "it is highly likely that voting by nonresidents changed the result." Hassan defeated Ayotte by 1,017 votes.

Kobach, the secretary of state of Kansas, made the charge in an opinion piece published late Thursday by the conservative news and opinion site Breitbart, which can be viewed here.

He also opined that "illegal voting by nonresidents" could have pushed Hillary Clinton to win New Hampshire's four electoral votes over Trump. Clinton won the Granite Statec contest by 2,700 votes.

Gardner is a member of the commission and will host the panel's next meeting, scheduled for Tuesday at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics. Kobach will chair the meeting.

After Kobach's piece appeared, Hassan and fellow Democratic Sen. Jeanne Shaheen issued a joint statement blasting Kobach and Trump and urging Gardner to resign from the commission.

The two senators said: "It has been clear since its inception that President Trump's voting commission is an attempt to grossly mislead voters and lay the groundwork for broad-scale, politically motivated voter suppression.

"Now, the head of President Trump's misguided commission is using deceiving and irrelevant data to rehash the same false claims that have been debunked time and again by independent analysis and members of both parties in New Hampshire.

"The law clearly states that college students and other New Hampshire residents can vote without a New Hampshire ID, and these false partisan claims are deliberately twisting the facts.

"Secretary Gardner's association with this partisan commission risks tarnishing his long legacy of fighting for the New Hampshire Primary and promoting voter participation, and it would be in keeping with his distinguished record to immediately relinquish any role with this commission."



Senate Bill 3



Birdsell, meanwhile, noted that a controversial new Republican-passed law known as Senate Bill 3 puts into place a requirement that those registering to vote demonstrate “verifiable acts” that they intend to remain in New Hampshire “so that they have a stake in the result of the election."

That law is currently being challenged in court by the New Hampshire Democratic Party and League of Women Voters.

“There is nothing that I know of that says you have to have a New Hampshire’s driver’s license in order to register to vote," Birdsell said. "But to me the most important piece of this is the 196 people who may have potentially voted in two places, and that is why I voted for and got the crosscheck program passed.”

“College students are eligible to vote if they declare domicile here, but anybody who does that then has to comply with the laws of the state,” he said. “If someone is domiciled in New Hampshire (and has a vehicle), then within 60 days, they need to obtain a driver’s license. I think we will find that within that 5,000, there will be many who did not comply with the law.”

The report said that among the 5,313 people without New Hampshire licenses or vehicle registrations, “it is likely that some unknown number of these individuals moved out of New Hampshire. It is possible that a few may have never driven in New Hampshire or have ceased driving. However, it is expected that an unknown number of the remainder continue to live and drive in New Hampshire.”

The report points out, however, that under a state Supreme Court decision issued in 2015, “a person maybe domiciled in New Hampshire for voting purposes and be a resident of another state for motor vehicle/driver’s license purposes.”

Affidavits for ID purposes

Under current state law, those who do not present a valid photo ID when voting or registering to vote sign affidavits.

The report says that in January, the secretary of state’s office sent 1,423 letters to voters who, rather than show IDs, signed challenged voter affidavits, swearing to their New Hampshire addresses in order to vote in the 2016 state primary and general elections. Of those, 978 were properly returned by the recipients and 311 more addresses were verified by election officials.

But 58 envelopes were returned as “not delivered,” and there were no responses from 71 more.

The report said that also in January, follow-up letters were sent by the secretary of state to 6,033 people who had signed domicile affidavits to register to vote between May and December, but 458 follow-up letters were not delivered to the address provided.

The report acknowledged that no follow-up letter was sent to any forwarding address provided by the U.S. Postal Service.

The report said that also in January, the secretary of state’s office sent letters to 764 people who had signed qualified voter affidavits, rather than show IDs, in order to register to vote in the state primary or general election. Of those, 377 were delivered to the addresses but the voters did not return the enclosed postcards and 63 more were returned by the Postal Service as not delivered.

Jasper said that overall: “We wanted to see how much progress we’ve made now that we have data that we were not able to collect previously. This has been a continuous process to gather information about what’s going on with our elections, and this certainly provides us with some very interesting and, in some cases, troubling information.”

“There can be no conclusions drawn regarding the driver's licenses, other than for whatever reason, those people didn’t stay in the state or didn’t comply with the law or never were actually residents of the state,” he said. “We won’t know that, and of course, 5,000 is a huge number.”

Jasper agreed with Birdsell that most concerning statistic was the 196 names and addresses that turned up in two states.

“I think we can safely assume that some of those people committed crimes,” Jasper said. “This is continuing and these are just the facts without drawing conclusions. There will be initial investigations through the secretary of state’s office, and then they will gather the facts and present facts to the attorney general, who will then decide whether to move forward with charges.”

Democrats charge ‘selective data, misinformation’

Democrats blasted the report as an attempt to use “selective data and misinformation” to try to show that there is a voter fraud problem in the state when no such problem exists.

State Democratic Party Chairman Raymond Buckley said Jasper was trying to justify Trump’s unsubstantiated claims that he lost the general election in New Hampshire because thousands of people were bused into the state from Massachusetts to vote illegally.

Buckley said Jasper “selectively requested information about voters who registered with out-of-state licenses, an entirely legal and normal practice. They can easily be accounted for by college students and other new Granite Staters who deferred acquiring an in-state license or don't intend to drive in the state.”

State Senate Democratic Leader Jeff Woodburn said: “Using cherry-picked data in order to support a false claim is dangerous and irresponsible. Today’s release of information by Speaker Jasper’s office fans the flames of misinformation in order to further suppress our citizens’ right to vote.

“The fact of the matter is that there is no requirement to obtain a New Hampshire driver’s license or register your car in order to exercise your constitutionally protected right to vote. Even the restrictive Senate Bill 3 passed by Republicans earlier this year does not force a voter to obtain a New Hampshire license or register their car in New Hampshire.”

Jasper said the Democrats' criticism is “demonstrably false. If you look at my history, this is something that I have been working on for more than 10 years. I sponsored the bill that required the affidavit cards that need to be returned. I was very involved in legislation requiring photo IDs.

“This has been a passion of mine for many years. These are logical questions to ask and we are just asking that the facts be presented. It has nothing to do with President Trump.”

AlertMe