Bush media party now 'Holiday Reception'
Presidential press secretary Scott McClellan today responded to a question about why the president’s traditional Christmas party for journalists had been changed to a “Holiday Reception,” saying the Bushes “welcome people of all faiths.”

At the White House press briefing, WND asked McClellan why this year’s invitation to media representatives did not reference, as it has in the past, Christmas.

“Given the recent statement by Speaker Hastert emphasizing Christmas, I am compelled to ask why the Bush White House has eliminated Christmas and replaced it with the world ‘holiday,'” queried WND.

“This is a time to welcome people of all faiths, and all those who are celebrating the holiday season,” McClellan responded. “The president just yesterday dedicated the National Christmas Tree to our men and women in uniform. … And all of us can take part in different ways to celebrate the holiday season and remember those who are in harm’s way and remember those who have lost their lives over the course of the past year.”

As WorldNetDaily reported, at last night’s tree lighting ceremony, Bush did not refer to Christ, though he made a joke alluding to him:

“Each year, we gather here to celebrate the season of hope and joy – and to remember the story of one humble life that lifted the sights of humanity. Santa, thanks for coming. Glad you made it. I know you’ve got a lot of commitments this time of year. By the way, we have a lot of chimneys at the White House if you’re looking for something to do.”

In dedicating an evergreen in the White House Blue Room this week, first lady Laura Bush referred to it as a Christmas tree.

Related special offers:

It’s here: ‘CRIMINALIZING CHRISTIANITY’

The books WND fans are gobbling up this season

“Christianity and the American Commonwealth”

John Gibson’s “The War on Christmas”

Avoid the crowds – finish shopping from home at WND’s Christmas Store!

More great Christmas ideas from WND

Related stories:

Bracelets urge: ‘Just say Merry Christmas’

Boycott of Target over next Christmas

Previous stories:

Dreaming of a White House ‘Christmas’

Bush White House’s Christ-less Christmas

Christmas in America becomes battleground

Another school censoring Christmas?

‘Merry Christmas’ boycott targets Sears

‘Christmas’ trees vs. ‘Holiday’ trees

District prohibits Christmas colors

School district backs down, will allow Christmas cards

School censors Christmas from student performance

Christmas music banned, then unbanned from bus

Principal cancels dramatization of ‘A Christmas Carol’

Denver backtracks on Christmas sign

District bans instrumental Christmas carols

Christmas card with ‘Jesus’ banned

Christmas CD banned for mentioning Jesus

Teacher takes ‘Christmas’ out of carol

Students threatened by Christmas?

‘No Christian symbols at Christmas’

School bans Christmas, but OK with Halloween

School bans saying ‘Christmas’

Ban on Christmas leads to court fight

Christmas book banned from class