Poverty Overview
There is no silver bullet to ending poverty, and strategies to reach the least well-off must be tailored to each country’s context, taking into account the latest data and analysis and the needs of the people. The fact that there has been such progress in the world, however, tells us that a few things are working. Experience shows that to sustainably reduce poverty, countries need to:

Grow in an inclusive, labor-intensive way.

Invest in the human capital of people, especially those who are unable to benefit from basic services due to circumstances beyond their control.

Insure poor and vulnerable people against the shocks that can push them deeper into poverty—things such as severe weather, pandemics, food price variability, and economic crises.

The World Bank Group’s goal to end extreme poverty within a generation has the specific target of decreasing the global extreme poverty rate to no more than 3 percent by 2030, since a small amount of frictional poverty is likely to persist. Important national and global challenges are standing in the way of progress and are keeping large pockets of people trapped in poverty. High inequality, in both incomes and opportunities, threatens the world’s ability to end poverty by 2030. Conflict can undo decades of progress, as can climate change and a lack of women’s economic empowerment and participation.

It will be important to promote growth that is sustained and inclusive; to create more and better jobs; to invest in people’s health, education, nutrition, and sanitation; and to develop effective safety net programs to ensure that the most vulnerable can persevere in the face of shocks. While economic growth is vital, the quality of that growth also matters.

With more than 60 percent of the world’s extreme poor living in middle-income countries, we cannot focus solely on low-income countries if we want to end extreme poverty by 2030. We need to focus on the poorest people, regardless of where they live, and work with countries at all income levels to invest in their well-being and their future.

This goal to end poverty works hand in hand with the World Bank Group’s goal to promote shared prosperity , focused on increasing the income growth among the bottom 40 percent in every country. Boosting shared prosperity broadly translates into improving the welfare of the least well-off in each country, and includes a strong emphasis on tackling persistent inequalities that keep people in poverty from generation to generation.

This is no easy task, and the road ahead will not be simple or straightforward, but this is at the core of what we do every day at the World Bank Group, and we will continue to work closely with countries to help them find the best ways improve the lives of their least advantaged citizens.

Last Updated: Apr 03, 2019