Cairo students set record straight after candidate makes negative comments

CAIRO, IL – A comment from an Illinois gubernatorial candidate upset many at a local school. Democrat Chris Kennedy recently blamed Cairo’s issues as a community on its school system during a recent interview with the Southern Illinoisan.

Cairo High School students are speaking out about this remark Kennedy made about Cairo schools: “Zero percent of kids in Cairo are college-ready. Seventy-five percent of high school graduates need remedial education,” said Kennedy. “The problem with Cairo is not with the housing authority. It’s with the school. It needs to be fully funded by the state.”

Now, the students are setting the record straight about the quality of their education.

“I’ve been accepted to SIU, SIUE, Tennessee State University, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Culver Stockton, and DePaul University. Oh, and Spartan College,” said Mack Hicks.

In fact, most of the students who spoke up on Wednesday have been accepted to several colleges and offered scholarships. Coming from a town that has seen its share of struggle, the teens said they are unfazed by the negative comments.

“It doesn’t bother us. He needs us as a vote. We are 18 and able to vote. So, just by him saying that, he just lost some votes. It’s not hurting us. It’s hurting him,” said class president Ke’Ron Jackson.

The students said they were a little confused about Kennedy’s comment because, according to the superintendent, 42 percent of the students will enter colleges and universities as sophomores, rather than freshmen. The senior class has 24 students, and 18 of those students have at least 1 college offer. So, they said something about his math doesn’t add up

“What person that is seeking the highest job in the state would even form his lips to say something like this? (It) shows us he is not ready to be our governor,” said Mayor Pro Tem Connie Williams.

“I actually want to thank him for doubting us. It’s going to push me further right now. It makes me think: If he doesn’t think I can make it, I got to prove him wrong,” said senior Shamari Smith.

After graduation, the students plan to let their success do the talking. The students invited Chris Kennedy to attend their high school graduation on May 19.

Kennedy had this to say about his statement in the newspaper: “I see the promise and potential of our students, our teachers, and our public schools, then I see the failing of the state government to adequately provide them the resources. It is the fault of Springfield that only 6 percent of Cairo Jr/Sr High School students haven’t met college readiness levels. In fact, 0 percent are college ready when it comes to math. That isn’t the fault of the students or the teachers. It’s the fault of a failed state government. I am going to change that by funding our schools with a progressive income tax instead of local property taxes which shortchange our students and our schools. It’s time for a change.”

Local 6 reached out to Kennedy’s team for a comment, and they said his statement was based on SAT data.