Conflict-Free Mineral Exports on the Rise -Enough Project
Workers unload newly excavated rock samples from a shipping container before sorting and identifying at the Kibali gold mine in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Photo: Bloomberg News

Companies are buying fewer minerals connected to militia groups in the Democratic Republic of Congo, according to the Enough Project, a human rights group.

Enough found that armed groups control less of the trade in tin, tungsten and tantalum in the DRC than they did five or 10 years ago. That means more of the metals - used in everything from wedding rings to soup cans to cell phones - can be considered conflict free, the group said in a report released Tuesday.

Large swaths of the DRC have been gripped by a violent civil war for the last two decades, and rebel groups and factions of the Congolese Army have benefited financially from the illegal trafficking of conflict minerals.

The group credited the Dodd-Frank financial reform passed in 2010, which included a provision requiring publicly traded companies to disclose whether any products containing the three metals plus gold were connected to militia groups in the country. The requirement led to tighter regulation and increased production of conflict-free minerals, Enough said.

top logistics news Get the latest logistics and supply chain news and analysis via an email newsletter. Sign up here.

For example, in 2015, Eastern Congo exported 948 tons of certified conflict-free tantalum, a mineral used in the circuitry of the Playstation 4 and other video game systems. That was a record, and a 19% increase over 2014, the report said. Enough has found that more of the region’s tin and tungsten is being certified as conflict-free as well, though gold mining continues to fund armed conflict in the region.

“More mines are getting assessed, so more material is coming out of those mines,” said Holly Dranginis, a senior policy analyst at Enough and author of the report. “A lot of big companies have really shouldered a heavy load on understanding their supply chains and doing better due diligence.”

Ms. Dranginis said that the push towards eliminating the controversial minerals has been led by the tech industry, including companies like Intel Corp. and Apple Inc., which have sent delegations to Africa and audited their supply chains to root out producers that use profits to fund armed conflicts.

Enough found that extortion and illegal taxation of gold continues to fund the Congolese Army, and noted in its report that miners have yet to develop a system to certify conflict-free gold. Ms. Dranginis said this is partly because gold is more valuable and therefore easily smuggled in small quantities.

‘There’s been better information and better insight in the supply chain for those companies that do have the desire to move towards more conflict-free products.’ —Bobby Kipp, PwC.

A report last year from Tulane University and the consulting firm Assent Compliance found that despite spending $709 million in 2014 on compliance efforts, 90% of the 1,262 companies that filed conflict-minerals reports with securities regulators said they were unable to determine whether their products were conflict-free.

Bobby Kipp, who heads up the conflict minerals solutions practice at PwC, said progress is being made, but noted efforts to eradicate the materials suffered a blow in August, when a federal appeals court ruled that companies could not be forced to disparage their own products by reporting that they were unable to determine if they were conflict-free.

“There’s been better information and better insight in the supply chain for those companies that do have the desire to move towards more conflict-free products,” she said. But “it’s going to be very hard to tell going forward whether companies are making progress. Some companies are going to choose to make a disclosure, and a lot of companies are going to continue to not make it.”

Write to Robbie Whelan at robbie.whelan@wsj.com