Case Studies
McKesson Medical-Surgical Adds 225 Jobs in Henrico County McKesson Medical-Surgical will invest $10 million to expand its divisional headquarters in Henrico County and relocate to a 168,500-square-foot facility at Deep Run III that was recently renovated by Markel|Eagle Partners. The project will add 225 new jobs in the region. McKesson Medical-Surgical has operated in Henrico County since 1998 and currently employs a staff of nearly 600 in the region. The company provides supplies and equipment to physicians’ offices, home-care agencies, long-term care facilities and surgery centers. It is an affiliate of McKesson Corp., a publicly-traded (NYSE: MCK) healthcare services and information technology company currently ranked 15 on the Fortune 500. "This new, state-of-the-art headquarters will create a collaborative workspace that helps us attract and retain the top talent we need to grow our business and better serve our customers as we work to improve healthcare in the U.S.," said Stanton McComb, President, McKesson Medical-Surgical. "McKesson Medical-Surgical is proud to be a Top-50 employer in Richmond and I look forward to McKesson’s continued investment in Virginia." Pharmaceutical, medical device and biotechnology firms are increasingly choosing Virginia. To learn why more than 800 life science establishments are located in the Commonwealth, click here. Lindenburg Industry Invests $113 Million in Appomattox County

Lindenburg Industry LLC announced it will invest $113 million in its first U.S. manufacturing operation in Appomattox County, creating 349 new jobs. After an extensive search across the U.S., the company located a facility in Appomattox that met all of their requirements and will allow the company to quickly ramp up to production. This project is a result of Governor McAuliffe’s meeting with company officials in China during VEDP’s Asia Marketing Mission. Lindenburg’s industrial honeycomb manufacturing facility will produce industrial environmental control components used in clean-air emissions. Its parent company, EagleRide Investment Holdings Ltd., is a world-leading investment holdings company based in China. The company will use the Port of Virginia to export its finished products to China. "This location provides us with an excellent business environment and the workforce talent we require to be successful," said Stella Li, CEO of Lindenburg Industry and CTO of EagleRide Investment Holdings Ltd. "We are greatly appreciative of the support that the Town of Appomattox, Appomattox County, the State of Virginia and Dominion Virginia Power have provided in making this project come to fruition." More than 5,600 manufacturing companies have chosen Virginia for its highly skilled workforce, logistical advantages and infrastructure. To learn why manufacturers have invested more than $13.7 billion in the Commonwealth over the last ten years, click here.

Monogram Food Solutions Adds 200 New Jobs in Henry County

Monogram Food Solutions will add 54,000 square feet to its meat snacks production facility in the Henry County Patriot Centre Industrial Park. The $36 million investment will bring 200 new jobs to the Southern Virginia region. The company was founded in 2004 when investors purchased the King Cotton and Circle B Brand meats business from Sara Lee Corporation. Monogram Foods produces a variety of private-label meat snacks, smoked meats, corn dogs and pre-cooked bacon, as well as selling under its brands, which include Wild Bill’s, O’Brien’s, Trail’s Best, Hannah’s, Bull’s and licensed brands Bass Pro Shop’s Uncle Buck’s, Johnsonville and Butterball. "The workforce in Martinsville has been outstanding, and, because of this, we are expanding now for the third time," said Karl Schledwitz, Chairman and CEO of Monogram Food Solutions. "When we purchased the facility in 2009, there were about 125 associates. This expansion will take employment to over 600. We love the Martinsville workforce, as they are hard workers and are committed to product quality, people safety and excellent customer service." Food processing companies love Virginia, making it the Commonwealth’s second largest manufacturing sector. To learn why more than 580 food processing companies call Virginia home, click here.

<< Back to Yes Virginia Insider