Melania Trump Hired Exorcist To ‘Cleanse White House Of Obama Demons’
First Lady Melania Trump demanded the White House undergo a complete exorcism, with “pagan idols and demonic artifacts” from “the Clinton and Obama years” removed from the premises before she would set foot in the building, according to White House pastor Paul Begley.

“I’m not going to go into that White House unless it has been completely exorcised,” Melania Trump told Pastor Begley.

“They cleansed the White House,” the pastor said. “They had people in there anointing it with oil and praying everywhere.”

After the First Lady had finished removing pagan and demonic items, only one thing was left – a cross on the wall. The White House is now free of all pagan gods and idols, and contains only Christian iconography.

“Because apparently during the eight years when Obama was there, and maybe even some of the presidents before him, there were all kinds of idol gods and images and all kinds of artifacts in there that were demonic, even some of the stuff from the Clinton era,” Begley said.

The White House pastor then related that the First Lady said, “‘You’ve got to get all of that out of there and send in some preachers and priests‘” – she wanted respected Christian leaders — to go in and cleanse the White House or, ‘I will not spend one night in it.’”

“I have to say, when the president allowed 40 pastors to come in to the White House and anoint him with oil and lay their hands and pray on him—seven times he’s done this—that is unheard of,” Begley said. “We haven’t ever – the guy’s got flaws, we all do. But at least he is humble enough and recognizing that he needs God enough that he keeps bringing them in for the prayer.”

Pastor Begley made his remarks during the Feb. 2 edition of Weekend Vigilante, hosted by Sheila Zilinsky.

In his book, My Life, former president Bill Clinton confessed that he and Hillary hosted a voodoo ceremony where an alleged “spirit arrived,” possessed participants walked on hot coals and burnt their flesh with fire, and at one point, a person bit the head off a living chicken.

A Wikileaks classified email released in 2016 also exposed Hillary Clinton for what she really is – an occultist who bows down to Moloch, the same pagan god they perform human sacrifice rituals for at the annual Bohemian Grove meetings.

In a Clinton email from August 29 2008 published by Wikileaks, a senior government staffer writes to Hillary Clinton, “With fingers crossed, the old rabbit’s foot out of the box in the attic, I will be sacrificing a chicken in the backyard to Moloch . . .”

Later that year Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman John Podesta was also exposed dabbling in the occult. WikiLeaks emails revealed he and his brother Tony fraternized with Marina Abramovich at Satanic “spirit cooking” dinner parties, featuring pig’s blood, countless human fluids, and mock human sacrifices.

With previous tenants like the Clintons and Obamas, and the kind of company those families kept, it is no wonder Melania Trump demanded the White House undergo a full exorcism before she set foot in the building.