Youngest World Leader Bans George Soros’s Foundations From Austria
The world’s youngest leader, newly-elected Sebastian Kurz, has informed George Soros that his Open Society Foundation has 28 days to cease and desist operations in Austria or face legal action for “attempting to undermine the democracy of the nation.”

31-year-old Sebastian Kurz, Austria’s youngest ever leader, has told colleagues that action must be taken immediately, after news broke that George Soros has donated $18 billion of his $24 billion dollar fortune to his Open Society Foundation.

“The situation has become critical,” Kurz said. “Soros is throwing everything he has behind his push for global control. Misinformation and media manipulation has already increased exponentially overnight. We have no room for complacency.“

Kurz, a self-described truther who says he was “red pilled” by the 9/11 film Loose Change, claims that he understands the Soros agenda, and “there is no way in hell this country will be his fifth victim.”

It is understood the Austrian chancellor is referring to the number of national economies Soros has crashed in order to gain enormous personal profit and political influence.

Asked why he was banning George Soros’s Open Society Foundations, Kurz said, “Because it’s 2017.“

The news that Soros has released 75% of his vast fortune to push his political and social agenda has caused shockwaves around the world, with many democratically elected leaders expressing fear that the sheer weight of his billions, used to buy politicians and journalists, will be difficult to fight against.

Kurz agrees. This is why he has taken fast action.

“The specter of Soros is the greatest challenge humanity is facing in the world in 2017. He is a great vampire squid wrapped around the face of humanity, relentlessly jamming his blood funnel into anything that smells like money, using this money to corrupt politicians, journalists and the public sector, and attempting to create the world in his image.

“The people of Austria have rejected the New World Order, and it is my duty and my privilege to uphold their will.”