Serial blasts target Modi's rally at Patna's Gandhi Maidan, 5 dead
In the first such attack in Patna, five people were killed and over 70 injured when serial blasts targeted Narendra Modi's rally in the state capital's Gandhi Maidan.

While six of the blasts occured around the rally venue, two bombs went off within 150 metres of the platform from where Modi delivered his speech. The last bomb went off at 12.25 pm — 20 minutes before Modi and top BJP leaders took the stage.

Four live bombs were later discovered near the rally venue. Though the Bihar Police did not call it a terror attack, Director General of Police Abhayanand confirmed the use of IED and timers. Intelligence sources also hinted at the use of ammonium nitrate, detonators, timer device and iron nails.

MoS (Home) R P N Singh told The Indian Express that it was too early to draw any conclusions regarding the identity of the attackers. "I can't say whether it was a terror attack or political conspiracy. Only after the investigation will we be able to tell anything."

One person, whose identity was not revealed, has been arrested and police claimed to have seized important documents from him.

Three of the five who died have been identified as Ramnarain Singh from Gaurichak near Patna, Vikas Singh from Kaimur and Munna Srivastava from Mirganj, Gopalganj. Whether they were political activists or had just come for the rally is yet to be determined. Most of the injured were attending the rally.

Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who spoke to Chief Minister Nitish Kumar condemned the blasts and appealed for calm. Home Ministry officials said there was no specific alert about the rally and it was solely up to the state government to decide what kind of arrangements were to be made. The Union Home Ministry had recently sent an advisory to all poll-bound states to maintain vigilance at election rallies.

... contd.

Please read our terms of use before posting comments

TERMS OF USE: The views, opinions and comments posted are your, and are not endorsed by this website. You shall be solely responsible for the comment posted here. The website reserves the right to delete, reject, or otherwise remove any views, opinions and comments posted or part thereof. You shall ensure that the comment is not inflammatory, abusive, derogatory, defamatory &/or obscene, or contain pornographic matter and/or does not constitute hate mail, or violate privacy of any person (s) or breach confidentiality or otherwise is illegal, immoral or contrary to public policy. Nor should it contain anything infringing copyright &/or intellectual property rights of any person(s).