Mr. Flaherty, get CPP increase right off the stove
Watching the U.S. fiscal cliff negotiations over the holidays was fascinating on many levels. While most Canadians know we are affected by the decisions made by the United States government, I’m not sure we’ve paid close enough attention to a major political and economic discussion the Canadian government had in December.

The recent meeting of federal, provincial and territorial finance ministers on the future of the Canada Pension Plan (CPP) can have far greater long-term consequences for us all.

To push back against growing concern about the massive unfunded liabilities of public sector pensions, Canadian unions in 2010 successfully lobbied the finance ministers to consider expanding CPP. Cooler heads prevailed. Given the shaky economy, Federal Finance Minister Jim Flaherty and the finance ministers of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Quebec put this issue on the back burner.

Recognizing the legitimate issue of ensuring middle-income Canadians save enough for their own retirements, the finance ministers proposed Pooled Registered Pensions Plans (PRPPs). Federal legislation to allow small businesses to offer simple, low-cost and payroll-tax exempt pensions was passed and proclaimed. Sadly, provinces need to do the same before PRPPs can be rolled out.

Some provincial governments — led by Ontario Finance Minister Dwight Duncan — blocked progress by calling for a mandatory hike in CPP premiums. This takes us to the recent meeting of ministers where it appears CPP was put back on the front-burner.

While there were a variety of CPP expansion proposals on the table, it appears ministers are considering a 10-year phased-in hike to both the benefit levels and the maximum pensionable earnings amount. One scenario suggested benefit levels would rise by 40% and premiums would be paid up to $60,000 in income — 20% more than now.

This double-whammy payroll tax hike could mean many Canadians see their take home pay drop each year on Jan. 1 for 10 consecutive years. And that isn’t an exaggeration. With employers and employees now each contributing 5% of an employee’s pay into CPP, a rate increase would mean employees would need a raise larger than the hike to ensure take-home doesn’t drop. Employers — already struggling with a soft economy and annual hikes in Employment Insurance premiums — would see their payroll budget climb, too. In response to an increase in CPP, 40% of small companies said they would freeze or cut salaries; another 18% said they would be forced to lay-off employees.

Why risk the country’s economic recovery by putting a heavier burden on the shoulders of small businesses?

I find it shocking finance ministers would consider a mandatory hike in payroll taxes before giving PRPPs a chance, but it appears many are set to agree to one in June. The Canadian Federation of Independent Business appreciates that Minister Flaherty has insisted the ministers agree on certain economic triggers before increasing premiums, small businesses are counting on him to take CPP expansion off the stove altogether. Greater clarity from the Federal government is needed on whether it considers a CPP expansion appropriate, particularly in advance of launching PRPPs. Provinces also need to give PRPPs a chance.

In a recent survey, a third of Canadian small businesses told us they would consider offering PRPPs in their workplace once the plan is in place. With the increasing shortage of labour, a low-cost pension vehicle may be just what the doctor ordered. However, for companies struggling to meet payroll today, no new pension plan — voluntary or mandatory — would be possible. A round of CPP hikes might actually force wage cuts, layoffs or even closures. CFIB data shows even a percentage point increase in CPP premiums would cost 220,000 person-years of employment and force wages down about 2.5% in the long run.

Small and medium-sized businesses make up 60% of Canada’s employment. While large firms shed massive numbers of jobs during the recession, small companies held employment levels relatively constant. Small businesses agree more is needed to help Canadians — particularly middle-income earners — save for retirement. However, at a time when Canada needs jobs, growth and opportunity, why risk the country’s economic recovery by putting a heavier burden on the shoulders of small businesses? Finance ministers, we’re counting on you.

CFIB’s fourth annual Red Tape Awareness Week (Jan. 21-25) is fast approaching, and this year’s promises to be a big one. We’re calling on fed up Canadians to join the Red Tape Revolution by signing our online petition at www.cfib.ca/redtape. If you think small business owners should spend their time serving customers and creating jobs rather than filling out unnecessary paperwork, make your voice heard.

Dan Kelly is president of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business and lead spokesman and advocate for the views of CFIB’s 109,000 small and medium-sized member businesses across Canada. Follow Dan on Twitter @CFIB and learn more about CFIB at www.cfib.ca.