Chrystia Freeland: “Our sovereignty has not been limited by this clause in any way, this is optics only.” - FactsCanada
Joseph Morris

By: Jacob Schroeder on November 10, 2018

The new United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement contains a clause that requires signatories to notify each other if they enter into free trade agreements with non-market economies, such as China. This is a new obligation not previously in NAFTA and is technically a limit of sovereignty. However, practically speaking, it may have negligible impact and change little about the status quo.

The Liberals announced the pending replacement to NAFTA, the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement or USMCA, last month. A new provision that grabbed attention was section 32.10, which requires the US, Mexico and Canada to notify each other if they are entering into free trade negotiations with a “non-market economy.” This prompted criticism that Canada was restricting its capacity to enter into free trade negotiations with China.

Speaking on CBC’s The House, Chrystia Freeland, Canada’s foreign affairs minister, responded to these criticisms, stating that Canada’s “sovereignty has not been limited by this clause in any way, this is optics only.”

What exactly does the contested section require? Would it actually impact Canada’s ability to enter into free trade agreements with non-market economies such as China – or other sovereign rights – or is it only optics like Freeland claims?

Non-market economies

A non-market economy is defined by the World Trade Organization as a country where the government has complete or near complete monopoly on trade. A non-market economy is defined in the USMCA as a country that at least one USMCA country has determined to be a non-market economy for the purpose of its trade remedy laws. For example, countries may classify another this way in their anti-dumping provisions within the WTO.

Unlike the US, Canada and Mexico don’t always classify China as a non-market economy. Debra Steger, a law professor at the University of Ottawa, explained, “Canada and Mexico appear to be applying China’s WTO Protocol correctly, which requires an examination of Chinese exporting companies in anti-dumping cases to determine whether or not they are market-oriented.” Steger noted that WTO rules no longer permit a presumption that companies from a particular country are non-market oriented, however, the US and the European Union do still apply this presumption to China.

USMCA Section 32.10

This section has three main features.

1) If a signatory is going to negotiate a free trade agreement with a non-market economy, it must notify the other USMCA signatories three months prior to beginning negotiations;

2) A negotiating signatory must provide the other signatories with as much information as possible about the objectives of the negotiations and 30 days prior to signing an agreement, must give a copy of the agreement to the other USMCA signatories; and

3) If a signatory then enters into a free trade agreement with a non-market economy, the other USMCA signatories may then, with 6 months’ notice, withdraw from the trilateral USMCA and replace it with a bilateral trade agreement with each other.

Are these new provisions? Not all of them. Some restate existing rights under NAFTA and some are in fact new.

According to Andrew Newcombe, law professor at the University of Victoria, the obligation to inform trading partners about negotiations is a new requirement under the USMCA and was not present under NAFTA. He points out though, that this is a process obligation and does not limit the right to negotiate.

What doesn’t change is the ability of a country to withdraw from the agreement. Both Newcombe and Steger point out that countries already had the ability to withdraw from NAFTA with 6 months’ notice.

The sovereignty question

So do these new requirements limit Canada’s sovereignty? Two core features of sovereignty, according to the legal scholars John Currie, Craig Forcese and Valerie Oosterveld, are autonomy in internal and foreign affairs.

Newcombe says that any treaty obligation, from a pure international law perspective, does limit sovereignty. Significance of the limitation is arguable, however, and may be political too.

For example, Newcombe questioned if Freeland might instead emphasize the impact of such a provision if notification was required for human rights or gender issues. According to Armand de Mestral, a law professor at the University of McGill, it’s speculative to say what the impact of a notification under section 32.10 would be as it would depend on the politics of the governments in place.

On the other hand, notification might not make much of a difference as the USMCA signatories may share information about each others’ trade negotiations anyways. Additionally, Steger said she doubts that any USMCA country would actually withdraw on this basis.

Verdict

Freeland claims that section 32.10 does not limit Canada’s sovereignty and is purely optics. While Newcombe pointed out that any obligation is technically a limit on sovereignty, we’re asking whether, practically speaking, Canada is more constrained. What section 32.10 adds is the obligation to inform. Given that the USMCA countries would likely already share news about their trade negotiations and that this is about information only, we rate Freeland’s claim as true.

That being said, it’s possible that Freeland’s statement is contradictory. As de Mestral pointed out, we can’t say how the notification would be used on a political level. So we add the caveat that even if it is a matter of optics, optics can still be consequential.

See how we score.