Justin Trudeau: "It took [Harper] only three years to put Canada back into deficit, and that was ahead of the recession." - FactsCanada
Alex Guibord

By: Hugh Verrier on May 19, 2015

The first federal deficit under Stephen Harper was logged for April 2008 to March 2009, overlapping with the Canadian onset of the recent global recession sometime between October 2008 and March 2009.

The Liberals did not support the federal budget tabled in April. In a budget day speech in the House, Justin Trudeau criticized Conservative fiscal management and said “it took [Stephen Harper] only three years to put Canada back into deficit, and that was ahead of the recession.”

This check is not about the causes of the deficit, only its timing. To address the Liberal leader’s claim, two answers are needed: When did a deficit first occur under the Harper government? And when did the recent global recession begin in Canada?

First, it’s important to understand a deficit. In this context, Trudeau is referring to a budget balance – revenue minus expenses – within an accounting period. When revenue is equal to or greater than expenses, there is a budget surplus. When revenue is less than expenses, it’s a budget deficit.

For a budget deficit to occur ahead of the recession, the accounting period for the deficit should precede the recession.

1) The start of the recession

Many will mark the dawn of the recent global recession as the day the investment bank Lehman Brothers collapsed in the middle of September 2008. But what was happening in the United States spread at an uneven pace across the globe.

The start date in Canada depends on the definition, becauses there are various ways to define a recession.

The first is a simple and often-used rule of thumb that an economy is in recession at the beginning of two consecutive quarters (totalling six months) of decline in real GDP. The second is an expert judgement based on analysis of a broad range of economic indicators. For example, the American National Bureau of Economic Research defines a recession as “a period of falling economic activity spread across the economy, lasting more than a few months, normally visible in real GDP, real income, employment, industrial production, and wholesale-retail sales.”

The two-quarter rule puts the start of Canada’s recession in the fourth quarter of 2008-2009, or from January 1 to March 31. According to Statistics Canada data, Canada experienced three consecutive quarters of GDP contraction from January 1, 2009 to September 30, 2009.

The expert judgement rule provides slightly different results. The C.D. Howe Institute concluded that the recession began in November 2008. This falls in the third quarter of the 2008-2009 fiscal year – or two months before the start of the recession according to the two-quarter rule. A government report, Public Accounts of Canada 2009, concluded that “Canadian economic growth began to slow in 2008 and by the fourth quarter [or January to March 2009], the Canadian economy entered a recession.”

A conservative conclusion is that the recession started somewhere in the third and fourth quarters of the 2008 fiscal year. That is, somewhere between October 1, 2008 and March 31, 2009.

2) Stephen Harper’s first deficit

To find the first deficit, we look at the annual accounting period, made up of four quarters, and not the first quarterly or monthly deficit. There are a few reasons for this. One is that monthly deficits can be naturally volatile. The Fiscal Monitor, a Department of Finance publication, explained in 2008 that financial volatility can occur “on a monthly basis due to variations in the timing of significant payments or receipts.” Plus, the cumulative monthly balances often diverge significantly from the annual fiscal reports, according to another Fiscal Monitor report.

The same problem applies to quarterly numbers. From 2005 to 2014, the federal government consistently ran a large first-quarter deficit, even in years that saw an annual surplus. For example, in the surplus year of 2005, the first-quarter deficit was $9.4 billion. So it’s difficult to show that a first-quarter deficit predicts an annual deficit.

And even if we assume that monthly and quarterly budgets are a useful measure of good fiscal policy, Trudeau preceded his claim with reference to “a $13 billion surplus” that is based on annual data for 2006. It would be misleading to criticize a Harper-era monthly deficit on the basis of a preceding annual surplus.

Looking at full years then, Department of Finance records show the Harper government logged its first annual deficit in the fiscal year 2008-2009, which refers to the accounting period of April 1, 2008 to March 31, 2009.

This overlaps with the start of the recession using either definition above, meaning that Trudeau’s claim is incorrect. Harper incurred his first annual deficit in part during, and not before, the recession.

See how we score.