Maxime Bernier: "The Global Compact for Migration commits Canada to developing all kinds of programs to deal with migration" and "ensure they have jobs." - FactsCanada
Maxime Bernier Facebook account

By: Nojan Kamoosi on November 17, 2018

The compact does not commit Canada to implement any programs, as it is not a legally enforceable agreement. The compact’s clauses on work do not require signatory countries to ensure the availability of jobs; those clauses merely encourage countries to ensure that the work available to migrants is “decent” and free from coercion.

Maxime Bernier , Independent MP for Beauce and leader of the People's Party, on Twitter on November 2, 2018

Maxime Bernier, the leader of the recently formed People’s Party of Canada, sponsored a petition last month which seeks to withdraw Canada from the United Nations’ Global Compact For Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. Shortly after, Bernier tweeted that the compact “commits Canada to developing all kinds of programs to deal with migration, give migrants extensive social services, equal rights, ensure they have jobs, prevent discrimination against them, etc. In short, spend $B to deal with more migration.”

Bernier did not respond for comment, so we don’t know precisely what he meant when he said the compact “commits” Canada. But a reasonable reading is that the compact would legally require Canada to implement certain programs or laws.

In this check, we look specifically at whether the compact will commit Canada to ensuring that migrants have jobs. We also provide some context on the rest of Bernier’s statement.

What is the compact and when did it come into force?

The compact is described by the UN as a “global agreement on a common approach to international migration in all its dimensions.” It has 23 objectives aimed at managing migration on a local, national and global level. The countries of the UN, which include Canada, agreed upon the final text in July 2018. However, Canada is not set to formally sign and adopt the compact until an international conference set for December 10-11 of this year.

Does the compact create legal requirements for Canada?

The commitments in the compact are completely voluntary. Even after Canada formally signs onto the agreement in December, it will not be committed by the compact to implement any new programs or laws.

Sharryn Aiken, an immigration law expert at Queen’s University, explained that the compact is “not legally binding.” There’s key wording in clause 7, she said, which states that the compact is a “non-legally binding, cooperative framework that builds on the commitments agreed upon by Member States.” Ted McDorman, an international law expert at the University of Victoria, also noted the impact of clause 7. He explained, “as a technical matter Canada is not obligated or required to do anything … at best Canada would be politically committing to certain things but not legally committing to anything.”

Clause 15 further bolsters the non-binding nature of the compact. Robert Russo, an immigration law expert at the Allard School of Law pointed out that the compact “specifically includes a ‘National Sovereignty’ clause [clause 15] that specifies each state retains authority to determine national migration policy and how they implement laws and policy dealing with migration.”

The voluntary nature of the compact puts the rest of Bernier’s statement into question, including the dollar figure of one billion for implementation. Aiken said, “it’s quite far-fetched to assert that [the compact] obliges Canada to spend billions of dollars.”

Does the compact require signatories to ensure jobs for migrants?

The compact neither requires nor recommends ensuring that migrants have jobs. It merely encourages signatory countries to ensure the jobs that are available to migrants are free from exploitation.

Aiken said Bernier’s statement about jobs likely stems from clauses 16 and 22 of the compact. Russo also speculated this is “probably” the case.

Clause 16 states that one of the compact’s objectives is to “facilitate fair and ethical recruitment and safeguard conditions that ensure decent work.” Clause 22 elaborates on this objective and lays out various actions that member states can take to meet it. It says that states agree to “review existing recruitment mechanisms to guarantee that they are fair and ethical, and to protect all migrant workers against all forms of exploitation and abuse in order to guarantee decent work.”

Aiken said, “it is a huge stretch … to suggest the compact is imposing an obligation to ensure employment.” She said these clauses show the objective is about non-discrimination, safe working conditions, and recruitment, as well as combating trafficking and other coercive practices.

Russo added that Bernier’s claim about jobs could also stem from clause 21, which is about adapting immigration pathways to facilitate labour mobility and decent work. However, Russo noted that clause 21 also does not commit Canada to ensure migrants have jobs.

A related point on Bernier’s claim is that Canada’s labour and employment laws already meet or exceed the requirements set out in clauses 16 and 22. This means that even if they were legal requirements, they are not new to Canadian law. As Aiken explained, “these standards are actually far weaker than what exists in labour and employment legislation across [Canada] – and our own Charter of rights.”

Verdict

Bernier’s statement is false. It framed an international cooperative framework as a legally enforceable agreement. Perhaps misinterpreting clauses about discrimination and decent work, Bernier also incorrectly asserted that the compact requires Canada to provide jobs for migrants.

See how we score.