Fact Sheet: Justin Trudeau's vacation and ethics report - FactsCanada
By: Dana Wagner on March 2, 2018

The Prime Minister vacationed with his family in December 2016 to Bells Cay, a private island in the Bahamas owned by the Aga Khan. One year later, the Conflict of Interest and Ethics Commissioner found Justin Trudeau contravened four sections of the Conflict of Interest Act. Check out the facts on the vacation and the rules that Trudeau broke.

The vacation

The Prime Minister vacationed with his family in December 2016 to Bells Cay, a private island in the Bahamas owned by the Aga Khan. Justin Trudeau calls the Aga Khan a personal and family friend. The 10-day trip was Trudeau’s second trip to the island, but his first as Prime Minister.

Earlier, in March 2016, Trudeau’s spouse, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, and their three children vacationed on the same island without the Prime Minister.

The questions

A key question surrounding the vacation is if Trudeau violated a conflict of interest law or other ethics rules by accepting the “gift” of hospitality and use of a private island from the Aga Khan, whose institutions lobby the government and receive federal funding. Members of Parliament including the prime minister cannot accept gifts that might reasonably be seen to influence them.

Answering this question involves evaluating the personal relationship between Trudeau and the Aga Khan because there is an exception in one of Canada’s conflict of interest laws for gifts given by a friend.

The former Conflict of Interest and Ethics Commissioner, Mary Dawson, examined these and other questions in a report that she initiated following a request by Conservative leader Andrew Scheer and another Conservative MP. Dawson released “The Trudeau Report” in December 2017 shortly before retiring.

The Aga Khan

The Aga Khan is a philanthropist and spiritual leader of Ismaili Muslims. An agreement signed by former Prime Minister Stephen Harper extends some diplomatic courtesies to the Aga Khan. His affiliated institutions, the Aga Khan Foundation Canada and the Global Centre for Pluralism, lobby the Government of Canada and receive federal funding. He is the chair of the board of directors of both agencies. According to Dawson’s report, since 1981, the Government of Canada has spent nearly $330 million on projects supported by the Foundation.

The Aga Khan was a friend of Pierre Elliott Trudeau, former Canadian prime minister and father of Justin Trudeau. Dawson’s report noted that Justin Trudeau had no personal contact with the Aga Khan since 1983, apart from his father’s funeral in 2000, until he became leader of the Liberal Party in April 2013.

The ethics examination and report

What it investigated

The Commissioner examined Trudeau’s December 2016 vacation under the Conflict of Interest Act and the Conflict of Interest Code for Members of the House of Commons. She also examined an earlier trip taken by Trudeau’s family in March 2016, as well as travel on private aircraft to and from the island during both vacations.

The Act and the Code are administered by the Office of the Conflict of Interest and Ethics Commissioner. Both are intended to prohibit public officials from acting to further their own or other private interests. Prime ministers and other MPs are subject to both. They carry potential punishments, but different types: The Act enables the Commissioner to issue compliance orders, order the reimbursement of costs, and slap a $500 “administrative monetary penalty” on the errant official; the Code provides that the Commissioner “may recommend appropriate sanctions.”

What it found

Dawson found that Trudeau contravened four sections of the Conflict of Interest Act, but found no violations of the Code. Here are the four sections of the Act:

Section 5: “Every public office holder shall arrange his or her private affairs in a manner that will prevent the public office holder from being in a conflict of interest.”

Dawson determined that Trudeau and the Aga Khan had a foreseeable, continuing official relationship before he and his family accepted two separate vacations in 2016. By vacationing on the Aga Khan’s private island, “Trudeau failed to arrange his private affairs in a manner that would prevent him from being placed in a conflict of interest.”

Section 11: “No public office holder or member of his or her family shall accept any gift or other advantage, including from a trust, that might reasonably be seen to have been given to influence the public office holder in the exercise of an official power, duty or function” except if that gift “is given by a relative or friend.”

Dawson found that Trudeau accepted a gift of hospitality and use of a private island that could be seen to influence him in his official duties. She found that the exception for accepting gifts from friends did not apply to Trudeau and the Aga Khan because “their relationship cannot be described as one of friends.”

Section 12: “No minister of the Crown, minister of state or parliamentary secretary, no member of his or her family and no ministerial adviser or ministerial staff shall accept travel on non-commercial chartered or private aircraft for any purpose unless required in his or her capacity as a public office holder or in exceptional circumstances or with the prior approval of the Commissioner.”

On both the March and December 2016 trips, the Trudeaus accepted travel by the Aga Khan’s private aircraft – a non-commercial chartered seaplane and a private helicopter – from neighbouring Nassau to Bells Cay. Dawson found that the exceptions to this law do not apply, even “exceptional circumstances” despite the remoteness of Bells Cay. She wrote, “there was nothing … unusual, unforeseen or unavoidable.” The Trudeaus had alternatives, albeit costly or inefficient, but instead used private aircraft. And Trudeau did not consult with the Commissioner before using the private aircraft.

Section 21: “A public office holder shall recuse himself or herself from any discussion, decision, debate or vote on any matter in respect of which he or she would be in a conflict of interest.”

Dawson found that on two occasions, in May 2016, Trudeau failed to recuse himself from official discussions relating to the Aga Khan and his institutions. These occurred after Trudeau’s family vacationed at Bells Cay in March 2016, and the discussions therefore “provided an opportunity to improperly further the private interests of the Global Centre for Pluralism.” Dawson found that Trudeau should have recused himself and did not.

Read the full report.

The response

Trudeau

Trudeau apologized upon the release of the report, which he said he accepts along with all its findings. He said he will follow at least two recommendations made by Dawson outside her report. As we covered in our fact check, the Prime Minister’s Office said Trudeau “set up a conflict of interest screen to ensure he is not involved in decisions or discussions about the Aga Khan, as per the recommendation of the Commissioner, and he has taken steps to ensure that all future family vacations are cleared ahead of time with Commissioner’s office.”

Opposition

Conservative Party leader Andrew Scheer and various opposition MPs have called for Trudeau to repay the costs of the December 2016 vacation. It cost the Canadian government $215,000, according to documents obtained by the CBC under an access to information request.

Asked at a committee hearing if Trudeau should repay the costs, Dawson said, “a lot of those costs would have been incurred anyway” for a sanctioned vacation made by a sitting Prime Minister.

Have more questions? Ask us.

Researched by Dana Wagner

Edited by Jacob Schroeder