Central Mediterranean route

The Central Mediterranean route remained under intense migratory pressure in 2015, although the total number of migrants arriving in Italy fell to 154 000 - about a tenth lower than the record set in 2014. The main reasons for the drop were the shift of Syrians to the Eastern Mediterranean route and a shortage of boats faced by smugglers in the latter part of the year. Smuggling networks remain well established in Libya, where migrants gather before crossing the sea. In 2015 Eritreans, Nigerians and Somalis accounted for the biggest share of the migrants making the dangerous journey.

People smugglers typically put migrants aboard old, unseaworthy fishing boats, or even small rubber dinghies, which are much overloaded and thus prone to capsizing. These vessels are generally equipped with poor engines, lack proper navigation systems and often have insufficient fuel to reach Europe. For these reasons, the vast majority of border control operations in the Central Mediterranean turn into Search and Rescue (SAR) operations.



Trends prior to 2015

The emergence of Libya as a collecting point for African migrants has long antecedents. Until 2010, Libya’s prosperity offered good job opportunities for migrant workers from African countries, who either used it as a final destination, or as a transit country where they could earn money to pay the smugglers for the last leg of their journey to the EU.

The sea route has long been popular. In 2008, nearly 40,000 migrants were detected, mostly near the islands of Lampedusa and Malta, the majority of them from Tunisia, Nigeria, Somalia and Eritrea. The migration almost completely stopped in 2009 following a bilateral agreement between Italy and Libya. The situation changed dramatically in 2011 – the year of the Arab Spring. Between January and March alone, some 23 000 Tunisians – most of them economic migrants hoping to find jobs in France – arrived on the small Italian island of Lampedusa.

Then, between March and August 2011, more than 40,000 sub-Saharan Africans arrived on Lampedusa and, to a smaller degree, on Sicily and Malta. Many had been forcibly expelled by the Gaddafi regime. A large number of them applied for asylum in Italy.

With the collapse of the Gaddafi regime in August 2011, the flow of migrants again almost entirely stopped. Detections remained very low throughout 2012. By 2013, however, the smugglers had reorganised themselves – and there was no shortage of customers desperate to escape Libya as the state imploded and violence escalated. In what was a de facto failed state, smugglers have been operating with impunity in the absence of effective law enforcement to counter their criminal activities.

Disclaimer: Data presented refer to the number of detections of illegal border-crossing at the external borders of the European Union. Illegal border-crossings at the external borders may be attempted several times by the same person.

Illegal border crossings on the Central Mediterranean route (including Apulia and Calabria) in numbers.

As of October 2014, the data for the the Central Mediterranean route include the data for the Apulia and Calabria route. Indeed many migrants are disembarked in Apulia and Calabria even though they have been detected in the Central Mediterranean area. However, the current reporting mechanism does not break down by areas of detections, but by areas of disembarkation, thus a distinction of detections between these two routes is not available.

For more information on this and other migratory routes, see Frontex Risk Analysis reports.