Wendy Davis Welcomed To Los Angeles With ‘Abortion Barbie’ Posters (PHOTO)
Texas gubernatorial candidate and state Sen. Wendy Davis (D) arrived in Los Angeles on Thursday morning for a fundraiser to spot multiple posters portraying her as an “abortion barbie,” the Huffington Post reported.

The signs, titled “Hollywood welcomes Abortion Barbie Wendy Davis,” depict the candidate as a Barbie with a plastic “fetus” in her abdomen. In the poster she is holding another plastic “fetus” below a pair of giant scissors.

Davis garnered national attention with her filibuster of a bill in the Texas state senate that would close most clinics that provide abortions in the state.

After her filibuster, RedState’s Erick Erickson referred to Davis as an “abortion barbie”, and is apparently quite proud that the nickname stuck around.

“The media prefers to ignore that to which Wendy Davis staked her career. They’d prefer to focus on her, as Vogue described her, ‘Barbie looks’ and pink sneakers,” he said in January. “I have helped define Wendy Davis by a moniker that sticks, describes, and makes her the butt of jokes, while drawing out the shrill hysterics of her supporters.”

The Davis campaign does not know who created the posters, according to the Huffington Post, but blamed them on her Republican opponent Greg Abbott.

“It seems that Greg Abbott can’t let a week go by without showing how out of touch he is with women,” Davis campaign spokesman Zac Petkanas told the Huffington Post. “This is just another in a long line of offensive actions and comments by Greg Abbott in an attempt to demean Wendy Davis.”

The Abbot campaign told the Huffington Post that they did not know who was behind the signs.

The Davis campaign then slammed Abbott for not condemning the posters.

“Greg Abbott’s refusal to denounce these nasty campaign posters is offensive but not surprising. Whether it’s paying the women in his office less than men for doing the same work or campaigning with an admitted sexual predator, it seems that Greg Abbott can’t let a week go by without showing how out of touch he is with women,” Petkanas said in a Thursday statement.

Image courtesy of the Wendy Davis Campaign