Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology
Proceedings of the Standing Senate Committee on

Social Affairs, Science and Technology

Issue No. 45 - Evidence - May 28, 2018

OTTAWA, Monday, May 28, 2018

The Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology, to which was referred Bill C-45, An Act Respecting Cannabis and to amend the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, the Criminal Code and other acts, met this day at 1:16 p.m. to continue the study of this bill.

Senator Art Eggleton (Chair) in the chair.

[Translation]

The Chair: Welcome to the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology.

[English]

I’m Art Eggleton, a senator from Toronto and chair of the committee. I’ll ask my colleagues to introduce themselves.

Senator Seidman: Good afternoon. I’m Judith Seidman from Montreal, Quebec, and deputy chair of the committee.

Senator Patterson: Good afternoon. Dennis Patterson, senator for Nunavut.

[Translation]

Senator Poirier: Rose-May Poirier from New Brunswick.

[English]

Senator Stewart Olsen: Thank you all for coming. Carolyn Stewart Olsen from New Brunswick.

Senator Plett: Don Plett, and I’m from Winnipeg.

[Translation]

Senator Saint-Germain: Raymonde Saint-Germain from Quebec.

[English]

Senator Woo: Yuen Pau Woo, British Columbia.

Senator Bernard: Wanda Thomas Bernard, Nova Scotia.

[Translation]

Senator Pratte: André Pratte from Quebec.

[English]

Senator Deacon: Marty Deacon, Ontario. Good afternoon.

Senator Dean: Tony Dean, Ontario.

Senator Omidvar: Ratna Omidvar, Toronto, Ontario.

[Translation]

Senator Mégie: Marie-Françoise Mégie from Quebec.

Senator Petitclerc: Chantal Petitclerc from Quebec.

[English]

The Chair: Today, we culminate almost two months of hearings by this committee, not to mention the hearings done by other committees as well, on Bill C-45, An Act respecting cannabis and to amend the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, the Criminal Code and other Acts.

In the first part of our agenda today, we’ll hear from Bill Blair, who is the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Justice and Attorney General and also to the Minister of Health, and also the point person on this particular bill. We also have officials from Health Canada and from the Department of Justice.

We will go until 2:30. We’re starting late, so there may be a little bit of flexibility if we need extra time. We have a break between 2:30 and 3:00 scheduled, and then at 3:00 we’ll start the process of clause-by-clause consideration.

I’ll ask Bill Blair to make his opening comments, and we’ll start getting senators down on our list for questions and take it from there.

Bill Blair, M.P., Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada and to the Minister of Health: Honourable senators, I’d like to begin by thanking you all for the opportunity to appear before you today. I am accompanied, of course, by senior officials, which I am confident will be extremely helpful in responding to concerns and questions that you may have.

I’d also like to begin by acknowledging the important work of the Senate, particularly the work of this committee, in conducting such a comprehensive review of Bill C-45, the cannabis act.

Your in-depth study has provided opportunities for Canadians to learn about this important and transformative policy initiative and for our government to explain the objectives and key features of the proposed framework for the legalization and strict regulation of cannabis.

I will focus my remarks today on two aspects of the issue at hand. First, I will speak to the various strategies that, along with the legislative framework that would be established under Bill C-45, constitute the key pillars of our public health approach to the legalization and strict regulation of cannabis.

Second, I will touch on a number of areas that I know have been of particular interest during the Senate study and key points underpinning our government’s policy decisions and approaches in these areas.

The public health approach that our government is taking to cannabis legalization and regulation is comprehensive and thoughtfully designed to support our objectives of better protecting Canadians and minimizing the harms associated with cannabis use.

Our government has learned from the existing evidence and from the experience of jurisdictions in the United States that have legalized and regulated access to cannabis. Our approach has been informed by the input of experts and extensive consultations with Canadians from coast to coast to coast.

As you will have heard on multiple occasions over the course of your study, our approach goes beyond the proposed legislative framework that would be established if Bill C-45 were to become law. In fact, we are taking decisive action in a number of key areas. Our approach is informed by the strict regulatory controls that are currently in place for Canadians who access cannabis for medical purposes and by the lessons learned from our considerable success in taking a public health approach to reducing tobacco smoking rates.

Our strategies include efforts to educate Canadians about the harms and risks of cannabis use, to promote healthy choices and reduce youth access, to prevent problematic and high-risk patterns of use, to protect Canadians through strict regulation and vigilant oversight, and to monitor cannabis trends and impacts in order to quickly respond to any new threats or risks that may emerge.

I would encourage the committee to consider the proposed legislation in the context of these broader, proven strategies for protecting public health. Of course, effecting such a major change cannot happen oversight. As I have mentioned on very many occasions, the legalization and regulation of cannabis should not be viewed as a single event but rather as a process that will happen over time. We are confident that the policy framework that we are proposing, which is informed by the thoughtful expert advice provided by our Task Force on Cannabis Legalization and Regulation will put Canada in a far better position and a stronger position to protect the health and safety of Canadians, especially our youth.

We are also mindful that this is a complex and transformative policy initiative and that our policy objectives will not be met merely with the coming into force of Bill C-45 alone. Instead, the success of our initiative will rely on ongoing work in areas that I have identified and our ability to be responsive to new evidence, developments and trends.

Against this backdrop, I would like to speak to a number of specific areas that have been at the forefront of the Senate’s study to date and the main points underpinning the government’s policy decisions and approach in these areas.

First of all, with respect to home and personal cultivation, I know this has generated considerable debate in the Senate and in the public domain. Our government’s view is that allowing adults to cultivate a limited amount of cannabis in their home is consistent with the objective of displacing the illegal market and it can be done in a responsible way. This is the approach that was recommended by the Task Force on Cannabis Legalization and Regulation, and it is the approach that has been adopted by the majority of jurisdictions in the United States that have regulated access to cannabis.

Setting a very low limit on the number of plants is a reasonable way to allow adults to cultivate cannabis for personal use while prohibiting larger scale grow operations. By being too restrictive in the prohibition of personal cultivation, we risk criminalizing adults who are otherwise law-abiding, which is contrary to the objectives of our bill.

Another area that has been the object of Senate committee recommendations is the possibility of establishing cannabis product requirements directly in the legislation rather than through regulations as has been proposed by our government. The possibility of specific amendments was suggested on packaging and labelling, as well as THC limits. That was raised at committee. On this, I would simply stress the importance of maintaining the flexibility within the legislative framework to be able to be responsive and to adapt to new evidence and product innovation in this evolving space. The task force recommended the creation of a flexible, legislative and regulatory framework for this very reason. Bill C-45 provides for this flexibility to adapt to new evidence and product innovation by establishing a range of regulation-making authorities, including on THC limits, packaging and labelling.

I can assure you that it is our government’s intention to establish, through regulation, THC limits for different types of cannabis products. It is also our government’s intention to require child-resistant plain packaging of cannabis products with strict requirements to display clear health warnings and messages and a standardized cannabis symbol. All of these measures are intended to protect kids and to reduce the appeal of cannabis products.

The next area I would like to raise is one that relates to a top priority for our government: Indigenous interests and concerns in the context of the proposed framework to legalize and strictly regulate cannabis. I know this issue has been a prominent theme throughout the Senate review. Engagement with Indigenous leaders, organizations and communities has been ongoing for over two years, beginning with the Task Force on Cannabis Legalization and Regulation and continuing throughout the development of the framework up to this point. This extensive engagement has led to a better understanding of the diverse perspectives among Indigenous leaders and communities. It has also led to concrete action to respond to some of their concerns.

Indigenous communities have expressed a strong interest in ensuring that Indigenous peoples can benefit from the economic opportunity of the emerging legal cannabis industry. Health Canada has responded by establishing a navigator service designed specifically to help guide self-identified Indigenous applicants through each step of the licensing process. Indigenous Services Canada has responded by making its economic development programs available to support projects related to cannabis.

Indigenous organizations have called for support to prepare for cannabis legalization and regulation. For this reason, our government is providing financial support to the Assembly of First Nations Cannabis Task Force and the Thunderbird Partnership Foundation to conduct additional work, consultations and engagement.

In response to calls for culturally appropriate public education, our government has announced significant additional investments in Budget 2018. These funds will support the involvement of community-based and Indigenous organizations that are educating their communities on the risks associated with cannabis use.

Indigenous leaders and communities have also identified the ongoing need to improve access to health and social services, which goes well beyond the issues associated with cannabis use. In Budget 2018 our government has announced new funding to enhance the delivery of culturally appropriate addictions prevention and treatment services in communities with high needs and for mental health and emotional supports.

By no means, senators, do I mean to suggest that our work is done.

Some of the issues that have surfaced during debates on Bill C-45 point to broader social, economic and public health issues that will require continuous engagement and sustained efforts over the long term. However, I wish to reinforce that delaying the coming into force of Bill C-45 is not, in my respectful opinion, the proper response to these issues.

We have talked extensively about the shortcomings of the current approach. As I mentioned earlier, the public health approach that we are proposing will better position us as a nation to tackle these issues as they relate to cannabis. Canada has some of the highest rates of youth use of cannabis, the illegal market is thriving for Canadians, including for Indigenous peoples, and they all continue to be subject to criminal prosecution for possession of small amounts of cannabis. Delaying the transition to our proposed new legal framework would in fact perpetuate a system that is failing our children and putting our communities at risk.

In conclusion, I want to reinforce that the legislative framework that would be established through Bill C-45 is the result of two and a half years of extensive work and consultation. It reflects and balances diverse perspectives from provinces and territories, municipalities, Indigenous communities and First Nation governments and a wide range of experts and stakeholders.

Provincial and territorial governments have developed their own legislation on the basis of this proposed framework, and investments and preparations to establish retail systems in their jurisdictions are well under way.

Once again, I wish to express my appreciation for the in-depth review of this proposed legislation conducted by the Senate, and I look forward to the opportunity to discuss any outstanding questions that you may have of us. Thank you.

The Chair: Thank you very much. We’ll do our usual five minutes each. That includes questions and answers. The shorter the questions, the shorter the answers, the more you can get in in your five minutes. We’ll start with our deputy chair, Senator Chantal Petitclerc.

[Translation]

Senator Petitclerc: Thank you, everyone, for joining us today. My question goes to Mr. Blair.

Can you confirm for me how solid Bill C-45 is in terms of packaging, advertising and marketing? In the work of our committee and in the work of other committees, we have come to realize that industries are already very dynamic and very creative and that some are even taking advantage of the fact that cannabis is not yet legal to build their brand, until they are no longer allowed to do so. I want to be sure that, in terms of the packaging, the names that can be put on it, and in terms of the advertising, the marketing and the cannabis-derived products, that this bill will be solid enough for us to be able to protect our young people.

[English]

Mr. Blair: Thank you, senator.

Let me begin by saying that it is absolutely not the Government of Canada’s intention to allow for the promotion of this drug’s use by any Canadian. We propose to strictly regulate the access that young people will have to this drug by effecting a prohibition for its purchase, possession and consumption by persons under the age of majority in every province and territory in this country.

We’ve also introduced very strict requirements and restrictions, exactly as you have mentioned, on packaging, branding and labelling and front-of-package information so people know the potency, purity and provenance of what is being consumed, including health warnings for those vulnerable to the risks associated with the use of this drug, for example, women of childbearing age or people suffering from other unrelated illnesses or contraindications of this drug.

There will be strict limitations on such things as branding and packaging, with no lifestyle advertising or promotion.

Frankly, we have tried to learn from our very positive experience in reducing tobacco usage among vulnerable populations in Canada by placing greater restrictions on plain packaging through health warnings and other measures.

I wish to assure you that it has been front of mind in the development of not only Bill C-45 but in the regulations that will support it at Health Canada. To that end, if I may, I would ask Mr. Costen, who is the director of the cannabis secretariat at Health Canada and who has expert knowledge in this area, to perhaps comment.

Eric Costen, Director General, Cannabis Legalization and Regulation Secretariat, Health Canada: Your answer is pretty comprehensive. There are a few other features that may be of interest.

In addition to the different controls that Mr. Blair has outlined with respect to the use of colour, the regulations would prescribe font size, position of certain information on the label, really drawing from all of the lessons that I think are behind your question that we’ve learned through the tobacco control experience. We’ve certainly studied very closely how industry will try to outmanoeuvre governments and to build and craft regulations that look to anticipate and be as agile as possible.

It’s probably worth mentioning that among these different features that would be required on the package and the label, there’s also a universal THC warning symbol that would have to be present on all cannabis products. This is a symbol that we focus-tested with parents, with very young children and with teenagers that help non-consumers who may be in the home environment recognize and stay away from a product that has THC in it. That’s another lesson we learned from the U.S.

Mr. Blair: Senator, these regulations have teeth. They are enforceable and there are consequences for breaking them. I think that’s very important as well.

The industry has to know not only that we will have these regulations but we’re prepared to defend them and there are consequences for breaking them.

Until this regulatory package comes into force, I think we are seeing people trying to scramble to establish themselves and get out ahead. Once these regulations are available to us, I am very confident we’ll be able to curtail that activity and bring it under control.

The Chair: I will now recognize our other deputy chair, Senator Seidman.

Senator Seidman: Thank you all for being with us today.

Mr. Blair, when you appeared before this committee in March, I asked you why the government had not set any targets for reducing the rates of cannabis use among Canadians. In response, you said that you planned to eliminate use of cannabis among young people. Coincidentally, just a few weeks later, the health minister tabled plans to set targets to reduce the rate of Canadians 15 to 24 who use cannabis by December 31, 2021. If you’re confident that your bill will eliminate use by young people, why not announce that target today? Moreover, why have you not committed to setting reduction targets for people over the age of 24, which is very similar to the non-smoking targets you’ve set for everyone? Is this because the bill really isn’t about discouraging people from using cannabis?

Mr. Blair: Senator, if I may be really clear, our number one policy goal in bringing forward this legislation right from the outset, in the establishment of our task force, we asked them to look at reducing health and social harms. We identified as the first harm the high rate of use among our kids. We know that has not happened overnight. With great respect, it will not be eliminated overnight. Right now they have almost unfettered access to this drug. It’s available in every community and frankly in every schoolyard. The cannabis they have access to is 100 per cent produced and sold by criminals. We believe that by displacing that illicit market, by driving those criminals out of those schoolyards, we can have a better effect of restricting the access young people have to it.

Also by the new regulations we’re putting in, we’ve created a new criminal offence of selling to kids that has real consequences, a penalty of up to 14 years. Cannabis that will legally be available for sale will be sold under a system of strict regulation and oversight where there’s accountability, where none currently exists. Simply restricting their access through regulation isn’t enough. So we’re making significant investments over the next five years of $108.5 million in public education to give young people, their parents, teachers, health service providers and their peers information so that they can make more informed decisions, that they will know the risks.

With regard to our experience with tobacco, we have not been successful in completely eliminating tobacco use among young people, but we have been hugely successful in reducing it. We’re building upon that experience with cannabis.

Senator Seidman: Thank you, but if I would like to get back to the question for a moment. The question is about setting targets to reduce the rate of Canadians aged 15 to 24 who use cannabis.

The minister said she would announce the target, plan the target by December 31, 2021. Why aren’t you willing to announce that target today? What is the target?

Mr. Blair: Senator, in explanation of the position the minister has taken, I think it’s a very responsible one.

One of the things that we have also said right at the outset was the need for good baseline data. We’ve gone to Statistics Canada, Ontario drug usage studies and other institutions conducting surveys so we have a good understanding of the rate of usage among our young people, what it is they are using, the circumstances of its use and where they’re acquiring it. We’ve also put in ongoing surveillance and measurement. We’re building up that.

We’ve been also been putting in place very strong systems of ongoing surveillance and measurement. We’ve been working with the academic community and public health officials, StatsCan and others to establish an ongoing system of measurement so we can know where to begin and we can see trends emerging and we can have a better understanding as we get systems in place as to what’s working and what’s not.

As I indicated earlier, this is a process, not an event. So we are committed to a process of continued adaptation and improvement to achieve our public purpose goals. Our first goal is the protection of our kids and getting this drug, which has real risks, both health and social for our children, out of their hands. Right now we have the highest rates of any country in the world, and reducing that can have a positive outcome for the health, safety and futures of our kids. We’re putting all of the things in place in establishing strong baseline measurements to begin with so we’ll be able to know exactly what’s working and what’s not. We’ll continue to measure, evaluate, adapt and to innovate to achieve those purposes. When we have more evidence and better experience with its implementation, the minister has committed to coming out with clear, identified targets of reduction, which we believe will be based on evidence and not on mere speculation.

Senator Plett: Thank you, Mr. Blair and the rest of the witnesses for being here. I will make my comments with the highest respect that I do indeed have for you, Mr. Blair, especially in your previous occupation as one of the country’s top police officers.

I just find it mind-boggling when your government can say that one of your biggest priorities is to protect the health and safety of Canadians, especially youth. I think that is pretty much quoting what you said in part of your opening comments.

We are legalizing both a drug, smoking, that we have for years and years been trying to eliminate in other forms because we recognize the horrible health hazards that smoking has. Now we’re legalizing a mind-numbing method of smoking, and all the while we’re saying we are trying to protect the health and safety of Canadians. That is such a horrible contradiction of statements, in my opinion.

That, however, isn’t my question, Mr. Blair. I have two questions and I’ll try to get them in under my five minutes.

You recently stated, Mr. Blair, that Canadians should be truthful in answering questions at the border about their marijuana use. However, witnesses before our National Security and Defence Committee told us that any admission of past marijuana use can lead to an individual from being banned for life from entering the United States.

Last month, the Department of Global Affairs tabled the following planned messaging for Canadians after Bill C-45 becomes law:

You may be denied entry to a foreign country if you have previously used cannabis products, whether for medical purposes or not, even if you have used them legally in Canada.

How, Mr. Blair, are Canadians supposed to prepare for being banned for life from the United States for admitting to something that your government is making legal in Canada? If you answer that fairly briefly, I think the chair will let me get my second question in.

Mr. Blair: Truthfully, sir — and you made allusion to what I used to do for a living — I would never tell anybody to lie to a law enforcement official at the border or anywhere else. I believe telling the truth is upholding Canadian values and the rule of law, full stop.

I will also tell you, sir, that we know from their admissions. There are nearly half a million Canadians who currently have a record for civil possession of cannabis. We also know that there are several million Canadians who were simply not caught. We often hear admissions from people who have very responsible positions that at one time they used cannabis illegally in this country. When they go to the border there is no expectation — frankly, I’ve crossed the border myself hundreds of times and I’ve never been asked about illegal drug use. If asked, however, I would answer honestly. I have never used any illegal drug, ever.

Quite frankly, we’re working very carefully with law enforcement officials in the United States and in other countries to ensure Canadians entering into those countries will be treated properly. We recognize there are currently 30 states in the U.S. where cannabis is available for use medically; 10 states where it’s available for non-medical uses, and frankly two of those are border states. Two of them border Canada, and it has not been an impediment for Americans travelling into Canada, so I do not anticipate it will be a significant issue for Canadians going back and forth into the United States. We’re working with U.S. law enforcement officials to minimize any challenges that Canadians may face at the border.

Senator Plett: I hope you give us a phone number so we can call you from the border. I smoked marijuana when I was 18 years old — 50 years ago. I may be asked that question. I hope I’m not because, along with you, I don’t believe in lying to somebody who asks me a question.

We will be asked more often when this becomes law than we are being asked right now, I assure you.

My second question, Mr. Blair, is your government said you are ready to legalize cannabis. I note from the bill that it has already been amended at least 20 times in the other place. We are hearing that we are going to have some 29 more amendments coming to us, albeit technical amendments, later today.

I’m wondering how ready we are, how many more amendments we will be getting and how you can sit there and say we are ready and your government is ready when we have at least 49 amendments that are being proposed or have been proposed by your government and are probably going to be proposed by the sponsor of the bill later today?

Mr. Blair: Actually, that brings me back to your earlier comments about what you perceive, senator, respectfully as a contradiction.

The current criminal prohibition is largely ignored — as you did when you were 18 — by Canadians. Ignoring the existing Canadian law, the prohibition against the purchase, possession and use of cannabis, has created a set of circumstances, first, where our kids are in enormous jeopardy, in my opinion; and, second, where organized crime is enriched to the tune of several billion dollars each year. They control 100 per cent of the illicit market and profit enormously from it.

One of the things I know from my experience in my previous profession is that you cannot regulate a prohibited substance. It’s only by lifting the criminal prohibition — that’s what legalization is — that allows us to introduce a comprehensive system of strict regulation to control every aspect of its production.

We learned in 2013, and in the subsequent five years of our experience with licensed production for medical purposes, that it can be done right under strict regulatory regime. Production can be done in such a way that we know the potency, providence and purity of what is being consumed for medical purposes in this country. We know it can be done in such a way where dangerous chemicals are not included and it’s not adulterated. We’re building upon that experience.

It gives me confidence that five years of experience with those regulations and licensed production, the production for non-medical use, can be done right. We have the experience and the evidence to support it.

We have also been working closely for the past two years with provinces and territories across the country in establishing strict regulatory regimes for its distribution. We’re building on the experience of other substances like tobacco and alcohol. We’ve brought forward what we believe is a very appropriate, strict regulatory framework that will do a much better job protecting our kids and displacing that illicit market.

Finally, sir, as I said, we see this very much as a process of continuous adaptation. Bill C-45 provides us with the opportunity and a framework not only to move forward — and we are committed to moving forward — but also, when technical amendments come forward that make sense, to adapt to make sure that we give Canadians the best laws and the best regulations to protect them. That is our responsibility.

Senator Stewart Olsen: Mr. Blair, I’m kind of on the fence about the legislation, but I’m not reassured by your presentation in two instances, and perhaps you can help me with them.

The first part is when you said the bill is comprehensive and thoughtfully designed, but you’re now requiring many technical amendments to correct what are obviously flaws in the drafting. I don’t see that as thoughtful or well designed.

My second question is: Do you really think that an ongoing or work in progress is applicable in this area of extreme social change for the country? I’m not sure I’m satisfied with your statement that says, “We’re going to monitor it.” I would have thought, if you were going to do this, you would have monitored, done your studies and done all of this ground work before bringing in the legislation.

Also, in much of your statement to us, your main argument has been the criminals making all this money that we can’t tax. I hear this over and over. You didn’t say “we can’t tax”; I just thought that it when you kept saying it.

Then you talk about the Aboriginal peoples and their real hesitation as to the coming into force of this legislation. You say yes, we’ve made adjustments, and we’re going to have it so they can make money, too. Is it the focus of your government to say no pipelines, no this, no that, but by God you can make pot?

Mr. Blair: Senator, first of all, in a number of other jurisdictions, particularly the United States, they had ballot initiatives that said they were going to legalize and tax it. And it previously was about revenue. With great respect, I would not agree with your statement.

Our approach has been entirely predicated on a public health model. We began by looking at harms, both health and social. We asked the task force to examine this cross the country. They had people with expertise from areas of public health, public safety, justice and problematic substance use. They travelled across the country looking at how to reduce the social and health harms of cannabis use. That has been the basis upon which this legislation comes forward.

There are revenue implications through excise tax and sales tax. The Prime Minister has been very clear. The revenue generated for the federal government in their portion of the excise tax as a result of the new cannabis act will be reinvested in research, treatment, prevention and rehabilitation. And I might suggest to you that those are precisely the things that address those social and health harms of which I’ve spoken earlier.

When we talk about Indigenous communities participating in this new industry, it’s because First Nations told us they wanted to participate. Not all of them but many of them came to us and said they want access to the economic opportunity that this may present for their communities, and they asked for help and we responded to that. We said we will provide them with support and assistance and we will hire someone to help them because they asked for it. That’s part of the ongoing engagement we have with Indigenous communities.

We’ve been working on many of the issues and concerns of jurisdiction, on access and participation in this new industry, and on culturally appropriate training materials. We’ve been working with Indigenous communities, but we’re not done. It’s an ongoing process of engagement. That’s part of our commitment. It’s not simply that we went and talked to them, we’ve ticked the box and we’re done. What we’ve said is, “We’re working with you and we’re going to continue working with you. As opportunities come forward or as concerns are raised, we’ll be with you to make sure that we, together, through a very respectful nation-to-nation discussion, can address the legitimate concerns of those communities.”

Senator Poirier: Thank you all for being here to answer our questions again today.

Mr. Blair, since the bill was introduced and throughout the committee hearings, we heard from some people how cannabis is far less dangerous than alcohol, but that notion is really not reflected in Bill C-45. For example, penalties are way harsher for having 6 grams of cannabis in a bag than six bottles of beer. If cannabis is so much safer than alcohol, why is the punishment for youth so much harsher with cannabis?

Mr. Blair: Senator, first of all, I have never said that cannabis is safe, particularly for young people.

Senator Poirier: No, I didn’t say that you said it was. I said that throughout the committee meetings, we heard from some people who had stated that. I just wanted your opinion on it.

Mr. Blair: Senator, we’re transitioning from a century-long system of criminal prohibition that the overwhelming majority of Canadians have begun to ignore, but it had enormous consequences for individuals caught in possession. As a result of some youthful indiscretion, many were not caught but some were, and they ended up with a criminal record that affects the rest of their lives — their ability to cross the border, their ability to get a job or the cost of having a criminal record. Those consequences are quite significant.

We’re moving away from that criminal prohibition, but I believe the regulations we’re putting in place will reflect Canadians’ concerns that have been expressed to us about the availability of this drug, and they want to ensure that we do not allow the illicit market to continue.

It’s important to be very clear. We are creating a system of strictly regulated production and distribution of cannabis, and any cannabis outside of that strict regulatory framework — so illegal production — remains a serious criminal offence. Illegal distribution through trafficking remains a serious criminal offence. Importation/exportation not under ministerial licence but by criminals remain serious criminal offences. That is simply an acknowledgment that organized crime has 100 per cent control of this market. The police are retaining all of the authorities, offences and penalties that they have had for a century, but we are adding a new element of competing with organized crime by giving them a competitor in the marketplace so that adult Canadians can make a different choice — a legitimate, healthier, lower risk choice than the one they currently have dealing with criminals.

Senator Poirier: Can you tell me when Health Canada is expected to issue a request for proposal for tracking recreational products between the licensed producers and the retailers?

Mr. Blair: I will refer to Health Canada’s director on those matters.

Mr. Costen: Thank you for the question. We’re prepared to launch the system at a point in time when the legislation will come into force, should Parliament approve it. It is a system that we are designing internally. It is not a system that we are seeking to procure externally at this time.

Senator Poirier: On the question of the home cultivation, our committee has heard the concerns from key witnesses from all fields, including health, police, municipalities, lawyers, and the list goes on. Weighing the pros and cons of this provision, it’s clear that the negative effects and the concerns clearly outweigh the benefits.

The most striking comment came from Professor Benedikt Fischer, a senior scientist with the Institute of Mental Health Policy Research at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. He said:

In my opinion, it’s categorically misguided as part of the supply scheme for cannabis in a public health and a strictly regulated approach. It’s a recipe for people producing cannabis that is unregulated, to expose minors and other vulnerable people who shouldn’t be exposed to cannabis and a recipe for diversion. It doesn’t belong in a public health oriented supply framework for cannabis. The provision should be scrapped.

Your government has been clear from the get-go that the intent of the bill was to protect kids from using cannabis, which you say are among some of the highest in the world. Can you please explain how normalizing cannabis by allowing unregulated and unchecked cannabis plants in Canadian homes is part of a strategy from protecting young people from using cannabis?

Mr. Blair: Thank you. Let me also be very clear: Personal cultivation is not part of the supply framework. The supply framework is the only cannabis that will be available, and that supply framework is that which has been produced under strict regulatory and oversight by Health Canada and available through the distribution systems established by the provinces and territories — but not for distribution, not the supply network, but for individuals.

What our task force heard and what we have in our regulations is a limit on how much an individual can cultivate for their own personal consumption. They can’t sell it. They can’t give it to the neighbours. They certainly can’t give it to their children. There are regulations that prevent that. If they went to the end of the driveway and started to sell it, that’s a criminal offence, trafficking, and that’s illegal production in any amount — four plants or 400 plants. It’s not part of the supply chain.

It allows an individual Canadian for their own personal use to cultivate up to four plants. It creates an offence for more plants.

It’s very important to be clear. With regard to the provinces and territories, we have said that they can put in regulatory control to ensure that that personal cultivation can take place in such a way as to address local concerns with respect to safety, sanitation, access to children. Municipalities can zone where it can take place. The provinces can put in regulations that would, for example, limit or restrict or prevent it from taking place in multi-residential dwellings, around school campuses, in close proximity to schools and community centres where children are present. They can even put in a permitting system so if some individual wanted to engage in personal cultivation, they need to get a municipal permit to do so and abide by whatever conditions were put in place.

This is an activity not part of the supply chain but rather only for personal use, which is subject to strict local regulatory conditions and controls.

Senator Munson: Marijuana wasn’t around when I was 18, but it certainly was around in my 20s.

As a breath of fresh air and to chill out the room a little bit, as my sons would say, I support this bill. And I support it for many of the reasons you talk about, so you can take a deep breath, parliamentary secretary. I don’t know how important it is in the scheme of things, but we are going to have many recommendations in amendments dealing with this bill.

Being of a certain age, I have covered constitutional conferences in the 1970s here, at the old train station, and seen the bidding to and fro of what makes up this country and what makes up fairness in terms of provincial jurisdiction and powers. It was a very difficult thing to cover over a number of years in those days.

With that in mind, and dealing with what we’ve been talking about and amendment-wise, provinces have made it very clear — and you’ve discussed this before, but I think we need an update to refresh our memories — on the cultivation and possession and harvesting of cannabis plants, including the power to prohibit it.

Are there any barriers today, jurisdictional or otherwise, to implementing the recommendation that the provinces want to have that power or say that they have the power to do that, particularly Quebec and Manitoba?

Mr. Blair: Senator, I’m assuming you’re speaking specifically about personal cultivation.

Senator Munson: Yes.

Mr. Blair: If I also may quickly address: One of the things that was also in place, which I think is appropriate to your question as well, is we’ve established, at a minimum, the age of 18 for the applicability of this legislation. But we’ve said to the provinces that they may establish their own age, and they have. They’ve all established their own, which happens to align with their age of majority, 19 in the vast majority of cases, 18 in two others. We have asked each of them — and they have done this in their own legislation — to bring forward regulation that prohibits the purchase, possession and consumption of cannabis for any individual, any young person, between the ages of 12 and the age of majority in their jurisdiction. I think the power of that is that it doesn’t criminalize that behaviour. It regulates it. It gives the police to ability to enforce a total prohibition on kids possessing this drug without criminalizing it.

Senator Munson: Just to be clear, though, will the provinces be able to prohibit the cultivation of four plants, or whatever, in their jurisdictions? Yes or no?

Mr. Blair: With great respect, sir, frankly, I’m not sure I’m able to give you a definitive yes or no. What I can tell you is that, in the federal legislation, more than four plants is an offence under these regulations. We’ve been very clear with the provinces. For example, New Brunswick has brought in regulations that it has to be done, under certain circumstances, with locks and security measures. There are other jurisdictions that have said it can only take place indoors and under glass, rather than in outdoor cultivation.

Many of the provinces are bringing in regulations that they deem to be appropriate in their circumstances to control personal cultivation — where it can take place, when it can take place, by whom and under what circumstances. I believe, senator, that they have that authority.

What limits and restrictions may subsequently be determined to be had, I think that will be determined by other processes. But we’ve been working very closely with the provinces and territories to enable them to regulate this behaviour in a way that they deem to be appropriate in their circumstances.

Senator Munson: Thank you for that.

We seem to be operating on a timetable. It’s like getting out of school at the end of June, to get things done before summer happens. We will have many amendments. You talked about technical amendments, but there will be substantive amendments. Certainly, there will be a debate around this table.

Is your timetable still 90 days after Royal Assent, and do you hope for Royal Assent to happen by July 1 still? Do you see regulation being done and law taking place by September? Is that still your timetable?

Mr. Blair: Sir, I very much respect the processes that are taking place here. When you’re done, and we move toward Royal Assent, we have already said publicly that following Royal Assent — we have provincial and territorial partners in this endeavour. We’ve been working with them for many months in preparing for an orderly implementation of the new act and regulations and their regulations. They have told us that they need between eight to 12 weeks following Royal Assent to effect responsible implementation. We’re working on that timetable, whenever the Senate completes its important work. Then the bill moves to Royal Assent. Frankly, I don’t control that timetable, but when that work is completed, we have work to do. We’re ready to do that work. Health Canada is ready to go. The provinces and territories have told us they’re ready to go, but they need that period of eight to 12 weeks to effect an orderly implementation. So when you’re done, sir, we’ll be able to give you a far more accurate idea of when the law could come into effect.

Senator Munson: Thank you.

Senator Bernard: Thank you for being here. We’ve heard from a number of witnesses, including the Criminal Lawyers’ Association, that have highlighted the fact that pardons for past convictions for simple possession of cannabis are not addressed in this bill. Does the government intend to put in place a separate system for pardons for convictions for simple possession, and, if so, what is the timeline that is being proposed?

Mr. Blair: Thank you, senator. The issue of Canadians with a criminal record for simple possession of cannabis was identified as one of the social harms that we hope to address in this legislation. By lifting that criminal prohibition and replacing it with regulation, working with the provinces and territories, we have, I think, created a situation going forward where we have significantly reduced the risk of Canadians being criminalized for any activity regarding cannabis.

In addition, the Prime Minister has made it clear: While the prohibition remains in effect, while the criminal law is still the only means of controlling cannabis in this country, that law remains in effect until repealed and replaced. So what you have suggested, frankly, cannot be addressed without nullifying the existing law. There’s an appropriate process for repealing and relacing laws in this country, and we’re in the midst of it. So we’ll continue with that important work. The Prime Minister has indicated that, once that is done, once we have repealed the criminal prohibition, once we have established and put in place the new regulatory framework for the strict control of the production, distribution and consumption of cannabis, then the issue of the social harm of those outstanding criminal records is something that he is prepared to address. I think that’s the appropriate time and, frankly, it is not within the scope of this legislation, with great respect. It is something, if the government chooses in the future to address it, that would be more appropriately dealt with not in the cannabis act but in a more particular piece of legislation.

Senator Bernard: The Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples noted in their recommendations that there should be culturally specific public education materials on the subject of cannabis for First Nations and Inuit communities. I fully support that recommendation but believe that public education needs to be gender specific. I’m wondering if a GBA+ analysis is being used in the preparation of public education but also culturally specific for other cultures, in addition to the First Nations and Inuit. Is that part of the plan?

Mr. Blair: Yes, ma’am. May I say that I also agree completely with that recommendation from the Aboriginal Affairs Committee about the importance of being culturally appropriate? By the way, in many cases, language specific. Language is equally a serious concern, as well as the cultural competence and appropriateness of what’s available.

I can assure you that in everything that comes from Health Canada there’s a GBA+ lens attached. So, for all of those training programs that will be developed, I think gender and all of the complex issues that are engaged in that analysis are under consideration and will be included.

I would also agree with you, senator, that we live in a remarkably diverse country, and we have seen the impact of cannabis disproportionately affecting some communities. I think that demands of us that, in the development of the education and information that we’re making available, it’s not just simply trying to educate but making people understand the law and how it should be applied. I think it has to be done in all of the diversity of this country, in particular with great sensitivity to those communities that have been most significantly impacted by the existing system of cannabis control. We want to make sure that as we roll out these new regulations, we address what I think we would both agree are the significant social harms that are possible if it’s not done right.

Senator Bernard: Thank you.

Senator Patterson: Welcome, witnesses.

Your government has supported the UN declaration on the rights of Indigenous people, which features prior — I emphasize “prior” — informed consent. You say the task force consulted with Aboriginal peoples, but as you know, the President of ITK has said that consultation and conversation with ITK is not consultation with Inuit.

I thank you for coming up to Nunavut, but it was not until about a year after the bill was introduced in Parliament. I don’t think anyone would say consultation after the bill was drafted was adequate. We’ve had the AFN national chiefs on December 17 advocating delay and the NTI Nunavut Tunngavik annual general meeting advocating delay.

Now, you’ve said that to delay the coming into force of the bill is not acceptable, but you tell us that concrete action has been taken on the issues that have been raised —economic opportunities, financial support for consultation, funding for community-based treatment and funding for culturally appropriate treatment programs. You’ve given us a quick assurance that that’s happening.

In light of the non-partisan Aboriginal Committee’s clear concern that consultation was ineffective, would you agree that the government should come back to Parliament with a more detailed report on these issues of concern? And I didn’t even mention the First Nations Tax Commission saying they’ve been left out of the revenue stream. Out of respect to the inherent right to self-government, they have to deal with the health, education and social impacts of this legislation, yet they’ve been left out of the revenue stream.

Would you agree that you should come back to Parliament with more detailed reports on these major issues of concern to Aboriginal peoples before the bill comes into force?

Mr. Blair: Senator, with great respect, I would like very much to speak to some of the issues that you raised.

There was consultation. When the task force was established, they conducted a number of consultations with Indigenous and First Nations organizations, actually held a specific event, a round table, in which First Nations and Indigenous organizations were invited to participate. We also received a number of written submissions from them. So they were involved in the consultation from the outset.

Since that time, I believe there have been — and I may not have the exact number — about 50 different events where we’ve come together and we’ve been involved in discussion. I participated in many of those, but not all of them. Senior officials, particularly from the health ministry, have been involved in those discussions, as well as Indigenous Services and others.

You made reference specifically to the taxation issue. I had the privilege of attending at the AFN special assembly that was held a few short weeks ago. I actually spoke at that event and stayed for plenary sessions. It was three or four hours. Far more importantly, the Prime Minister spoke, and the Prime Minister talked, with the AFN and with First Nations represented in that special assembly, about a process of establishing a new fiscal arrangement. It would include all of the fiscal and financial relationships between the Government of Canada and the First Nations. I think it’s far more appropriate for discussion around things like cannabis excise or sales tax to be included within the context of that larger fiscal arrangement discussion that the Prime Minister spoke of on that date before the special assembly.

With respect to issues around public education, we have worked with many First Nations Indigenous organizations, including the ones you referenced in Nunavut. They were very compelling in their advocacy for the need for being culturally appropriate. We have listened, and we’ve made a commitment to all of those organizations.

We’re not saying that this consultation process and engagement is concluded. We’re not suggesting for a moment that we visited them and we’re done. I think there’s a very legitimate concern among those organizations that this process of engagement continues, that they continue to work with us and to ensure that those educational products are produced and available within their community, that we continue to work with them, not just up until the passage of this bill and the date the law comes into effect, but beyond that date and well into the future, to make sure that for those who wish to be involved in the economic opportunities, participating in this new emerging industry, that they have those opportunities. So they don’t have to get rushed through the door before the law comes into effect. We will be with them now and well into the future and continue working with them.

It’s the same with the discussion over the exercise of jurisdiction. We very much respect and acknowledge the jurisdictions of First Nations. We are committed to working with them so that they may exercise that jurisdiction and authority in an appropriate way, and we’ll continue to commit to engage and work with them going forward.

Senator Patterson: That was a long answer, Mr. Chair.

The Chair: I’ve given everybody the five minutes. Questions and answers need to be short. I can put you down for the second round.

Senator Dean: Thank you for being here today.

I’ve been struck over the last several months by the effort of some to create the impression that when and if this bill is proclaimed and implemented, we will suddenly have a problem with cannabis on our hands. All of us in this room know that isn’t the case, that this is a piece of legislation that is responsive to a problem that we have with cannabis today. So it’s a simple question for you, Mr. Blair: What are the consequences of not legalizing and strictly regulating cannabis in Canada?

Mr. Blair: I think, senator, the evidence is overwhelming that the current system of cannabis control in this country is failing. It’s failing us on many fronts. Most importantly, it’s failing us for our children. I think the evidence is overwhelming, compelling and conclusive that we have among the highest rates in the world of cannabis use for our kids.

It’s not just the health risks of that cannabis that our kids are using. First of all, the cannabis itself is untested, unregulated, unsafe and contains chemicals unfit for human consumption. We know that the earlier they begin to use, the more frequently they use, and the higher potency of what they use, the greater the risks for their health and for their outcomes.

We also know they’re buying it from criminals, so it’s exposing our children to a criminal element that young people should never be exposed to. Because they’re operating outside the law, in their own mind they’re defining themselves as outside the law. That’s also not good socialization for our kids.

We also know that 100 per cent of the market, its production and distribution, is a criminal enterprise. They don’t follow any law. They don’t obey any rule. They’re not accountable in any way. There’s no oversight, no governance and no testing. They operate in the dark. And they make money — the easiest money they ever made.

I ran large organized drug crime units in Toronto for many years. The money they make in cannabis is the easiest money organized crime makes. There’s no competition for them in the marketplace. Canadian society generally does not see this as a serious criminal activity, and they control 100 per cent of it; there’s no competition. So it works out to about $20 million a day, flowing into criminal enterprise in this country.

The price of leaving that is that we’re leaving the health and safety of our children in the hands of criminals. We’re allowing criminals to make enormous profit. The sad reality is you cannot regulate a prohibited substance. As long as that criminal prohibition remains in place, there’s no way we can ever get control over its production and distribution or effect reasonable regulations that control its consumption.

Cannabis is a serious problem in the workplace today, but it’s very difficult for an employer to regulate that behaviour because it’s criminally prohibited. It’s a difficult conversation for parents, teachers and health professionals to have with their kids about the risks of cannabis today. How do you talk to your kids about committing a criminal act in a socially responsible or less risky way? It’s only by lifting that prohibition that we actually can get control of this situation. I think it’s a very responsible approach.

For those who focus on the Government of Canada merely legalizing cannabis, they’re completely missing the story here. The story is we’re lifting that prohibition to effect a comprehensive and effective system of regulatory control over production, distribution and consumption of cannabis in this country. It’s going to create safer and healthier communities. It will, over time, displace that illicit market and give Canadian adults a healthier, lower risk, more socially responsible choice. I’m confident they will make that choice once we make it available to them.

Senator Dean: As sponsor, as we come to the end of these hearings, I want to recognize the work of the officials who supported us from various government departments, some of whose work goes back to the task force and some goes back to the beginning of the medical cannabis system, which reminds us this isn’t a cold start.

I’ve worked with a lot of public servants over the last 20 years. Canada’s public servants have a global reputation for being the smartest and the best, and I also include our political public servants in that light. We have seen and I have been reminded of the talent and commitment of our public servants by the people who have supported us in this room and who will do that beyond today. As sponsor, I want to put that on the record. Thank you very much.

Senator Omidvar: In December of last year, we were blessed with the presence of Senator Nancy Ruth in the Senate. She was a member of the Conservative caucus and a powerful voice for gender equality. I will try to channel the question she would have asked you.

Was a gender-based analysis done on the impact and offences contained in the bill? If yes, what shifted? I certainly hope the answer is yes. What shifted, then, as a result in the bill? If the answer is “no,” why not?

Mr. Blair: Senator, the health minister has made it clear — I work closely with her — that everything within her ministry is subject to a GBA+ analysis. I will defer to senior officials who would have been involved in that process from the outset.

Mr. Costen: This may be something that we both have to play off one another.

As Mr. Blair indicated in the previous answer, whether it’s launching a major new grants and contribution program such as the one that he made reference to previously with respect to supporting various communities to do public education and health promotion, disease prevention activities, or whether launching a major government policy or, in this case, a significant new piece of legislation, we undertake a comprehensive gender-based analysis of the impacts of the program, the policy or in this case a change of law.

Unfortunately, I do not have before me the GBA that we’ve — I feel a bit constrained in trying to recall precisely the details of that analysis. Suffice to say that it is a key feature that we undertook in this regard.

I don’t know, Carole, if there’s anything you’d like to add to that.

Mr. Blair: I’ll jump back in because I was involved in some of this discussion. For example, when we were looking at youth usage, we were able to break it down by gender. We saw that youth usage was higher among young males than it was among young girls, but it was increasing for young girls. That was part of the consideration and the concern with respect to training materials.

Also in the development of those training materials, our government has been working with a number of NGOs and developing some things we’re working with a number of different communities organizations on. In every conversation I have with those organizations, I remind them of applying the lens of young women and girls to training materials, public responses and support programs that can be brought forward as a result of this to make sure that lens is applied. It is a problem that, frankly, cannabis use is affecting boys and girls in our society, but we also recognize that the information that we want to make sure we share with young girls may be a little nuanced and different than that which is used to reach young boys.

Senator Deacon: On Friday, we had a number of witnesses who spoke that frankly complemented and overlapped with some of the work we’re talking about this afternoon, your team and Mr. Costen’s team.

The reality is, as we continue to listen and meet with many Canadians and listen to a few months of witnesses here, the responses of Canadians feel like they’re really embedded in fear — fear of change, fear of significant change, lack of the unknown — these are all change issues — and the perception that the engagement process, the opportunity to be listened to or to be heard is done and over, and here we go. I think part of that is tied to the readiness issue, too, and what that looks like.

While we continue to frame the well-being of our youth as the number one priority — and we hear it in this room and we hear it regularly — this message is being missed. I feel fairly accurate in stating that. It’s not being heard as the driver of everything that we’re trying to do.

How do we get this right? I think that’s a critical piece. All of the pieces matter, absolutely, but how do we get this messaging — this is our most important priority — understood and comprehended and processed first for Canadians before we work through all the other pieces that will come?

Mr. Blair: Thank you, senator.

I was in the house yesterday, and a member got up and he stated that when this legislation comes in, kids under the age of 18 will be able to legally possess up to 5 grams of cannabis. It’s not true. I’m sure that scared a lot of parents. I’m sure when they heard it, it frightened a lot of parents. I won’t ascribe motive, just the effect. I think a lot of parents would have been frightened by that. Even more dangerously, a whole bunch of kids were misinformed by that and it puts them in jeopardy.

In every province and territory, without exception, there will be legislation put in place that enforces an absolute prohibition on possession, purchase and consumption of cannabis for people under the age of majority. That’s the reality. The police will be able to enforce that prohibition; seize the drug, issue a ticket. There are consequences. Thank God it’s not a criminal record because, in my opinion, that’s a disproportionate consequence. That’s a consequence that causes more harm than good. We will be able to enforce that prohibition.

I don’t know what the motive is for saying those things, but I think we need to get back to facts and share facts with Canadians. That’s ultimately my responsibility and the responsibility of my government, so we’ll continue to work hard on going out to communities and keeping people informed so they know the facts, not the fear, but the truth. I think it’s really important that we do that. We have to keep doing that.

I’ve gone into communities. Decent people who just care about their kids have been fed this nonsense, quite frankly, and they’re really frightened. Frankly, the job I used to have, and a lot of people thought I was law enforcement, but really my job was to keep people safe. I strongly believe that fear is the greatest enemy of public safety. When people are afraid, they don’t use public space, they lock their doors, put alarms and bars on them, they withdraw from society and from each other. They make choices that actually make them less safe.

In my old job as a police chief but also one of our jobs here is to take the fear out of life. I think you do that by giving people the facts. Give them the truth, and from my position, reassure them that we’re not going to put their kids in jeopardy. When someone tells them something that isn’t true, you have to stand up and respectfully say, “That’s not true.”

The Chair: Before I go to round two, I’m going to put in a question or two.

First of all, I’m concerned that there still is too much possible criminalization in the system with Bill C-45 for simple possession, simple personal use which we now say is a health matter and shouldn’t be a criminal matter.

The government got elected on this platform. It was part of its platform that it was going to do this. Since then, thousands of people have been charged with possession. Of course, the law is still in effect, but there’s still some discretion. You wonder about that discretion, particularly when it comes to people who are part of marginalized communities and people in poverty or racialized minorities. We’ve heard evidence of concern that there has been an over-representation in those charges from those groups of people.

When the Criminal Lawyers’ Association was in here, they said that under Bill C-45, an adult who possesses over 30 grams of marijuana in public is a criminal. A youth who possesses more than 5 grams of marijuana is a criminal. An 18-year-old who passes a joint to his 17-year-old friend is a criminal. An adult who grows five marijuana plants is a criminal.

Those statements may be a little on the extreme side, but this whole business of drawing these lines of 30, 18, five plants, et cetera, are not things that we’re used to seeing in terms of alcohol, another drug that has had a profound effect on the population for a long period of time, or tobacco for that matter.

I’m particularly concerned about possession. I think we should be totally decriminalizing possession. In particular, I’m concerned about any criminalization that may involve youth. When I talk about youth, I’m not just talking about the legal age limit of 18. I’m talking about the social consideration of what we consider youth, which would be people even into their 20s. If these people get a criminal record, their lives can be ruined. It can be difficult to get a job or to do anything productive in life. It just weighs on them terribly.

What do we do to take out the criminalization from this and to ensure that if there are going to be penalties, that they are alternate forms of justice, like tickets, that are not going to give them a criminal record?

Mr. Blair: Thank you, senator. You raise some interesting things.

Any federal statute with a penalty is essentially criminal law. When the criminal lawyers said all of those behaviours are criminal, did they also mention that not having a bailer in their boat or not wearing a life jacket is a criminal offence? It is under federal statute, but we don’t give people criminal records for that.

Most of the waivers you describe, I believe, wouldn’t result in a criminal record. They’re not offences that people would be fingerprinted for. Most of them would be resolved and dealt with through a ticketing scheme. I understand some of the technical amendments that we’re bringing forward more clearly define a fine structure for the enforcement of those offences. They’re not things that result in a criminal record. I think that needs to be clear.

I also want to differentiate, when you say you want things to be decriminalized. It’s important to understand what that is. Decriminalization maintains a prohibition, but instead of having a criminal penalty, you have a civil penalty. That’s essentially what decriminalization is. In fact, if you look at what we are proposing for enforcing the prohibition of young people in the possession of cannabis by using provincial regulation exactly as we do with alcohol, essentially that is decriminalization because the prohibition is maintained, but it’s not maintained through criminal sanctions but, rather, a civil penalty, which is what the province allows for in its ticketing regime. So it’s a far less consequential way of dealing with it.

I would also point out that in the criminal law, particularly as it deals with young people, there is a requirement — and it’s very explicit in Bill C-45 — that any offence for a young person must be dealt with in accordance with the Youth Criminal Justice Act. The YCJA requires that the police, prosecutors and the courts deal with that young person in the least consequential way. I’m paraphrasing and perhaps oversimplifying it, but that’s the real requirement. For example, if the police find a young person in possession of any amount of cannabis in any province or territory, they have the ability to deal with that young person in a number of different ways. The least intrusive way would be issuing a provincial ticket. If the circumstances require it be dealt with in a more consequential way, that would have to be justified by the police under the Youth Criminal Justice Act.

I believe there’s a great proportionality available in this system and, quite appropriate as well, it does not result in a criminal prosecution. It does not result in a criminal record. It’s an offence under the federal statute, and therefore I suppose the criminal lawyers are saying, yes, that would make it a criminal offence. But the reality is the records for that are kept in a very different way and do not result in what would be considered an indictable record that would be available to the police or border security officers ever. That information would simply not be available on CPIC because it’s not fingerprinted or loaded up into those information systems.

The Chair: Thank you. I have two people on for second round.

Senator Seidman: Thank you very much, Mr. Blair. You talked about facts and making facts evident to Canadians. It’s really critical. You’re quite right. I completely agree with you.

I’m not sure if you saw a feature on CBC television last week on Colorado and the increase on marijuana in the illegal market there. In today’s CBC news bulletin, there is a follow-up to that titled “Why Colorado’s black market for marijuana is booming 4 years after legalization.” In fact, it says:

. . . in Colorado in 2014, the government’s goal was to regulate and tax a drug that was already widely used and to squeeze out dealers and traffickers in the process.

In other words, exactly the rationale we’ve heard from the government. But in Colorado — and this piece relies on the law enforcement agencies in Colorado — “. . . law enforcement authorities in the state say legalization has done the exact opposite.”

They go on to talk about all the problems of the black market booming, driven by criminal organizations. Marijuana users are deterred by higher dispensary prices and are loyal to their long-time dealers. I’m not going to read the article now, but basically they say:

Investigators say the illegal trade has flourished because the state laws around growing marijuana were overly generous in the beginning and hard to enforce.

In other words, when the genie is out of the bottle, you cannot put it back in. I’d like to hear how you would respond to that.

Mr. Blair: Yes, ma’am, I’m happy to because they shared that experience with us. Their advice to us, which we took, was to be very restrictive and very careful. What they said to us was that there were many unintended consequences of the approach they took.

For example, they allowed unlicensed, unregulated cultivation for hundreds of plants. We do not allow that. The only cannabis that would be available for sale in this country would be that produced under the strict regulatory conditions overseen and enforced by Health Canada. That’s not the approach that Colorado began with. They did not put the same strict regulatory controls advised by our task force and adhered and agreed to by the provinces and territories in the establishment of their distribution networks.

They were also operating in an environment where they were surrounded by states that had not legalized, so they became the source state for all the states around them for illicit production. The circumstances that they found themselves in and the regulatory approach that they took was extremely problematic. They shared that with us.

I would contrast, in many significant ways, our approach, which is far different. Our approach is where the only cannabis allowed for sale is that which is produced under strict regulatory control. If you go to one of these licensed producers, you would see the extraordinary security requirements, the accountability and oversight, the governance and the testing put in place. That was not what was originally established in Colorado. We did not replicate their mistakes. They’ve shared with us, we’ve learned from that and we’ve taken a different approach.

By the way, other states have done that as well. If you contrast, for example, the experience in Washington State, which took a much stricter regulatory approach, somewhat more similar to ours, they have not had the same experience with illicit cannabis producers in their jurisdictions.

I am compelled to go back to this: We have a situation today where 100 per cent of cannabis production in this country is illicit. It’s one of the reasons we are retaining, partly in response to Senator Eggleton’s concerns, the authorities that the police currently possess to deal with organized crime, to deal with those illegal producers, to deal with those illegal drug traffickers. Their authorities, the offences and the penalties are being retained. So the police can still do their job.

In fact, we are also making significant new investments. The Minister of Public Safety has announced $113 million for both the RCMP and the CBSA, for the RCMP to improve their law enforcement capacity to address organized crime issues as they relate to cannabis, and to invest in CBSA so that we may do a better job of upholding the integrity of our borders because we have responsibilities to other jurisdictions as well. It’s not simply strict regulation, but it’s significant investment. I think those things were missing in the other jurisdictions that you refer to.

I’m very grateful to that jurisdiction for sharing their experience with us so that we might learn from their lessons and not have to replicate their mistakes. We’ve learned from their history. I think we’re going to do it a very different way.

Senator Patterson: Mr. Blair, you assured us, in answer to my question about the lack of consultation with Aboriginal people, that you were going to continue the dialogue after the bill is passed.

Frankly, I don’t believe that the Aboriginal people are willing to accept that kind of an approach. The UNDRIP resolution talks about prior informed consent — prior. Most of the consultation that has taken place has been after the bill was introduced.

I have two questions. I’m talking about accountability to Parliament. What I want to know is, all of the great discussions that you’re having and all of the great progress you’re making, as you told us, on culturally appropriate treatment programs, culturally sensitive education, if this is all going so well, why would you not commit to coming back to Parliament and giving us a detailed report, more detailed than you’ve been able to give us in your few minutes here today, on these significant issues for very vulnerable Aboriginal populations dealing with intergenerational trauma and then satisfy us that we’re ready to implement the legislation?

Mr. Blair: Senator, I’m only able to respond that we consulted with them prior to the introduction of legislation and that their feedback to us informed us in the development of the legislation we brought forward.

When we had a bill, we went back to those communities and have continued to work with them. Our senior officials at Health Canada and Indigenous Services have been working very closely with those communities. I’ve gone to many of them myself. I’ve assured them that just because I showed up and sat down with them across the table and we’ve talked for hours on these issues and I’ve listened to their concerns, we’re not done. We’re not just walking away and ticking the box and saying, “We’ve finished this consultation.” We’re committing to continuing to work with First Nations and Indigenous leadership on the concerns that they raise.

Many of them have told us, for example, that they have a strong interest in being able to exercise their jurisdiction, and we’ve acknowledged and said we respect that. But they’re not yet ready. So ongoing discussions are taking place and will continue to take place with Indigenous First Nations communities on how that might be put into effect.

We’ve also had other discussions with them. Many of them are very interested in what might be available as far as getting involved in the economic opportunities that this new emerging industry presents. We’ve told them, “You don’t have to have all of that decided before the date of implementation. We’ll continue to work with you.” So those licensed applications are under development. We’ve gone out and hired a navigator to work with Indigenous communities. For those who are interested — and not all are — we’ve said we’re going to work with you and continue to work with you.

I think that commitment to continuous engagement, respectful dialogue, nation-to-nation discussion on all of these issues is very much a part of what we have begun with and will continue with in the implementation of this act and other things.

The government has many bills. You alluded to it yourself, sir. You and I have had a number of important and meaningful, to me, discussions around addictions and mental health services in the Far North. We are committed to continuing to work with those communities and with you to address those, not just in the context of this bill but in the context of the reality that people living in those communities are facing.

Senator Patterson: Thank you.

The Chair: Colleagues, I have two more senators on the list, and, if you take into consideration the fire alarm delay, this is the allotted an hour-and-a-half. If we go much further, we’re going to continue to delay getting into clause by clause, which could be a very lengthy process this afternoon. Do you prefer to keep going with questions, or do you want me to stop the meeting now and take the break and —

Senator Plett: Take a break.

Senator Dean: A quick correction of the record, please, chair.

The Chair: Okay. It’s a point of order, I guess.

Senator Dean: It is a point of order.

There was a statement made earlier about the CBC story and the record of diversion of legal and illegal cannabis in Colorado. The CBC story that I watched on TV the other night also mentioned, against that backdrop, that there had been a 50 per cent diversion from the illegal market to the legal market in Colorado.

I will add to that that Michael Hartman, Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue, said in the HESA committee that more than 70 per cent of the market in Colorado is now regulated, and that number in Washington is between 50 and 65 per cent now in the regulated market.

So, where we saw the dramatic footage in the CBC story, it was obviously about what’s happening in that 50 per cent of the market in Colorado that is still operating illegally.

Senator Patterson: That’s not a point of order.

The Chair: No, that isn’t. It’s a statement.

I do have one other person down here. Senator Saint-Germain. I can take her for just a single question.

[Translation]

Senator Saint-Germain: Good afternoon and thank you for your replies. My question follows on from Senator Eggleton’s.

The bill legalizes the possession of 34 grams of dried cannabis or less for adults, while for young people, the amount is 5 grams. The Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs has indicated, as you mentioned, that provinces have all considered prohibiting simple possession for young people. Your view is that you would like decriminalization and compliance with the youth criminal justice system at the same time. That being the case, why 5 grams and not zero?

[English]

Mr. Blair: I just looked to Justice officials to see if they wanted to respond, but I’m quite prepared to respond to that.

The discussion that took place with Justice on the establishment of a 5 gram maximum was reflecting a concern about young people being in possession of this drug in some circumstances that could be of higher risk. So the concern was, if a young person is in possession and brings it to school, for example, or into a social setting with other young people, that there was a higher risk. So there was concern about applying some reasonable limit on how much a young person could have within the cannabis act itself.

In the discussion of the appropriate place to set that, the amount of 5 grams came up. And I point at the reference to the Youth Criminal Justice Act, because in establishing the 5 grams we also wanted to make sure that it was very clear to any law enforcement officer, prosecutor or judge that the principles of the Youth Criminal Justice Act must apply to any consideration of possession in that amount for a young person.

Finally, I met with all the provinces and territories. We spoke about the importance of using their appropriate jurisdictional authority to enforce the prohibition. And they all get it. It’s their experience with alcohol too and their experience with tobacco.

In every place in this country, it’s an offence for a young person to possess alcohol. It’s not a crime under the criminal law. It’s an offence under the provincial jurisdiction and provincial regulation. Each province has its own regulation prohibiting the possession, purchase and consumption of alcohol and its own provincial offence ticket regime so that the police may enforce it.

There was a concern that, unlike alcohol, we wanted to ensure that young people are not engaged in the distribution of cannabis, so a reasonable limit was placed upon it. I believe that’s where the discussion around the 5 grams came in.

Carole Morency, Director General and Senior General Counsel, Criminal Law Policy Section, Department of Justice Canada: I would add that in the distinction between 30 grams for adults and 5 grams for young persons, 30 grams is quite a bit of dried cannabis. The estimate would be 40 to 50 joints would constitute 30 grams.

The reality is today, in a completely prohibited, criminalized regime, youth still have access to cannabis. Going forward, Bill C-45 recognizes that in a legalized, regulated environment, despite the fact that Bill C-45 prohibits selling, giving or distributing to youth in any circumstance by anyone, the reality is a young person may still come into possession of a small amount of cannabis. That’s why Bill C-45 proposes to not criminalize 5 grams below but to leave it to provincial jurisdictions to address it, as the parliamentary secretary has just noted.

The Chair: We’ve come to the end of this portion of our meeting and will now continue with clause-by-clause consideration of Bill C-45 and consideration of amendments and, beyond that, of observations.

Let me point out that we, of course, also have the feedback in front of us of four other Senate committees, colleagues in Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee, the National Security and Defence Committee, Foreign Affairs Committee and Aboriginal Peoples Committee. They combined to hold 29 meetings on Bill C-45. They sat for over 50 hours and heard from 104 witnesses.

Our committee, Social Affairs, started on March 22, and since that date, we’ve held 18 meetings because we have the responsibility for the entire bill. We sat for just over 45 hours and heard from 131 witnesses on this bill.

We’ve now reached the conclusion of our public hearings, and we’ll proceed shortly to the final stage of our study, which is clause-by-clause examination.

Before we begin, I’d like to remind senators of a number of points. We do have officials from Health Canada and Justice Canada, a row of friends. We’ve been looking down the table at them for so many meetings now and here they are again. They can answer any questions you may have with respect to amendments or observations. Officials from Public Safety Canada, the Canada Border Services Agency and the RCMP are also here with us in the room.

If at any point a senator is not clear where we are in the process — this is a formidable process, I must tell you — please ask for clarification. I want to ensure that at all times we have the same understanding of where we are in the process.

Because of the length of the bill, 226 clauses altogether, I propose that we consider the clauses by the parts and divisions according to the Table of Provisions in the bill.

You have now received the amendment package. When we reach a clause where a member has proposed an amendment, we will allow the member to introduce their amendment. I’ll ask the member to briefly speak to the “what and why” — what the amendment is and why. After each response, I’ll then ask if there are any contrary views or any other views that senators want to express. You can also ask questions of clarification.

We’ve had a lot of debate and discussion over a long period of time. Let’s try to keep this portion short or we could be here for hours and hours.

I will then, of course, ask as to whether we are in favour or against. There are some technical amendments, so we may in some cases just have a quick agreement. We may in other cases have a voice vote or a show of hands. If there’s any division, I will ask for a show of hands. Of course, members at any time can ask for a recorded vote.

Also, if a senator is opposed to an entire clause, I would remind you that in committee the proper process is not to move a motion to delete the entire clause but rather to vote against the clause as a standing part of the bill. So you can indicate you’re opposed to it, and if you want a recorded vote, that’s possible.

Some amendments that are moved may have a consequential effect on other parts of the bill, and I’ll be pointing that out as I go through them. It would be useful for this process if a senator moving an amendment would identify to the committee other clauses of this bill where the amendment would have effect, and if you don’t, I will certainly be trying to keep on top of it. Our staff, of course, will also keep track of all of this stuff and whisper in my ear as necessary.

With respect to who votes, the members that I have here are — you can correct me if I’m wrong on any of it — for the ISG, Senator Petitclerc, Senator Bernard, Senator Dean, Senator Omidvar and Senator Mégie.

For the Conservative Party, Senator Seidman, Senator Poirier, Senator Plett, Senator Stewart Olsen and Senator Patterson.

For the Liberal caucus, the independent Liberals, myself and Senator Munson.

There are other senators in the room, but they are not part of the voting process unless you tell me otherwise or unless there are substitutes I’m not aware of.

Okay, those are the people who are entitled to vote.

Senator Seidman: Thank you for clarifying that, chair. I appreciate it. But there’s another issue associated with the number of people sitting around the table. In my opinion, we should be clear that voting members of the committee should take precedence in terms of asking questions or the discussion around clause-by-clause consideration. As you said, you’d like to keep things short. So I’d like to be assured that the voting members of this committee would take precedence over the non-voting members of the committee.

The Chair: They always have. Any time I’ve had members outside of the committee attend our meeting, I put them down on the speaker’s list, but I put them after the designated members. The same would apply in this case.

Any questions or comments on the procedure I’ve just outlined? Are you all agreed to that?

Hon. Senators: Agreed.

The Chair: Thank you.

Is it agreed that the committee proceed to clause-by-clause consideration of Bill C-45, An Act respecting cannabis and to amend the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, the Criminal Code and other Acts? Is that agreed?

Hon. Senators: Agreed.

The Chair: Agreed.

Shall the title stand postponed?

Hon. Senators: Agreed.

The Chair: Shall clause 1, which contains the short title, stand postponed?

Hon. Senators: Agreed.

The Chair: Clause 2 starts with the interpretation section. I will pick it up from page 2. Let me get my amendments out here because I’ve got the first of the amendments.

The first two amendments are the same, but I understand Senator Dean will withdraw his. So TD-1, consider that withdrawn, and in its place is CP-1, standing for Chantal Petitclerc. You can find this in clause 2, which is on page 2. On page 5, there are three components to it. You can read it, in either language.

Can you tell us what the amendment is, and why, as short as possible?

Senator Petitclerc: Should I read first?

[Translation]

I move:

That Bill C-45, in Clause 2, be amended by:

(a) replacing lines 13 to 15 on page 2 with the following:

“sented to be used in the consumption of cannabis; or”;

(b) replacing lines 17 and 18 on page 2 with the following:

“represented to be used in the consumption of cannabis. (accessoire)”; and

(c) replacing lines 28 to 30 on page 5 with the following:

“ry, a thing that is commonly used in the consumption of cannabis is deemed to be represented to be used in the consumption of cannabis if the”.

This is an amendment that the Committee on Agriculture and Forestry proposed and I would first like to thank Senator Black and Senator Griffin for their concern in making this amendment. The amendment basically proposes to remove accessories used to produce cannabis from the definition of cannabis accessories. People in the industry have made us aware of this concern. With this amendment, gardening products, such as soil, pesticides, specialized lighting and fertilizer, that are currently included in the definition, would be removed from it and could be sold with information indicating that a pesticide, for example, can be used to produce cannabis.

So these are concerns that we have heard from the industry, and also from provinces and territories. The attempt is to differentiate the products and the consumption from the production.

[English]

The Chair: Questions or comments?

Senator Stewart Olsen: I do have a question. I’m not clear on the agricultural amendment. Does that mean you can use fertilizers and maybe toxic materials on the cannabis and that’s okay?

Senator Petitclerc: Fertilizers are used in the production of cannabis, and they are regulated under the Pest Control Products Act. So they are regulated that way. Right now, they are part of the definition of “accessory.” The industry is telling us that it really restricts them in terms of where they can sell those products. They want to be able to sell the production products of cannabis, being able to say that this can be used for the lightening of cannabis or growth or pesticides of cannabis.

Senator Stewart Olsen: That’s fine, as long as it’s regulated. I just wasn’t sure.

The Chair: Anything else? Can we agree to this?

Hon. Senators: Agreed.

The Chair: Carried.

I don’t have any other amendments to clause 2, so I need to know: Shall clause 2, as amended, carry?

Senator Plett: No.

The Chair: On division, is it? Okay. I’ll consider that to be on division, the majority in favour.

Shall clause 3 carry?

Senator Plett: No.

The Chair: On division. Carried.

Shall clause 4 carry?

Senator Plett: No.

The Chair: On division.

Clause 5. I have more amendments. I have JS-1, that’s Judith Seidman, number 1.

I’m being advised this is to create a new clause. If there are no other amendments to clause 5, we can carry clause 5. Is that agreed?

Carried, on division. Everything is on division, I’ll say.

So we have an amendment from Senator Seidman to create a new clause, 5.1.

Senator Seidman: To give you a bit of background, this has been discussed at our committee and as well at Legal and Constitutional Affairs, and it has to do with not applying harsher sanctions to youth and adults. The issue has to do with the Youth Criminal Justice Act. In fact, we had a question to the Department of Justice on Friday when we were here. We asked them if this law specifically provides the protection for youth that we’re looking for. It’s not written in the law, and they seem to be deferring it to the provinces.

So we said to them, “What’s the harm of writing it in the law? Is there any harm of writing this guarantee in the law?” They didn’t seem to find any harm.

So it was Pascal Lévesque, the chair of the committee with the Barreau du Québec, who clarified that nothing in Bill C-45 should limit the operation of the extra-judicial measures that are provided for under the Youth Criminal Justice Act, which would encourage the use of warnings and referrals instead of criminal sanctions for youth caught with over 5 grams of cannabis, up to a certain limit, of course.

She said very clearly that it says to all stakeholders that the police community officer would have that in mind, so before stepping over to criminalize and stigmatize the principles, the scope and the objective of the YCJA would be applied.

That’s the whole point of this amendment. So it is proposed to amend the bill to provide that no harsher sanctions are applied to youth than are applied to adults. Thus, I move:

That Bill C-45 be amended, on page 6, by adding the following after line 8:

“5.1 For greater certainty, nothing in this Act is to be construed as limiting the operation of the extra-judicial measures that are provided for under the Youth Criminal Justice Act.”.

The Chair: Are there any other comments on this?

I’d like to ask the officials. I’m not certain whether this doesn’t have some challenge for doing what you want to do. Can I clarify that with the officials from Justice, I guess, in this case?

Ms. Morency: I received the question on Friday, and I think my answer was that there could be unintended consequences. It is to the following effect: Rules of statutory interpretation direct courts, when they’re interpreting and applying a law, to ask what was in Parliament’s mind when they adopted this section or that section in a bill. Part of our answer was that clause 5 of Bill C-45 already says very directly, explicitly, that the Youth Criminal Justice Act applies to the offences committed here involving young persons. There’s no doubt or uncertainty about that.

To add the proposed clause in the motion, then a court, applying usual rules of statutory interpretation, would ask what was in Parliament’s mind when they adopted 5.1, and how is that different than what’s in clause 5 in Bill C-45, as before the committee?

All I can say is that while there’s no intention, I assume, to create a different approach, I think that might be part of the natural discussion and interpretation of two very similar clauses. What was the difference in the first one that isn’t addressed and that needs to be addressed in 5.1? So the harm is potential unintended confusion because of statutory interpretation.

The Chair: The beginning of this says, “For greater certainty.” Doesn’t that tell them something? It’s not contrary to the previous clause 5, but it’s saying, “For greater certainty.” Doesn’t that explain it better? You’re not sure.

Ms. Morency: I don’t really have anything more to offer.

If you look at other laws of general application that are criminal in nature, the Youth Criminal Justice Act will apply no matter. It’s not usual in other laws where you would say specifically, “If a youth is the accused, then the Youth Criminal Justice Act applies.”

Bill C-45 does do that here exceptionally, to be clear, because the offences are a bit different when you are dealing with youth with different penalties, including when the youth is a victim. So there’s an intention to be very clear, for sure, with clause 5 in Bill C-45. All I can say is that what more or what different does 5.1 add? That would be the question.

Senator Seidman: I would like to add that this amendment comes from a unanimous recommendation of the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee that studied, in pre-study, the legal and constitutional issues associated with this legislation, and heard from many witnesses. This was a unanimous amendment. It was non-partisan and supported by every member of the committee. I think that’s important to understand.

The Chair: That doesn’t mean it’s right legally, but anyway.

Is it agreed to have this amendment?

Hon. Senators: Agreed.

The Chair: Carried.

Next, on page 6, this is also a new clause 5.1. If this actually gets carried, it would be clause 5.2.

I want to point out something else. Further down the line, if you look at page 25 in your amendments, there’s a JS-6 amendment. The latter wording here is much the same as this wording, but it has some other wording. It talks about possession of cannabis as well. How can we marry this up here? JS-6 has very similar wording in one respect but has additional wording in another respect. I just want to point that out. We can deal with that when we come to it, or we can try to marry them now.

Okay, when we come to it.

This one is in the name of Senator Petitclerc.

[Translation]

Senator Petitclerc: I move:

That Bill C-45 be amended, on page 6, by adding the following after line 8:

“5.1 For greater certainty, this Act does not affect the operation of any provision of provincial legislation that is more restrictive with respect to, or prohibits, the cultivation, propagation or harvesting of cannabis in a dwelling-house.”

We acknowledge that this amendment comes to us directly from our Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs. That committee passed the recommendation unanimously: it states that provinces have authority over whether or not to allow home cultivation.

Moreover, I would like to thank our colleagues on the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs for their work, including Senator Pratte and Senator Dupuis, who worked hard on this amendment. We have often heard this concern, especially from Quebec and Manitoba; they unanimously support this amendment we are proposing today.

I would also like to say that it comes back a little later among the amendments. It is true that we could have added it further along in our amendments, in clause 12, for example, which deals with the production of cannabis. We decided to put it right at the beginning, as a result o