Notorious Pedophile ‘Crucified’ By Vigilante Gang As Warning To Child Abuser

A known sex offender was killed by a gang to warn pedophilia rings

© press The child abuser was killed and hung from a road sign as a 'warning' to ther peodphiles

A gang of vigilantes has captured a notorious child abuser and "crucified" him on a road sign to send a warning out to pedophile rings.

The rapist was snatched from police custody before being killed, maimed and then strapped to a wooden post and hung from a huge road sign at a busy intersection.

His castrated, naked body was found with a sign around his neck that read:

“This happened to me for being a child rapist and it is going to happen to all the pedophiles, scandalmongers, traitors… Be aware that this is not a game.”

© press The pedophile’s dead body was found with arms tied to a wooden pole and his penis cut off and stuffed in his mouth.

Police believe the killing is the work of the infamous Knights Templar Mexican drug cartel who has recently appointed themselves as violent moral law enforcers in Mexico.

29-year-old Eduardo Cruz had been taken into police custody after being caught raping an 11-year-old boy.

Cruz was being transported to the police station when the patrol car was ambushed and blocked in by armed men in two vehicles who took kidnapped the suspect.

Police officers were directed to a road junction in Contepec in southwestern Mexico the following day by an anonymous phone call.

They arrived to find the victim hanging naked from a traffic sign with his arms tied to a wooden pole and his penis cut off and stuffed in his mouth.

A cardboard sign with the chilling warning to other child abusers was reportedly fixed to his chest with two ice picks.

© press Police believe vigilante gang 'The Knights Templar' may be behind the attack

The drug cartel known as the Knights Templar could be responsible for the savage execution, according to local analysts.

The gruesome warning signals a new development in a move to vigilantism from the drugs wars that have rocked Mexico for decades.

The recently-formed Knights Templar have branded themselves as Robin Hood-style fighters, say crime experts, who enforce the laws on one hand and break them on the other.

The area where the crucified body was found is at the center of a bloody turf war between the Knights Templar and the rival Michoacan family cartel.

In the neighboring state of Guerrero, the bullet-riddled bodies of 16 men, said to be Knights Templar members, were found in an abandoned van.