France Passes Law Saying Children Can Consent To Sex With Adults
President Macron’s government has voted against having an age of consent in France, becoming the latest nation to give in to pressure from an international network of liberal activists determined to normalize pedophilia and decriminalize sex with children across the world.

Federal law in France now has no legal age of consent, meaning adults who have sex with children of any age will not be prosecuted for rape if the child victim is unable to prove “violence, threat, duress, or surprise.”

The draft bill against sexual and gender-based violence, known as the Schiappa law, was signed into law by the French Parliament on 3 August, sparking outrage in France as parents and children’s rights groups accuse Emmanuel Macron’s government of betraying the nation’s children.

The lack of an age of consent places millions of children in serious danger of sexual abuse in France, according to child protection officials.

Childrens’ rights groups criticised Emmanuel Macron’s government for failing to provide a legal age of consent to protect children, pointing to the recent decision by French courts to refuse to prosecute two pedophiles for the rape of 11-year-old girls because authorities couldn’t prove the children did not consent.

On Thursday, several groups, including the French Council of Associations for the Rights of the Child, issued a joint statement to express their “indignation” at the abandonment of an age of consent under French law.

In a joint statement, the associations condemned the new law in the strongest possible terms: “This should be the flagship measure of the bill: the introduction of an age below which children would automatically be considered unable to consent to sex with adults.“

The French child protection associations are demanding that Macron’s government revoke the Schiappa law and establish a legal age of consent under which any sexual act involving an adult and a child will constitute rape.

The abandonment of a legal age of consent has shocked French society. The controversial bill had focused on an appropriate threshold for an age of consent — 13 or 15 years. However, the choice was made to abandon the principle of a minimum age.

In its final version, the Schiappa law provides that for children under the age of 15, “the moral constraint or the surprise is characterized by the abuse of the vulnerability of the victim who does not have the necessary discernment for these acts“. However, the former minister of women’s rights, Laurence Rossignol, says these notions of “vulnerability” and “discernment” leave far too much room for pedophiles to escape punishment under the law.

“Outdated laws”

France is not the only European nation moving towards the decriminalization of sex with children. According to top German immigration attorney Hans Goldsberg, laws on pedophilia are outdated and need to be abolished.

“There will be the need for a consolidation of national laws under the current European system on the legal aspects of sex. Most of these national rulings don’t represent the modern social complexities of our times and are legally baseless. Some even argue that a law on the age of consent has become superfluous and should no longer exist,” claims the lawyer who has worked for more than 35 years in his field.

Support for the European motion also exists in the United States.

“Just think about how 2,000 years ago the Greeks were a much more open society. We must remember that love between a man and a boy were not as taboo as today,” explains cultural anthropologist, Thomas Black, from the University of Michigan.

Currently the age of consent varies by state across the USA and is currently set between 16 and 18 years of age.