Imported Chewing Gum Brand May Not Be Halal!
If you opened this article, chances are that you are a person who is very fond of chewing gum. You might prefer local brands that are available for less than 5 rupees in practically any store in your neighbourhood, or the fancy imported brands you get at the stores in petrol stations.

However, if you prefer the second option, there’s always a risk of the products not being halal. It’s not just local markets that have non-halal food coming in; turns out that imported products can be just as haraam.

It Is Very Likely That Trident Is Haraam

The popular chewing gum made by Mondelez International is not certified halal. There was a post on Trident’s Facebook page that confirmed as much.

However, you might say that it not being certified halal is not the same as it not being halal. While that’s true, it was stated in an email to the relevant consumer services about Trident Layers, a certain brand of chewing gum. It was said that even though there was no alcohol left in the gum by the time it was packaged, pork gelatin is used in the manufacturing process.

Dear Lazeena:

Thank you for contacting us about Trident Layers. Your comments and inquiries are appreciated because they provide valuable feedback about our brands.

Our Trident Layers products do contain gelatin that is derived from a pork base.

Alcohol can be used as a carrier in certain flavors in our confectionery products. Also, our gums, mints, and cough drops are not kosher certified.

There is no alcohol present in the final product (or any of our other confectionery products). Any minute traces of alcohol that might possibly be used as a flavor carrier would dissipate during the manufacturing process and would not be present in the finished product.

Thank you for taking the time to contact us. We hope that you will continue to purchase and enjoy our products. Sincerely,

Consumer Relations

source: isithalal.blogspot.com

This isn’t the first time

This isn’t the first time this has happened. Just recently, the popular toasted pastry, “Pop Tarts”, was allegedly banned from local markets because it contained haraam products too.

Please look out for these things when buying products like these. There are always Halal Certified alternatives you can pick out. If you didn’t know a product is haraam while having it, the blame isn’t on you. However, if you continue having it after you find out, it is. So make sure to boycott such products and spread awareness about it so others can know as well.