Joondalup is a suburb in Perth
Or as the commercial promoting pork says “put some pork on your fork”

WAY TO GO AUSTRALIA

MAYOR REFUSES TO REMOVE PORK FROM SCHOOL CANTEEN MENU... EXPLAINS WHY

Muslim parents demanded the abolition of pork in all the school canteens of a Perth suburb.

The mayor of the Perth suburb of Joondalup, has refused, and the Town clerk sent a note to all parents to explain why...

“Muslims must understand that they have to adapt to Australia, its customs, its traditions, its way of life, because that's where they chose to immigrate.

They must understand that they have to integrate and learn to live In Australia.

They must understand that it is for them to change their lifestyle, not the Australians who so generously welcomed them.

They must understand that Australians are neither racist nor xenophobic, they accepted many immigrants before Muslims (whereas the reverse is not true, in that Muslim states do not accept non-Muslim immigrants).

That no more than other nations, Australians are not willing to give up their identity, their culture.

And if Australia is a land of welcome, it's not the Mayor of Joondalup who welcomes foreigners, but the Australian people as a whole.

Finally, they must understand that in Australia with its Judeo-Christian roots, Christmas trees, churches and religious festivals, religion must remain in the private domain.

The municipality of Joondalup was right to refuse any concessions to Islam and Sharia.

For Muslims who disagree with secularism and do not feel comfortable in Australia, there are 57 beautiful Muslim countries in

the world, most of them under-populated and ready to receive them with open halal arms in accordance with Shariah.

If you left your country for Australia, and not for other Muslim countries, it is because you have considered that life is

better in Australia than elsewhere.

Ask yourself the question, just once, “Why is it better here in Australia than where you come from?”

A canteen with pork is part of the answer.”



If you feel the same forward it on, if not, hit the delete