Images of Ursula Andress from James Bond movie resurface as Sonia Gandhi’s photographs
“चमचों की राजमाता “सोनिया गाँधी”अपने दिनों में कांग्रेस को मजबूत बनाती हुई ,,,,,,,,,,,कुछ दुलर्भ फोटो चमचों की आँखें चकाचौंध करने के लिए…तौबा तुम्हारे ये नजारे (The leader of Bootlickers, “Sonia Gandhi” is making Congress strong in her country. Some rare pictures to dazzle the eyes of bootlickers. Gosh what an imagery.),” is the caption shared with a set of images circulated as photographs of former Congress President Sonia Gandhi.

Individual users on Facebook were at the forefront of sharing these images in the last 24 hours, including on a Facebook group We Support Narendra Modi 2019.

Swiss actress Ursula Andress on the set of a James Bond movie

The photographs are actually of Swiss actress Ursula Andress on the sets of the first Bond movie Dr. No. The man pictured with Andress is Scottish actor Sean Connery, the first actor to portray the fictional character of British spy James Bond.

Alt News had debunked this set of images last year when it was viral with the identical claim that the woman in the photographs was Sonia Gandhi. A Google-reverse image search, however, proved otherwise.

We have often observed that misleading images are shared on social media as Sonia Gandhi’s photographs. Recently, we debunked a photoshopped image that attempted to show Gandhi sitting on a man’s lap. Hollywood actress Reese Witherspoon’s photograph has also been used to claim it is the image of a young Sonia Gandhi as a “bar waitress”. A photograph of Marilyn Monroe was morphed with Sonia Gandhi’s face, calling her a “bar dancer”.

Donate to Alt News!

Independent journalism that speaks truth to power and is free of corporate and political control is possible only when people start contributing towards the same. Please consider donating towards this endeavour to fight fake news and misinformation.



Donate Now To make an instant donation, click on the "Donate Now" button above. For information regarding donation via Bank Transfer/Cheque/DD, click here.

You could follow Alt News posts either via our Facebook page or by following us on Twitter or by subscribing to our E-mail updates.