Real Action On Climate Change
Ignoring climate change is simply not an option. Each year there are more extreme weather events like droughts and floods – natural disasters are already costing the economy $18 billion a year.

The Liberal Party is full of climate sceptics and hopelessly divided on climate change.

There is only one political party serious about doing something on climate change - Labor. That is because we are determined to pass on a better deal to the next generation.

We are committed to reducing pollution by 45 per cent on 2005 levels by 2030 and reaching net zero pollution by 2050.

After six years of chaos, uncertainty and division under the Abbott/Turnbull/Morrison Governments, Australians need stability and certainty on climate change policy – that’s what Labor’s plan delivers.

LABOR’S PLAN:

Labor’s plan will tackle climate change and keep the economy growing by:

Investing in renewable energy and batteries to grow jobs and cut power bills: this will help deliver 50 per cent renewables by 2030, which is expected to see the creation of over 70,000 new jobs.

Creating clean transport and infrastructure: a target of 50 per cent of new car sales being electric vehicles by 2030, creating a $200 million fund to rollout charging infrastructure across the country, and introducing responsible vehicle emissions standards. The Electric Vehicle Council estimates that switching to an EV can deliver annual savings up to $2,300 from reduced fuel and maintenance costs.

Working in partnership with business to help bring down pollution: extending the existing pollution cap implemented by Malcolm Turnbull – the safeguard mechanism – to gradually reduce pollution by big business over a decade (0.01 per cent of businesses are covered by the extended safeguard mechanism).

Supporting trade exposed industries to keep Australian businesses competitive: tailored treatment through the safeguard mechanism and a $300 million fund to help business reduce pollution.

Helping the land sector to cut pollution while giving farmers and the forestry industry new opportunities to earn income: strengthening the carbon farming initiative so farmers can make money from reducing pollution.

In addition, Labor will reduce pollution and support jobs by kick-starting Australia’s hydrogen economy; increasing energy efficiency; revive Australia’s international engagement on climate change; and restore Australia’s climate change institutions.

For further information, see Labor’s Climate Change Action Plan.