Saudi Arabia: Cleric sentenced to death after flawed trial: Sheikh Nimr Baqir al-Nimr
UA: 271/14 Index : MDE 23/028/201 4 Saudi Arabia Date: 31 October 201 4

URGENT ACTION

CLE RIC S ENTE NCED TO D EAT H AF TER FLA WE D TRI AL

P rominent Saudi Arabian Shi’a Muslim cleric Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr has been sentenced to

death on vague charges and after a deeply flawed trial. His conviction must be quashed

and he should be released immediately in relation to these charges.

Sheikh Nimr Baqir al -Nimr was sentenced to death by the Speci alized Crim inal Court i n Riyadh, the c apital, on 15

October for a l ist of offences including “d isobeying and break ing allegiance to the ruler”, “callin g to overthrow the

regime”, “calling for dem onstrations”, “inc iting sectarian strif e”, “questioning the in tegrity of the judic iary”, “m eeting

with and supportin g wanted suspects”, and “interf ering in a ne ighbouring state ’s af fairs” (in referenc e to Bahra in).

Evidence for the charges th at Sheikh Nim r al-Nim r was convicted of came from religious serm ons and interviews

attributed to the cleric. Amnesty I nternational ’s re view of these texts c onfirm s that he was exercising his r ight to

free expression and was not inci ting violence. A numbe r of charges, including disobe ying the ruler, should not be

offences at all as they criminali ze the peacef ul exercise of the right to freedom of expression and oth er human

rights. Other charges are vague and ha ve been abuse d here to punish th e exercise of human rights.

The trial that comm enced at the Specialize d Criminal Court on 25 March 2013 was also deeply flawed. The cleric

was denied the m ost basic needs to pre pare for his def ence, including regular ac cess to his law yer and a pen and

some paper to respo nd to the charges. K ey eyewitness es were allowed not to t estify in court in viol ation of Saudi

Arabian laws, and his lawyer was not inform ed of the dates of a number of court hearings.

Sheikh Nim r al-Nim r, who is the Imam of al-Awami yya mosque in al-Qatif, east ern Saudi Arabia , was arr ested

without an arrest warr ant o n 8 July 2012 when securit y officers f orced his car to stop and shot h im when he ref used

to accompan y them. He spent m ost of his detention in s olitary confinem ent in military hospitals and in al- Ha’ir

Prison in Ri yadh. He has been paralyzed in one l eg because of the incident leadi ng to his arrest and ne eds urgent

medical attention to rem ove a second b ullet in his back .

Please write immediat ely in English, Arabi c or your ow n language:

 Calling on the Saudi Arabian authorities t o quash the c onviction and death sentence of Sheikh Nim r Baqir al -

Nimr and releas e him imm ediately in relat ion to these charges ;

 Urging them to provide him with ad equate m edical treatm ent;

 Urging them to establish imm ediately an off icial moratorium on all executions with a view to abolishing the death

penalty in Saudi Arab ia.

PLEASE SEND APPEALS BEFORE 12 DECEM BER 2014 TO :

King and Pri me Minister

King Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud

The Custodian of the two Holy Mosques

Office of His Maje sty the King

Royal Cour t, Riyadh

Kingdom of Saud i Arabia

Fax: (via M inistry of the Interior)

+966 11 403 3125 (please keep trying)

Salutation: Your Majesty

Minister of Jus tice

His Excellency Sheikh Moha mmed bin

Abdulkaree m Al-Issa

Ministry of Just ice

University Stree t

Riyadh 1113 7

Kingdom of Saud i Arabia

Fax: +966 11 401 1741

+966 11 402 0311

Salutation: Your Excellency

A nd copies to :

President, Hu man Rights Commi ssion

Bandar Moh ammed ‘Abdullah al -A iban

Human Right s Commission

PO Box 58 889, Riyadh 11515

King Fahad Road

Building No.373 , Riyadh

Kingdom of Saud i Arabia

Fax: +966 11 461 2061

Email: hrc@haq-k sa.org

A lso send copies to diplomatic representa tives accredited to your country . Please insert local diplomatic addresses belo w:

Name Address 1 Addre ss 2 Address 3 Fax Fax number E mail Email ad dress Salutation Saluta tion

Please check w ith your section office if sending appea ls after the abo ve date.