Story Of ‘Boy Sealed In Wall’ In Ondo As Told By Neighbours
Last week, the report of a boy said to have been sealed in the wall of a house in Ondo town in western Nigeria spread.

After that story was told on online news platforms but without details, rumours have been circulating about the reality of the occurrence.

To get the true picture of the incident, Channels Television crew visited the town in Ondo State and was at the very house where the incident happened.

A bungalow located on 3B Akinfemisoye Street, Oduduwa Area in New Town, Ondo city in Ondo West Local Government Area of Ondo State was where the boy was found.

According to the information gathered, the owner of the house had travelled out of the country several years ago. But the building at the back is being inhabited by tenants who are students of the Adeyemi College of Education in the town.

Suspected To Be Mentally Deranged

Charity Adebayo is one of the students living in the compound. She told Channels Television that the boy, who is suspected to be mentally deranged, fell into a little space between the walls of the house and a food canteen next to it.

“We started hearing the boy saying meaningless things from inside the wall,” she said.

Charity explained that at daybreak, people came and broke the fence and brought him out.

According to her, the grandmother of the boy came to pick him.

Felicia Olaniyi, who operates the food canteen at the other side, gave her own account of the story in Yoruba language.

“The boy was said to have escaped from his grandmother one evening while she was taking him to a church for healing.

“The boy must have fallen in-between the walls of the two buildings,” she said.

According to her, after they heard the voice of the boy in the wall, it attracted people’s attention and a ladder was brought. “He was discovered in the space and the wall was broken,” she explained.

She said the residents also alerted the police before the boy was brought out and also corroborated Charity’s claims that he was taken away by his grandmother.

Michael Gbala, a medical practitioner, who also lives in the neighbourhood told Channels Television that he learnt that the boy was mentally deranged.

Determined to get to the root of the matter and more revelations, Channels Television crew proceeded to the church where the boy was taken to by his grandmother for healing, overseen by an old woman, Prophetess Dorcas Adebayo.

She explained in Yoruba language that the grandmother brought the boy for healing but later came back to take him away.

She believes the boy must have, in a bid to escaped from the grandmother after she took him away from the church, fallen into the wall.

The old prophetess said she did not know the boy’s whereabouts ever since.

A little boy also gave his account of the story, saying the boy had been taken to the State Specialist Hospital in town. ‎

At the hospital sources said that the boy’s name is Aduragbemi Saka and that he was admitted but had since been discharged.

Channels Television, however, got to know the address of the boy and his grandmother which is at number 11, Okegbogi Street in the town.

On getting to the house, the one storey building was locked with a padlock.

The residents of the street refused to speak to reporters, but however said that they knew the boy but had not seen him for a long time.