About Consultant360
Consultant360 received the Silver Award in the Best Healthcare Professional Media Brand category for the 2018 MM&M Awards.

Consultant360 was named an honorable mention in the 2018 Folio: Eddie Digital Award for B2B > Healthcare / Medical / Nursing

Consultant360 is a direct-to-practitioner messaging platform designed to provide timely and relevant clinical information to improve patient care.

Key features of Consultant360 include:

Concise and accurate news briefs covering the medical field—including breaking news, drug approvals, industry updates, conference coverage, and summaries of the latest research

Specialty resource centers, organized by therapeutic area, featuring the latest news, review articles, patient education tools and resources, videos, and podcasts

Commentary and advice from leading experts

Practical, clinical takeaway lessons from everyday patient scenarios delivered in weekly pearls

Daily medical trivia

A comprehensive, searchable database featuring 10,000 clinical images that serve as valuable delineative teaching tools

An interactive forum where a community of peers routinely share insights and opinions about today’s trending topics

Gateway portal to continuing medical education credits and in-person educational symposia

Home to current and archived issues of the venerable, peer-reviewed primary care journal, Consultant

About Consultant

Since April 1961, Consultant has pulled together practical clinical advice from top experts in many specialties in a convenient source for primary care practitioners.

The now-digital publication provides peer-reviewed articles about key topics encountered in clinical practice, as well as short, quick-reading features that emphasize diagnostic quizzes and color photography. Among the most popular features are “Dermclinic,” “What’s Your Diagnosis?” “Photoclinic,” “What’s the ‘Take Home’?” and “Photo Quiz.”

By focusing on the “how-to” of diagnosing and treating common medical problems, Consultant has become the number 1 independent clinical journal among office-based primary care physicians, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners, according to syndicated research studies.

Consultant and Consultant360 are the property of HMP Global, a leader in multimedia health care communications. HMP Global, LLC was founded in 1985 and has offices in Malvern, PA, and East Windsor, NJ. HMP Global is one of two operating divisions of HMP Holdings. The other is NACCME, LLC (North American Center for Continuing Medical Education).