In conversation with Sunita Williams
The half-Indian, half-Slovenian astronaut has broken the world record for the most time spent in space by a woman. A former Navy helicopter pilot, Williams spent 195 days aboard the International Space Station (ISS) on her first space-flight in 2006. Now, the 45-year-old—who lives with her police officer husband and two dogs in Houston, Texas—has been chosen as ISS commander for NASA’s next expedition in 2012. In honour of the ISS, which is set to break the record of former Russian space station, Mir, for longest uninterrupted human presence in space (10 years) on 23 October, we spoke to Williams about daily life on the ISS, her growing appreciation of Earth, and her cravings for samosas in space.

The ISS is set to break former Russian space station Mir’s record for the longest uninterrupted human presence in space. Your thoughts?

I’m not surprised. It’s an amazing piece of machinery. It’s a beautiful star, gold, silver, and white with shining antennas and big solar rays. It looks like something brand new. But once something gets ten years old, things break. It’s a good laboratory, a fully workable space station. I’m going to be up there in 2012 on its 12th anniversary—primarily doing science experiments—and I hope it’s cooking along. We’re finding cool things we had no idea we could even think about when we started building it.

What’s a space flight launch like?

When the engines start up, you think, “Holy moly, we’re really going.” Just eight minutes later, you’re in space.

Eight minutes?

Yeah. All of a sudden your arms start floating. I took my helmet off and it floated away and for me it was six months before I felt gravity again.

The first time you saw space was…

Awesome! There is a distinct layer between the Earth and the universe; which is extremely black. Slowly, the entire universe starts to look 3D, like you can fly through it rather than this sphere of blackness overhead. And when you’re above the atmosphere, there isn’t water vapour in the air to make things foggy. There are windows at the top of the space shuttle and about 10 minutes into the flight, my commander said, “Suni come here.” I fly up to the flight deck—you don’t have to use the ladder, it’s incredible—and I look out and am amazed. You can see the curvature of the Earth. The moon is amazing, shaded by hundreds of complex greys, whites, and blacks. The stars are crystal clear and you can see that some are closer than others.

I read that you took samosas to space.

I was dying for them. A shuttle brought them to the space station—three months late, but they were worth the wait. In fact, we had a big dinner with international food, where everybody got to experience and try new things. My veggie and potato samosas were eaten up so quick I only got one.

Are rumours that you converted to Islam after seeing the lights of Mecca and Medina from space true?

I don’t know where that started. It’s not like I mind and I don’t have favoritism for any religion. But my dad is Hindu and I grew up trying to understand, what Krishna, Ram and Sita means? My mother is Christian, so then, what does Jesus mean? Me personally—not something to do with NASA—I do think there is a God and it’s somebody looking out for us and trying to guide us to live a very happy, productive life. There is further meaning. That’s just my thought.

Usually one thinks, scientist equals atheist. How do you reconcile the two?

There are natural sciences out there. Physics and chemistry—those are things that exist. There’s engineering and we mass model a lot of stuff to design things. But we model based on physics and chemistry because those things occur in nature. So something started everything at some point in time. I don’t think everything is here by happenstance. I think there is some meaning to it all. The biggest contribution is to be nice and be a good role model for kids so in the future they too are caring towards mankind, animals, plants and our planet.

Did you pray during the launch sequence?

When you’re faced with something for the first time and if you’re scared to death of that, you might want to reconcile your life beforehand. I felt like, had I been a good person? Had I made sure I talked to my parents or someone that I had maybe left a bad impression with? So I made an effort to do that about a month before I flew.

What are your thoughts on the Indian Space Research Organization?

Space programs are a bit of a luxury and a bit of a necessity. I’m glad India is at the point where a space program is financially feasible. It’s also a necessity because it’s the next frontier of exploration. It’s part of what humans want to do—we want to explore. I hope we all have a great deal of cooperation while working on these programs. When India sent Chandrayaan to the moon, the United States had a piece of experiment on it, which we are using to map the moon to help the next spacecraft—to potentially—land. The main goal of the International Space Station is to work on peaceful projects. In space, we’re all people from Earth.

What do you love about travel, in space or on Earth?

Travel is always surprising. You can never read enough about a destination in a book to understand or to see what it’s like until you get there. So, I tend to reserve my judgment about places because every time I’ve gone to different places I’ve been surprised. And I love that

Where are you planning to go for your next vacation?

A friend of ours has a cottage in Wisconsin and I’ve never hung out in the woods so I want to check that out..