The Trade Deficit Matters, But Not How You Think
With the Trump Administration underway, international trade is a hot topic and public opinion is more against free trade than ever. There are some legitimate arguments on both sides of the free trade/globalization debate. Yet, while there are some aspects of this debate where there is room for differing opinions, some facts are both beyond dispute and widely misunderstood. The best example of that category is the mistaken idea that when the trade deficit grows it hurts economic growth. Below I explain the flaw in that common misperception and why the trade deficit doesn’t matter in the way many people think it does.

The most famous accounting identity in economics is the formula for computing the most used measurement of an economy’s size, the gross domestic product (GDP). GDP is the value of everything produced in the country in a year. The formula says

GDP = C + I + G + (X-M).

In the formula, C is consumption (consumer spending), I is investment, G is government spending on products and services, X is exports, and M is imports. Thus, (X-M) is the trade surplus or deficit, depending on if the term is positive (surplus) or negative (deficit).

Many people (even financial reporters and a presidential advisor) mistakenly think that an increase in imports (which also means an increase in the trade deficit) lowers GDP. This misperception comes from a shallow understanding of the formula. Since imports (M) are subtracted in the formula, if M gets bigger, GDP must get smaller, right? Wrong!

Imported goods all end up as either C, I, or G because either consumers or the government are consuming them or the imported good is something like a big piece of machinery that ends up in a factory, thereby qualifying as investment (I). Thus, exactly offsetting the negative effect of a new import through the M term is a positive addition to one of C, I, or G.

In simple terms, imports have no effect on GFP at all. The only reason imports are subtracted from GDP is that otherwise they would add to GDP which makes no sense since they were not produced in the U.S. The subtraction offsets a previous addition and simply serves to ensure only domestically produced goods and services are counted. After all, the D in GDP stands for domestic.

While the idea that imports subtract from economic growth or activity is completely false, a trade deficit does matter in a different way. When we run a trade deficit, it is offset by an equally sized inflow of foreign investment, called a capital account surplus; similarly, a trade surplus necessitates an outflow of U.S. capital be invested elsewhere in the world. This comes from the simple fact that a trade deficit leaves the rest of the world with a pile of dollars which can only be spent in the U.S. (at least in meaningful quantities).

Thus, one important outcome of our perpetual trade deficit is that foreigners are investing in our economy. They can buy government bonds (helping to finance the government’s budget deficit), American corporate stocks and bonds, real estate (like Manhattan apartments), or they can build factories, thereby creating jobs. Without all those years of trade deficits, we might not have all those foreign car plants scattered around the country, for example. A trade deficit makes many people think we are losing jobs to overseas plants making all those imports, but the money comes back home and often creates new jobs here in foreign-owned factories.

There is room to debate the impacts of trade on affected parties. While increased trade makes the country richer thanks to the advantages of specialization, some people lose their jobs and may have difficulty in obtaining another job or one that is as good. There is also the possibility that globalization has put a damper on wages for low-skilled workers, but if so, that effect is caused by the presence of trade itself and would be unaffected by whether we run a trade deficit or a surplus. Trade creates both winners and losers, although we win in the aggregate.

People can debate the pros and cons of trade, but they should not misconstrue the impact of a trade deficit. Imports don’t lower our economic growth and any trade deficit simply means we will shortly be receiving some foreign investments. Let’s stick to the real facts about trade as the debate over globalization continues.

Follow me on Twitter @DorfmanJeffrey