Drawing the Line
Details

Missed out on tickets? WATCH THE FREE AND LIVE STREAMING OF DRAWING THE LINE TONIGHT, SATURDAY 11 JANUARY FROM 7.30PM, IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE GUARDIAN

London, 1947. Summoned by the Prime Minister from the Court where he is presiding judge, Cyril Radcliffe is given an unlikely mission. He is to travel to India, a country he has never visited, and, with limited survey information, no expert support and no knowledge of cartography, he is to draw the border which will divide the Indian sub-continent into two new Sovereign Dominions. To make matters even more challenging, he has only six weeks to complete the task.

Wholly unsuited to his role, Radcliffe is unprepared for the dangerous whirlpool of political intrigue and passion into which he is plunged – untold consequences may even result from the illicit liaison between the Leader of the Congress Party and the Viceroy’s wife… As he begins to break under the pressure he comes to realise that he holds in his hands the fate of millions of people.

Howard Brenton and Howard Davies reunite following Hampstead’s critically acclaimed and sell-out hit 55 Days last year. Brenton’s sweeping epic Drawing the Line vividly unfolds the chaotic story of the partition that shaped the modern world.

Howard Brenton’s recent theatre credits include the critically acclaimed #aiww: The Arrest of Ai Weiwei (Hampstead Theatre), Never So Good, Danton’s Death (National Theatre) and Anne Boleyn (Shakespeare’s Globe). Howard Davies’ theatre credits include Children of the Sun, Never So Good and The Cherry Orchard (National Theatre).

‘The real pleasure lies in seeing a pivotal moment in English history presented with such fervent dramatic power’ Guardian on 55 Days

Tom Beard plays Cyril Radcliffe. Previous stage appearances include King Lear (Donmar). Television and Film credits include Whitechapel and Salmon Fishing in The Yemen.

Andrew Havill plays Lord Mountbatten and last appeared at Hampstead in Farewell To The Theatre. Other stage work includes This House (National Theatre) and The King James Bible (Shakespeare’s Globe). Film credits include Les Miserables, The King’s Speech and The Iron Lady.

Lucy Black plays Lady Mountbatten. Her theatre credits include Children of the Sun (National Theatre) and The Only True History of Lizzie Finn (Southwark Playhouse). Television credits include Waterloo Road and Wire in the Blood.

Tanveer Ghani plays Gandhi. His stage work includes In The Balance (New End) and Macbeth (Tricycle Theatre). Film includes Bend It Like Beckham.

Silas Carson plays Nehru. His stage work includes The Comedy of Errors (National Theatre), Arabian Nights (RSC) and Ruined (Almeida Theatre).

Paul Bazely plays Jinnah. His previous stage work includes The Djinns of Eidgah (Royal Court) and Really Old Like 45 (National Theatre). Television includes Benidorm.

Running time is approximately 2 hours and 15 minutes