Fact Check: This viral photo is not of an injured Indian Army soldier but a Russian
Social media has been flooded with posts of the Indian Army and it's valour following the Pulwama terror attack.

A photo of an injured man in army clothes with bandages on his body has been doing the rounds on social media. One Facebook post claimed that after the news that the Army was given a free hand to retaliate for the Pulwama attack, this soldier left his treatment halfway through and bounced back to teach the terrorists a lesson.

After the terrorist attack in Pulwama, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said security forces were given complete freedom to act.

The Archived version of the post can be seen here.

India Today's Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) found that the soldier in the viral photo is not from the Indian Army but is actually a Russian soldier.

The image which has gone viral was posted on the Facebook page 'Mission 400+ saath hai to abhi jude' with the caption: "When this injured soldier got news of the Army getting a free hand, he left his treatment half way and returned to take revenge against the enemy. (sena ke ghayal jawan ko pata chalte hi ki sena ko khuli chhoot milgai, ilaaj ke beech se uthkar dushman se badla lene hospital se bahar nikal aaya, ye hai hamari sena jazba, Jai Hind, Vande Mataram)."

At the time this story was filed, the post was already shared by more than 12,000 people in two days.

Facebook pages 'Political Tamasha', 'Kattar Modi samarthak group se jude aur apne 51 sathiyo ko jode' and 'Mera Bharat Mahan' have also shared the photo with the same claim.

Using reverse search, we found that the soldier in the viral image is a Russian army man. The image was taken back in 2004 in Russia when a few terrorists took around 1,100 people, mostly children hostage in the Beslan school siege on September 1. The seige continued for three days. The Russian military launched a counter-terrorist operation to rescue the hostages.

The Russian army man in the viral photo is Maxim Alexandrovich Razumovsky. During the rescue operation, he got injured thrice. Whenever he got injured he ran for medical treatment and then returned to the school to save people.

Western journalists later called him "Russian Tank". We found many news articles covered by local media lauding his bravery.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Injured Indian soldier left his treatment midway to take revenge of the terror attack. Conclusion The injured soldier in the viral photograph is not an Indian but a Russian soldier. This photo was taken during a terrorist attack in Russia in 2004. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false