Badal do, badal do, Delhi mai sarkar badal do: Mamata at mega rally | IN QUOTES
Trinamool Congress (TMC) chief Mamata Banerjee's mega rally was hosted earlier today (January 19) at Kolkata's Brigade Parade Ground. The mega rally is also known as the United India Rally and was attended by leaders from 20 Opposition parties.

Big names in politics like HD Deve Gowda, Arvind Kejriwal, N Chandrababu Naidu, HD Kumaraswamy, Farooq Abdullah, Omar Abdullah, and Akhilesh Yadav attended Mamata's mega rally. Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP) dissident leaders Yashwant Sinha, Arun Shourie and Shatrughan Sinha were also present.

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi and his mother Sonia Gandhi were not present in the rally. They, however, sent their representatives.

A view of the crowd at Trinamool Congress (TMC)s mega rally in Kolkata | Photo from PTI

MAMATA ON PM POST AND MODI

"Don't have to worry about who will be the prime minister. It's not the right time for that question. We will fix it after the polls," Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee said.

Mamata, critisising Narendra Modi, said, "He [Modi] says all are corrupt. He is the only honest and rest all are corrupt." Putting 'corruption' into perspective Mamata said, "How do they [BJP] get so much money? They have built a party office like a shopping mall."

MAMATA ON GATHBANDHAN

Talking about lines and crossing them, Didi said, "In politics there is a laxman rekha; you didn't leave Laloo ji, Akhilesh, Mayawati. What's the need for a state government if they [BJP] claim they have done everything. This gatbandhan is the need of the hour."

"Everyone must come together for the cause of the nation. Whoever is strong wherever, they should be supported. Collective leadership is important. One seat is not important," Didi said at her mega rally.

MAMATA ON RATH YATRA

"Won't allow danga-fasaad [hooliganism] in the name of Rath Yatra in Bengal.

"Jitna bhi koshish karlo Bengal mein zero milega (try as much as you want but Bengal will not pay you [BJP] off," Mamata Banerjee said.

"BADAL DO, BADAL DO, DELHI KA SARKAR BADAL DO"

Mamata at her United India Rally raised a slogan, "Badal do, badal do, Delhi ka sarkar badal do (change the government at the Centre)."

Everyone must come together for the nation. Right now, collective leadership is important. We want a fight. A new government will be formed at the Centre. It is inevitable. Their expiry date has come. This is people's verdict. Wherever BJP meets, we will hold a meeting at the same place the next day," Mamata said.

RALLIES ACROSS INDIA

"History has led to this mahagathbandhan. Everybody has to come together to save the country. One city is not important but this country is important. We are starting our meeting over here in Kolkata. Now all of us will hold meetings in their respective states," Mamata Banerjee said.

BJP CHANGING GEOGRAPHY, HISTORY OF INDIA

Switching between Hindi and Bengali, Mamata said, "The BJP is changing the history and the geography of the country. They [BJP] said they will provide two crore jobs but the same number of people have lost jobs. They have introduced reservation but there are no jobs in the country."

JAAGO BENGAL JAAGO

"We will work together to bring a new dawn for the country. Modi government has destroyed every institution, be it CBI or ED. Jaago Bengal jaago, jaago manush jaao (Wake up Bengal, wake up people)," Mamata Banerjee said.