Bengal panchayat polls: 1 killed, several injured after violence breaks out on extended day nomination filing
The day-long extension for filing nominations for West Bengal panchayat election was once again marred by violence. One person was killed and several others were injured in a clash that erupted in various districts between ruling TMC and opposition members.

In Birbhum's Suri-1 block one person identified as Dildar Khan was killed after being hit by a bullet. Several houses were also set on ablaze during clashes between the BJP and TMC. Both parties have claimed that the deceased was their supporter. BJP claims Dildar was the general secretary of the BJP's minority morcha.

"He is a BJP worker. He has been shot dead by TMC while another member has received serious injuries in his hand and has been taken to a Kolkata hospital. The entire incident took place in front of the police who were mute spectators," said Dilip Ghosh, state BJP president.

"BJP is getting outsiders from Jharkhand to create trouble in Bengal. Today our party worker Dildar Shiekh has been shot and killed in Birbhum's Suri.," claimed Bengal minister Firhad hakim.

However, refuting the minister's claim, Dildar's father Touhid Khan said, "My son and daughter-in-law were going to file nomination for BJP today when they were attacked. I was standing next to him when TMC goons fired at him."

Slamming both the TMC and BJP over their stance, CPI(M) politburo member Surjya Kant Mishra condemned the bickering over a dead body. "Look at the polarisation in Bengal politics today. Even when a person has died the two are bickering over which party he belonged too! They do the same over Ram and Hanuman as well," he said.

In Murarai block in the same district crude bombs were hurled indiscriminately, during clashes between supporters of the TMC and BJP.

In Murshidabad, Congress MLA Manoj Chakraborty was beaten up, allegedly by TMC workers infront of the Behrampore BDO office. Congress MP Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury's vehicle was also attacked outside the party's office in Shamsherganj.

At Arambagh in Hooghly district, a CPM party office was ransacked and partymen beaten up, allegedly by TMC cadres. An independent candidate's proposer was brutally thrashed by alleged TMC supporters outside the Baraboni BDO office while trying to file nomination today. In Bankura, masked men could be seen openly brandishing pistols in Sonamukhi in an attempt to intimidate locals.