Najeeb Ahmed case ends where it began: A timeline
The Delhi Police and the CBI failed to find JNU student Najeeb Ahmed in two years since he was reported missing.

With the CBI being clueless about JNU student Najeeb Ahmed, the Delhi High Court has now allowed the investigation agency to close the missing case. Najeeb Ahmed's mother, Fatima Nafees had approached the Delhi High Court for setting up a Special Investigation Team (SIT) and monitoring the CBI probe.

On the other hand, the CBI, having failed to make any headway in the case in the past two years, wanted to file a closure report. The high court refused to admit the plea by Fatima Nafees. A CBI closure report brings the Najeeb Ahmed case to a full circle.

Two years ago on October 14, Najeeb Ahmed was reported missing after an altercation with ABVP members in JNU. Four days later on October 18, JNU sought the help from the CBI.

On October 20, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh directed the Delhi Police to set up special team to trace Najeeb Ahmed. Delhi Police declared a reward of Rs 1 lakh for information on Najeeb on October 24. Posters were put up at various places.

Najeeb remained untraced for over a month when on November 25 in 2016, his mother Fatima Nafees moved the Delhi High Court. The high court sought reply the Delhi government and police.

Three days after the petition was filed in the Delhi High Court, the police raised the reward for information on Najeeb Ahmed to Rs 10 lakh. Police failed to get any clue about Najeeb. On November 28, the high court came down heavily on the Delhi Police asking how a person could just vanish from the heart of the national capital.

The Delhi High Court again expressed its frustration with police efforts on December 9, 55 days after Najeeb Ahmed was reported missing. Meanwhile, police's attempt to search JNU campus was met with resistance from students and university administration. Activists also alleged that the police was acting at the behest of the ruling BJP.

The Delhi Police notification enhancing reward for information on Najeeb Ahmed to Rs 10 lakh.

On December 14, the high court ordered the police to scan the entire JNU campus. The high court directed to search all places in JNU campus including hostels, classrooms and rooftops, of the varsity by using sniffer dogs. More than 600 cops, sniffer dogs searched JNU campus on December 19 but there was no trace of Najeeb Ahmed.

The Delhi High Court asked the police on December 22 to explore other methods to find Najeeb Ahmed. It also suggested to the Delhi Police to conduct lie-detector test on Najeeb Ahmed's roommate and nine suspects in the case.

In January 2017, Najeeb Ahmed's family alleged harassment by the Delhi Police. The police officials had conducted pre-dawn searches at their house at Badaun on January 28.

On February 13, Najeeb Ahmed's family moved the Delhi High Court seeking transfer of the missing case to some other agency. Progress in the case was very slow. Police moved for polygraph tests. The nine suspect students approached a magisterial court. The matter remained between magisterial court and sessions courts till May 15.

On May 16, 2017, the Delhi High Court handed over the Najeeb Ahmed missing case to the CBI. The probe was to be supervised by a CBI officer, not below the rank of a DIG.

Six months later on November 14, the CBI told the high court the mobile phones of the suspect students had been sent for forensic examination. The report did not come for another six months.

On May 11 this year, the CBI informed the Delhi High Court that it could gather, in one year of its investigation, no evidence to show that any crime was committed in the Najeeb Ahmed missing case.

On July 12, the CBI told the high court that it was contemplating to file a closure report in Najeeb Ahmed missing case. On September 4, the CBI said it wanted to file closure report as it had found no clue on Najeeb Ahmed despite having probed the case from all possible angles.

Today, the Delhi High Court disposed off the petition of Fatima Nafees seeking direction to police to trace her son. Najeeb Amhed's case now legally draws to a close without any information about the JNU student.

ALSO WATCH | Police could have used this force to find my son instead: Najeeb's mother