Pakistan targets civilians, violates ceasefire across International Border
There is no end to Pakistan's brutality at the international border in Jammu's RS Pura sector, Arnia Sector, Samba sector and Hiranagar.

On Wednesday, Pakistan intensified mortar shelling on the civilian areas at the international border. All through Tuesday night and in the wee hours on Wednesday, Pakistani Rangers bombarded the border villages with heavy mortar shells resulting in civilian causalities. Massive loss of property was also reported from Arnia, Samba, and RS Pura sectors.

Five people including a 10-year-old boy named Krishna were killed in Pakistani shelling while over 25 others received injuries. The injured were rushed to government hospitals in their respective areas and those with severe injuries were referred to Government Medical College, Jammu.

"We are visiting the areas where civilian casualties have been reported. We are providing all kind of help to the people. Situation is very tense at the border," said SP Police HQ (Incharge RS Pura & Arnia Sectors) RC Kotwal while speaking to India Today.

India Today crew was at the ground zero and accompanied a police party who were being assisted by a team of Army during rescue operations in Arnia sector. India Today crew boarded the bulletproof vehicle of the rescue party to assess the situation in the border villages where heavy shelling was taking place.

The police party was appealing to the people to stay indoors or else board the bulletproof vehicle so that they could be taken to a safer area. The police party went inside many houses damaged due to Pak shelling in the villages near the zero line in Arnia sector.

India Today crew accompanying the police party found shell marks on the walls and broken window glasses. While India Today crew was reporting from the area, the Pakistani Rangers resorted to heavy mortar shelling. The police party and the India Today crew had a narrow escape. One of the residents lashed out at Pakistan and asked the government to give a strong reply to Islamabad.

"Our government must teach Pakistan a lesson. We must go on war with Pakistan and divide it like we did in 1971, only then they will stop targeting border villagers," said the angry resident while praising the Army and para-military forces for their work.

Later, the police party went to another village to rescue the stranded civilians there. India Today crew was the only channel which went near the zero line and they saw heavy shelling taking place. India Today team was with the rescue party when they received a distress call from a family which requested the police to evacuate them to safety.

Amidst heavy shelling, India Today crew accompanied the police party to the house where a family was stuck. India Today witnessed the dramatic operation in which women, children were successfully rescued by the police party from the house, an elderly woman who was unable to walk was carried by a policeman on his shoulders. The people were then taken inside the bulletproof vehicle which took them to a safer area. India Today spoke to the rescued people and found them extremely distressed. "I'm very scared. Pakistanis are firing shells at us. We felt we were going to die," said the elderly woman who was rescued by the police party.

"How long we are going to face this? This keeps happening again and again. The government must take tough action against Pakistan," said another woman who was rescued by the police party.

Meanwhile, two top ministers of the Mehbooba Mufti government visited a relief camp set up inside a government school in RS Pura town. BJP MLA from border constituency of Suchetgarh and J&K's Irrigation Minister, PDP leader and state's Relief and Rehabilitation Minister Javed Mustafa Mir met the family members of shelling victim Bhajan Lal and assured them of all help. The body of the victim was kept in the camp.

There was anger among family members of Bhajan Lal who was killed in Pak shelling in RS Pura sector. The inconsolable relatives of the victim were crying next to his body. "Stone-pelters in the valley are being rewarded with jobs and money, but we the residents of border villages in Jammu region are not being given enough compensation by Mehbooba Mufti government. The government is ignoring patriots and appeasing stone-pelters," said an angry relative of the victim.

Both the ministers also reviewed the arrangements made for the displaced border villagers. "We are providing all kind of facilities to the people here. Pakistan is targeting our innocent civilians, but our forces are giving them a befitting reply", said Minister Sham Lal Choudhary while speaking to India Today.

When India Today confronted PDP leader and Minister Javed Mustafa Mir over his party's push for Ramzan ceasefire and Pakistan's betrayal, he went into a defensive mode and admitted that Pakistan was not responding to India's peace initiatives. "Yes, Pakistan is not reciprocating to our peace initiatives. But we are a big nation, we must show a big heart. We must continue to work for peace. As far as action against Pakistan is concerned, that is a call which centre has to take," said Minister Javed Mustafa Mir.

On the other hand, people living in the relief camp asked the government to give a tit-for-tat response to Pakistan. "We are fed up with the shelling now. The government must go on war with Pakistan and destroy it completely. Pakistan's existence is a threat for us," said the people at the camp while raising 'Bharat Mata Ki jai' slogans.

Meanwhile, Pakistan was intermittently firing mortar shells on the border areas in RS Pura, Arnia and Samba sectors till the time of filing of this report.