22 lakh jobs, Rs 72,000 for poor, kisan budget: Congress releases manifesto, makes big promises for 2019
Congress released its manifesto for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections on Tuesday. (Image: Pankaj Nagia/India Today)

Congress released its much-anticipated manifesto for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections titled as 'Hum Nibhayenge' and said there are no lies in the book of promises and it is an attempt to marry wealth and welfare.

Congress has promised to fill up 22 lakh government job vacancies by 2020 in its bid to take on the problem of growing unemployment in the country.

In its manifesto, Congress has pledged to give the highest priority to protecting existing jobs and creating new jobs and Rahul Gandhi announced that new businessman trying to set up businesses will not have to ask for permission from anyone.

Rahul Gandhi's big poll promise that he had announced earlier, the NYAY scheme, remains the central focus in the party's manifesto. Once again talking about the minimum income support scheme, NYAY, Rahul Gandhi said, "Gareebi pe vaar, 72 hazar".

Congress has also proposed to have a separate 'kisan budget' and make non-payment of loans by farmers civil offence instead of criminal one.

"There are no lies in this manifesto as we have had enough lies in the past five years," said Rahul Gandhi.

In another big promise in the manifesto released ahead of the Lok Sabha elections, Rahul Gandhi said Congress will allocate 6 per cent of GDP to education and will strengthen government hospitals and give high-quality healthcare access to poor.

Former Union minister P Chidambaram said, "The manifesto focuses on unemployment, farmer's distress and women's security."

Rahul Gandhi was joined by other top party leaders, including former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Sonia Gandhi, at the manifesto releasing event.

Speaking before the manifesto release, Manmohan Singh said, "Purpose of Cong manifesto is to spell out vision of moving towards forward-looking and inclusive economy, polity."

At the manifesto release, Rahul Gandhi also said his party will work to unite the people. Gandhi accused the Modi government of dividing the society and spreading hatred.

On the agricultural sector, Congress has promised in its manifesto to completely rehaul the "BJP's failed Fasal Bima Yojana that has only helped the insurance companies at the expense of the country's farmers".