Marikina City: The Shoe Capital of the Philippines
Marikina’s history provides an interesting glimpse into the events that helped shape its evolution. The Augustinians were the first to arrive at the Marikina Valley in 1500, at the spot known as “Chorillo” in Barangka. Next came the Jesuits in 1630, in a place now called Jesus dela Peña (Jesus of the Rocks). Here, the Jesuits established a mission and built a chapel.

In 1687, this pueblo became a parish known as Mariquina. In1901, with the coming of the Americans, its name officially became Marikina. The early settlers lived along the riverbanks and nearby fertile farms. With the industry of the natives, combined with the know-how of the early Chinese settlers, the farms began to produce rice and vegetables in great quantities until the valley became part of the country’s most prized hacienda. By the 19th century, Hacienda Marikina was owned and administered by the Tuason family and had become the biggest in the Philippines. For its massive size, natural beauty, and plentiful harvest, the hacienda was declared a mayorazgo (royal estate) by the Spanish colonial government.

In 1887, Marikina’s shoemaking industry began through the pioneering efforts of Don Laureano “Kapitan Moy” Guevarra, assisted by Tiburcio Eustaquio, Ambrocio Sta. Ines, and Gervacio Carlos. Kapitan Moy’s worn-out pair of British shoes provided the creative spark: he took the shoes apart, painstakingly studied their components, and then made patterns out of them. After keenly observing the Chinese in Parian, Manila, he fashioned his own pair of shoes. With crude tools, raw materials, and the villagers’ support, Kapitan Moy subsequently mastered the art of shoemaking.

By the turn of the 20th century, Marikina emerged as a town of shoemakers. Honed by years in shoe manufacturing, the natives quickly developed a work ethic that had prepared them for the arrival of heavy industries in the 1950s. With the proliferation of industrial plants came waves of workers who had chosen to stay, rapidly increasing the population. In no time, shoe manufacturing flourished into a multi-million-peso industry, earning for Marikina the moniker, “Shoe Capital of the Philippines”.

On 11 June 1901, Marikina was incorporated in the newly created Province of Rizal by Act No. 137 of the Philippine Commission. In 1975, when the Metro Manila Commission was created under Presidential Decree No. 824, integrating four cities and 13 towns majority of which were in the province of Rizal, Marikina became part of Metropolitan Manila area. Legend has it that the Jesuits found an icon of the Infant Jesus among the boulders and, thus, decided to christen the new mission Jesus dela Peña or maybe because they were members of the “Society of Jesus” which made famous the place called Jesus dela Peña or Jesus of Stone.

When the Jesuits returned in 1689, they protracted the propagation of Christianity in the town, which included “Olandes” which was a part of Kalumpang. They left Jesus dela Peña, but they converted it to a plantation of wheat or trigo obtaining its name “triguhan”. When the church of San Roque was finished, the barrios of Barangka, Tañong and J. dela Peña were termed “Marikina”. The myths and tales of the source of the word “Mariquina” were not yet justified but in the publication of a newspaper “La Illustracion Filipina” on 15 November 1859 and at the dictionary of Buseta published in Madrid in the same year, the name of “Marikina” was mentioned but they never mentioned its meaning.

In view of the non-existence of records or documents on how Mariquina came into being, the following legends were gathered from the elders of the different barrios in Marikina.

From the name of a priests name “Mariquina” One of the builders of the Jesus dela Peña Chapel was a young priest called “Mariquina” who was given the task of baptizing children to Christianity. Because of this very noble job “Mariquina” was named in his honor to bestow upon him glory and praise.