Parkes brothers Tim and Spike Orr feature on special edition stamp released by Australia Post
news, local-news,

When Parkes brothers Tim and Spike Orr posed for a photo on their farm during the last drought, little did they expect their faces to show up on a postage stamp. Australia Post has released a special edition Drought Relief stamp and it features the local duo front and centre. The new stamp will help raise funds for Rural Aid, the charity behind the Buy a Bale campaign, with the aim of raising $200,000. Up to 100,000 booklets, containing five stamps, are available for purchase for $5, and with each booklet sold Australia Post will donate $2 toward much needed relief efforts. READ MORE: Georgie’s Pantry offering free groceries to Parkes farmers until the drought ends Tim said a photographer from the stock photo agency Getty Images visited the family’s sheep and cropping farm, located 10 kilometres out of Parkes on the Condobolin Road. He said the photo had made the rounds and was used for drought campaigns and promotions. “Now Australia Post has discovered it,” Tim said. “They emailed Spike and asked if we minded them using our photo on a stamp. “I really wasn’t expecting that.” Tim, who’s currently visiting family in Newcastle, stopped by a post office on Wednesday to buy some booklets of the stamp. “The post office staff said to me ‘we’ve never met anyone who’s been on a stamp before’, then I had some photos taken with them,” he laughed. But the fanfare aside, Tim is happy to see the message and support behind the new stamp. “I guess in a way it puts Parkes on the map and shows where the problem is.” Australia Post Managing Director and Group CEO Christine Holgate said the special edition stamp is about showing support and ensuring ongoing awareness for farmers and communities impacted the most. “Our special edition stamp is about showing support for people across Australia affected by drought,” Ms Holgate said. “We've already seen communities across the country rally together to help our farmers, and over the coming weeks these stamps will serve as a reminder of the ongoing efforts needed to support Australians who need it most. “We recognise many Australians have made significant contributions already to drought relief, including some of our largest and well-known businesses. “As an organisation, Australia Post services every corner of the country, and that includes our people and customers who live in many of the impacted areas, so we're doing everything we possibly can to get behind them.” In addition to the Drought Relief stamp booklets, Australia Post is also supporting efforts by donating $100,000 to Foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal (FRRR) to help with relief efforts. And matching up to $100,000 in donations made by Australia Post Group employees via its Workplace Giving Program to four drought-relief charities – Australian Red Cross Disaster Relief and Recovery Appeal, Rural Aid's Buy a Bale campaign, Lifeline, and Aussie Helpers. The Drought Relief special edition stamp booklet is available at participating post offices, via mail order on 1800 331 794 and online at auspost.com.au/stamps, while stocks last. READ ALSO:

https://nnimgt-a.akamaihd.net/transform/v1/crop/frm/z3a8w56CNwsCzkzwrGewmE/83e63d71-4282-43f3-9e35-cd873f2ce25c.jpg/r0_252_3592_2281_w1200_h678_fmax.jpg

Parkes brothers Tim and Spike Orr feature on special edition stamp released by Australia Post facebook SHARE

twitter TWEET

email

whatsapp