Relevance of Neuroinflammation and Encephalitis in Autism
Abstract In recent years, many studies indicate that children with an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnosis have brain pathology suggestive of ongoing neuroinflammation or encephalitis in different regions of their brains. Evidence of neuroinflammation or encephalitis in ASD includes: microglial and astrocytic activation, a unique and elevated proinflammatory profile of cytokines, and aberrant expression of nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells. A conservative estimate based on the research suggests that at least 69% of individuals with an ASD diagnosis have microglial activation or neuroinflammation. Encephalitis, which is defined as inflammation of the brain, is medical diagnosis code G04.90 in the International Classification of Disease, 10th revision; however, children with an ASD diagnosis are not generally assessed for a possible medical diagnosis of encephalitis. This is unfortunate because if a child with ASD has neuroinflammation, then treating the underlying brain inflammation could lead to improved outcomes. The purpose of this review of the literature is to examine the evidence of neuroinflammation/encephalitis in those with an ASD diagnosis and to address how a medical diagnosis of encephalitis, when appropriate, could benefit these children by driving more immediate and targeted treatments. Keywords: neuroinflammation, encephalitis, autism spectrum disorder, microglia, astrocytic activation, cytokines, regression

Possible External Triggers of the Inflammation Process in Autism As mentioned earlier, systemic inflammation and/or infection can gain access to the CNS via blood flow and elicit an inflammatory response the brain (Sankowski et al., 2015). The resulting inflammatory mediators could interfere with neuronal and glial well-being, leading to a disruption in brain homeostasis and persistent inflammation and immune activation in the brain, ultimately resulting in cognitive and behavioral manifestations (Sankowski et al., 2015). Thus, it is plausible that systemic inflammation and/or infection could trigger the inflammation or encephalitis seen in the brains of children with an ASD. In addition, the production of brain autoantibodies, notably found in children with ASD and in specific cases of autistic regression and encephalitis, could also be secondary to various types of external triggers. Researchers have suggested various exposures that can contribute to the production of brain autoantibodies in autism (Mostafa and Refai, 2007; Mostafa and Al-Ayadhi, 2015). To this point, a study by Vojdani et al. (2003) provides evidence to support the hypothesis that there are external triggers, such as the ones mentioned previously, that can instigate the production of brain autoantibodies in children with autism. Vojdani et al. (2003) measured IgG, IgM, and IgA antibodies against CD26, CD69, streptokinase (SK), gliadin, and casein peptides and against ethyl mercury bound to human serum albumin in patients with autism. From the results, they proposed that bacterial antigens (SK), dietary peptides (gliadin, casein) and Thimerosal (ethyl mercury) in individuals with pre-disposing HLA molecules, bind to CD26 or CD69 and induce antibodies against these molecules. Their study demonstrated that dietary peptides, bacterial toxins, and xenobiotics bind to lymphocyte receptors and/or tissue enzymes, resulting in and autoimmune reaction in children with autism. It is conceivable that this process could begin with a single exposure or trigger; however, a combination of exposures or factors could also trigger a cascade of events resulting in brain inflammation and production of brain autoantibodies. Numerous studies have shown that toxins and pathogens can work synergistically – where the effect of the combination of their presence is greater than the sum of their individual effects (Kern et al., 2012).

How Recognizing Encephalitis or Brain Inflammation as a Potential Component of ASD May Improve Treatment Issues with Current Mainstream Treatments and Therapies As previously mentioned, another benefit of recognizing encephalitis in those with an ASD diagnosis is that this recognition might lead to more targeted and potentially more effective medical treatments. The current mainstream treatments and therapies for those with an ASD diagnosis emphasize educational interventions such as applied behavioral analysis (ABA) and/or psychoactive drugs such as Risperdal. These types of treatments do not address the patient’s underlying medical illness or disease pathology. This may be the reason for the dismal findings reported in a 2011 article in Pediatrics by Al-Qabandi et al. (2011). These researchers reported that although there are many available therapeutic approaches to childhood autism, none are curative or have well-established efficacy. This finding continues even with the promotion of early intervention. In addition, the psychiatric or antipsychotic medications frequently prescribed in ASD (e.g., risperidone or Risperdal), have serious side effects. For example, antipsychotics such as Risperdal can cause: neuroleptic malignant syndrome (a potentially fatal reaction); tardive dyskinesia (abnormal facial, shoulder and limb movements, which can be permanent); breast swelling or tenderness; low white blood cells; low platelets; high blood sugar; and many other serious side effects (PDR.net, 2014). Treatment Response and Timeliness Recent research suggests that even though parental concerns that their child might have ASD are generally expressed early on and reliably (Kern et al., 2014a,b; Sacrey et al., 2015), common responses to these concerns from healthcare providers are often reassuring or passive which subsequently delays diagnosis and treatment (Zuckerman et al., 2015). Another possible benefit of recognizing encephalitis or brain inflammation as a potential component of ASD is that this may drive a more timely response. If providers understand that the affected child may have an identifiable medical condition which would respond to appropriate and prompt medical treatment, they may be more likely to initiate medical intervention. Evidence to Suggest Effectiveness in Treating Encephalitis in ASD Several studies that link encephalitis with the onset of autism or an ASD, also report the improvement or amelioration of autism/ASD symptoms when the encephalitis was treated (González-Toro et al., 2013; Scott et al., 2014). For example, Scott et al. (2014) reported on a 33-month-old boy who presented with irritability, insomnia, decreased appetite, and symptoms of autistic regression following an upper respiratory tract infection. He displayed loss of previously acquired skills, including: language (eventually becoming mute and non-communicative), the ability to interact socially, and eye contact. The child was found to have anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. Treatment with intravenous (IV) immunoglobulins and steroids resulted in the child’s reacquisition of language and social skills and in the resolution of his abnormal movements. According to the authors, reacquisition of language and social skills were observed after the third day of treatment. He also began to show interest in his parents again and his eye contact improved. After the initial IV treatment was completed, he was started on high-dose steroids (2 mg/kg/d) for 2 weeks, with a slow tapering off over the next 6 weeks. During that time, he continued to make significant improvements and his behavior and personality were restored to their pre-illness state. In addition, he regained the ability to use multiple short phrases. A similar case (González-Toro et al., 2013) involved a 5 years old female who lost previously acquired skills and evolved into autism. After showing positive anti-NMDA receptor antibodies in her cerebrospinal fluid, she was diagnosed with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. An intravenous perfusion of corticoids, immunoglobulins, and rituximab was used. According the researchers, the child essentially recovered except for a slight language disorder that was still noted 6 months after treatment. Thus, as these reports suggest, another benefit to recognizing encephalitis as a physical condition in those with an ASD diagnosis is that it might lead to more targeted and possibly more effective medical treatments. As suggested by McDougle and Carlezon (2013), addressing the neuroimmunological pathophysiology in ASD offers exciting new possibilities for therapy. In the aforementioned cases, the drugs used were intravenous steroids and immunoglobulins (and rituximab). However, there are several studies which report on other pharmaceutical and nutraceutical treatments that can reduce microglial activation and/or the levels of their associated inflammatory cytokines. If encephalitis were routinely assessed as a component in autism and ASD, then in those cases where it is identified, more benign treatments might be available than the current psychiatric medication choices, and their use might be more efficacious in producing a positive outcome. The authors of this review are not recommending any treatment in particular, and acknowledge that, in any treatment regimen, the risk/benefit ratio would have to be considered. That said, further research into the diagnosis and treatment of encephalitis as a potential component of ASD is merited.

Discussion The dramatic rise in ASD began in the 1990s, and in the past two decades, the rates of ASD have increased by 289% (Boyle et al., 2011). The sudden and dramatic rise in ASD prevalence has, in some ways, caught the medical community “off guard.” In the midst of the meteoric rise in rates of autism and ASD, significant new research into the physical symptoms has been done. The challenge now is to incorporate this new research about the physical symptoms of autism into the practice of medicine that historically has stereotyped autism as a purely psychiatric disorder. For the benefit of patients, the physical symptoms of autism must be recognized and treated. For children with ASD, particularly those who have begun to regress into ASD and show other signs of neurological regression, testing for encephalitis may be warranted. Particularly, given the documented cases of children with regressive ASD and NMDA Encephalitis who tested positive for anti-NMDA receptor antibodies, routine testing for anti-NMDA receptor antibodies in ASD should be seriously considered. The study by Scott et al. (2014), mentioned earlier, of the child who regressed into autism and recovered from treatment for NMDA, indicates that there is benefit to recognizing the possibility of encephalitis in children with ASD. The delay in incorporating new research findings into medical practice standards is unfortunate because if a diagnosis of autism or ASD were recognized in the medical community as having a possible component of encephalitis that could be tested and treated appropriately, such treatment for encephalitis would likely reduce, and possibly eliminate, ASD symptoms in some children. Future studies should include treatments for neuroinflammation in ASD.

Author Contributions JK was the main writer and analyzed data, DG reviewed the manuscript structure, ideas and science, LS co-wrote and edited structure, ideas, and science, and MG evaluated and reviewed manuscript ideas and science. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Conflict of Interest Statement The authors have been involved in vaccine/biologic litigation. The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.