After School Siege, Russia Also Mourns Secret Heroes
Now, like New York City police officers and firefighters after Sept. 11, 2001, these "spetznas," or special forces, are national heroes, but with a catch -- their nation knows little about them.

"They died defending Russia's children," said Mikhail V. Odinokov, the head manager of the Nikolsko-Arkhangelskoe cemetery, as he led a visitor to the manicured pine grove that is the private special forces cemetery, patrolled by the police and monitored by security cameras.

Near him, mourners heaped so many flowers and banners -- one said, "Tragically killed in the fight on terror," another said, "From Grandma" -- on the graves that they obscured most of the victims' names in the only place where they have been publicly recorded.

How did these men die? He paused and then said, "We can't give out that kind of information."

His colleague following, a retired special forces officer, snorted. "Why can't we? They are heroes, like your firefighters in America. People should know who they are."

Both men fell silent.

The ages ranged from 21 to 36. And a few names carved into the dark gray granite gravestones were visible: Alexei Turkin, born 1975. Dmitri Razumovsky, born 1968. Date of death: Sept. 3, 2004.

A day after the funerals, friends and colleagues, possibly special forces soldiers, came to lay flowers or to leave traditional funeral offerings, like a glass of vodka and a slice of bread, cigarettes and candles. Some wept, and they waved off requests for comment by a reporter.

The Russian military operation at Beslan "was a disaster" on the order of that experienced by American Special Forces in their ill-fated "Black Hawk Down" battle in Somalia in 1993, and their failed effort to free American hostages in Iran a quarter century ago, said Roger N. McDermott, a senior fellow and Eurasian military analyst at the University of Kent and a senior fellow of the Jamestown Foundation. But, he said, the men performed heroically. "They were caught off guard, but largely trying to do their best trying to save these children's lives," he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Infuriated and grieving Russians want answers to many questions: Why did intelligence agencies fail to pick up on the hostage-takers' planning for the siege? How did the armed attackers make their way through checkpoints? Why were basic security measures not taken after the school was seized? Why was the final Russian military action so haphazard, and why did it result in so many deaths?

The official version, put forth by the Russian general prosecutor's office, is that an explosion in the school went off by accident and that as hostages began fleeing and their captors began shooting at them, the Alfa and Vympel forces stormed the building. According to this version, the commandos were then caught in a crossfire when residents of Beslan began firing toward the school from behind.

One unidentified wounded special forces soldier, interviewed on Russian television, confirmed that after the blast, the two commando teams were caught between lines of fire -- pinned down by the hostage-takers inside the building and fired upon by local residents who began shooting at the hostage-takers. Three Alfa and seven Vympel officers died in the fight and another wounded commando died last week. At least 30 unit members were seriously wounded.

Some Russians have criticized the units for arriving too late, and newspapers have reported that the commandos did not have a plan of the building, and that the police never established a cordon around the school to stop the attackers from fleeing.

Others offer a different critique. They suggest that the Kremlin, placing a premium on a show of force, had planned an assault all along, regardless of the potential loss of life. According to this theory, officials would justify their actions by saying that their decisions were prompted by an accident in the building, though, in this case, the hostages inside did say the fighting began when a explosion went off unexpectedly.

"The same thing happened during the Moscow theater siege," recalled Pavel Y. Felgenhauer, an independent Russian military analyst, referring to an attack in October 2002 in which 129 hostages and 41 hostage-takers died. Almost immediately after the military stormed the building, he said, "the Kremlin put out a statement saying it had to be done because hostages were being shot."

"As it turned out later," he said, "that wasn't true."

But the special forces soldiers' scramble into the fray -- in which many of them did not even have the time to don bulletproof vests -- is ample refutation of this, Lt. Col. Aleksandr Yermolin, the former head of operations of Vympel and now a member of Parliament, told Ekho Moskvy radio.

Igor Senin, president of the Association of Alfa veterans, raised the possibility in the newspaper Vremya Novostei that somebody in the school building accidentally set off a hand grenade. "It went off," he was quoted as saying. "Terrorists decided that we were attacking, exploded several other devices and opened fire. Our men could only join the battle."

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There are accounts that say the Alfa unit was planning a more careful operation. Before the assault, Alfa's superiors at the F.S.B. ordered the unit to prepare to storm the school with 30 men, said a photographer, Dmitri Belyakov, who was positioned with the unit for the Sunday Times of London the day of the siege. The commanders discussed tactics and options, Mr. Belyakov wrote.

"I never heard anyone question whether they were going to storm the building," the article said. "The only question was when and how the assault should take place."

Even without a plan, some analysts contended, the Alfa and Vympel forces did save some children and might have helped the government to save face. "They saved Russia's reputation when they rushed into battle without a plan, and without any bulletproof jackets -- in effect, contrary to their own professional training," Yulia Latynina, an independent political commentator, wrote in the newspaper Novaya Gazeta.

At the cemetery, meanwhile, under the pine trees, under the roses and banners, there is only quiet. "Most of them had families," said Mr. Odinokov, the cemetery manager, referring to the young men buried before him. One banner stuck out from the rest, laid over a gravesite: "From your wife and son."

--------------------

Bush Visits Russian Embassy

WASHINGTON, Sept. 12 (AP) -- President Bush made an unexpected visit on Sunday to the Russian Embassy, where he signed a book of condolences for victims of the school hostage seizure and expressed outrage at the actions of "evil terrorists."

"The atrocities that took place in the school were beyond comprehension," he told reporters after writing a one-page note in the book.

"The killers once again remind us of the duties we have as free people to work in concert, to work in unity, to make this world a better place."