Global-scale predictions of community and ecosystem properties from simple ecological theory
Associated Data Supplementary Materials JMBFDW PRSB ESM 2008 File containing all ESM rspb20080192s03.pdf (216K) GUID: B0724DF2-9C40-4A5F-A63E-3C59BDBFF2E6

Abstract We show how theoretical developments in macroecology, life-history theory and food-web ecology can be combined to formulate a simple model for predicting the potential biomass, production, size and trophic structure of consumer communities. The strength of our approach is that it uses remote sensing data to predict properties of consumer communities in environments that are challenging and expensive to sample directly. An application of the model to the marine environment on a global scale, using primary production and temperature estimates from satellite remote sensing as inputs, suggests that the global biomass of marine animals more than 10−5 g wet weight is 2.62×109 t (=8.16 g m−2 ocean) and production is 1.00×1010 t yr−1 (31.15 g m−2 yr−1). Based on the life-history theory, we propose and apply an approximation for distinguishing the relative contributions of different animal groups. Fish biomass and production, for example, are estimated as 8.99×108 t (2.80 g m−2) and 7.91×108 t yr−1 (2.46 g m−2 yr−1), respectively, and 50% of fish biomass is shown to occur in 17% of the total ocean area (8.22 g m−2). The analyses show that emerging ecological theory can be synthesized to set baselines for assessing human and climate impacts on global scales. Keywords: macroecology, metabolic ecology, food web, food chain, climate, production

1. Introduction Globally, communities and ecosystems are highly diverse, varying in species composition, biomass and productivity and their resilience to human impacts, environmental variation and change. However, these communities and ecosystems are also characterized by remarkably consistent relationships among variables such as species richness, abundance, range size and body size (Brown 1995; Gaston & Blackburn 2000; Kerr & Dickie 2001). Knowledge of these relationships, the reasons they evolve and their links to patterns of energy acquisition, transfer and use, can help to isolate the factors that account for differences among communities and ecosystems. Here, we show how recent developments in macroecology, life-history theory and food-web ecology can be combined to formulate a simple model for predicting the potential biomass, production, size structure and trophic structure of consumer communities. The strength of this approach is that it uses remote sensing temperature and primary production (PP) data, available on global scales, to predict properties of consumer communities in environments that are challenging and expensive to sample directly. This approach builds on the observation that size distributions of animals in food webs largely reflect the availability and transfer of energy (Dickie et al. 1987; Brown & Gillooly 2003). These size distributions are often described as relationships between the logarithm of total abundance by body mass class and the logarithm of body mass, with individuals binned to body mass classes irrespective of species identity, and are dubbed size spectra (Sheldon & Parsons 1967). Our example focuses on the marine environment and we use size spectra to describe the main flux of energy from primary producers to higher trophic levels. The rate and magnitude of flux depends on temperature and PP, parameters that are measured by remote sensing. Consumer production and biomass are determined from relationships that link body mass, temperature and mass-specific rates of production (Ernest et al. 2003; Brown et al. 2004). Our results provide a baseline for assessing human impacts and predicting the contribution of marine animals to biogeochemical processes, and can be compared with results from more complex community and ecosystem models applied at regional scales. We necessarily make many broad assumptions in an analysis of this type, and recognize and report on the scope to extend and further validate our approaches.

Acknowledgments We wish to thank the Ocean Biology Processing Group and the Distributed Active Archive Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center (NASA) for the production and distribution of the SeaWiFS data, NOAA for the provision of the LME shapefiles, the FAO and the Flanders Marine Institute for making available the FAO area shapefiles and Carla Houghton and Craig Mills for their assistance with data processing. Two anonymous referees made constructive suggestions that improved the scope and content of the manuscript. This project was funded by the European Commission, the UK Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the Natural Environment Research Council.