What is the Progressive Wage Model

The Progressive Wage Model (PWM) helps to increase wages of workers through upgrading skills and improving productivity. It is implemented via government levers in the cleaning, security and landscape sectors.

What is it

Developed by tripartite committees consisting of unions, employers and the government, the PWM helps to uplift low-wage workers in the cleaning, security and landscape sectors.

Wages in these sectors had stagnated due to widespread cheap sourcing. The low wages in turn resulted in high turnover and labour shortages.

The PWM benefits workers by mapping out a clear career pathway for their wages to rise along with training and improvements in productivity and standards.

At the same time, higher productivity improves business profits for employers. Service buyers also enjoy better service standards and quality.

Who it covers

The PWM covers Singapore citizens and Singapore permanent residents (PRs) in the cleaning and security sectors, as well as landscape companies on NParks’ Landscape Company Register.

Employers are encouraged to use these principles of progressive wage for your foreign cleaners, security officers and landscape maintenance employees.

When it took effect

Employers must have met PWM requirements by the following dates:

Sector PWM requirements took effect from Cleaning sector 1 September 2015

Note: Wages increased from 1 July 2017. Security sector 1 September 2016

Note: Wages increased from 1 January 2019. Landscape sector 30 June 2016

Note: Wages will increase from 2020.

How it is implemented

The PWM is regulated by the respective lead sector agencies through:

Sector Regulated by Cleaning Licensing condition by NEA Security Licensing condition by PLRD (SPF) Landscape Landscape Company Register requirement by NParks

PWM by sector

View details of the PWM for each sector:

Help for employers

If you are an employer, you can tap on the Workfare Training Support scheme to offset a significant portion of the training costs for your Singaporean employees.

You can also get co-funding for productivity improvement projects through various grants in the Lean Enterprise Development Scheme.