A Moscow street to be named after Hero of Russia Dmitry Razumovsky
Moscow will receive a Dmitry Razumovsky Street. The name of the Hero of Russia, who helped to free the hostages at school No 1 in Beslan in 2004, will be perpetuated in the Kryukovo District, Zelenograd Administrative Area. The name was approved at a recent meeting of the City Interdepartmental Names Commission headed by Deputy Mayor Leonid Pechatnikov. The idea to name a street after Razumovsky was suggested by the Rokada Foundation for the veterans and persons disabled in armed conflicts.

Planned streets No. 6719 and No. 6721 in the Kryukovo District in the Zelenograd Administrative Area will be named Dmitry Razumovsky Street. Razumovsky lived in Kryukovo in the late 1980s and many local residents remember him. A grand prix parachuting tournament for accurate landing has been conducted annually in Kryukovo in Razumovsky’s memory.

Dmitry Razumovsky (1968-2004) was a Russian serviceman and Lieutenant Colonel. Thirteen years ago, on 3 September 2004, he was involved in the assault on School No. 1 in Beslan that was captured by terrorists. The Hero of Russia title was conferred upon him posthumously.

A memorial plaque marks the place where he died in Beslan. A street bears his name in Ulyanovsk, where he lived in his youth. The title Honorary Ulyanovsk Citizen was conferred upon him. The school he attended there holds a commemorative plaque.

The date 3 September marks a milestone for Russia as the Day of Solidarity in the Fight against Terrorism. The landmark date was established by the federal law of 2005 On Days of Military Glory of Russia following the Beslan tragedy. On this day, Moscow will host the rally To Remember in Order to Live. Muscovites will gather at terrorist attack sites to commemorate those who died there. The sites include Dubrovka, Guryanova Street, 6 Kashirskoye Motorway, Rizhskaya metro station grounds, the entrance halls of Park Kultury, Avtozavodskaya and Lubyanskaya stations, a pedestrian underpass at Pushkinskaya Square and Tverskaya Street near the National Hotel. They will also gather on Aviatsionnaya Street at the monument to soldiers who died in trouble spots. A wreath-laying ceremony and the ‘Rally Without Words’ will be held on Solyanka Street by the monument to victims of the Beslan tragedy.