Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines
From the Department of Interior and Local Government

Secretary of the Interior and Local Government Mar Roxas opened an P8-M level III water supply system to Camalig, Albay, which is expected to benefit more than 1,000 households in four barangays.

Calling the project Patak ng Buhay, Roxas said, “Importante ang proyektong ito dahil dati, kailangan pang maglakad ng 10 hanggang 15 minutes para mag-igib, iuuwi, at pakukuluan para ligtas inumin. Ngayon, nandiyan na ang gripo sa loob ng inyong tahanan.”

The project covers four barangays: Barangays Baligang, Taladong, Comun and Cotmon, all in Camalig.

One of the beneficiaries of the project thanked Roxas and said, “Dahil sa water system na ito, nabawasan na ang pagkakasakit ng mga tao, nabawasan ang medical expenses.”

Another said, “Nabawasan ang pagkakasakit ng mga tao dahil sa malinis na tubig.”

For his part, Camalig Mayor Carlos Irwin Baldo, Jr. said “malaking tulong ang ibingay sa atin ng DILG mula sa pondo ng BUB.” He said that they expect more investors to come to their municipality because of the availability of basic services like potable water.

The project was funded by the Sagana at Ligtas na Tubig para sa Lahat (SALINTUBIG) program under the government’s Bottom-Up Budgeting (BuB) initiative where members of grassroots communities themselves identify the projects that they want to be implemented in their locality.

A level III water supply system has provisions for a house-to-house connection; level II, a communal faucet or taps stand which benefits six to ten households; and level I, a dug well or hand pump intended to service 15 households. All levels have appropriate water treatment systems.

Roxas said “kayo ang gumawa ng magandang proyekto na ito. Bunga ito ng magandang programa kung saan kayo ang nagpa-prioritize kung ano ang kailangan ninyo.”

Saying this is an example of the “whole of government” approach, he added, “kung ano ang kailangan ninyo, ang national at local government ay nagtutulungan para maisakatuparan ito.”

Roxas also handed two checks to Mayor Baldo to finance two other BUB projects in the municipality: P1.120M for the construction of an access road and P4M representing the first tranche of another P8M worth of water project which will benefit more than 3,000 households in two barangays in Camalig.

dole.gov.ph