MiG-27 Fighter Plane Crashes Into Building In Jodhpur, Pilot Unhurt
The MiG-27 aircraft crashed into a building in Rajasthan's Jodhpur city today.

Highlights MiG-25 crashes into building in Jodhpur, pilot managed to eject safely Crash occurred near Jodhpur air base while the jet was on training flight MiG-27s are one of the oldest aircraft of IAF; to be phased out soon

The Air Force has ordered a court of inquiry into the crash

A Russian-made MiG-27 fighter jet of the Indian Air Force crashed near the Jodhpur airbase in Rajasthan this afternoon during a training flight, underscoring the perils of an ageing aircraft fleet. The fighter jet was the second fighter aircraft to crash this year. (In Pictures) "The aircraft was on a routine training mission," an Indian Air Force spokesperson said, adding that the pilot managed to eject safely. The plane crashed into a building as it came to land at the Jodhpur air base causing minor injuries to some residents.The IAF is the process of phasing out the ageing MiG-27 fighters. One squadron of MiG-27 (of 16-18 fighters each) has been phased out this year another three more are likely to be phased out in the next three years.The incident highlighted growing concerns about the ageing fleet of the Air Force, which is in the process of phasing out the old MiG-27 fighters. One squadron of MiG-27 (of 16-18 fighters each) has been retired this year three more are likely to be phased out in the next three years.The crash also reignited brought into focus the shortage of aircraft with the Indian Air Force which needs 42 fighter squadrons but currently has only 33. The numbers are likely to go down further in the coming years when the IAF is forced to decommission a total of 12 aging fighter squadrons of MiG-21 and MiG-27.The Indian Air Force refused to speculate on the cause of the crash but added that "an inquiry into the crash has been ordered.In the last 10 years over 90 fighters including 11 MiG-27 have crashed, a report recently tabled in the Parliament said. Majority of the MiG27, inquires have revealed that they went down because of "technical defects," the report adds.The Parliamentary Standing Committee has also strongly recommended that the Captain and co-pilot should "carry out external checks independently" before flying. The report has also pointed to shortage of "supervisors" in units and said it must be addressed immediately. It also says that there is need for better communication between those who provide "support services" - like Hindustan Aeronautics Limited that produces the spares and maintains the aircraft - and the IAF.

Get the latest election news, live updates and election schedule for Lok Sabha Elections 2019 on ndtv.com/elections. Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter and Instagram for updates from each of the 543 parliamentary seats for the 2019 Indian general elections. Election results will be out on May 23.