Constitution Not A Video That Can Be Doctored: Kanhaiya Kumar
I want to assure the people of the country that your tax money is not used to fund any anti-national activities in JNU.

There are some dark clouds but I want to tell them that there will be rainfall after the dark clouds.

These dark clouds can't hide the red sun and the blue skies.

The rainfall will push away the dark clouds.

People who play with our Constitution, we have to stand up against their evil designs.

The sacrifice of our jawans and our farmers committing suicide and Rohith Vemula - will not go waste.

You are trying to divide the country.

Farmers, sons of farmers and daughters of farmers.

There is difference between sedition and treason.

It was made by the English to make people fear them.

JNU has full faith in Constitution and judiciary.

Let courts decide if it was sedition or not.

We will not say anything.

We have faith on Constitution and judiciary.

Despite all their efforts they have not been able to fabricate the truth.

Constitution is not a video that can be doctored.

Truth will win and dark clouds will go away.

There should be more JNUs from the subsidy money.

So that other friends who come from poor backgrounds can do their PhD and can fight for the country.

Your money is being spent well.

Problem is that the government of the country, has become the government of one party. Not one party but one office.

We have to make them realise that they are here for the country.

Not only to an office but they are answerable to Parliament.

I have no personal differences only ideological differences.

We are children like any other, we are from this country, we are not terrorists.

Soldier fighting for the country, or our farmers dying, or students fighting for their rights - this is our crime.

But if government considers this as a crime, we will do it again and again, we have no regrets.

Our students have been beaten up by mobs.

Fabricated videos to malign the campus.

Some people have appointed condom counting officers.

JNU is a real voice of the country.

From North East to Gujarat, Kashmir to Kanyakumari.

Not just Indians, but students from 145 countries are here, they contribute.

Of 4,500 bureaucrats - 2500 are from JNU.

Sedition is a black law, should not be used on students.

We understand the limit of freedom of speech.

Freedom not from country but freedom within country

We want to make the country stronger, more united.

In globalisation, it is tough to strengthen nationalism.

It is a big challenge, we understand it.

The conspiracy to deflect attention from the real problems of the country.

We need to understand that.

Jawaharlal Nehru University student union president Kanhaiya Kumar is addressing the media after being released from jail on bail yesterday. He had been arrested on charges of sedition over a controversial event on the campus where anti-India slogans were allegedly raised. Here are highlights from his address: