'Treated like animals' by TSA because we wore hijabs, NJCU professor says
A Bayonne woman and her daughters are part of a joint complaint filed by 14 women against the Department of Homeland Security, alleging they were illegally targeted at the Newark Liberty International Airport because they were wearing hijabs.

Meriem Bendaoud, an assistant biology professor at New Jersey City University, alleges in the joint complaint that she, her twin daughters, and the group of other women -- all Muslim -- were stopped by Transportation Security Administration agents and screened for additional security, they say, because they wear traditional Muslim headdresses.

"This was an experience that is still hard for me to go back to and remember. It was very shocking," she said. "I needed to speak up about it."

In December, Bendaoud and her 19-year-old twin daughters, Sara and Amina, who are New Jersey Institute of Technology students, arrived at Newark Airport for a 7:10 a.m. flight to Chicago to attend the annual conference of the Islamic Circle of North America.

As they were waiting on line for general security clearance, they were pulled away and told to move to the front of the line.

TSA agents brought out a security dog to sniff her and her daughters' bags, but the women were told to stay for extra security screenings.

As they waited, more and more women wearing hijabs were brought to what Bendaoud described as a "cage" with four glass walls, where the 14 women were searched extensively in clear view of other passengers.

"That's what was horrifying -- the window was right there, with people walking past like we were in a zoo, taking videos, taking pictures," she said. "Some people were horrified, but others were laughing. It was very shocking."

Bendaoud remembers she and her daughters were shocked to witness the other girls, many of whom were young and unaccompanied by a parent, being searched to that extent in clear view of everyone.

"These girls didn't have their parents with them ... and they touched them in front of everybody," she said.

The complaint, filed by the Council on American-Islamic Relations in May with the TSA and the Department of Homeland Security, is calling for $100,000 in damages for each of the women, an official apology and mandatory diversity training for all TSA agents at the airport.

A spokesperson for the TSA referred comment to the Department of Homeland Security's Office of Civil Rights, which is reviewing the case. A DHS spokesperson cited a policy of not commenting on open complaints.

The head of the TSA, Bendaoud said, told her at the time that they typically used that security method for groups. "But I told them 'This is not a group! Check our flight passes, we have separate booking companies,'" she said.

The TSA kept the women for more than two hours, causing them to miss their flight.

"Two hours in front of people, treated like animals ... I couldn't believe they would do that," she said. "I felt violated."

"I just wish that never happens to anyone again," she added. "This cannot happen again, because that was clear cut -- pulling 14 women wearing hijabs? How do you explain that?"

Corey W. McDonald may be reached at cmcdonald@jjournal.com. Follow him on Twitter @coreymacc. Find The Jersey Journal on Facebook.