In Latest Controversy, BJP Says Rahul Gandhi Referred To Lord Shiva As ‘it’
Hack: Congress President Rahul Gandhi is on a pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar

However, the BJP seems not to be very pleased with his 'yatra' as it has now come down heavily on Gandhi for one of his tweets on Kailash Mansarovar

In the said tweet, Rahul Gandhi had said that he feels happy to have this opportunity to visit Kailash Mansarovar, adding, 'a man goes to Kailash when it calls him'

Congress President Rahul Gandhi is on a pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar, which is in accordance with a wish he expressed in April, when his plane plunged hundreds of feet during the campaign for the Karnataka elections. However, the BJP seems not to be very pleased with his 'yatra' as it has now come down heavily on Gandhi for one of his tweets on Kailash Mansarovar. In the said tweet, Rahul Gandhi had said that he feels happy to have this opportunity to visit Kailash Mansarovar, adding, “a man goes to Kailash when it calls him.”

“A man goes to Kailash when it calls him. I am so happy to have this opportunity and to be able to share what I see on this beautiful journey with all of you,” wrote Rahul Gandhi on Twitter.

A man goes to Kailash when it calls him. I am so happy to have this opportunity and to be able to share what I see on this beautiful journey with all of you.#KailashYatra — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) September 5, 2018

Now, BJP’s national Information & Technology in-charge Amit Malviya has slammed Rahul Gandhi for allegedly referring to Lord Shiva as ‘it’. While further reprimanding him, Malviya said that his tweet shows his ignorance about the religious significance of the Mansarovar Yatra.

“‘It’? Did you just refer to Lord Shiva as ‘it’? Unless you have gone to mount Kailash with the sole objective of trekking, this smacks of ignore about the cultural and religious significance of the Mansarovar Yatra,” wrote Malviya.

‘It’? Did you just refer to Lord Shiva as ‘it’? Unless you have gone to mount Kailash with the sole objective of trekking, this smacks of ignorance about the cultural and religious significance of the Mansarovar Yatra. https://t.co/uVGsYJyLfb — Amit Malviya (@amitmalviya) September 5, 2018

This is not the first attack on Rahul Gandhi, coming from Amit Malviya over the former’s pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar. Earlier on Tuesday, Malviya had accused Gandhi of eating non-vegetarian food during Kailash Mansarovar Yatra. While putting out a video, reportedly featuring a restaurant waiter talking about what all Rahul Gandhi ate during his visit to the restaurant, Malviya alleged playing with the faith of Hindus has become a habit for Rahul Gandhi and Congress.

WATCH | Congress' Randeep Surjewala Brandishes 'Brahmin DNA' Caste Card And Draws 'Gods Vs Demons' Parallel To Rahul Gandhi And BJP

Recently, Congress media-in-charge Randeep Surjewala brandished caste card at an of ‘Brahmin Samaj’, saying Congress party’s blood has Brahmin Samaj’s DNA in it.

Meanwhile, Rahul Gandhi has been putting out pictures from the Mansarovar Yatra. Recently, he shared pictures of the "tranquil and calm" waters of the lake and said there "is no hatred here".