Community Resilience Fund

The Canada Centre leads the Community Resilience Fund (CRF), a key tool for supporting partnerships and innovation in countering radicalization to violence in Canada.

The CRF launched in December 2016 and provides financial assistance to organizations towards:

Enhancing research capacity for policy development, programming and engagement activities;

Supporting evidence-based models and practices;

Building capacity through expert knowledge, enhancing cooperation and knowledge transfer to key stakeholders; and

Empowering local communities.

Projects to date

Descriptions of projects that have received funding through the CRF are available online.

2018-2019 Call for Applications

The 2018-2019 Call for Applications is now closed. Thank you to everyone who submitted an application.

The Canada Centre has begun the CRF project assessment process, which includes review periods to assess applications according to both basic eligibility and merit criteria, and consultation with provincial and territorial government partners. All measures have been taken to ensure a fair and transparent process.

Communication of Results

Ineligible applicants will receive a written notification.

Public Safety Canada will be contacting eligible applicants directly with the results of their assessment.

Priorities for 2018-2019

The Canada Centre has chosen three priorities to support Canada's approach to countering radicalization to violence, as outlined in the recently released National Strategy on Countering Radicalization to Violence. The call will seek proposals primarily on these priority areas, though initiatives that address other aspects of countering radicalization to violence in Canada will also be considered, as long as they meet the terms and conditions of the CRF. The three priorities are:

Building, sharing and using knowledge

Addressing radicalization to violence in the online space

Supporting interventions

New to the CRF starting in 2019 will be the Youth-Led Projects funding stream that supports projects empowering young people working to counter radicalization to violence. This new pilot initiative aims to use a simpler, streamlined application process to support new youth-led ideas.

This initiative will include projects by youth-led organizations, organizations with a core mission to support youth, and youth who have partnered with an organization for the purpose of implementing a project. Youth-led projects may focus on research, programming or Conferences/Workshops/Seminars as detailed in the funding streams above.

CRF Eligible Activities

Research;

Programming;

Evaluation; and

Networking, including network and coalition building (e.g., conferences, workshops and seminars)

CRF Eligible Applicants

Financial Assistance may be provided to the following classes of Recipients only if they have the legal capacity to enter into an agreement:

National, provincial, territorial, municipal, Aboriginal, youth-led, community or professional organizations, societies and associations which have voluntarily associated themselves for a not-for-profit purpose, and which have the mandate to represent their membership or community;

Not-for-profit organizations including non-governmental organizations, non-profit corporations, community groups, umbrella organizations, and regulatory bodies and apprenticeship authorities, as well as associations serving the private sector;

A provincial or local police service, including an indigenous police service, and/or its governing authority (also known as a board or police commission);

Provincial, territorial, municipal, regional, and indigenous governments and their agencies;

Universities and educational institutions;

Individual researchers, acting in their personal capacity;

Research institutions, domestic or international, with an established record in relevant field(s), pursuing a domestic focus;

International non-governmental organizations, including bodies associated/affiliated with organizations of which Canada is a member, which have their purpose supporting domestic public safety as a priority; and

For-profit institutions with a record of developing and delivering programming, and performing research or related activities relevant to the goals of the Canada Centre. These for-profit institutions may be eligible provided that the nature and the intent of the activity is non-commercial.

Federal institutions, including any department, branch, office, board, agency, commission, corporations, or other entity which received an annual appropriation from Parliament, are not eligible for funding under the Community Resilience Fund.

Contact Us

For questions on the Community Resilience Fund, or to be added to the mailing list, please contact ps.crf-frc.sp@canada.ca.