British aid worker among two people shot dead at Nigerian resort, 4 tourists abducted: Police
KANO, NIGERIA (AFP) - Two people including a British aid worker have been shot dead and four tourists abducted in an attack by armed gunmen on a holiday resort in north-western Nigeria, police said on Sunday (April 21).

Police and aid agency Mercy Corps named the dead woman as Ms Faye Mooney.

“Faye was a dedicated and passionate communications and learning specialist,” Mercy Corps chief executive Neal Keny-Guyer said in a statement posted on social media, adding that her colleagues were “utterly heartbroken”.

Ms Mooney had “worked with Mercy Corps for almost two years, devoting her time to making a difference in Nigeria”, Mr Keny-Guyer added.

Gunmen stormed the Kajuru Castle resort, 60km south-east of Kaduna City at 11.40pm local time last Friday, Kaduna state police spokesman Yakubu Sabo told reporters.

The Briton “was gunned down from the hill by the kidnappers who tried to gain entrance into the castle but failed”, Mr Sabo said. “They took away about five other locals but one person escaped,” he said.

A Nigerian man believed by local residents in Kajuru to be Ms Mooney’s partner was also killed in the attack on the resort, where a group of 13 tourists had arrived from Lagos, south-west Nigeria the police spokesman said.

In Kaduna and the wider north-west region, kidnapping for ransom has become an increasingly rampant, particularly on the road to the capital, Abuja, where armed attacks have thrived.

Kidnapping in Nigeria’s oil-rich south, has long been a security challenge, where wealthy locals and expatriate workers are often abducted.

Yet the problem has escalated in northern areas too, like Kaduna where criminal gangs made up of former cattle rustlers have been pushed into kidnapping after military crackdowns on cattle theft.

Kajuru is also a flashpoint in the deadly conflict over increasingly limited land resources in Africa’s most populous country, between herders and farmers, predominantly across central and northern Nigeria.

The conflict has increasingly taken on ethnic and religious dimensions in the region, with the Fulani Muslim herders in conflict with Christian Adara farmers in Kajuru.

Tourists are rarely affected by the herder-farmer violence and Kajuru Castle resort has attracted many foreign and local visitors.

Yet police have struggled to thwart kidnappers in the region.

The latest attack comes in a resort in northern Nigeria, particularly popular among foreign and well-to-do local tourists.

In January four Western tourists – two Americans and two Canadians – were also abducted in Kaduna by gunmen in an ambush in which two of their police escorts were killed.

Earlier in April, recently re-elected President Muhammadu Buhari, ordered his most senior security chiefs to curb kidnapping in the region.