President Donald Trump all smiles as he poses with England football shirt
“MR President, these gentlemen are from The Sun,” an aide formally announced, as we were ushered into the Trump inner sanctum.

Entering the court of an emperor, it pays to bring a gift.

Paul Edwards The SUN Donald Trump was all smiles after The Sun presented him with a personalised England shirt

We presented the President with his very own England shirt when we interviewed him at the US Embassy in Brussels on Wednesday, ahead of the Nato summit.

“Oh wow. I love gifts,” he said, happily obliging our photographer Paul Edwards by holding the shirt up with a trademark grin.

“You don’t hear the word England as much as you should,” Mr Trump continued.

“I miss the name England. You understand that? I think England is a beautiful name.”

Paul Edwards The SUN President Trump happily obliged our photographer by holding the shirt up with a trademark grin

It had taken two hours of queuing, security searches and waits in two different holding rooms to get into the President’s temporary office, the embassy’s beautifully furnished drawing room.

Two things struck me most.

First, Trump has total power. Nobody on his White House staff tells him what to say or questions him when he says it.

When Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders announced our scheduled ten-minute slot was almost up, the President swiftly interjected: “No, give them a little bit more”.

Paul Edwards The SUN Donald Trump gave a world exclusive interview to The Sun's Tom Newton Dunn

We stayed for a total of 28 minutes, without any more prompts to go.

Secondly, he is a very sensitive man, constantly saying how much various people like him.

It clearly pains him today that he is not being welcomed to Britain as a hero and our most important ally.

Reuters Donald Trump and the First Lady Melania Trump leave the US ambassador's residence in London

most read in politics BREXIT BOOST Top German politician praises Theresa May's Brexit trade deal blueprint BOJO NO-SHOW Donald Trump DIDN'T meet Boris Johnson on trip to London MEL CHANELS JACKIE Melania Trump channels Jackie Kennedy when she meets the Queen FROM UK TO US The gifts Theresa May gave Donald and Melania Trump at Chequers ONE TRUMP OR TWO? Donald and Melania meet the Queen for tea at Windsor Castle DINNER DELAYS Trump so engrossed in Churchill display he delayed dinner for 150 guests

On our way out in the marble hallway, we met Trump’s Chief of Staff John Kelly, standing with no less than 20 Secret Service agents, ear pieces buzzing as they prepared to move POTUS.

Conspiratorially, "Chief" – as he is known - took me aside and introduced himself as a fervent Anglophile.

“I read The Sun every day. I love Britain,” said the former US Marine Corps general.