Omar Khadr to widow: ‘I’m really, really sorry’
GUANTANAMO BAY, CUBA—Omar Khadr, now a 24-year-old convicted murderer, self-professed Al Qaeda terrorist and war criminal, looked across the courtroom and told the widow of the American soldier he killed he was “really, really sorry.” “I wish I could do something that would take this pain away from you,” he said Thursday as he stood in the witness box and directly faced the widow and friends of U.S. Delta Force soldier Christopher Speer.

Tabitha Speer shook her head and pursed her lips, appearing to not accept the apology as she gripped the arm rests of her chair. When Khadr stopped talking, she began to cry. Taking the stand for the first time since he was first charged in 2005, Khadr spoke to the hushed courtroom for just under five minutes.

ARTICLE CONTINUES BELOW

“During my time here, as Nelson Mandela says . . . the most important thing you have is time to think about things,” he said. “I came to the conclusion that . . . you’re not going to gain anything with hate. Second thing, it’s more destructive than it’s constructive. Third thing: I came to a conclusion that love and forgiveness are more constructive and will bring people together.” Thursday’s testimony in Khadr’s sentencing hearing may have ended with the Toronto-born detainee’s statement, but it began with poignant words from Tabitha Speer. Speer looked squarely at Khadr from the witness stand when she told the Canadian detainee what she thought of him. “You’ll forever be a murderer in my eyes. It doesn’t matter what you say from this day on,” she said, her voice unwavering.

Khadr had his head bowed, as he had for most of Thursday hearing, but raised his eyes to meet hers as she told him how he had deprived her two children of their father. “I heard over and over how he’s the victim, he’s the child,” she said. “I don’t see that. The victims are my children, not you. They are the ones hurting.”

ARTICLE CONTINUES BELOW

Her 55 minutes of testimony brought many spectators in the war crimes court here to tears, as she read out letters written by her children and pictures of her husband flashed across a court video screen. Khadr pleaded guilty Monday to throwing a grenade that fatally wounded Speer’s during a firefight in Afghanistan when Khadr was 15. He is also convicted of attempted murder, spying, conspiracy and providing material support to terrorism. His case has made history on a number of fronts: Only person charged for a battlefield killing despite the 5,000 deaths of U.S. service member killed in Iraq or Afghanistan; only Guantanamo detainee convicted of murder; and the first war crimes prosecution of a juvenile since World War II. Speer’s widow was the prosecution’s last witness this week to address the seven-member military jury. She turned directly to the three uniformed women and men as she described her husband’s smile and devotion to his children. She read from a letter addressed to Khadr written by her daughter Taryn, who was 3 when Speer was fatally wounded in July 2002. “I am mad at you for what you did to my family. Because of you my dad never got to see me play soccer,” she read, her voice breaking. Her 8-year-old son Tanner concluded his letter to Khadr saying, “Army rocks. Bad guys suck.” Some of the most ardent Guantanamo critics and advocates for Khadr’s rights were among those openly crying as Speer talked about her loss.

“The fact this process is unfair and we shouldn’t be here in Guantanamo in the first place, doesn’t minimize the tragedy of the loss of Christopher Speer’s life,” said the ACLU’s Jennifer Turner, who has attended many of Khadr’s hearings. “It’s a shame that it has been eight years and justice delayed is justice denied. The truth is if Omar Khadr had been bought to court in Afghanistan, or a federal court, this case would have long ago adjudicated, Tabitha Speer would have long ago received some closure.” In the years since the July 27, 2002 firefight where Khadr was shot and Speer fatally wounded, the Khadr case has been overtaken by politics and challenges of the post-9/11 laws. Both Speer and Khadr became symbols for much more as they were held up as victims of the U.S.-led war on terror. But in at hilltop military courtroom this week, it has been about Speer and Khadr. Before the 40-year-old widow testified Thursday, Air Force Capt. Michael Grant, a member of the Pentagon’s prosecution team looked at her and said, “This is it. Long time coming.” Khadr also spoke about the passage of time. “That’s my biggest dream, my biggest wish — to get out of this place.” He said he wanted to “have the chance to have true relationships — an experience I’ve never had in my life.” He said earlier that he “decided to plead guilty to take responsibility for the acts I’ve done” and that he wanted to be a doctor. Since Khadr did not testify under oath, he could not be cross-examined or asked questions by the judge or jury. It was unclear Thursday night whether Khadr’s lawyer would call their last two witnesses, or proceed to closing arguments Friday. Guantanamo’s former top legal advisor testified for the defence earlier Thursday, telling the jury he believed Khadr could be rehabilitated. Appearing by video from Kabul, Afghanistan, Navy Capt. Patrick McCarthy said he had frequent contact with Khadr here between 2006 and 2008. McCarthy described Khadr as cheerful and said he often acted an intermediary to help Guantanamo officials “diffuse” situations with other detainees. McCarthy said Khadr’s admission of guilt did not change his opinion. “Fifteen-year-old,” he said, “should not be held to the same standard of accountability as an adult would be.” The jury is unaware that a plea deal has already been brokered in the case, which reportedly gave Khadr eight years in return for his guilty plea. It will apply only if the military panel imposes a lesser sentence. In his words Edited transcript of Omar Khadr’s statements to court My name is Omar Khadr. I’m 24 years old. I finished eight grade. My hobbies are sports and reading. I decided to plead guilty to take responsibility for the acts I’ve done. . . . Firstly, I lost my sight in my left eye. And my right eye was severely wounded. I still experience problems with my right eye. I have a cataract and shrapnel. I’ve been notified by medical staff that I might lose my vision from my injuries. I was shot twice in my back. Once in my left shoulder, another in my back and they both exited from my chest. . . . Oh, that’s my biggest dream and biggest wish to get out of this place. Because, being in this place, I’ve really known and understood the wonders and beauties of life I haven’t experienced before. I would really like to have a chance to experience these things. The first thing is school and knowledge, have a chance to have true relationships, an experience I’ve never had in my life. And almost everything else in life. Education is knowledge and I have a fascination with knowledge. I just feel it’s something beautiful to understand and know and have a sense of everything in life. . . . The most important thing that I wish for is being a doctor of medicine. That’s because, me personally, I’ve experienced from my injuries physical pain and I’ve experienced like emotional pains. I know what pain means. I’d really love to relieve a person who is suffering from such pain.

Read more about: