Lawrence O’Donnell Falsely Claims Republicans Want to Repeal Immigration Law Protecting Children From Sex Trafficking
On the July 23 edition of The Last Word, in an apparent effort to demonize conservatives as being uninterested in protecting children who were victims of sex trafficking, Lawrence O’Donnell deliberately misinterpreted the Republican position on the 2008 immigration law signed by President Bush.



O’Donnell played a clip of Congressman Mo Brooks (R-Alabama) expressing his support for sending illegal immigrant children back to their home countries. Brooks elaborated further by saying, “Now, if in fact some are, for example, being trafficked for slavery or sex purposes, that's a different issue.” Despite this clear statement, the host of The Last Word claimed that “one of the positions that these Republicans are holding is that they want to repeal the law that President Bush signed, which is about protecting children from sex trafficking. So they want to be on record as not wanting to protect children from this kind of sex trafficking.” [MP3 audio here; video below]

Republicans, along with President Obama, have supported an amendment to that 2008 law which would expedite deportations. It is a huge stretch to claim that Republicans want to be on record as opposing protections for victims of sex trafficking, particularly when virtually the same changes to the law are supported by the Democratic president.

Liberal MSNBC contributor Richard Wolffe chimed in with a ridiculous assertion of his own: “The President is going to turn around and make some executive orders that will drive this caucus – this block of this caucus – even more off the edge of the extreme edge of Republican politics. And they've only got one place to go at that point, and that's impeachment.”



Earlier in the segment, MSNBC guest Raul Reyes implied that fear of immigrants is part of the strategy to support deportation of these unaccompanied children. He declared that “there’s some misinformation going on up here, and that is selling the idea that is conflating this border crisis with immigration reform, with fear of immigrants and all this other ugly rhetoric we’ve heard about.”



O’Donnell would do well to have discussions that at the very least correctly identify the conservative position on the immigration crisis.



The relevant portion of the transcript is below.