Complete guest list for the State Dinner in honor of Prime Minister of Canada Justin Trudeau
President Obama and first lady Michelle Obama welcome Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and first lady Sophie Grégoire Trudeau to the White Hose for a state dinner. (WhiteHouse.gov)

The complete guest list as provided by the White House for the state dinner honoring Prime Minister of Canada Justin Trudeau.

[Full story of the night: White House state dinner for Canada is a cozy cross-border affair]

The President and Mrs. Obama

Prime Minister Trudeau and Mrs. Gregoire Trudeau

Ms. Naomi Aberly, philanthropist and Mr. Larry Lebowitz

Mr. David Abney, chairman & chief executive officer of United Parcel Service, and Ms. Sherry Abney

The Honorable Adewale Adeyemo, deputy assistant to the president & deputy national security advisor for international economics, White House National Security Council, and Ms. Heather Wong

Mr. Michael Alter, president of The Alter Group, and Ms. Ellen Alter

Mr. Robert Anderson, author, and Mr. Eric Harland

The Honorable Navdeep Bains, minister of innovation, science & economic development of Canada



Singer Sara Bareilles and her sisterJennifer Bareilles arrive at the State Dinner. (Chris Kleponis/AFP/Getty Images)

Ms. Sara Bareilles, singer, and Ms. Jennifer Bareilles

Mr. Bruce Bastian, co-founder of WordPerfect Corporation, and Mr. Clinton Ford

Mr. Gary Bettman, commissioner of the National Hockey League, and Mr. William Daly III, NHL deputy commissioner and chief legal officer

The Honorable Marie-Claude Bibeau, minister of international development & La Francophonie of Canada

The Honorable Tony Blinken, deputy secretary of state, U.S. Department of State, and the Honorable Evan Ryan, assistant secretary of state for educational and cultural affairs

Ms. Angela Bogdan, Chief of Protocol of Canada

1 of 22 Full Screen Autoplay Close Skip Ad × See what guests wore to the state dinner for Canada’s Justin Trudeau View Photos President Obama hosted the first state dinner honoring a Canadian prime minister in nearly 20 years Caption President Obama hosted the first state dinner honoring a Canadian prime minister in nearly 20 years March 10, 2016 Actor Ryan Reynolds and wife Blake Lively arrive at the state dinner for Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau at the White House in Washington. Andrew Harnik/AP Buy Photo Wait 1 second to continue.

Mr. Jeremy Broadhurst, deputy to the chief of staff & principal secretary to the prime minister of Canada

Mr. Stephen Bronfman, a Canadian business representative and philanthropist

Ms. Ursula Burns, chairman and chief executive officer of Xerox Corporation, and Mr. Lloyd Bean



Ursula Burns, chairman & chief executive officer of Xerox, arrives with her husband Lloyd Bean (Mary F. Calvert/Reuters)

Mr. Gerald Butts, principal secretary, Office of the Prime Minister of Canada

The Honorable Kristie Canegallo, assistant to the president and White House deputy chief of staff for implementation, and Ms. Simi Shah

The Honorable Ashton Carter, secretary of defense, U.S. Department of Defense, and Ms. Cynthia DeFelice

The Honorable Susan Collins, U.S. senator from Maine, and Mr. Peter Vigue

Ms. Audie Cornish-Emery, National Public Radio, and Mr. Theodore Emery



Sen. Susan Collins ( R-Maine) and Peter Vigue arrive at the White House (Andrew Harnik/AP)

The Honorable Susan Davis, U.S. representative from California, and Dr. Steven J. Davis

The Honorable Mark Dayton, governor of Minnesota

The Honorable Anita Decker Breckenridge, assistant to the president & White House deputy chief of staff for operations, and Mr. Russell Breckenridge

The Honorable Brian Deese, assistant to the president and White House senior advisor, and Ms. Kara Deese

The Honorable Stéphane Dion, minister of foreign affairs of Canada

Ms. Karen Dixon, attorney and executive committee member of Lambda Legal, and Dr. Nan Schaffer

[Yes, Canada has fashion designers, and the first ladies wore them to the state dinner]

Ms. Juliet Eilperin, The Washington Post, and Mr. Andrew Light

Mr. Adam Entous, The Wall Street Journal, and Ms. Sandra Medina

Mr. Mark Feierstein, senior director for western hemisphere affairs, White House National Security Council, and Ms. Tiffany Stone

Mr. Michael J. Fox, actor, and Ms. Tracy Pollan



Michael J. Fox and his wife Tracy Pollan arrive at the State Dinner. (Andrew Harnik/AP)

The Honorable Chrystia Freeland, minister of international trade of Canada

The Honorable Michael Froman, U.S. trade representative, and Ms. Nancy Goodman

Ms. Anna Gainey, president of the Liberal Party of Canada and a philanthropist

Mr. Mark Gallogly, co-founder and managing principal, Centerbridge Partners, and Ms. Elizabeth Strickler

The Honorable Suzy George, deputy assistant to the president and executive secretary and chief of staff of the White House National Security Council, and Ms. Devon George-Eghdami

The Honorable Ralph Goodale, minister of public safety and emergency preparedness of Canada

Mr. Jean Grégoire and Mrs. Estelle Blais, parents of Mrs. Sophie Grégoire Trudeau

The Honorable Avril Haines, assistant to the president and deputy national security advisor, White House National Security Council, and Mr. David Davighi

[The best lines from Obama and Trudeau’s toasts at Canada’s State Dinner]

Mr. John Hannaford, foreign and defense policy advisor to the prime minister and deputy secretary to the Cabinet Privy Council Office of Canada

The Honorable Orrin G. Hatch, U.S. senator from Utah and president pro tempore of the Senate, and Ms. Wendy Hatch

Ms. Marillyn Hewson, chairman, president, and chief executive officer of Lockheed Martin, and Mr. James Hewson

The Honorable Bruce Heyman, U.S. ambassador to Canada, and Ms. Vicki Heyman



Grant Hill and Tamia Hill arrive at a State Dinner. (Chris Kleponis/AFP/Getty Images)

Mr. Grant Hill, former basketball player and member of the President’s Council on Fitness, Sports & Nutrition, and Ms. Tamia Hill

Dr. Irwin Jacobs, co-founder of Qualcomm and chair of the Board of Trustees for the Salk Institute, and Ms. Joan Jacobs

The Honorable Roberta Jacobson, assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs, U.S. Department of State, and Mr. Jonathan Jacobson

The Honorable Valerie Jarrett, White House senior advisor and assistant to the president for intergovernmental affairs and public engagement, and Mr. Anthony Balkissoon

The Honorable Jeh Johnson, secretary of homeland security, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, and Ms. Susan DiMarco

The Honorable Mélanie Joly, minister of Canadian heritage

Mr. Wayne Jordan, executive, founder and principal of Jordan Real Estate Investments, and Ms. Quinn Delaney

Mr. Jonathan Kaplan, founder and chief executive officer of The Melt, and Ms. Marci Glazer

[Sasha and Malia Obama attend their first state dinner]

The Honorable Derek Kilmer, U.S. representative from Washington, and Ms. Jennifer Kilmer

The Honorable Angus King, U.S. senator from Maine, and Ms. Kathryn Rand

Mr. Robert Klein II, president of Klein Financial Corporation and chairman emeritus of the California Institute of Regenerative Medicine, and Mr. Robert Klein III

The Honorable Amy Klobuchar, U.S. senator from Minnesota, and Mr. John Bessler

The Honorable Patrick Leahy, U.S. senator from Vermont, and Ms. Marcelle Leahy

Ms. Twila Legare, letter writer, and Mr. Marc Legare



Twila Legare and Marc Legare arrive at the White House. (Mary F. Calvert/Reuters)

The Honorable Jacob Lew, secretary of the treasury, U.S. Department of the Treasury

Mr. Charles Lewis, chairman of the Lewis-Sebring Family Foundation, and Ms. Penny Sebring

Mr. Andrew Liveris, chairman and chief executive officer of The Dow Chemical Company, and Ms. Paula Liveris

Mr. Alexander Macgillivray, White House deputy chief technology officer, and Ms. Shona Crabtree

His Excellency David MacNaughton, ambassador of Canada to the United States, and Mrs. Leslie Noble

The Honorable Denis McDonough, assistant to the president and White House chief of staff, and Ms. Karin McDonough

The Honorable Catherine McKenna, minister of environment and climate change of Canada



Lorne Michaels and his wife Alice arrive for the state dinner. (Andrew Harnik/AP)

Mr. Lorne Michaels, executive producer of “Saturday Night Live,” and Ms. Alice Michaels

The Honorable Lisa Monaco, assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism, White House National Security Council, and Mr. Mark Monaco

The Honorable Ernest Moniz, secretary of energy, U.S. Department of Energy, and Ms. Katya Frois-Moniz

Mr. Dennis Muilenburg, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, The Boeing Company, and Mr. Gregory Smith

The Honorable Shailagh Murray, assistant to the president and White House senior advisor, and Mr. Neil King

Mr. Mike Myers, actor, and Ms. Kelly Myers



Mike Myers claps during the state dinner. (Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images)

The Honorable Marvin Nicholson, special assistant to the president, White House trip director and personal aide to the president, and Ms. Helen Pajcic

Dr. Konrad Ng, executive director of Shangri La, Doris Duke Foundation for Islamic Art, and Dr. Maya Soetoro-Ng

Ms. Sandra Oh, actress, and Mr. Lev Rukhin



Sandra Oh and Lev Rukhin arrive at the State Dinner. (Chris Kleponish/AFP/Getty Images)

Mr. John Owens, chairman of the board of MediGuide International, and Ms. Missy Owens

The Honorable Nancy Pelosi, U.S. representative from California and Democratic leader of the U.S. House of Representatives, and Mr. Paul Pelosi

The Honorable Amy Pope, deputy assistant to the president & deputy homeland security advisor, White House National Security Council, and Mr. Neil Allison

The Honorable Samantha Power, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, and Mr. Cass Sunstein

The Honorable Penny Pritzker, secretary of commerce, U.S. Department of Commerce, and Mr. John Poorman

Mr. Thomas Pritzker, chairman and chief executive officer of The Pritzker Organization, and Ms. Margot Pritzker

Ms. Kate Purchase, director of communications, Office of the Prime Minister of Canada

Ms. Roberta Rampton, Reuters, and Mr. Peter Rampton



Ryan Reynolds and Blake Lively arrive for the State Dinner. (Ron Sachs/EPA)

Mr. Ryan Reynolds and Ms. Blake Lively, actors

The Honorable Ben Rhodes, assistant to the president and deputy national security advisor for strategic communications and speechwriting, White House National Security Council, and Ms. Ann Norris

The Honorable Steven Ricchetti, assistant to the president and White House chief of staff to the vice president, and Ms. Amy Ricchetti

The Honorable Susan Rice, national security advisor, White House National Security Council, and Mr. Ian Cameron

Dr. Martine Rothblatt, chairman and co-chief executive officer of United Therapeutics Corporation, and Mrs. Bina Rothblatt

The Honorable Harjit Sajjan, minister of national defense of Canada

The Honorable Peter Selfridge, chief of protocol, U.S. Department of State, and Ms. Parita Shah Selfridge

The Honorable Jeanne Shaheen, U.S. senator from New Hampshire, and Mr. William Shaheen

Ms. Beth Shaw, personal finance commentator and member of the President’s Advisory Council on Financial Capability for Young Americans, and Mr. Adam Shaw

Mr. Adam Silver, commissioner of the National Basketball Association, and Ms. Maggie Grise

Mr. Ian Simmons, co-founder and principal of Blue Haven Initiative, and Ms. Liesel Simmons

The Honorable Todd Stern, special envoy for climate change, U.S. Department of State, and Ms. Jennifer Klein

Mrs. Michéle Taylor, member of the United States Holocaust Memorial Council, and Dr. Kenneth Taylor

The Honorable Tina Tchen, assistant to the president and White House Chief of Staff to the First Lady

Ms. Katie Telford, chief of staff, Office of the Prime Minister of Canada

The Honorable Jon Tester, U.S. senator from Montana, and Ms. Sharla Tester

The Honorable Hunter Tootoo, minister of fisheries, oceans and the Canadian Coast Guard of Canada



Margaret Trudeau, mother of Justin Trudeau, is applauded as she is introduced by President Barack Obama during the state dinner. (Paul Chiasson/The Canadian Press via AP)

Mrs. Margaret Trudeau, mother of Prime Minister Trudeau

Mr. Michael Wernick, clerk of the Privy Council and secretary to the Cabinet Privy Council Office of Canada

The Honorable Melissa Winter, deputy assistant to the president and White House senior advisor to the First Lady

Mr. David Zaslav, president and chief executive officer, Discovery Communications, and Ms. Pam Zaslav



President Obama and Michelle Obama with Prime Minister of Canada Justin Trudeau his wife Grégoire-Trudeau at the White House on Thursday. (Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA)

Read More:

Planning to move to Canada if Trump wins? Meet your new prime minister.

State dinner will start with a gussied-up version of Canada’s late-night party food

Quiz: Can you guess which famous person is Canadian?

The Canada state dinner is the chief floral designer’s first start-to-finish effort