Appendix 2 Survey concepts used in Canada and in the United States
Table A2.1

Concepts used by the household labour force surveys

Table summary

This table displays the results of Concepts used by the household labour force surveys. The information is grouped by Concepts (appearing as row headers), Labour Force Survey

Statistics Canada and Current Population Survey

Bureau of Labor Statistics (appearing as column headers).

Concepts Labour Force Survey

Statistics Canada Current Population Survey

Bureau of Labor Statistics

Employment concept Estimate of employed persons (multiple jobholders are counted only once). Estimate of employed persons (multiple jobholders are counted only once).

Employment Employed persons consist of persons who during the survey reference week: did any work for pay including self‑employment;

did any unpaid work in a family-owned enterprise operated by someone in their household; or

were temporarily absent from their regular jobs, whether they were paid or not. Employed persons consist of persons who during the survey reference week: did any work for pay including self-employment;

did at least 15 hours of unpaid work in a family-owned enterprise operated by someone in their household; or

were temporarily absent from their regular jobs, whether they were paid or not.

Unemployment Unemployed persons consist of persons who during the survey reference week: had no employment;

were available for work (except in the case of temporary illness); and

were either waiting to be recalled to a job from which they had been laid off, made specific efforts to find employment sometime during the 4-week period ending with the survey reference week or had a job to start within the next four weeks. Unemployed persons consist of persons who during the survey reference week: had no employment;

were available for work (except in the case of temporary illness); and

were either waiting to be recalled to a job from which they had been laid off, or had made specific efforts to find employment sometime during the 4-week period ending with the survey reference week.

Not in the labour force All persons who are neither employed nor unemployed. This group includes persons who, during the reference week, were unwilling or unable to offer or supply labour services under conditions existing in their labour markets. All persons who are neither employed nor unemployed. This group includes discouraged workers, defined as persons not in the labour force who want and are available for a job and looked for work sometime in the past 12 months but who are not currently looking because they believe there are no jobs available or there are none for which they would qualify.

Labour force All persons classified as employed or unemployed. All persons classified as employed or unemployed.

Participation rate The proportion of the population that is in the labour force. The proportion of the population that is in the labour force.

Full-time/part-time Full-time employment consists of persons who usually work 30 hours or more per week at their main or only job. Part-time employment consists of persons who usually work less than 30 hours per week at their main or only job. Full-time employment consists of persons who usually work 35 hours or more (at all jobs combined). Part-time workers are those who usually work less than 35 hours per week (at all jobs).

Reference week Generally the calendar week, Sunday through Saturday, that includes the 15th day of the month. Generally, the calendar week, Sunday through Saturday, that includes the 12th day of the month.

Population Included are persons aged 15 years and over residing in Canada who do not reside in the territories and are not living on Indian reserves, full-time members of the regular Armed Forces, and persons living in institutions (for example, inmates of penal institutions and patients in hospitals or nursing homes who have resided in the institution for more than six months). Included are persons aged 16 years and older residing in the 50 states and the District of Columbia who are not confined to institutions such as nursing homes and prisons, and who are not on active duty in the U.S. Armed Forces.

Household Any person or group of persons living in a dwelling. A household may consist of any combination of: one person living alone, one or more families, a group of people who are not related but who share the same dwelling. All persons—related family members and all unrelated persons—who occupy a housing unit and have no other usual address.

Industry General nature of the business carried out in the establishment where the person worked (main job only), based on the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). General nature of the business carried out in the establishment where the person worked (collected for main job and secondary job). Classification is based on the Census Classification which is derived from the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).

Occupation Refers to the kind of work persons were doing during the reference week. Classification is based on the National Occupational Classification for Statistics (NOC-S). Refers to the kind of work persons were doing during the reference week (collected for main and secondary job). Classification is based on the Census Classification, which is derived from the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC).