British Columbia's Carbon Tax
B.C.’s carbon tax provides a signal across the economy to reduce emissions while encouraging sustainable economic activity and investment in low-carbon innovation.

In 2008, the province implemented North America’s first broad-based carbon tax, proving that it is possible to reduce emissions while growing the economy. Between 2007 and 2016, provincial real GDP grew by 19%, while net emissions declined by 3.7%.

The carbon tax applies to the purchase and use of fossil fuels and covers approximately 70% of provincial greenhouse gas emissions.

Carbon pricing is gaining momentum globally. In Canada, the federal government implemented a coordinated nation-wide carbon price, beginning at $20 per tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions (tCO2e) in 2019 and rising to $50 per tonne. As of 2019, over 70 jurisdictions, representing about 20% of global GHG emissions, have put a price on carbon.

New Approach to Carbon Pricing

On April 1, 2019, B.C.'s carbon tax rate rose from $35 to $40 per tCO 2 e. The tax rate will increase each year by $5 per tonne until it reaches $50 per tonne in 2021.

New revenues generated from increasing the carbon tax will be used to

Provide carbon tax relief and protect affordability

Maintain industry competitiveness

Encourage new green initiatives

To improve affordability, government is increasing the Climate Action Tax Credit to $154.50 per adult and $45.50 per child as of July 1, 2019. Government also offers several carbon tax programs for businesses and local governments.

The CleanBC Program for Industry directs an amount equal to the incremental carbon tax paid by industry above $30/tonne into incentives for cleaner operations. The program is designed for regulated large industrial operations, such as pulp and paper mills, natural gas operations and refineries, and large mines.

The program includes:

A CleanBC Industrial Incentive that reduces carbon-tax costs for operations meeting world leading emissions benchmarks, and

A CleanBC Industry Fund that invests some industrial carbon tax revenue directly into emission reduction projects, helping to make our traditional industries cleaner and stronger.

Tax Rates by Fuel

Different fuels generate different amounts of GHG emissions. The April 2019 carbon tax rate of $40 per tonne must be translated based on the type of fuel used. Below are rates for select fuels.