ObamaCare Cutting Hours At Goodwill, Salvation Army?
IBD's list of employers that have cut work hours or adopted other labor policies to limit ObamaCare liability has expanded to 319.

The updated list now includes 250 public-sector employers and 50 employers based in Indiana.

IBD's effort to document the impact of ObamaCare's employer mandate on modest-wage workers is getting a helping hand from people who have felt or seen up close the sting of cuts.

The information includes reports of work-hour reductions at Goodwill Industries and the Salvation Army.

IBD got no response from the divisions where reports of reduced hours emerged — Goodwill Industries of East Texas and Sacramento Valley/Northern Nevada and Salvation Army's Eastern Michigan Division.

A Salvation Army spokesman said each of its 40 divisions across the country "makes most of its own operational decisions." Goodwill's structure appears similar.

IBD isn't adding Goodwill or Salvation Army to its ObamaCare Employer Mandate List Of Cuts To Hours, Jobs because of the lack of conclusive evidence of systematic cuts across entire divisions. But the reports are credible and consistent with the shrinking workweek at used merchandise stores.

More broadly, the workweek has fallen to a record low in industries where the pay of nonsupervisors averages up to about $14.50 an hour. It is clear that modest-wage workers have the most to fear from the Affordable Care Act's employer mandate.

Doing Harm To Doing Good

Now, we have examples of organizations synonymous with doing good apparently being compelled to act in ways that do harm to their own workers.

The risk is that this becomes a trend. IBD's ObamaCare employment impact list already includes the LDS Church-owned Deseret Industries, which operates thrift stores that train war refugees for lasting employment.

The list's seven new additions include Cabela's (CAB); Worldwide TechServices; Davis School District in Utah; Eastern Florida State College; and three Indiana school districts (School City of Mishawaka, Shelby Eastern Schools and Southwestern Consolidated School District).

They include three employers whose work-hour cuts have apparently gone unreported. In each case, current or former employ ees provided official documents to back up their claims.

Cabela's, whose 42 U.S. retail stores sell hunting, fishing and camping gear, cut part-time workers to a maximum of 28 hours per week. A notice to employees informed them that the change was due to health care reform: "the definition of part-time em ployment is changing to less than an average of 30 hours per week."