Target to Discontinue Sale of Holy Bible – True Trumpers
Minneapolis, MN – Target announced today the retail giant will be discontinuing sales of the Holy Bible. The company has come under fire recently from religious groups for its new transgender bathroom policy. The King James Bible has been available for purchase at Target stores ever since the company was founded as Goodfellow Dry Goods back in 1902.

Speaking with CNBC, Target CEO Bryan Hornell cited recent protests from what he calls “religious extremists” as the reason to pull the bible from its shelves. “Target will no longer cater to religious extremists,” said Hornell. “If that means removing the bible from our shelves, then so be it.” Hornell said the big box chain is “sticking to its guns” regarding their bathroom policy, and will be phasing out anything having to do with religion. “We believe that everyone, every team member, every guest, and every community, deserves to be treated equally, regardless of their religious beliefs.”

Hornell may be referring to a recent viral video of a mother storming through a Target store waving a bible and warning customers that Target is unsafe for children. “Mothers have enough decency to get out of this store, it’s a dangerous place,” the mother screams in the video. “What Target has done is very hateful. It’s hatred towards families. It’s hateful towards mothers. It’s hateful towards children…Are you gonna let the devil rape your children?”

Traynesha Holmes, a Target employee who witnessed the bizarre demonstration, described the situation. “A disturbed woman with about ten kids came in the store yelling and screaming that Target was raping children…it was hilarious at first but after a while we were getting scared that they might be a religious cult and would start shooting.”

Over 1.2 million people have signed a petition promising to boycott Target stores. A new campaign, launched today, will see a #FlushTarget truck visit every store in the retailer’s home of Minnesota.

Do you agree with Target’s decision to discontinue bible sales? Sound off in the comments below.