Mysterious and ‘arrogant’ Vladimir Putin seeks Russia's return to status of world superpower
The infuriatingly catchy Russian electro-pop song opens with a lament about the singer’s boyfriend, who has been in a fight again, drunk something “nasty” and — finally — been dumped.

Then, it kicks into its relentless refrain, the woman declaring she wants “a man like Putin … One like Putin, full of strength, One like Putin, who won’t be drunk, One like Putin, who wouldn’t hurt me.”

The song became a hit locally and in the West highlighted a conflicting view of Vladimir Putin. Here, he was seen as a steely eyed former KGB man, but also cartoonishly macho and so anxious to woo voters he would parade, frequently shirtless, through any number of humorous photo ops.

The reality was never so risible, a fact that has now sunk in with chilling effect, as the chest-baring horseman from the PR photos has sent in his army to grab a chunk of Ukraine.

As Mr. Putin, 61, broke days of silence Tuesday to defend his invasion of another country, the leader one biographer dubbed “the man without a face” remains a bundle of contradictions and mystery to the West.

The Russian leader has dubbed the fall of the Soviet Union the 20th-century’s “greatest geopolitical catastrophe,” been accused of accumulating a corrupt fortune worth billions and suppressed opposition ruthlessly — even as he furiously courts public opinion in Russia.

But it is his 15-year career in the KGB — the feared Soviet spy agency and the job he dreamed of as a child — that perhaps most defines the man who has ruled Russia directly or indirectly since 2000, said Clifford Gaddy, co-author of [itals]Mr. Putin: Operative in the Kremlin[enditals] published last year.

“His whole training, his whole identity is as a KGB field officer, a recruiter,” said the Brookings Institution economist Tuesday.

“That required what Putin himself has described as his ultimate skill, which is dealing with people … That spans the gamut from being very persuasive to just reminding people that if you don’t work with me, the alternative is pretty bad.”

To that end, the Russian leader does not want a return of the USSR, despite that provocative 2005 quote about its catastrophic demise. Rather, he is anxious to create a buffer of compliant states around his country, argues Mr. Gaddy.

According to this world view, the toppling of Ukrainian president Victor Yanukovych was a coup and the European alignment of the new government in Kyiv a real threat to Russia’s security.

“We think that’s crazy … [But] like it or not that’s how he and a lot of Russians think,” Mr. Gaddy said.

Mr. Putin was born in St. Petersburg — then called Leningrad — in October, 1952. Details of his early life are sketchy, but the book The Man Without A Face, by journalist Masha Gessen, describes him as a scrappy young man who would rather fight bullies, than back down.

He studied law in university, then in 1975 launched his career in the KGB, spending several years in the intelligence agency’s office in Dresden, East Germany, trying to recruit foreigners and others as agents.

He returned to St. Petersburg in 1990, just before the fall of the Soviet Union, and eventually worked with Anatoly Sobchak, a former law professor who became the city’s first elected mayor in June 1991.

Mr. Putin went on to became St. Petersburg deputy mayor and — Ms. Gessen argues — began to acquire his alleged kleptocratic practices. Responsible for issuing export licences to Russian firms for lumber and other commodities, he managed to siphon off millions for himself, she alleges.

By 1996, Mr. Putin had made the move to Moscow and work in the Kremlin, rising to be head of the FSB, the KGB’s successor organization, two years later. Backed by then-president Boris Yeltsin, he became acting president after Mr. Yeltsin resigned and was elected to the office in 2000.

He served two terms as president, then another as prime minister under close ally Dmitry Medvedev, who changed the constitution so Mr. Putin could run yet again for president in 2012. He won, the newly extended term allowing him to stay in power until 2018.

Opinion polls place his approval rating even now at more than 60%.

The Russian economy has grown substantially under his watch, rising 72% by 2008. Also, he has largely kept his promise to restore the country’s “dignity” after the shambles of those first post-Communist years in the 1990s, said Mr. Gaddy.

Yet his rise has come alongside troubling developments. Opposition parties and candidates have been pushed aside or co-opted into the Putin camp, while he has suppressed most media critical of his reign.

“Putin did all he could to bring back the life he had loved: the closed world of the Soviet Union and, even more important, the KGB,” wrote Ms. Gessen.

“He also succeeded in transforming the country, turning back democratic reforms and ultimately establishing a thoroughly corrupt and inefficient authoritarian regime.”

Mr. Putin still believes in “legitimacy” — having the support of the Russian people for his government — but is prepared to go to unscrupulous lengths to solidify that popular mandate, Mr. Gaddy said.

“He does care about the will and voice of the people, but that doesn’t mean he’s going to just stand idly by and let people vote.”

Meanwhile, he has allegedly built up a massive personal fortune. His cash, real estate and other assets have been estimated at more than $40 billion, says Nina Khruscheva, a professor at New York’s New School and granddaughter of former Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev.

Mr. Gaddy and co-author Fiona Hill, also of Brookings, say in their book they could find no hard corroboration of his reported ill-gotten wealth, despite considerable circumstantial evidence.

Regardless, Mr. Gaddy argues Mr Putin is driven, not by personal greed, but by a desire to restore Russia as a powerful world player, an ambition he will pursue with formidable skill.

“This guy is supremely self confident. It’s bordering on — no it is — arrogance. He really is convinced he is the smartest guy around,” said the economist.

“There’s real rationality in Putin. It’s so important to understand how he looks at the world.”

National Post

• Email: tblackwell@nationalpost.com | Twitter: tomblackwellNP

— — — — —

‘He said / He said’ on Ukraine:

Russian President Vladimir Putin gave a press conference Tuesday to defend his actions in Ukraine. Later U.S. President Barack Obama, Secretary of State John Kerry, and British foreign minister William Hague responded in separate press conferences.

PUTIN’S ASSESSMENT

Putin: “There can be only one assessment of what happened in Kiev, in Ukraine in general. This was an anti-constitutional coup and the armed seizure of power. No one has challenged that. Who is saying it’s not true?”

Kerry: “Not a single piece of credible evidence supports these claims.”

Obama: “President Putin seems to have a different set of lawyers making a different set of interpretations. I don’t think that’s fooling anybody.”

THE LAST RESORT

Putin: “The use of the military is an extreme case. But we have a direct request from a legitimate president, [Viktor] Yanukovych, on military aid to protect Ukrainian citizens. I want you to understand me clearly. If we make such a decision, it will only be for the protection of Ukrainian citizens. What could serve as a reason to use military force? It would naturally be the last resort, absolutely the last.”

Hague: “The suggestion that a president who has fled his country then has any authority whatsoever to invite the forces of a neighbouring country into that country is baseless.”

NO FIGHT

Putin: He said he saw no immediate need to invade eastern Ukraine. “We aren’t going to fight the Ukrainian people,” he said. He said Russia was not considering annexing Crimea, but said Crimean citizens should be allowed to determine their own future. “Only the people who live in a certain territory have the right to decide their own future,” he said.

Obama: “Together, the international community has condemned Russia’s violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine. We’ve condemned their intervention in Crimea and we are calling for a de-escalation of the situation and international monitors that can go into the country right away. Above all, we believe that the Ukrainian people should be able to decide their own future.”

DON’T COME, THEN

Putin: He warned any sanctions by the West would backfire. “All threats against Russia are counterproductive and harmful.” He said Russia was ready to host the G8 meeting of world leaders but Western leaders who did not want to attend “don’t need to.”

Kerry: “Our partners will have absolutely no choice [but] to join us to continue to expand on steps we have taken in recent days to isolate Russia diplomatically, politically and economically.” He said sanctions were “not something we are seeking to do, it is something Russia is pushing us to do.”

LAB RATS

Putin: He accused the West of encouraging an “unconstitutional coup.” “We have told them a thousand times ‘Why are you splitting the country?”’ He said the U.S. had interfered in Ukraine “from across the pond in America as if they were sitting in a laboratory and running experiments on rats, without any understanding of the consequences.”

Kerry: “I think that it is clear that Russia has been working hard to create a pretext for being able to invade further.” He said Moscow was “hiding its hand behind falsehoods, intimidation and provocations.”

WHAT SOLDIERS?

Putin: He said gunmen without military insignia who had taken over government buildings in Crimea were not Russian soldiers. “Look at former Soviet republics. You can go to a store and buy a uniform. Were these Russian soldiers? No, they’re very well-trained self-defense forces.”

Kerry: “Did he really deny that there were troops in Crimea?” Mr. Kerry asked when quizzed by a reporter about Mr. Putin’s claim.

National Post news services