Oklahoma Indian gaming revenues rise while fees to state drop
Oklahoma Indian gaming revenues climbed more than $60 million in 2013, but the amount of fees tribes paid the state dropped by more than $3.1 million.

The reason for the disparity appears to be a subtle shift in the types of gaming machines tribes have been operating, reports reveal.

Driven by an increase in both the number of gaming facilities and gaming machines, Oklahoma Indian gaming revenue grew 2 percent in 2013 — reaching nearly $3.8 billion, according to the 2015 edition of Casino City’s Indian Gaming Industry Report released Monday.

That was slower growth than recent years but still high enough to place Oklahoma 10th out of 28 Indian gaming states in revenue growth.

Eleven states experienced declines.

Expanding even more rapidly in Oklahoma were tribal non-gaming revenues generated by casino patrons’ expenditures on food, beverages, lodging, shopping and entertainment.

Those revenues grew 13.8 percent, reaching $580.5 million, the report said.

The year 2013 is the most recent year for which the report has compiled financial data.

The report cited nearly a dozen new Oklahoma casinos, expansions or renovations that occurred in 2013, alone.

Types of games

But one thing that didn’t expand was the state’s fee revenue from casinos.

That revenue dropped — going from about $127.8 million in calendar year 2012 to $124.7 million in 2013, providing less money for education, mental health services and general operations, state records show.

Under compact agreements, Oklahoma tribes are required to pay the state exclusivity fees based on the amount of revenues they generate off of the operation of Class III games like slot machines, craps, roulette, pari-mutuel wagering, house-banked card games and certain video and electronic games of chance.

Tribes are not required to pay such fees on the revenues they generate from Class II games like bingo, pull-tabs, lotto, punch boards and tip jars.

Electronic versions of such games also are exempt from such fees and have become more similar to Class III games in recent years.

That has particularly been the case since 2008 when the National Indian Gaming Commission backed away from an attempt to crack down on electronic Class II games that were seen as too similar to ones that are in Class III.

Casino City’s Indian Gaming Industry Report noted that the percentage of Class II games in Oklahoma Indian casinos has risen steadily from 34 percent in 2008 to 42 percent in 2013, while the percentage of Class III games has declined from 66 percent to 58 percent.

The exclusivity fees tribes pay the state on the operation of Class III electronic games are based on a sliding scale that starts at 4 percent on the first $10 million in revenue, rises to 5 percent on the next $10 million and then goes to 6 percent on revenues above $20 million. Tribes pay 10 percent of the monthly net win from table games.

“This trend towards more Class II machines in recent years is interesting and its starting point (2009) coincides with the withdrawal of restrictive Class II gaming machine regulations that were originally proposed by the NIGC (National Indian Gaming Commission) in May 2006 and ultimately withdrawn in September 2008,” the report by economist Alan Meister noted.

Judy Allen, spokeswoman for the Choctaw Nation, said her tribe always has offered some Class II games and currently offers customers a mix of about 40 percent Class II games and 60 percent Class III games.

“We like to offer our customers a variety of games to play, and Class II titles are extremely popular with our customers,” she said.

Meister told The Oklahoman that when tribes shift from Class III games to more Class II games, it is generally because of economic considerations, and not having to pay exclusivity fees to the state is just one factor that can come into play.

“Part of that is the mix that the tribes prefer — probably the mix that the customers prefer,” Meister said.

“And mixed in there somewhere, of course, is the fact the tribes don’t have to do revenue sharing on the Class II machines, so they can afford to take in a little less revenue and still make just as much or more money, depending on how those machines are performing.”

Changing trend?

State revenues from Indian gaming exclusivity fees continued to decline in 2014, dropping to just under $124 million last year.

“Oklahoma’s gaming industry is growing, but having more casinos making more money doesn’t necessarily mean more gaming revenue coming to the state for education,” said John Estus, spokesman for the state Office of Management and Enterprise Services.

“State gaming revenues, the vast majority of which are directed to education, actually dropped in calendar years 2013 and 2014. We believe a major reason for that drop is casinos increasingly favoring games from which the state receives no revenue over games from which the state does receive revenue.”

Interestingly, the trend appears to have reversed itself in recent months with monthly state revenues from Indian gaming showing an increase over revenues from the same month a year earlier for each month since August.

It is unclear at this point whether that has resulted from a change in the mix of Class II vs. Class III games, an increase in gambling overall or some other factor.

“The state compliance unit has been utilizing different approaches than it did in the past to ensure compact terms are being met, and that unit will assess the recent revenue uptick we’re seeing at fiscal year’s end to determine potential causes,” Estus said.

Expansion projects

Casino City’s report identified eight Oklahoma expansion projects that took place in 2014 and early 2015, including:

The Comanche Nation’s opening of a new hotel at the Comanche Red River Casino at Devol.

The Choctaw Nation’s opening of a newly renovated pool with swim up bars and a grotto at the Choctaw Casino Resort near Durant.

The Chickasaw Nation’s opening of a third hotel and keno lounge at the WinStar World Casino at Thackerville.

The Kaw Nation’s opening of a Class II casino in Braman.

The Wichita & Affiliated Tribes opening of an events center at Sugar Creek Casino at Hinton.

The Muscogee Creek Nation’s opening of a new restaurant at the River Spirit Casino in Tulsa.

The Wyandotte Nation’s addition of a bowling alley at the Wyandotte Nation Casino in Wyandotte.

The Cherokee Nation’s opening of a new casino in South Coffeyville.

Current, future projects

The report also listed more than a dozen new or expansion projects that are underway or planned, including:

The Choctaw Nation’s plans to add a hotel, conference space, restaurant, movie theater, bowling alley and new entertainment venues at Choctaw Casino Resort, with construction expected to be completed this summer.

The Cherokee Nation’s plans for a hotel, convention center and golf course in Tahlequah, also expected to be completed this summer.

The Cherokee Nation’s plans to add an outlet mall at the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino Tulsa by late 2016.

The Shawnee Tribe’s plans to build a casino in Guymon, with construction expected to begin in 2016.