VietJet Air and Pratt & Whitney Announce Selection of PurePower® Geared Turbofan™ for Aircraft Order

HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 11, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Pratt & Whitney, a division of United Technologies Corp. (NYSE: UTX), and VietJet Air ("VietJet") today announced the selection of the PurePower Geared Turbofan (GTF) engine to power an order of 10 new aircraft. This deal, which is valued at $600 million at list prices, includes a 12-year EngineWise™ Fleet Management Program. This order follows a February 2016 contract signing for GTF engines to power VietJet's 63 newly ordered aircraft.

The signing took place in a ceremony in Vietnam's capital, Hanoi, and was attended by U.S. President Donald Trump and Mr. Trần Đại Quang, President of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, along with officials from VietJet and Pratt & Whitney during the president's official trip to Vietnam for the APEC 2017.

"We are delighted to add 10 additional GTF-powered new aircraft to our fleet. We look forward to the proven performance and environmental benefits that they deliver," said Dinh Viet Phuong, vice president of VietJet Air.

Since entering into service in early 2016, the GTF engine has demonstrated its promised ability to reduce fuel burn by 16 percent, regulated emissions by 50 percent and noise footprint by 75 percent.

"We were honored to celebrate a new relationship with VietJet last year, and we are thrilled to extend this relationship now and into the future," said Rick Deurloo, senior vice president of sales, marketing and customer support at Pratt & Whitney.

About VietJet Air

Since commencing operations in 2011, VietJet, Vietnam's largest airline in terms of domestic market share, has become the Asia Pacific's fastest growing low-cost carrier. It has operated profitably since its second year of operation with over 73 domestic and international routes and technical reliability rate of 99.6%, the highest among the airlines in the region who operate the same aircraft model.

About Pratt & Whitney

Pratt & Whitney is a world leader in the design, manufacture and service of aircraft engines and auxiliary power units. United Technologies Corp., based in Farmington, Connecticut, provides high-technology systems and services to the building and aerospace industries. To learn more about UTC, visit its website at www.utc.com, or follow the company on Twitter: @UTC.

This press release contains forward-looking statements concerning future business opportunities. Actual results may differ materially from those projected as a result of certain risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to changes in levels of demand in the aerospace industry, in levels of air travel, and in the number of aircraft to be built; challenges in the design, development, production support, performance and realization of the anticipated benefits of advanced technologies; as well as other risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to those detailed from time to time in United Technologies Corp.'s Securities and Exchange Commission filings.

Pratt & Whitney

+1 (860) 565-9600

media@pw.utc.com

SOURCE Pratt & Whitney