Vietnam Airlines and Pratt & Whitney Announce Selection of PurePower® Geared Turbofan™ Engine for A321neo Aircraft Order

HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 11, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Pratt & Whitney, a division of United Technologies Corp. (NYSE: UTX), and Vietnam Airlines gathered today for a signing ceremony announcing the selection of the PurePower Geared Turbofan (GTF) engine to power 20 A321neo Airbus aircraft. The deal, which is valued at $1.5 billion at list prices, includes a 12-year EngineWise™ Fleet Management Program.

The event was hosted during a commercial signing ceremony in Vietnam's capital, Hanoi, attended by U.S. President Donald Trump and Mr. Trần Đại Quang, President of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, along with Vietnam Airlines and Pratt & Whitney officials.

"We are pleased to select the GTF engine for our fleet of A321neo aircraft," said Dương Trí Thành, president and CEO at Vietnam Airlines. "This engine will deliver superior economic and environmental performance to Vietnam Airlines."

"We are proud to celebrate this momentous occasion with Vietnam Airlines," said Rick Deurloo, senior vice president of sales, marketing and customer support at Pratt & Whitney. "We've been powering Vietnam Airlines since the early 1990s when the airline received its first PW4000-powered 767. We look forward to continuing our strong relationship and long history with Vietnam Airlines."

Since entering into service in early 2016, the GTF engine has demonstrated its promised ability to reduce fuel burn by 16 percent, regulated emissions by 50 percent and noise footprint by 75 percent.

About Pratt & Whitney

Pratt & Whitney is a world leader in the design, manufacture and service of aircraft engines and auxiliary power units. United Technologies Corp., based in Farmington, Connecticut, provides high-technology systems and services to the building and aerospace industries. To learn more about UTC, visit its website at www.utc.com, or follow the company on Twitter: @UTC.

This press release contains forward-looking statements concerning future business opportunities. Actual results may differ materially from those projected as a result of certain risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to changes in levels of demand in the aerospace industry, in levels of air travel, and in the number of aircraft to be built; challenges in the design, development, production support, performance and realization of the anticipated benefits of advanced technologies; as well as other risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to those detailed from time to time in United Technologies Corp.'s Securities and Exchange Commission filings.

Pratt & Whitney

+1 (860) 565-9600

media@pw.utc.com

SOURCE Pratt & Whitney