Cuts in store for many of Missouri’s public assistance programs
A new state law taking effect next year will cut an estimated 3,155 Missouri families from one public benefit program, and require thousands more to participate in “work activities” to receive food assistance.

The legislation, which Republican-led lawmakers passed over a veto by Gov. Jay Nixon, shortens the maximum amount of time people can receive benefits from the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, or TANF, to three and a half years from five. It also strengthens a requirement for TANF recipients to be employed or participating in “work activities” such as taking classes or community service prior to becoming eligible for benefits.

A 30-hour per week work requirement will also go into effect for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP.

Listen: Cuts in store for many of Missouri's public assistance programs

Caught in the middle are people like Johnnina Ray: a single mother of three, who worked as a hairstylist in Detroit before moving to St. Louis with her daughters in 2003. Ray reaches her five-year limit this summer, and her story is no anomaly: After juggling three jobs for years to support her daughters, her health gave out.

“I was in pain one day, so bad I was under the desk,” Ray said.

Her doctor recommended cutting back her hours at work, but the car rental agency she worked for wouldn’t pay her more without a college degree. So Ray did something she never thought she’d have to do — she signed up for public assistance programs like TANF, SNAP and Section 8 and went back to school through a work-study program at St. Louis Community College.

For about five years, Ray managed to feed her family with a benefit of $511 each month through SNAP. She said it usually lasts if she buys in bulk and sticks to less expensive types of meat, like a package of turkey meatballs she pulls out of the freezer. Her eldest daughter helped with child care.

“I don’t go to food pantries because I don’t want to take from somebody who really needs it,” Ray said.

Ray graduated in May, with a place on the Dean’s List. She’s confident she’ll find work and plans to take online courses through the University of Missouri-St. Louis.

“When I go and look for jobs, I can ask for enough to take care of my family, instead of accepting what they’re offering because I don’t have a degree. That’s the thing that makes me happy,” Ray said.

About 21,000 Missourians receive about $114 a month through TANF. It’s funded by a $217 million annual block grant from the federal government. The shorter timeline could pose a problem for students who are going to school part-time, said Danielle Lusk, who helps coordinate assistance for about 400 students at St. Louis Community College at Florissant Valley.

“We’re just going to try to alter their plan. We’ll see what can we do to help speed it up … maybe try and add another class in,” Lusk said.

Lusk said the state has made so many changes to social service programs in the past year that her students often don’t know whom to call for information on their case. In some cases, she said, students who are self-employed have been sanctioned for not providing the right documentation required by the state to show how many hours they worked. In 2016, sanctions will mean a family’s benefits would be cut in half for up to 10 weeks, and their case would be closed if they do not begin working.

State Sen. David Sater, R-Cassville, sponsored the bill changing TANF and SNAP. He said it was inspired by a 2011 report that showed 14.8 percent of TANF recipients surveyed were participating in a “work activity.”

“I want to see people back to work. They’re staying on the program way too long, and they’re not even trying to be in a work activity,” Sater said, pointing out that the definition of “work activity” is relatively flexible in the bill.

But 43 percent of respondents in that same report said the reason they weren’t working was because they had never been contacted by the Missouri Work Assistance Program.

Average SNAP benefit for one individual without dependents: $176 a month.

Missouri won’t actually save money with this measure. There’s the administrative cost of making sure everyone is working, and 4 percent of the funding will be set aside for "alternatives to abortion" and “marriage promotion activities.” Sater says he thinks the up-front expenses are worth it if it gets people back to work.

In a separate bill, Missouri legislators also cut the maximum number of weeks people can receive unemployment insurance by tying it to the state’s unemployment rate. At the state’s current rate of 5.7 percent, people who have been laid off would be cut off from benefits after 13 weeks, instead of 20, which is what it is now.

Average TANF benefit for a family: $227 a month

People who receive public assistance in Missouri are stigmatized, said Ray. It’s something she experienced firsthand: During a political science class last year, another student voiced an opinion that really stung.

“She was, like, I’m a taxpayer, all these people on welfare are having all these children,” Ray said.

After a heated class discussion, Ray said that student left the class.

“I don’t think people should look down on someone because they’re getting public assistance. You don’t know if this person worked, just like you, to pay taxes.”

Here’s how public benefits will change as of Jan. 1, 2016, according to SB 24 and HB 150:

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP: “Able-bodied adults without dependents” would be required to work to receive more than three months of food assistance.

“Able-bodied adults without dependents” would be required to work to receive more than three months of food assistance. Savings to state: $40,400 the first year and about $121,000 in years after

Cost to state: $441,500 in the first year, about $74,000 in years after.

Average benefit for one individual without dependents: $176 a month.

47,260 individuals could be cut from the program on Jan. 1, 2016, if they do not comply with the new work requirements.

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, or TANF: Parents applying for TANF would be required to engage in work activities (working, job searches, or schooling for 30 hours a week) before becoming eligible for cash assistance. Not working results in a 50 percent reduction in benefits and a full loss after 10 weeks, and contracted employees would meet face-to-face with recipients to determine compliance. The lifetime limit for receiving TANF would go to 45 months from five years, with some exceptions for extreme hardship and heads of households who are minors. Four percent of TANF federal funding will be diverted to nonprofits that offer alternatives to abortion, fatherhood supports or “marriage promotion activities.”

Parents applying for TANF would be required to engage in work activities (working, job searches, or schooling for 30 hours a week) before becoming eligible for cash assistance. Not working results in a 50 percent reduction in benefits and a full loss after 10 weeks, and contracted employees would meet face-to-face with recipients to determine compliance. The lifetime limit for receiving TANF would go to 45 months from five years, with some exceptions for extreme hardship and heads of households who are minors. Four percent of TANF federal funding will be diverted to nonprofits that offer alternatives to abortion, fatherhood supports or “marriage promotion activities.” Savings to state: $0 (TANF funding comes from the federal government)

Cost to state: $571,788

Average benefit for one family: $227 a month

An estimated 3,155 families would be cut from the program on Jan. 1, 2016, due to the shortened time limit.

Unemployment benefits: The maximum length of time a person could receive benefits after losing their job will be tied to the state’s unemployment rate. Missouri’s current 5.7 percent unemployment rate would correspond to a 13-week maximum. Current law sets the maximum at 20 weeks.

The maximum length of time a person could receive benefits after losing their job will be tied to the state’s unemployment rate. Missouri’s current 5.7 percent unemployment rate would correspond to a 13-week maximum. Current law sets the maximum at 20 weeks. Savings to state: up to $14 million (assuming 6 percent unemployment rate)

Cost to implement: $461,000 next year, and about $226,000 each year afterward.

Average benefit for one family: $237.91 a week

All monetary figures come from the bills’ fiscal notes, prepared by the Committee on Legislative Research, and are available here and here.

For more health and science news, follow Durrie on Twitter: @durrieB.