National Service Update on Hurricane Sandy
Hurricane Sandy: Donate and Volunteer



Our thoughts and prayers are with the families and communities affected by Hurricane Sandy.

The Corporation for National and Community Service is working with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster (NVOAD), and other partners in this coordinated multi-agency response effort.

We salute individuals at every level of government, in nonprofit organizations, and in the private sector whose work is helping save lives, provide shelter, and rebuild communities.

For Those That Want to Help

Give Blood

The need for blood rises during disasters of this scale, and this problem is exacerbated in affected areas where blood drives may have been cancelled. You can locate information about donating through the American Red Cross or by calling 1-800-RED-CROSS.

Cash Contributions

Cash donations are very useful in situations where supplies must be acquired quickly. This is the most efficient way to make an impact with your donations. If you need help in determining who to give to, the National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster website has a list of major nonprofits that are active in disaster work or you can make your offer through the National Donations Management Network.

Don't Send Unsolicited Donations

One of the biggest issues around disasters is the amount of unsolicited item donations that start to come in immediately. It's better to wait until communities assess and confirm their needs before you start to send things in. At that time, you can make your donations through non-profits in the National Donations Management Network.

Volunteer

For the Press

Press Releases

More Information

Regularly updated information about the National Service response to disaster, including deployments of AmeriCorps and FEMA Corps members, and Senior Corps volunteers.

CNCS Disaster Services Unit: More information about the CNCS Disaster Services unit including contact information and an archive of Disaster Briefs.

Social Media

Hurricane Sandy Information from USA.gov including how to get help, health and safety, and more.