For Income Tax Cuts, Walker Would Raise Sales Tax But Carve Exemptions
Enlarge image Credit Marie Coleman (CC-BY-NC-SA) / http://www.flickr.com/photos/colemama/7707145886/ Gov. Walker has said he's considering raising the sales tax in order to pay for reducing the state's income tax, but might carve out exemptions for essential items.

If Gov. Scott Walker's next budget raises the sales tax in order to cut or eliminate the income tax, Walker says he would consider a sales tax exemption for essential goods like clothing.

The reason Walker is even even discussing an exemption for clothing is because of the different ways the sales and income taxes affect poor people. Under the progressive income tax, people who earn less pay lower rates, but with the sales tax, everyone pays the same rate no matter how much money they make.

Critics say that's why raising the sales tax would hurt poor people the most, even if it's offset by complete elimination of Wisconsin's income tax. But Walker says there could be ways to get around that by “carving out” sales tax exemptions for goods like clothing.

“It would protect people who have the lowest incomes the most if you could carve out those basic essentials out there,” Walker said, “and then say, you know, you want to spend more on things that may not be essential to your life and your livelihood, well then: the sales tax is going to be a part of it.”

Walker stresses that it's only an idea, but groups that study tax policy say the idea has its problems. Todd Berry, with the Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance, says if Walker wants to eliminate the state income tax, he'd have to make up billions of dollars in revenue with the sales tax. Carving out more exemptions makes that tougher: “What other states that have gone in this direction do is they tax more things, not fewer things.”

Jon Peacock with the Wisconsin Council on Children and Families says the more necessities you carve out of the sales tax, the more you have to tax everything that's left. “Carve out clothing, but then does that mean a higher rate for your utilities? Your phone bill and your electricity and your gas bill,” Peacock asked. “Does that mean a higher rate on your other household items that you have to buy?”

According to the national Tax Foundation, eight states, including Minnesota, already offer some kind of tax exemption for clothing.