Trump Signs Bill Ending Three-Day Government Shutdown
WASHINGTON (CBSNewYork/AP) — President Donald Trump signed a bill reopening the government late Monday, ending a 69-hour display of partisan dysfunction after Democrats reluctantly voted to temporarily pay for resumed operations. They relented in return for Republican assurances that the Senate will soon take up the plight of young immigrant “dreamers” and other contentious issues.

The vote set the stage for hundreds of thousands of federal workers to return on Tuesday, cutting short what could have become a messy and costly impasse. The House approved the measure shortly thereafter, and President Donald Trump later signed it behind closed doors at the White House.

Tonight, President Donald J. Trump signs H.R. 195 – Federal Register Printing Savings Act of 2017, including Extension of Continuing Appropriations Act, 2018, in the Treaty Room at the White House. pic.twitter.com/2ws5dsTa3M — Dan Scavino Jr. (@Scavino45) January 23, 2018

But by relenting, the Democrats prompted a backlash from immigration activists and liberal base supporters who wanted them to fight longer and harder for legislation to protect from deportation the 700,000 or so younger immigrants who were brought to the country as children and now are here illegally.

Lawmakers sped toward reopening the government through the day, as Democrats in the Senate dropped their objections to a temporary funding bill in return for assurances from Republicans leaders that they will soon take up immigration and other contentious issues.



The Senate vote was 81-18 Monday to end the debate and advance the bill, CBS News reported.

Ahead of the vote, Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer said Democrats would vote in favor of the bill after a deal had been reached with Republican leaders.

“In a few hours, the government will reopen. We have a lot to do,” Schumer said. “The issue of the Dreamers demands resolution. A budget must be written. Health care has to be addressed. Relief provided to disaster-stricken parts of our country, pensions and opioids, veterans, child care — all have to be taken care of.”

HAPPENING NOW: The Senate votes on a temporary spending bill that will fund the government through February 8th https://t.co/z65TvL7Mz3 pic.twitter.com/I1WKKzmRck — CBS News (@CBSNews) January 22, 2018

Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said that if they could not find bipartisan solutions on immigration and other issues by the Feb. 8 deadline, then he would hold a vote on those matters.

“Every day we spend arguing about keeping the lights on is another day we cannot spend negotiating DACA or defense spending or any of our other shared priorities,” he said. “Let’s join together, put the filibuster behind us, and get back to work for the American people.”

The government shutdown entered a third day Monday after senators failed to come to an agreement to end it Sunday night.

In the meantime, hundreds of thousands of government employees weren’t working Monday and won’t be paid. The government employees on furlough will likely see that payment after the funding bill is passed.

The bill will head to the Office of Management and Budget, a legal review, and then ultimately to the president’s desk for a signature.

The White House says the timing looks as if the government will be able to reopen Tuesday.

(© Copyright 2018 CBS Broadcasting Inc. All Rights Reserved. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)