RELEASE: On Supreme Court Confirmation, Ayotte Kowtows to Far Right, Forgoes Constitutional Duty & Ignores People of New Hampshire
Concord, N.H. – Fearing discontent from her far-right base and pressure to appease her party bosses, Senator Kelly Ayotte has rejected her constitutional duty and decided to back Mitch McConnell’s controversial decision to block the Senate from giving fair and timely consideration to President Obama’s next Supreme Court nominee—a move that would leave the nation’s highest court with an unprecedented year-long vacancy.

And while Ayotte may have made this decision to try to save her political career, her move only serves to reinforce to New Hampshire voters that Washington is broken — and Ayotte is part of the problem.

Ayotte’s dereliction of duty is a politically calculated move to appease her party’s leadership and far-right base:

Southern New Hampshire University Professor Dean Spiliotes told WMUR prior to Ayotte’s announcement that, “if she seems to waver at all on this issue of whether to give Obama’s nominee a hearing and a vote, she could end up with a primary challenge from the right.”

CNN’s Hugh Hewitt put it simply when he said, “The base will not forgive anyone. Senators will lose their jobs if they block the blockade. There should be an absolute blockade on this.”

But Ayotte’s strategy is sure to backfire:

The Washington Post reported on how her decision “could also undermine efforts by Senate Republicans to show that they are capable of governing and not just ‘the party of no.’ Make no mistake: The upper chamber will grind to a standstill if the GOP follows through on this threat.”

According to the New York Times, “The death of Justice Antonin Scalia has energized a right flank that has been long suspicious of Mr. McConnell and forced him into a fight that is likely to derail his smooth-functioning Senate. The tactic could alienate moderate voters and imperil incumbent Republicans in swing states.”

Roll Call noted that “winning over middle-of-the-road voters who prefer temperamentally and ideologically moderate candidates is essential to victory — and those are exactly the type of voters Democrats hope a contentious fight over the Supreme Court vacancy will alienate most.”

And New Hampshire political analyst Scott Spralding told NECN that “It is the end run of our entire system here in America and I am not sure people like to tinker around with the politics of the United State Supreme Court. There could be significant blowback for anyone seen as trying to stop this entire process.”

Bottom line:

“Kelly Ayotte’s actions this week make it more than clear that she values appeasing her party bosses and right wing activists over the people of New Hampshire and will seal her fate when it comes to her reelection in November,” said New Hampshire Democratic Party Chair Raymond Buckley. “Her obstruction and unwillingness to do her constitutional duty will go over like a lead balloon with New Hampshire’s famously pragmatic general electorate.”