MEMO: MAGGIE HASSAN’S TERRIBLE CAMPAIGN KICKOFF
Negative Headlines

The governor’s first official day as a Senate candidate was overshadowed by her admission of support for President Obama’s disastrous nuclear deal with Iran. Polls show that while the Iran deal may have survived the test of Washington, it is widely unpopular with the American people.

Reports of incompetence at the highest levels of the Hassan Administration just won’t go away. Continued mismanagement from the governor’s embattled drug czar of the state’s response to the opioid epidemic prompted further calls for his resignation and a scathing editorial by the New Hampshire Union Leader.

Earlier this week, national Democrats blocked legislation to crack down on sanctuary cities that shield known illegal immigrants with criminal histories. In 2008, then-state Senator Maggie Hassan voted to kill legislation that would have blocked any effort to promote sanctuary city policies in New Hampshire and protect illegal immigrants convicted of violent crimes.

Hassan’s vote to block legislation to prevent sanctuary cities in New Hampshire eerily mirrored national Democrats’ vote to block similar legislation and provided Granite Staters with a preview of just how she would vote as a United States Senator – in lockstep with her party and against the state’s best interests.



Campaign Gaffes

Governor Hassan launched her campaign by promoting the value of bipartisanship and working together, but proceeded to launch personal attacks on the family life of her opponent by citing a widely discredited satirical blog on Twitter (@Maggie_Hassan).

The governor’s campaign was immediately mocked by national press for using a sexist satire blog which describes itself as a “vile socialist anti-Christian propaganda blog”. The article promoted by Governor Hassan referred to Senator Kelly Ayotte as a “girl-guy,” and was repeatedly defended by her campaign, despite its offensive, insulting and inaccurate content.

Struggling To Stay On Message

Last week, Harry Reid insulted New Hampshire’s status as the First-in-the-Nation presidential primary state, forcing his handpicked Senate candidate, Governor Hassan, to call for an apology for his offensive remarks. It has been widely reported that Harry Reid personally recruited the governor to run for United States Senate and his political operation has spent $550,000 on her behalf. She has refused to say whether she will continue to rely on his financial support and political backing.

Later that same week, fellow Hillary Clinton endorser Howard Dean insulted New Hampshire’s Secretary of State Bill Gardner, requiring yet another denunciation from Governor Hassan.

Conclusion

###

MEMO: MAGGIE HASSAN’S TERRIBLE CAMPAIGN KICKOFF

Jennifer Horn, NHGOP ChairmanInterested PartiesMaggie Hassan’s Terrible Campaign KickoffOctober 22, 2015The first two weeks of Governor Hassan’s campaign for Senate have been marked by negative headlines, embarrassing gaffes and a daily struggle to stay on message.While the governor’s fledgling campaign is doing its best to convince voters she isn’t just another partisan Democrat incapable of separating herself from Washington party bosses, a consistent barrage of negative headlines aren’t doing her any favors.Hassan may try to hide from her out-of-touch views, but her extreme record will come back to haunt her campaign for higher office.The candidate’s words and her campaign’s actions are telling two different stories, demonstrating her shameless hypocrisy and willingness to do anything to get to Washington.In as many weeks, Governor Hassan has been forced two separate times to denounce attacks on New Hampshire’s political tradition by top Democrat surrogates.The governor has had trouble separating herself from Washington Democrats and has continued to reveal herself as just another party line vote after coming out in favor of overwhelmingly unpopular national policies. Her campaign kickoff has been marked by consistent setbacks, particularly her inability to flee from her extreme record, and she has shown herself to be just as incompetent a campaigner as governor.