Long-Term Studies Show Lasting Gains from Pre-K
<< Back to issue

The effects of high-quality preschool education are long-lasting and substantial, says Steve Barnett, NIEER Co-Director, yet many continue to claim that the benefits disappear by the time children reach third grade.

“Absolutely not,” he counters. “A new NIEER study that provides an objective summary of all the research on preschool education’s effects finds substantial positive effects on achievement, special education, grade retention, and social behavior at ages 10 and higher.”

“This is really the last nail in the coffin of the idea that preschool effects disappear at third grade,” he says. “If you look at all the research—don’t cherry pick for results—it shows that long-term effects are robust even if smaller than initial effects.”

The idea that preschool effects fade out by third grade originated with one flawed study in the early 1960s, and this belief continues to be propagated by those who cite a few methodologically weak newer studies.

“The challenge for policymakers is sorting through the evidence,” says Barnett, one of the authors of the new study. “When policymakers ask, ‘what does the research say?’ they get lots of studies thrown at them. One study says one thing, another study finds something else. Policymakers want to know what all the research says, not just studies that have been selectively picked to support a particular point of view.”

NIEER researchers statistically summarized all the evidence since 1960 in Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Early Education Interventions on Cognitive and Social Development. “Overall, looking across the entire research literature over four decades—123 different studies—preschool has substantial impacts on cognitive development, on social and emotional development, and on schooling outcomes,” says Barnett.

The meta-analysis found that by third grade about one-third of the achievement gap is closed by preschool education. “Of course this is less than the immediate impact, but substantial nonetheless,” he says.

In another detailed review of the methodologically strongest and relevant research, Preschool Education and Its Lasting Effects: Research and Policy Implications, Barnett pointed out that rigorous studies find not only immediate gains, but lasting benefits for learning and educational achievement, school progress and educational attainment, and social behavior, including delinquency and crime.

Evidence that directly contradicts the idea that pre-K benefits fade out comes from many studies including a massive Rand study showing that enrollment in public pre-K increased scores on the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) tests at both fourth and eighth grade. State NAEP scores are widely accepted as showing the effects of state policies on student achievement. This Rand study also directly contradicts the claims that NAEP scores have not been raised by state-funded pre-K.

The “gold standard” for scientific research on pre-K effects is the randomized trial, and randomized trials find meaningful long-term effects of high-quality pre-K on achievement, school success, and behavior. Moreover, the findings of achievement test score gains, school success, earnings, and crime reduction all have been replicated in multiple randomized trials. None of the studies that claim to show pre-K effects disappear over time are randomized trials.

Even studies in other countries dispel the fade-out myth, finding that preschool education raises test scores from elementary school through high school and decreases school failure. Not only does preschool increase national test scores overall, but it decreases the amount of inequality within a country on test scores. These studies are confirmed by the findings of an international meta-analysis by Milagros Nores, NIEER assistant research professor. Studies in her analysis that looked at benefits at later ages found the positive effects lasted over the long term.

A broad base of research shows that the issue of fade out is more than anything else a red herring used by opponents of public pre-K. “It is no longer a credible argument that preschool benefits fade out,” says Barnett.