Northside ISD: The Destination District
A GREAT PLACE TO WORK, RAISE A FAMILY, AND SEND YOUR CHILDREN TO SCHOOL

Located in the northwest quadrant of San Antonio, Texas, Northside Independent School District, the state’s fourth largest school district, is in the heart of the most rapidly growing area of Bexar County. Many people say Northside ISD is not just in the heart of northwest San Antonio, but that it is the heart. They say this because the quality of the neighborhood schools is reflected in the quality of hundreds of smaller communities that make up Northside ISD. In Northside, schools are the hubs of their neighborhoods.

The District’s appeal to families is because of factors such as excellent teachers, strong academic and extracurricular programs, and attractive and functional facilities. As a family-friendly District, the emphasis is on children and families. Northside also places great emphasis on a high quality work force and an employee-family culture. There are about 608,000 people living in 210,000 households in NISD.

355 SQUARE MILES OF URBAN LANDSCAPE, SUBURBAN COMMUNITIES, AND RURAL TEXAS HILL COUNTRY

Established in 1949 by the consolidation of 12 rural school districts, Northside today is 355 square miles of urban landscape, suburban communities, and rural Texas hill country. As South Texas’ largest school system, Northside is the “Destination District” for thousands of families wanting a high quality school system. This is supported by the fact that an additional 1,500 students enrolled in NISD in 2015, and projections show that this trend will continue for the foreseeable future.

HOME TO GIANT ECONOMIC GENERATORS

Located within the boundaries of Northside ISD are giant economic generators such as the South Texas Medical Center, which is home to dozens of hospitals and other medical facilities. An estimated 9,200 large and small businesses are located within NISD. USAA, one of the largest insurance and financial companies in the United States, is Northside’s largest taxpayer. Entertainment giants SeaWorld and Fiesta Texas help draw people to northwest San Antonio. Valero Energy also calls Northside home.

The huge Westover Hills development includes major corporations like QVC Network, Citicorp, Capital Group, World Savings, and Chase Bank. Massive developments like the National Security Agency, Microsoft Corporation, and Lowe's Data Center continue to make NISD a commercial destination.

Ingram Park Mall is one of the area’s largest shopping malls with 1.1 million square feet. Also, the sprawling and upscale Shops at La Cantera, other major shopping centers, and dozens of small and large hotels are all located within NISD. The Rim entertainment and shopping destination brings thousands of visitors to NISD. Major resorts, including the Hyatt Hill Country Resort, Hilton San Antonio Hill Country Hotel & Spa, and La Cantera Hill Country Resort, are all major NISD taxpayers.

A BEXAR COUNTY EDUCATION CENTER

In addition to the 119 public schools (including five specialized magnet high schools) that Northside ISD operates, northwest Bexar County is also a higher education and research center magnet. The University of Texas at San Antonio, home to more than 28,000 students, is also located in Northside. UTSA offers dozens of undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate degrees. The University of Texas Health Science Center with its medical, dental, nursing, and allied health schools is located in Northside ISD. The sprawling Audie MurphyVeterans Hospital is also located within the South Texas Medical Center. In addition, Northwest Vista College, part of the Alamo Colleges, is in Northside ISD. Other large education and research centers that are located within Northside are the Southwest Research Institute and the Texas Research Park.