Photo Of Smiling Woman On Slain Giraffe Stirring Up Outrage (GRAPHIC IMAGES)
Sometimes, you’re browsing through your news feed on Facebook and you see something so horrible that it just makes you want to throat-punch the next human being that you see — because humans can be disgusting, awful creatures. This is one of those things.

The Facebook page Animal Shame posted a photo of a smiling woman sitting upon a giraffe she had just killed for sport, along with the caption:

[box type=”shadow”]A female trophy hunter sits smirking on top of the giraffe she blasted to death with a rifle as it ate from a tree.

The hunting company wrote:

“We took Shelley out this morning with the thoughts of maybe getting a giraffe. We found this big bull feeding in the trees, and Shelley put 2 good shots in him before he went down. Big mature bull. We have it all here, and we want to share it with YOU”.

Photo credit – facebook.comhttps://www.facebook.com/ KoeshallsWorldHuntingAdvent uresAndTaxidermyLlc/ photos_stream

The website of the hunting company http://www.allhunts.com/ Limpopo_Dangerous_Game.php“[/box]

Look at her–so happy that she slaughtered an animal for fun. Needless to say, the photograph was not met with much positivity. The backlash thus far has been such that the Koeshall’s World Facebook page has been temporarily deactivated in order to avoid facing criticism for the photo.

The business is owned by Kevin Koeshall of Wisconsin Rapids and specializes in taking anyone who will pay on an adventure of a lifetime, where they are coddled until they are able to execute (no reasonable person would call this hunting) an animal of their choice! Koeshall’s World offers on its web site a “no bullshit approach” to booking your “hunt” for you, then stuffing your “trophy.”

Koeshall’s wife, Rita, celebrates her “trophies” on her Facebook profile, which is littered with incredibly racist, anti-Mandela rants–with complaints about “reverse-apartheid.” She also proudly supports Phil Robertson’s bigotry, and is an enthusiastic Ted Nugent fan.

Mrs. Koeshall’s love of Nugent is unsurprising, as their services have even been enlisted by admitted pedophile Ted Nugent and family–so you know it’s a great excuse to get out of America and into a country with less restrictive laws regarding the young’uns! Er…a great service to use for *cough* hunting.

A real hunter eats what he or she kills. Killing just so that one can brag about killing is just disgusting. Oh, and “Shelly?” You can go f#$% yourself.