Democratic Leaders Who Haven’t Yet Endorsed Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders
With the Democratic presidential primary likely drawing to a close two weeks from today, some prominent Democrats are still withholding formal endorsements.

While some party leaders have been careful to stay neutral in the race between Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, others have not-so-subtly hinted at their preference. Clinton is widely expected to capture the nomination once the primaries are over on June 7.

Here’s a look at the party leaders who haven’t endorsed Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders:

President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden

For much of the primary season, the White House has been the political equivalent of Switzerland. However over time, the president and vice president appear to have come around to Hillary Clinton -– though not officially.

The New York Times reported in March that at a fundraiser in Texas, President Obama privately advocated for DNC donors to come together and back Clinton.

Still though, he stressed to the donors in the room, that he was not endorsing either candidate.

And in the Politico podcast “Off Message,” the president called his former secretary of state “wicked smart,” “extraordinary experienced” and argued that on day one, Clinton would be able to govern.

Biden told ABC News’ Robin Roberts he was “confident” that Clinton would be his Party’s nominee, although it was also not an endorsement.

Rep. Nancy Pelosi

The House Democratic leader is the only member of the Democratic leadership in Congress who hasn’t backed the party front-runner.

Ahead of Super Tuesday, Pelosi told reporters she was withholding an endorsement out of respect for the “voice” of American people.

Earlier this month, the California lawmaker said she expects Clinton to win the general election in November.

"We're very proud of Hillary Clinton and what she will bring to the Oval Office when she's president of the United States," Pelosi said despite praising Sanders for his “positive force” in the Democratic party.

Sen. Elizabeth Warren

Sen. Elizabeth Warren has remained tight-lipped about who she plans on supporting and has told local Boston station NECN that she has no “timeline” for when she’ll make her endorsement known.

The Massachusetts senator did sign a letter back in 2013 along with other fellow female senators urging Clinton to run for the White House.

But she also told the AP in March that she’s “cheering Bernie on.”

“‘He has put the right issues on the table both for the Democratic Party and for the country in general so I’m still cheering Bernie on,” Warren said.

Sen. Jon Tester

Montana Sen. Jon Tester has joined the list of Democratic leaders who will not be endorsing a presidential candidate.

The Great Falls Tribune reported that a spokesperson for Tester, said he “does not intend” to back anyone.

“Sen. Tester wants the people of Montana to decide who their nominees are,” Banks said.

Montana will hold its Republican and Democratic primaries on June 7.

Sen. Angus King

The U.S. Senator and former governor of Maine, Angus King, has not expressed support for either Sanders or Clinton.

However, the independent senator acknowledged in the past it would be a “difficult” run for the former Secretary of State.

“I think that this is going to be a difficulty for someone like Hillary Clinton, who has tremendous experience and background,” King told MSNBC in 2014. “She’s going to have a hard time saying, ‘Oh, I’m a new person.”

Al Gore

Although he was Bill Clinton’s Vice President, Al Gore has been sitting out this primary.

In an interview with NBC that aired Monday on NBC’s “Today Show,” Gore was asked whether he’s been approached by either candidate asking for his endorsement.

“I've gotten signals that you can easily interpret that way,” the former 2000 Democratic presidential nominee said, remaining coy.

Gore, however, praised both candidates for their focus on climate change and said he would back the Democratic nominee, according to NBC.

Gubernatorial Hold-Outs

California Gov. Jerry Brown has kept mum on who he’s throwing his support behind, but hasn’t been shy about throwing a few jabs at Sanders.

The Los Angeles Times reported Brown, who is also a superdelegate, said it’s important to “work together” to “beat” GOP presumptive nominee, Donald Trump.

“I don’t think anybody should be seeking the Democratic nomination with a scorched-earth policy. At the end of the day we’ve all got to work together,” Brown told reporters.

Brown’s endorsement is highly coveted considering California voters head to the polls on June 7.

Hawaii Gov. David Ige may be holding back his endorsement, however, a top Democrat involved with the Clinton campaign is confident the state's new governor will back the former secretary of state.

“He’ll vote for Hillary and I think when he goes up to Philadelphia I would be shocked if he didn’t cast his vote [for her] as a super delegate,” top Democrat told Politico back in March.

The Honolulu Star Advertiser reported that Ige would be holding his endorsement until after the Hawaiian primary on March 26.

Gov. Steve Bullock, who’s state also votes on June 7th and is up for reelection, isn’t throwing his support behind either candidate yet.