President Trump's first State of the Union in photos - ABC News
President Donald Trump delivered his first State of the Union address before a joint session of Congress in the Chamber of the House of Representatives. <br><br> The President claps during his address, Jan. 30, 2018. Win McNamee/Pool via AP

Vice President Mike Pence and Speaker of the House Paul Ryan before President Donald Trump arrived to deliver his State of the Union address in the chamber of the U.S. House of Representatives Jan. 30, 2018 in Washington. Mark Wilson/Getty Images

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi talks with Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer before the State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington, Jan. 30, 2018. J. Scott Applewhite/AP Photo

Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump greet people in the gallery as they arrived for the President's State of the Union address, Jan. 30, 2018. Shawn Thew/EPA

Donald Trump Jr. uses his mobile phone to photograph the House chamber shortly before being told not to as he waited for the President to deliver his first State of the Union from the floor of the House of Representatives, Jan. 30, 2018. Shawn Thew/EPA

First Lady Melania Trump shakes hands with one of the guests after arriving for the President's State of the Union address from the House chamber, Jan. 30. 2018. Jack Gruber-USA TODAY NETWORK

From left, Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court John Roberts, Associate Justices Stephen Breyer, Elena Kagan and Neil Gorsuch are seen before President Donald Trump delivers the State of the Union address from the House chamber, Jan. 30, 2018. Jack Gruber-USA TODAY NETWORK

President Donald Trump holds up copies of his speech upon arrival and before delivering his State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington, Jan. 30, 2018. Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP Photo

President Donald Trump delivers the State of the Union address in the chamber of the U.S. House of Representatives Jan. 30, 2018. Mark Wilson/Getty Images

US Representative Steve Scalise gestures after President Donald Trump called him out during the State of the Union address at the US Capitol in Washington, Jan. 30, 2018. Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images

President Donald Trump delivers his State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington, Jan. 30, 2018. Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP Photo

Democratic members of congress, some dressed in black as a form of protest, listen as President Donald Trump delivers the State of the Union address from the House chamber, Jan. 30, 2018. Jasper Colt/USA Today Network

United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agent CJ Martinez stands as he is acknowledged by President Trump during the State of the Union address. Jack Gruber-USA TODAY NETWORK

Robert Mickens, Elizabeth Alvarado, Evelyn Rodriguez, and Freddy Cuevas are recognized By President Donald Trump during the State of the Union address, Jan. 30, 2018. Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images

Members of the College Republicans at the University of Washington eat pizza and other snacks as they watch a broadcast of President Donald Trump as he gives his State of the Union speech during an on-campus viewing party, Jan. 30, 2018, in Seattle. Ted S. Warren/AP

Senator Bernie Sanders, center, watches President Trump during the State of the Union address, January 30, 2018 in Washington, DC. Alex Wong/Getty Images

Fred and Cindy Warmbier are recognized during President Donald Trump's State of the Union address January 30, 2018. Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images

Members of President Donald Trump's cabinet applaud him as he delivers his State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Capitol Hill, Jan. 30, 2018. Jonathan Ernst/Reuters

Republican supporters of President Donald Trump cheer and watch him deliver his State of The Union speech, Jan. 30, 2018, in Peoria, Ariz. Ross D. Franklin/AP

President Donald Trump signs a hat on his way out of the House chamber and after finishing his first State of the Union address, Jan. 30, 2018 in Washington, DC. Win McNamee/Getty Images