abc7news.com: Paper Shredder Dangers To Kids, Pets 11
7 On Your Side Investigates

7 On Your Side has uncovered a danger in your home that you've probably never thought about and kids and pets are most at risk.

Paper shredders weren't considered home appliances until about a decade ago. Now there's a good chance you have one in your house.

Michael Finney has pleaded with you to buy one, and now has a warning.

Advertisement

What makes a paper shredder so good is what makes it so potentially dangerous around your house.

A close-up look shows steel teeth that can chew up more than just paper.

Two-year-old Aaron Waters from just outside L.A. knows about it first hand -- literally.

His fingers are all there now and he's fine, but there was a moment when that was not a sure thing.

Sara Waters, Lake Forest: "So he stands there and watches me shred paper. I turn to get more paper and turn around and notice the shredder has stopped and his hand is in the opening of the shredder."

And here is where it goes from bad to worse.

Sara Waters: "I see blood, his fingers. I couldn't even tell how many fingers had been affected. They were just sliced and diced."

CPCS demonstrator: "This represents the 12-year-old probe, which is what the voluntary standard is right now."

The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission set up this demonstration just for 7 On Your Side after we inquired about shredder safety.

It turns out the agency knows about the problem and even proved it for us on camera.

CPCS demonstrator: "Here's a rubber finger that represents a two-year-old."

Now think of Aaron. So why isn't something being done?

Patty Davis, Consumer Product Safety Commission: "There is a voluntary standard in place right now. But it doesn't address this issue of children potentially getting their finger stuck. We are working with U.L. Laboratory to develop a new voluntary standard."

The Underwriters Laboratory is working on the problem and tells us the increase in identity theft is partially to blame.

John Drengenberg , Underwriters Laboratories: "Up to that point paper shredders had been used basically in an office environment and there were virtually no reports of incidents with paper shredders. However, once they got into the home we started receiving reports of children being injured by these paper shredders even children."

New standards will make the paper slot thinner so little fingers can't get inside.

The blades will be further away from the opening, adding more safety.

Many of the shredders on the shelves already have these safety features, but even when the new standards are fully in force, plenty of old shredders will still be used.

Sara Waters: "I tell all my friends what has happened to my son Aaron and. It all happened within a few seconds that's all it takes."

About 50 children have been hurt. For some there have actually been amputations.

Pets have been injured as well. The federal government says at least one dog had to be put to sleep after his tongue was shredded.

If you have a shredder keep it unplugged until you use it.

>> <font color="red">Video On Demand: Build Your Own Newscast</font>

(Copyright ©2009 KGO-TV/DT. All Rights Reserved.)