Tens of Thousands Protest Trump Election Victory, 124 Arrested
Tens of thousands of demonstrators took to the streets in cities across the country Wednesday to protest Donald Trump's election victory, in mostly peaceful gatherings that nonetheless resulted in at least 124 arrests and reports of damage, vandalism and injuries in several locations.

NEW YORK CITY

A large group of protesters marched on Trump Tower in midtown Manhattan Wednesday night, chanting, "My body, my choice," "Not my president," and "Hey, hey, ho, ho, Donald Trump has got to go."

Another crowd gathered at Columbus Circle near the Trump International Hotel & Tower.

At least 65 people were arrested, according to WABC. Sources also tell WABC that at least 10,000 people took part in the NYC demonstrations.

The majority of the arrests took place in front of Trump Tower, where several people climbed light poles and had to be taken down. Police closed 5th Avenue at 57th Street due to the unrest and walled off demonstrators in front of Trump Tower.

Drew Angerer/Getty Images

Josh Einiger/WABC-TV

CHICAGO

In Chicago, hundreds of protesters marched through the city's downtown and gathered outside the city's Trump Tower to express their anger that Trump was elected.

Five people were taken into custody during the demonstration outside the Trump Tower.

"You saw all of the hate was coming with him, and you were just hoping that that would never come to fruition, and it has," anti-Trump protester Will Rossi told Chicago's ABC7.

Anti-Trump demonstrators take to to the streets in downtown Chicago, protesting the election: https://t.co/F2TSClngjj pic.twitter.com/Ls5dMavL3w — ABC 7 Chicago (@ABC7Chicago) November 9, 2016

Protesters filled the streets in Washington, D.C., and gathered outside the newly-opened Trump hotel.

Folks protesting trump headed toward the #WhiteHouse pic.twitter.com/OqZZxoXDdv — Ben Bell (@BenjaminBell) November 10, 2016

Some protesters also gathered outside the newly-opened Trump Hotel.

One person was arrested.

Students at American University protested on campus.

LOS ANGELES

Hundreds of people took to the streets of downtown Los Angeles.

Many protesters gathered at City Hall, where they burned a piñata of Trump. Another protester wrote "F*** Trump" on city bus.

The Los Angeles Police Department reported 13 arrests.

Protesters now burning a piñata of Donald Trump's head on the steps of LA City Hall @ABC7 pic.twitter.com/Cq5lRFsaEW — Jory Rand (@ABC7Jory) November 10, 2016

Protesters also converged on the 101 freeway in downtown Los Angeles, shutting down one of the city's busiest arteries.

Anti-Trump protests spilling out onto downtown freeways, shutting down 101 https://t.co/w40Zou9ytA pic.twitter.com/f63lGLa1em — ABC7 Eyewitness News (@ABC7) November 10, 2016

SEATTLE

In Seattle, about 100 protesters gathered in the Capitol Hill neighborhood, blocked roads and set a trash bin on fire, according to The Associated Press.

Anke Kuballa

Protesters marched through downtown, carrying signs that read "Black Lives Matter", "Misogyny has to go," "Love Trumps Hate," and "The people united, will never be defeated." They also chanted "Not My President," as Seattle Police officers on bicycles closely watched over the marchers.

HAPPENING NOW: 100s are protesting Donald Trump's victory in Seattle #KOMONews pic.twitter.com/PwXf37xibH — KOMO News (@komonews) November 10, 2016

OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA

About 7,000 showed up in the northern California city to protest president-elect Trump, according to the Oakland Police Department.

The protests were mostly peaceful, except for splinter groups that vandalized the city's downtown area, setting objects on fire and breaking windows, according to the the Oakland P.D.'s public information officer, Johnna Watson.

The Oakland Police Department made 30 arrests and handed out 11 citations during the protest, on charges of assault on an officer, vandalism, unlawful assembly, failure to disperse, and possession of a firearm.

Trump Protest- Update, 8:07pm- The crowd is now at 6,000 and is situated at 8th and Washington and 8th and Broadway https://t.co/6TpCOO1Nel — Oakland Police Dept. (@oaklandpoliceca) November 10, 2016

Obtained by ABC News

According to ABC affiliate KGO-TV, protesters chanted "not our president" and carried signs that read "Donald Trump is a rapist" and "Secede #CalExit."

Three Oakland police officers were injured and two patrol cars were burned.

A splinter group of anti-Trump protesters have set fires and lit fireworks in downtown #Oakland. https://t.co/YWcAzgWKuf pic.twitter.com/UtrNPo5uRC — ABC7 News (@abc7newsbayarea) November 10, 2016

BOSTON

An estimated 10,000 anti-Trump protesters crowded around Boston Common Wednesday night, before heading to the Statehouse and Copley Square, ABC affiliate WCVB reported.

Protesters chanted "Not My President," "No Fascist," "We Will Not Be Silenced," and "No KKK," while carrying signs that read "He Will Never Be My President."

Thousands of people protest Donald Trump's win in Boston https://t.co/oj722zOXFi pic.twitter.com/iMi7ITRWli — WCVB-TV Boston (@WCVB) November 10, 2016

Meaghan Schaefer, a 19-year-old student at Emerson College, told WCVB, "We were so close to seeing the first woman become president and she lost to a man who has no political experience, who doesn't represent the majority in this country."

Thousands marching in Back Bay chanting "Trump Not My President". "No Facistol USA,No KKK"#wcvb pic.twitter.com/qYyFL9Sr6C — Jorge Quiroga (@JorgeWCVB) November 10, 2016

And at the University of Massachusetts, students gathered at the Goodell Building for Workplace Learning and Management with chants of, "Trump must go!"

About 150 #UMass students marched to Goodell building in protest of Donald Trump's election chanting "Trump must go!" @MDCollegian pic.twitter.com/XooKQQA8Xp — Kyle DaLuz (@Kyle_DaLuz) November 9, 2016

PORTLAND, OREGON

About 2,000 people blocked Interstate 5 twice during protests Wednesday night, according to ABC affiliate KATU.

Protesters also forced a delay for trains on two light-rail lines.

The crowd of anti-Trump protesters burned American flags and chanted, "That's not my president."

Protest march has been peaceful group of approximately 2,000 people. #pdxtraffic — Portland Police (@PortlandPolice) November 10, 2016

PHILADELPHIA

About 700 protesters marched through the Philadelphia's downtown Wednesday night, according to city police. The demonstrators kicked off the their protest across from City Hall and continued through Temple University, marching for two hours, according to ABC affiliate WPVI.

Expect traffic delays near center city, approx. 700 marchers moving north on Broad St. from Arch St. — Philadelphia Police (@PhillyPolice) November 10, 2016

"We are not going to take anything lying down," Chris Price of North Philadelphia told WPVI. "This is Philadelphia. We don't take anything from anybody."

#BREAKING - Protesters converge around the on-ramp to 676 in Center City. Police block the ramp, and protesters move on. pic.twitter.com/KJ77nkF6GJ — Action News on 6abc (@6abc) November 10, 2016

RICHMOND, VIRGINIA

Hundreds of protesters shut down several streets in Virginia's capital city Wednesday night as they marched, chanting, “No Trump. No KKK. No fascist USA,” "Not My President," according to ABC affiliate WRIC.

Some protesters also marched onto I-95 south in downtown Richmond, shutting down the interstate in both directions.

Virginia State Police said in a statement, "State troopers have responded to the location to guide the protesters off the interstate –- for their safety and the motoring public’s safety. Due to it being dark outside with limited lighting, and the blind curves and ramps along this particular stretch of I-95, this is an extremely dangerous situation for any pedestrian traffic."

Ten people were arrested, Virginia State Police said in a statement: "At approximately midnight, a total of 10 protesters were taken into custody without further incident and charged with unlawful assembly and for being pedestrians on an interstate. The six females and four males arrested range in age of 20 to 26 years of age."

DALLAS, TEXAS

According to Dallas police, about 300 protesters gathered at the city's Victory Park for an anti-Trump rally organized by the Next Generation Action Network.

"As we wrap our minds around this failed attempt at democracy that we as a country have witnessed in this election, and brace ourselves as Americans for a new Republican commander-in-chief with a majority Republican House and Senate; we are even more strengthened in our resolve to fight," read a statement from the group before the protest, according to ABC affiliate WFAA. "Most everything out of the Trump campaign has been divisive and contrary to those values written in the U.S. Constitution."

Dallas police estimates 300 plus people at Victory Park in Anti-Trump rally: https://t.co/CEUi1QUjtz pic.twitter.com/csV47k4ysi — WFAA-TV (@wfaachannel8) November 10, 2016

ELSEWHERE IN THE US

Anti-Trump protests were also held in Atlanta; St. Paul, Minnesota; and Pittsburgh.

ABC News' Matt Foster, Rex Sakamoto, Joshua Hoyos, Chad Murray and Geoffrey Eisler contributed to this report.