Firefighter among 3 injured in Trump Tower rooftop fire Secret Service spotted
Secret Service agents spotted smoke on the rooftop of President Donald Trump's New York City home early this morning and called the fire department, according to fire officials.

Interested in New York? Add New York as an interest to stay up to date on the latest New York news, video, and analysis from ABC News. Add Interest

Three people, including a firefighter, suffered minor injuries, officials said.

At around 7 a.m., about 70 firefighters rushed to the apex of the Fifth Avenue Trump Tower skyscraper at 57th Street in midtown Manhattan to put out the blaze, fire officials said.

They were met with steam and smoke brought on by the 19-degree conditions, officials said.

Firefighters extinguished the blaze “without any problems within the building,” FDNY Manhattan Borough Commander Roger Sakowich said.

We were able to extinguish the fire without any problems within the building. Everything went according to plan - #FDNY Manhattan Borough Commander, Asst. Chief Roger Sakowich while on the scene of a fire in Trump Tower earlier this morning. — FDNY (@FDNY) January 8, 2018

But smoke continued emanating from a rooftop heating and cooling unit of the 58-story building, fire officials said.

At least one firefighter suffered minor injuries after being hit by debris before being transported to the hospital.

Two building employees, including an engineer, were evaluated at the scene for smoke inhalation but refused medical treatment, the officials said.

So Trump Tower NYC seems to be on fire... Photos courtesy of my Cousin. #trumptower pic.twitter.com/MGhoq9zfBB — Hugh Curran (@hughcurran) January 8, 2018

There were numerous announcements addressing tenants to assure them that there was no need to evacuate because the smoke from the fire hadn't breached the building.

Trump's son Eric Trump tweeted about "a small electrical fire in a cooling tower" on the roof of the building and praised the FDNY for arriving "within minutes and did an incredible job."

"The men and women of the #FDNY are true heroes and deserve our most sincere thanks and praise!"

There was a small electrical fire in a cooling tower on the roof of Trump Tower. The New York Fire Department was here within minutes and did an incredible job. The men and women of the #FDNY are true heroes and deserve our most sincere thanks and praise! https://t.co/xuTmq1GBbj — Eric Trump (@EricTrump) January 8, 2018

Trump Tower, named for the 45th president, is also the headquarters of The Trump Organization and was the campaign nerve center for President Donald Trump when he ran on the GOP ticket in the 2016 presidential election.