[OPINION] Hurricane Sandy And Climate Change?
by Jeff Tittel, director of the New Jersey Sierra Club

New Jersey is moving forward with rebuilding in the wake of Hurricane Sandy. Sandy was the ninth such devastating storm to hit the Garden State in the last three years and the fourth 100-year storm to hit the Jersey Shore in the past two decades. The impacts of climate change will only make such storms worse.

No particular storm can be irrefutably linked to climate change, but the impacts of climate change make storms like Hurricane Sandy worse. Over the past century, sea level has risen over 19 inches at some parts of the Jersey Shore and Rutgers studies project they could rise as much as 67 inches by 2100. The above average surface water temperatures in the Atlantic Ocean made Sandy more powerful. Typical cooler temperatures would have weakened the storm. The length of heat waves in New Jersey is expected to increase significantly due to climate change- By 2050 the amount of days over 90 degrees could triple.

Hurricane Sandy had a devastating impact on our economy. Across the northeast, about 650,000 houses were damaged or destroyed. In New Jersey, 346,000 housing units were damaged or destroyed, leaving 22,000 units uninhabitable. There are still 42,000 people in New Jersey homeless. Nearly 19,000 businesses had damage totaling over $250,000. Utility repairs statewide are expected to cost about $1 billion. Repairs to damaged water and sewer infrastructure will cost about $3 billion. 6.5 million tons of debris have been collected and temporarily stored at 131 sites, raising the concern of potentially creating toxic sites. Sandy is estimated to have caused $50 billion in damages, making it the second costliest disaster in the nation’s history.

We need to protect our families across the nation from the impacts of climate disruption and sea level rise. We deserve strong action by our leaders to help reduce the likelihood and severity of future disasters.

However in New Jersey, Governor Christie is taking steps to reverse our state?s leadership on addressing climate change. The Governor stated he did not have time to ?ponder the esoteric question of the cause of this storm? and that he does not ?have time to deal with it (climate change).?

Governor Christie eliminated the Office of Climate Change within in our DEP and has undone efforts under previous administrations to implement hazard planning. The areas hit hardest by Hurricane Sandy are the areas we have said for a long time are most vulnerable for flooding and storm surges and they have done nothing to increase protections in those areas and are making it worse. In 2005 Rutgers prepared mapping of our coast and those are the same areas that flooded. The state DEP Division of Coastal Resources had not only mapped vulnerabilities to sea level rise and storm surges but had authorized studies to the Sea Grant Consortium on the Delaware Bay and were working on adaptation and mitigation planning for coastal communities. The state?s 309 report under the Coastal Zone Management Act raised significant warnings of the vulnerabilities of our coastal areas to storm surges. We had all this information prepared by the state warning us that this would happen and under Governor Christie those adaptation and mitigation plans were shelved.

The 2005 study by Rutgers University found that 9% of New Jersey?s land area could be under water as a result of climate change. Some of these areas are the fastest growing places in New Jersey. Other places are critical infrastructure for the state such as Newark Airport, nuclear power plants, electrical generation plants, sewer plants, chemical plants, and transportation hubs. We have failed to protect this vital infrastructure, including drinking water intakes and sewer plants form storm surges. Unfortunately the Governor is not implementing this science and data as we rebuild, putting families and property at risk again.

New Jersey passed the Global Warming Response Act in 2007, but Governor Christie has stopped any work in implementing the Act.

Governor Christie pulled New Jersey from the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) in 2011 and vetoed legislation passed by both houses that prohibits New Jersey from leaving the program. RGGI is an agreement signed by nine northeast states to cut carbon emissions from electrical generation power plants. Emissions would be cut through a surcharge on carbon pollution from the electrical generation plants as well as mandating a 10% cut in carbon pollution from the plants. The concept of RGGI is to put a fee on dirty power to get utilities and others to move towards cleaner power.

The RGGI program funded the Office of Climate Change and the adaptation and hazard planning work being done around the state, including reports and mapping.

A report by the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners found that New Jersey?s participation in RGGI created $151 million in economic value and 1,772 jobs in our state. Throughout the region, RGGI saved customers $1.1 billion on their electric bills and $174 million on gas bills, offsetting the $912 million paid by customers. RGGI?s energy efficiency programs helped keep $765 million in regional economy instead of going to out of state fossil fuel interests, including natural gas and coal.

We are concerned that New Jersey?s policies on climate could cost our state federal funding, not just for future disaster relief but things such as road building and infrastructure. Last month the federal Government Accountability Office (GAO) included climate change on its updated ?High Risks List? report. This independent analysis by the GAO talks about the financial risks to government from climate change. This report means there will be changes happening at the federal level dealing with FEMA and climate change. This report clearly outlines the threat and financial costs from climate change and storms and comes out with some good policy recommendations.

The report found increased costs because of climate change. The report called for shifting the focus to climate adaptation and insurance programs. They found that there are increased risks and expenses to the country as a result of climate change that will impact disaster relief, crops, and other areas.

The top recommendations for action of the report include revising federal flood and crop insurance to assess the threats of climate change, providing climate data that can assist in decision-making by state and local governments, and expanding the environmental satellite system. The report also called for improved FEMA criteria and for the agency to do more to apply lessons of the past.

The federal government is already making many of the changes in the GAO report with the President?s Executive Order and changes at FEMA. If New Jersey does not also start making these changes, we risk not only losing future money from the federal government but current FEMA reimbursements. The federal government will not invest its money into projects that will be vulnerable to storm surges and climate disruption.

Instead of learning from the mistakes made in Katrina, Governor Christie is following the same playbook. Following the Hurricane, DEP Commissioner Bob Martin signed an Administrative Consent Order waiving compliance with CAFRA, Flood Hazard Area, and wetlands protections for infrastructure rebuilding after Hurricane Sandy. Under the ACO infrastructure will be rebuilt in the same vulnerable areas that were just destroyed. The ACO waives environmental standards while discouraging better planning.

The Governor issued an Emergency Order adopting FEMA advisory base flood maps, but these maps do not include the latest data from Hurricane Sandy or sea level rise and only apply to coastal areas, not inland. The Emergency Order applies only to elevation and rebuilding codes. Even more troubling, the Governor is not requiring DEP to adopt the mapping for its regulatory programs. Without this integration, homeowners could choose not to conform with the standards and pay higher insurance premiums. We all end up paying higher insurance premiums and put more people in harm?s way. This leaves families vulnerable to the next storm and could jeopardize compensation families receive from FEMA.

The Governor is also waiving environmental rules on waste and reopening closed landfills. New Jersey has hired AshBritt on a no bid contract, the same contractor used in the Gulf Coast following Katrina. A report by the US General Accountability Office (GAO) in 2008 found that the disposal of Katrina wastes by AshBritt in the south resulted in the creation of contaminated sites along the Gulf Coast and two new Superfund sites in New Orleans.

This is part of the ongoing weakening of protections under the Christie administration. Governor Christie weakened land use tools within the DEP that prevent sprawl in flood prone and wetland areas. His administration has rolled back the Stormwater and Flood Hazard Area rules, removing key protections like zero net fill and stream buffers, increasing erosion and sedimentation in our waterways. They have also rolled back stream encroachment and Water Quality Management Planning rules. The DEP has proposed a waiver rule that is so vague that virtually any development project can skirt the rules of critical environmental programs. They could apply for a waiver under this rule instead of waiving three entire rules.

Governor Christie continues to support fossil fuel projects across the state that release large amounts of greenhouse gas pollution. He has supported and heavily subsidized the construction of three new natural gas plants in New Jersey as well as allowing a number of new major pipeline expansion projects to be approved through environmentally sensitive and densely populated areas. He has also backed the Susquehanna-Roseland transmission line which will bring in more coal-fired power from Pennsylvania. Governor Christie refused to join seven other Northeast states and the District of Columbia in supporting the EPA?s Cross State Air Pollution Rule, which would reduce the amount of toxic pollution coal plants to our west can emit.

We need clean energy solutions to combat climate disruption and ease the severe consequences of these extreme storms. Governor Christie has taken over $600 million in clean energy funds, and last year he took $63 million dollars of funding from RGGI to balance his budget. The Governor?s revised Energy Master Plan reduces our renewable energy goals from 30% to 22.5% in favor of more fossil fuels, contributing to climate change pollution. Those with renewable energy have power even with the grid being down.

As we continue to understand the devastation and impacts of Hurricane Sandy we are going to need to change things in New Jersey. In addition to relief aid we need our leaders to come up with better polices to address the impacts of flooding and climate change on our coast and flood prone areas. It is going to take partnership and tough choices on limiting development in flood prone areas, moving people out of harm?s way and developing real comprehensive programs to reduce greenhouse gases and protect us from climate change and sea level rise.

There are critical policies and practices that we need to revise, create, and eliminate so that we can rebuild the coast in the right way and keep people and property safe.

• Coastal Council. We need to create a coastal council to coordinate efforts to rebuild along the shore and to make ensure we protect vital infrastructure, do proper planning and zoning, and develop building codes. During the recovery, this body would help coordinate funding and regional rebuilding activities so that redevelopment in one town does not negatively impact neighboring communities.

• Better Planning. New Jersey needs to adopt the new FEMA flood maps, update building codes, and start implementing adaptation and hazard planning along our coast to make sure we build in the right places using sound science and based on capacity of drinking water and wastewater.

A recent study found that by 2050 the sea level at Sandy Hook could rise by 21 to 35 inches, meaning water could move up to three feet inland. The study projected 6.5% to 9% of the state could be impacted by coastal flooding over the next 100 years. We need to incorporate these projections into state, regional, and municipal master plans and other planning documents.

We need to scrap the Strategic Plan and instead fix and update the State Plan, a plan that is based on carrying capacity analysis and natural resources.

As we rebuild we need to revise our building codes so structures stand up better to higher winds and flooding. We need to use metal bands or tie to hold down roof rafters and metal roofs instead of shingles. We need to build further back from flood prone areas and the dunes and also make sure we elevate not only houses but key infrastructure. We should be promoting more green homes and energy efficient buildings when we rebuild as well.

• Fix CAFRA. We need to close loopholes and change the impervious cover limits to allow less development in environmentally sensitive areas.

Developments of less than 25 units in environmentally sensitive areas are currently exempt from CAFRA regulations. We need to close this loophole so that impervious cover limits and protections of sensitive features apply to new projects along our shore. This loophole creates a death of a thousand cuts.

We also need the DEP to do a better job of enforcing CAFRA violations, especially with development in the wrong places and that encroaches on dunes. Dunes are critically important for property protection and the environment.

We need to remove the provision under CAFRA that you can automatically rebuild if you stay within the existing footprint.

We need to change the Municipal Land Use Law so towns can do adaptation and hazard planning and allow them to change their ordinances to adopt proper standards for rebuilding.

• Infrastructure. We need to protect and rebuild vital infrastructure in the right places and rebuild dunes and coastal wetlands to protect against the impacts of future storms.

We need to look at renewable energy solutions and distributive generation to help prevent blackouts in the future.

We need an infrastructure assessment to determine where we need to upgrade infrastructure to meet the demands of rebuilding the shore as well as the rest of New Jersey.

• Catastrophic Insurance Pool. We cannot allow people to keep rebuilding in the same place and have tax payers foot the bill each time there is a storm. We need to put in place a catastrophic insurance pool as was done in Florida and other places so tax payers are not on the hook to cover all the costs.

• Blue Acres Funding. Our open space fund is out of money so we will not be able to purchase many of these sites through the Blue Acres Program, which helps move families out of harm?s way. We need funding to preserve lands to create more dunes and areas for flood water storage.

• Coordinate Disaster Relief Funding Programs. FEMA will give you money to replace electronics and appliances but a homeowner must apply to a different program for money to elevate or move hot water heaters, furnaces, and air conditioners. We need to coordinate the programs so that when we rebuild and replace things we can protect them from the next storm.

• Limit Federal Disaster Funding. We need to stop using public money to subsidize development in the wrong places. Disaster relief must not keep using taxpayer money to rebuild the same house in the same wrong location every three years. Instead they should be giving them money to rebuild somewhere else.

• Restoring Natural Systems. In some places we need to pull back from rebuilding on our coast and invest in creating dunes and flood storage systems. We need to maintain stream buffers and riparian borders.

Jeff Tittel delivered these remarks at the panel on Superstorm Sandy, Extreme Weather Events, Climate and Adaptability at the Tulane Law School Environmental Summit today.