National Mining Association
NMA Press Release

Ten States Bear the Brunt of Jobs Lost to Sierra Club’s Obstruction

Washington, D.C. – On the eve of the president’s address to the nation on job creation, a new report shows potentially 1.24 million jobs in 36 states have been destroyed by the Sierra Club’s “Beyond Coal” campaign aimed at stopping coal-based power plants. The finding, from an analysis released today by the National Mining Association (NMA), shows that while the Sierra Club boasts of stopping coal plant projects it is also destroying high-wage jobs for American workers in a struggling economy.

Applying coal plant employment data from the U.S. National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) to the Sierra Club’s own claims of halted power plant construction, the analysis shows Sierra Club’s "Beyond Coal" campaign has targeted for destruction 116,872 permanent jobs and an additional 1.12 million construction jobs represented by the power plants they have prevented from being built. Examples include Illinois, where proposed power plants could have supported 126,612 total jobs there and in surrounding states, and Texas, where blocked power plant construction represented 122,065 total jobs and where potential shortages of electric power exists today.

"From this analysis, only two conclusions are possible: Either the Sierra Club is exaggerating its effectiveness, or its effectiveness is genuine but at the cost of hundreds of thousands of high-wage jobs for Americans struggling to find work in the middle of an historic employment crisis," said NMA President and CEO Hal Quinn.

The destructive impact of the "Beyond Coal" campaign is most clearly evident in the following 10 states where power plants blocked by the club represent the highest number of potential jobs (construction and permanent) foregone: Illinois (126,612), Texas (122,065), Montana (114,102), Nevada (75,194), Florida (75,055), Ohio (70,371), Colorado (55,620), Michigan (53,587), Oklahoma (42,581) and Kentucky (38,824).

The Sierra Club promises future destruction of employment. Last month, the Sierra Club’s Executive Director Michael Brune boasted that "eight years from now we could have a third of the coal fleet be retired" – despite the consequences for working Americans.

Because the Sierra Club has prevented construction of the newest coal plants, it has also prevented advanced technologies from driving environmental and energy efficiency progress in the power plant fleet. According to a report by NETL, a division of the U.S. Department of Energy, a coal plant built today with new coal technology emits on average 90 percent fewer pollutants than a plant that it replaces from the 1970s.

The job loss analysis released today is based on work performed by Energy Ventures Analysis, Inc. (EVA) of Arlington, Va.; related power plant cost data developed by NETL and RSMeans Reed Construction Data; and data on power plants specifically listed on the Sierra Club’s website.

In late August, the U.S. unemployment rate stood at 9.1 percent, with 26 million Americans now unemployed or underemployed.

For additional details on the number of construction and permanent jobs lost, by state, from the Sierra Club’s campaign, see NMA’s website at http://www.nma.org/tmp/090711_sierra_club.asp.