THAT Americans for Freedom of Information Isn’t The Real Deal Either

September 21, 2009 at 1:08 pm

You’ve figured out by now, if you have an IQ above 50, that this website is for a group, Americans for Freedom of Information, that DOES NOT exist. The e-mails you have been getting from your conservative Aunt Gertie proclaiming that Barack Obama’s real last name is Soetoro are FAKES.

Unfortunately, a number of Americans’ hatred toward Barack Obama seems to have cut off the blood supply to their brains, effectively lowering their IQ to just about 50. One of these folks left a comment here just the other day:

I received this email. I went to snopes to see what they knew. I read the claim that the website did not exist, until it was creadted to discredit the email. I decided to check for myself, and entered http://www.americansforfreedomofinformation.com. I wanted to read the debunking phrase for myself. Lo and behold, there was a website http://www.americansforfreedomofinformation.com/. However, it wasn’t a site debunking the email, but one confirming it. If there had been a website (which normall must be registered for at least a year), that was a spoof, then how did the website I landed at SUPPORT the claim? IF there is any conspiracy by people in power to cover-up Obama’s actual birthplace, I wouldn’t put it past them to be able to get Snopes to print the information they have on their site. Too bad. I’ve always looked to Snopes for the truth. “What good fortune for governments that the people do not think.” – Adolf Hitler

What good fortune for the Republican Party that the person leaving that comment does not read! Debra Smith of Hilton, New York is the author of that website, and she explicitly states:

Another site of mine, is: http://www.AmericansForFreedomOfInformation.com. -Please note that I had nothing to do with the AP email that went out, claiming to be from an organization by this name. The email actually went out before the site began on, May eleventh, two thousand-nine.

Yes, that e-mail, the hoax e-mail, went out months before the creation of Debra Smith’s website. Debra Smith’s website, in turn, was created a week after this one.

Here’s my suggestion for those people who need a crutch to support their ideas about Barack Obama being the secret Indonesian love child of Malcolm X:

Use blogspot.com for your hoax. Nobody’s taken that one yet.

Share this: Email

Facebook

Twitter

Reddit

Like this: Like Loading... Related

Entry filed under: chumps, shenanigans. Tags: after the fact, americans for freedom of information, fake, post hoc, website.