Google Answers: Guns & Doctors
Hello again Monroe. Glad to see you again! Guns & Doctors - the truth? NOT! You WON'T find the source to the ?statistics? you showed us because the source is unknown. In fact, this is merely a very prolific, somewhat darkly amusing urban legend that many of us can recall reading many years ago and it never seems to die off. Like many urban legends, this one has changed a bit from it?s original source, but you might find it interesting, and perhaps even surprising, to know that this particular one changed "before" it actually became internet discussion fodder ? that?s actually how it got here in the first place. You see, this whole thing started because of an article published in 1999 by the INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE (IOM) that quoted a statistic saying that in the MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY medical errors are the cause of somewhere between 44,000 and 98,000 deaths a year. First, this figure does seem huge but you will notice that it clearly is not the 100,000 deaths that many of us have read in this Internet posting then and now. Secondly, the statistic is related to the ENTIRE MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY, not only physicians in particular - so NO, it isn't true at all. This industry wide issue might justify a comparatively high number when all deaths are calculated but no...the media saw this article and made an enormous issue of it. In short order the number of deaths annually was rounded off to the highest quoted figure and before you know it, it was DOCTORS who were killing 100,00 people a year rather than every quirky accident, failed medical device, malfunction, etc. Frankly, considering how long this urban legend has been alive, I'm surprised it has not become 100 million by now. What the internet legend DOESN'T go on to say was the IOM report has been disputed by reputable sources. According to this source after the IOM original article appeared the JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (JAMA) responded by suggesting that the statiistics were absurdly overstated and "suggested that the number of deaths due to error is probably closer to between 5000 and 15,000 annually." 'Medical Errors: Leading Cause of Death or Urban Legend?' http://www.devicelink.com/mddi/archive/01/11/007.html ?Who is at fault then for putting this crap out?? Who knows, if I had to guess I?d say thousands of people have shared this responsbility in some way or other over the years for breathing new life into it and passing it on or posting it anew on the internet. After all, these are not real statistics and the whole thing is a joke. In fact, this very message you showed us appears on lots of joke and humor pages that are intended for that very purpose - to make us laugh. Here is but one example: GOP FUN http://www.gopfun.com/misc/gop_joke_central.htm ?Who, or what, is the source for the original urban legend?? There?s no way to answer that by pinning it down to a person?s name, but suffice it to say that the whole ridiculous thing was born through gross exaggeration of the 1999 Institute of Medicine article. Actually, unless one falls for the nonsense of the statistics and cannot be reasoned with otherwise, he will clearly see that the legendary set of statistics is NOT about doctors at all. No, the intent of the article is HUMOR, not by disparaging the medical profession, but by justifying ? in a silly and entertaining way ? GUN OWNERSHIP. It?s a simple as the people who swallow it?hook, line and sinker. Below you will find that I have carefully defined my search strategy for you in the event that you need to search for more information. By following the same type of searches that I did you may be able to enhance the research I have provided even further. I hope you find that my research exceeds your expectations. If you have any questions about my research please post a clarification request prior to rating the answer. Otherwise, I welcome your rating and your final comments and I look forward to working with you again in the near future. Thank you for bringing your question to us. Best regards; Tutuzdad ? Google Answers Researcher INFORMATION SOURCES Defined above SEARCH STRATEGY SEARCH ENGINES USED: Google ://www.google.com SEARCH TERMS USED: Urban legend Hoax Joke "Guns don't kill people, doctors do" ?Accidental deaths caused by Physicians per year?