Trump Administration Cages Immigrants Under Bridge Because Detention …
By: Tom Cahill  Featured |  March 27, 2019

Several photos that have emerged show what appear to be hundreds of immigrant families caged under the Paso Del Norte Bridge in El Paso, Texas.

The photos were initially tweeted by Washington Post immigration reporters Nick Miroff and Bob Moore, who said the immigrants are being held there because the border patrol station in El Paso — just beyond Ciudad Juarez in Mexico — is full.

Moore tweeted that the holding pen appears temporary, but that some families tell journalists they’ve been caged there for at least four days. Moore added that the immigrants are being held on the U.S. side of the border.

Hundreds of migrants are being held under the Paso Del Norte Bridge in El Paso, near the site of Hundreds of migrants are being held under the Paso Del Norte Bridge in El Paso, near the site of @CBP Commissioner McAleenan’s press conference. pic.twitter.com/FeHWauFD53 — Bob Moore (@BobMooreNews) — Bob Moore (@BobMooreNews) March 27, 2019

According to According to @tornandra , who has spoken to some people after their release, some have been there 4 days. — Bob Moore (@BobMooreNews) — Bob Moore (@BobMooreNews) March 27, 2019

These photos are just the latest examples of the Trump administration’s controversial methods of detaining immigrants. One of the most notorious sites is the “tent city” in Tornillo, Texas, which saw its capacity These photos are just the latest examples of the Trump administration’s controversial methods of detaining immigrants. One of the most notorious sites is the “tent city” in Tornillo, Texas, which saw its capacity triple to nearly 4,000 beds in the months following the official end of the Trump administration’s policy of separating undocumented children from their parents at the border.

The undocumented families being held under the bridge include families with children, meaning they have not yet been separated. It is unclear as of this writing whether or not they will be prosecuted or sent back to Mexico. Neither border officials nor White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders have issued statements in response to the photos as of this writing, nor is it known how long the space underneath the Paso Del Norte Bridge has been used to detain immigrants.

Tom Cahill is a contributor for Grit Post who covers political and economic news. He lives in Bend, Oregon. Send him an email at tom DOT v DOT cahill AT gmail DOT com.