Loughner sentenced to 7 consecutive life terms
The Republic | azcentral.com Fri Nov 9, 2012 9:18 AM

Editor's note: An earlier version of this article included a quote and information erroneously attributed to Kelly O'Brien, the fiancee of slain congressional staffer Gabe Zimmerman. The Republic regrets the error.

TUCSON - A U.S. District Court judge on Thursday sentenced Jared Loughner to seven life sentences — one for each of the six people he killed and one for trying to assassinate U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.



Then, Judge Larry Burns sentenced Loughner to 140 more years in prison for the other 13 people he shot and wounded in a supermarket parking lot near here on a January day in 2011.



Burns ordered Loughner back to the federal prison hospital in Missouri where he has lived since March 2011 and recommended that Loughner continue to receive psychiatric treatment. But where he is permanently imprisoned and what treatment he is afforded will be up to the Federal Bureau of Prisons.



Loughner, 24, was transferred to Arizona on Monday for the sentencing. He wore a metallic-brown shirt and tie, and his brown hair was trimmed short. He sat motionless and expressionless, appearing to listen intently through the 21/2-hour hearing as his parents sobbed inconsolably in the gallery behind him. Occasionally, his lead attorney, Judy Clarke, rubbed his arm for support.



Neither he nor his attorneys nor his parents spoke on his behalf.



This hearing was about the victims — those who died and those who survived.



The courtroom was silent, but the emotion was palpable as several survivors rose to address the court, many of them turning from the lectern to talk directly to Loughner.



Their messages ranged from scolding to poignant.



Mavy Stoddard, who was shot, and whose husband, Dorwan, died in her arms, said to Loughner, “You forgot to shoot yourself.”



In effect, the victims had shaped the sentence and influenced Loughner’s case.



Loughner could still be charged with murder and face the death penalty in Arizona state court.



But Pima County Attorney Barbara LaWall said after the hearing that she had received a letter signed by the survivors and the families of the victims asking her not to file charges.



“It is our fervent hope that you will not seek further prosecution,” they wrote.



LaWall said she will not try Loughner in state court.



“It ends today,” she said.



Most murder cases take many years to resolve, yet Loughner’s justice was meted out in only 22 months.



“Today’s sentence — life in prison without the possibility of release — means Jared Loughner will never again be free to hurt or menace the American public,” said U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder, who signed off on Loughner’s plea agreement. “For the victims, their families, and the larger community impacted by this tragic event in our nation’s history, it is my sincere hope that this conclusion will help in their journey toward physical and emotional recovery.”



On Jan. 8, 2011, Loughner went to the Safeway supermarket at Oracle and Ina roads north of Tucson where Giffords was holding an event to meet her constituents.



Loughner walked up to Giffords and shot her in the head with a semiautomatic pistol. Then, he unloaded a 33-cartridge, high-capacity magazine on the people lined up to meet her. Six died:



-- U.S. District Judge John Roll, 63.



-- Gabe Zimmerman, 30, one of Giffords’ staffers.



-- Christina-Taylor Green, a 9-year-old attending Giffords’ event.



-- Dorwan Stoddard, 76; Dorothy Morris, 76; and Phyllis Schneck, 79, three retirees at the event.



Thirteen were wounded. In addition to Giffords, they were Mavy Stoddard (Dorwan’s wife); George Morris (Dorothy’s husband); Suzi Hileman (Christina-Taylor’s neighbor); Ron Barber, a Giffords staffer who filled her congressional seat; Pam Simon, another Giffords staffer; and event attendees Bill Badger, Kenneth Dorushka, Eric Fuller, Randy Gardner, Mary Reed, James Tucker and Kenneth Veeder.



Bystanders wrestled Loughner to the ground.



His mental illness was apparent, and prison psychologists determined that he suffered from schizophrenia. By April 2012, his psychologist determined he was mentally competent to understand the proceedings and assist in his defense.



At Thursday’s hearing, Burns stressed that Loughner was not legally insane, that he had carefully planned the shootings and, therefore, could be held accountable for his crimes.



If Loughner had gone to trial and been convicted by a jury, he could have been sentenced to death, a point that Assistant U.S. Attorney Wallace Kleindienst stressed in his closing remarks.



“Mr. Loughner, whether you know it or not, you have been given a gift,” he said. “I hope that you find some way to atone, some way to give back the gift of life you’ve been given. That is our hope.”



Kleindienst called Loughner “a young man with a twisted belief that the government was responsible for all his failures.”



But like many who spoke at the hearing, Kleindienst expressed his sympathy for Loughner’s parents, Randy and Amy Loughner.



“Mr. and Mrs. Loughner, they too have lost their son,” he said.



Several survivors and the judge spoke about the need for gun control, especially for limiting the size of the ammunition magazines available to the general public. And they lamented a system in which a mentally ill young man like Jared Loughner could go untreated.



“We are a people who can watch a young man like you spiral into murderous rampage without choosing to intervene before it is too late,” said Giffords’ husband, Mark Kelly. “We have a political class that is afraid to do something as simple as have a meaningful debate about our gun laws and how they are being enforced.”



Kelly and Giffords faced Loughner and glared.





“You have decades upon decades to contemplate what you did,” Kelly said. “But after today, after this moment, here and now, Gabby and I are done thinking about you.”



The courtroom was strikingly silent for the long moment it took Kelly to help his wife struggle back to her seat.