#22 (Douar Sidi Mohamed Chelh, Morocco - Ceuta, Spain) — Simply Cycli…
You watch the news and you read the papers and you're led to believe that the world is a big, scary place. People, the narrative goes, are not to be trusted. People are bad. People are evil. People are axe murderers and monsters and worse.

I don't buy it. Evil is a make-believe concept we've invented to deal with the complexities of fellow humans holding values and beliefs and perspectives different than our own—it's easier to dismiss an opinion as abhorrent than strive to understand it. Badness exists, sure, but even that's quite rare. By and large, humans are kind. Self-interested sometimes, myopic sometimes, but kind. Generous and wonderful and kind. No greater revelation has come from our journey than this.

We are seated, now, in the home of strangers. It's a big family, Abdul (this man we've only just met outside ) and his kinfolk. We're wedged in atop a horseshoe of couches between his mother and his father and his several sisters, along with whom I understand is perhaps his uncle and niece. A few other friends and relatives pass through the home to greet us over the course of the evening.

I should mention that this family does not speak English, and thus these details arrive in bits and pieces, in hints and conjecture. Lauren is busy astounding our hosts with her command of Arabic—which, yes, is not fluent, but is good enough for everyone to work through conversation rather than just sit around in silence.

This family is incredible. Hospitable would be an understatement. All we wanted was a little tajine (that we were willing to pay for) and maybe as an afterthought some land to camp on, and instead we have found ourselves, suddenly and unexpectedly, as the guests of honor for this serendipitous evening.

Dinner comes slowly and delectably. First tea, of course. Copious quantities of tea throughout. Chinese gunpowder with fresh mint and heaps of sugar. Halima, Abdul's younger sister, assures our glasses never go empty. Then starters: a bowl of olives fresh from the groves behind the house, warm bread freshly baked, a plate of olive oil freshly pressed from the family's olive stores. Oranges, sliced and served, also just brought in from the yard. Dates, large and sweet.

As conversation continues between Lauren and our hosts, the table in front of us crowds with our second, third, and fourth courses. Beans and couscous and soft, stewed vegetables. Later, a sweet rice pudding. More bread, more tea. Everything is delicious. We are beyond satiated, full to the point of discomfort, and after several hours—and our emphatic promises that we really have had enough to eat—dinner draws to a close. Everyone leans back against the couches for a rest.

On the television across the room, Al Jazeera plays softly. Donald Trump has just announced his plans to move an embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, and the Muslim world is visibly upset. Leaving Rabat a week earlier, we'd pedaled right by a massive peaceful demonstration against the relocation. The television broadcasts footage of protests just like that one stewing up all across the Maghreb, the Middle East, and beyond. As a clip plays of a sullen Trump waddling across the screen, I do my best to disappear into the soft plush of the couch cushion behind me. But American as we may be, no one here seems to mind.