Health Benefits of Cayenne Pepper
SECURITY WARNING: Please treat the URL above as you would your password and do not share it with anyone. See the Facebook Help Center for more information. Learn About the Specific Health Benefits of Cayenne Pepper and How It Can Help You by Glenn Reschke W hat are the health benefits of cayenne pepper (Capsicum)? The purported therapeutic benefits are almost too unbelieveable, but its reputation keeps growing among medical researchers as well as alternative health afficionados and deservedly so. It can do everything from kill cancer cells in the prostate, lungs, and pancreas to immediately stop a heart attack within 30 seconds. Let's get into some of the specifics of Capsicum benefits. Capsicum increases metabolism by immediately influencing the venous structure. It is nothing short of amazing with its effects on the circulatory system as it feeds the vital elements into the cell structure of capillaries, veins, arteries and helps adjust blood pressure to normal levels. Yes, Capsicum for high blood pressure is certainly one of its core uses, but Capsicum cleans the arteries as well, helping to rid the body of the bad LDL cholesterol and triglycerides. Considering that heart disease is the number one killer in America, this is significant. Capsicum is also great for the stomach and the intestinal tract. It stimulates the peristaltic motion of the intestines and aids in assimilation and elimination. When taken internally, it warms the body and has even been used by some herbalist doctors to help heal and rebuild flesh due to frostbite. Notwithstanding its hot taste, paradoxically it is actually superb for rebuilding the tissue in the stomach, facilitating healing with stomach and intestinal ulcers. Cayenne pepper for ulcers is not something most would have considered but I can testify to that remarkability capability of this remarkable medicinal spice. Cayenne Pepper (Capsicum) & Heart Health Yes, the effect of Capsicum upon your body is dramatic, even literally instant and no more so than with the heart. Its benefits is one of the things that brought you to this article so now let’s discuss the phenomenal healing properties of Capsicum with the human heart. Dr. John Christopher, the famed natural herbalist, was persecuted relentlessly by the government for his practice of herbal medicine all the while assisting patients in helping heart disease, cancer, tuberculosis, infertility, rheumatism, leukemia, and every other incurable under the sun. One of his greatest stories in his long career was how he could instantly stop a heart attack if he could get the patient to drink a glass of warm Capsicum water. He said, "A teaspoon of cayenne should bring the patient out of the heart attack." While this is not directly related to Capsicum and heart health, with internal hemorrhaging, if the patient can drink a glass of extra warm Capsicum water, Dr. Christopher wrote, "...by the count of ten the bleeding will stop. Instead of all the pressure being centralized, it is equalized and the clotting becomes more rapid." Perhaps now you can see why Capsicum is regarded as a true "miracle herb." With over 700,000 thousands Americans experiencing a stroke each year and almost half a million dying yearly of either heart disease or related issues, believe it not a possible solution is as close as your local health food establishment. How should you take it? Ideally orally in a drink. The drink, when taken faithfully, will dramatically improve your heart health as well as your venous structure. Drink it with warm distilled water but if that is unavailable, purified water will substitute nicely. Start by mixing about a quarter of a teaspoon in a glass of warm water. Then, down the hatch. Don't worry, you'll get used to it. Of course, the Scoville Heat Unit (SHU) rating of the cayenne you're using should be known. Most Capsicum is between 30,000 to 50,000 SHUs. Some, though, like the African Birdseye Capsicum powder can come in anywhere from 90,000 to 140,000! Needless to say, you should scale back your dosages of this until your body acclimates to its heat. Another benefit of Capsicum, and peppers in general, are its antifungal properties. Capsicum antifungal properties are significant although this is not its primary health benefit. Capsicum has been shown in some studies to be active against phomopsis and collectotrichum -- both are fungal pathogens. These fungal pathogens affect fruits especially strawberries and are not directly related to humans. Currently, immune system benefits are also the subject of studies conducted by many nutritional supplement companies and microbiologists. Let's get even more specific. Here is a comprehensive list of all the things Capsicum or cayenne pepper can do for your health and why you should make it a regular part of your daily health regime. According to Zhen-Yu Chen, Ph.D., a professor of Food and Nutritional Science at the Chinese University in Hong Gong, "We concluded that capsaicinoids were beneficial in improving a range of factors related to heart and blood vessel health." In this study, they found that among them were the inhibition of a particular gene that produces cyclooxygenase-2, a substance that makes the muscles around the blood vessels constrict. Why is this important? Because by blocking it, the muscles can relax and widen, which allows more blood to flow. Cayenne is a vasodilator and decreases the production of compounds that are made by the human brain that cause high blood pressure. Cayenne works on the muscle tissue of coronary arteries to halt and slow the inflammatory process that can lead to dreaded atherosclerosis. Indeed, cayenne's core competence is its amazing heart-health abilities including inhibiting excessive platelet aggregation thus remedying atherosclerosis. But wait there's more. The following information is taken Dr. John R. Christopher's book School of Natural Healing as well as other materials I've uncovered in my primary research. By the way, the word "Capsicum" is another term for cayenne pepper and is used interchangeably. That is how Dr. Christopher referred to it in his book. Key Health Benefits of Cayenne Pepper While cayenne is brilliant for heart-related health, it has a whole host of other health benefits as well. Here are more: • This herb is a great food for the circulatory system in that it feeds the necessary elements into the cell structure of the arteries, veins and capillaries so that these regain the elasticity of youth again, and the blood pressure adjusts itself to normal. It rebuilds the tissue in the stomach and heals the stomach and intestinal ulcers; in equalizing the blood circulation, it produces natural warmth in your body; and in stimulating the peristaltic motion of the intestines, it aids in assimilation and elimination. This is really its core competency and is one of the prime cayenne pepper health benefits . • It regulates the flow of blood from the head to the feet so that the pressure is equalized; it influences the heart immediately, then gradually extends its effects to the arteries, capillaries, and nerves (the frequency of the pulse is not increased, but is given more vigor). • Human circulation; it is warming; dilating; specific for varicose veins; equalizes the blood pressure in the arterial and venous system; actually equalizes blood pressure instantly. • It is useful in alleviating allergies, muscle cramp, improving digestion, gives more pep and energy, and helps wound healing with minimal scar tissue. • It is a counter-irritant; it brings blood to the surface and allows the toxins to be taken away. In an article reported on March 16, 2006 by Reuters, the main ingredient in Capsicum, capsaicin, was found to destroy prostate cancer cells. Here is what the article said, "Capsaicin led 80 percent of human prostate cancer cells growing in mice to commit suicide in a process known as apoptosis, the researchers said. Prostate cancer tumors in mice fed capsaicin were about one-fifth the size of tumors in untreated mice, they reported in the journal Cancer Research. 'Capsaicin had a profound anti-proliferative effect on human prostate cancer cells in culture,' said Dr. Soren Lehmann of the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and the University of California Los Angeles School of Medicine." • Capsicum supports the natural beat (rhythm) of the viscera and interior actions of the glandular, circulatory, lymphatic, and digestive systems. It has been used with great success as an aid for spotted fever (?); the most active stimulant to support and re-animate feeble or exhausted powers. • This is a medicine of great value in the practice, and may be safely used in all cases of disease, to raise and retain the internal vital heat of the system, cause a free perspiration, and keep the determining powers to the surface. The only preparation is to have it reduced to a fine powder. For a dose, take from half to a teaspoonful in hot water or tea sweetened with honey. • A Dr. Coffin (evidently his real name) includes Capsicum in his composition powder to restore the normal function of the body in the various stages of pregnancy and childbirth. For morning sickness he recommends a combination of ‘White poplar bark, agrimony, centaury, raspberry leaves, yarrow and rhubarb, each a quarter of an ounce, steep in two quarts of water, strain, and add while hot two teaspoons of powdered cinnamon, half a teaspoonful of Capsicum, and let the patient take one tablespoonful every three hours until the symptoms are removed if this should not relieve, give an emetic and repeat if necessary. • It's great for heartburn. • Cayenne is a powerful rubefacient, meaning it helps the body remove toxins from the blood. • Capsicum is a general nervous stimulant; a specific for delirium tremens. • For atonic gout, in paralysis, in dropsy, in tympanitis, and in the debilitated stages of fever. • For scrofulous; dyspepsia; flatulence; it's an excellent carminative. • For sore throats—gargle (prepare the gargle with honey); for spasmodic and irritating coughs; heartburn and diarrhea. • Enables feeble stomachs to digest food; for atonic dyspepsia; specific for hemorrhoids; helps with intermittent fever; Capsicum has the power to control menorrhagia; relieves sea-sickness; • In delirium tremens it is beneficial by enabling the patient to retain and digest food. • Capsicum is particularly efficient in tonsillitis, and the sore throat of scarlet fever and in diphtheria no application is so efficient as a strong gargle or wash make with Capsicum. • Promote digestion; relieves pains of the womb; removes obstructed menstruation; for quinsy; for all diseases of the throat; use as a plaster with honey for rheumatic pains, pains of the joints, gout, swellings, etc.; Use outwardly as a liniment, apply it warm or hot for arthritis and rheumatism; gargle for scarlet fever; use an infusion for ulcers in the mouth, strep throat or tonsillitis (p.103). • Capsicum is an excellent remedy for a cold; mix infusion with slippery elm and molasses or honey, and take in doses throughout the day; also excellent for sore throat and coughs. • Cayenne mixed with pennyroyal (an herb) taken for three days will expel the dead birth material from a miscarriage. • Eases toothache; preserves the teeth from rotting, and when rubbed on the gums, stimulates them enough to prevent pyorrhea. • Excellent for any type of internal hemorrhage, (create an infusion with bethroot or star root); • Capsicum is an important remedy in cholera; Capsicum stops vomiting; combine with equal parts of Capsicum and common table salt, one half ounce of each, one pint of good vinegar, give in tablespoon doses for cholera, vomiting "cholera morbus" -- the gross material associated with cholera from the system. • In chronic lumbago a plaster of Capsicum with garlic, pepper and liquid amber (silarasa) or storax is an efficient stimulant and rubefacient application (p105). • When made into a lozenge with sugar and tragacanth it is a remedy for hoarseness. • For a carminative make pills of equal parts of Capsicum, rhubarb and ginger or aloes. • Combine Capsicum with cinchona for intermittent and lethargic affections and for atonic gout and in advanced stages of rheumatism. • Combine with asafoetida and sweet flag root or camphor in the form of pills in cases of cholera. • Capsicum has a powerful action on the mucous membrane, and in hoarseness and sore throat, and in putrid throat a gargle made of Capsicum is particularly beneficial. • By pouring hot vinegar upon the fruits of Capsicum all the essential qualities are preserved. This vinegar is an excellent stomachic. Even More Cayenne Pepper Health Benefits • The whole plant steeped in milk is successfully applied to reduce swellings and hardened tumors. • An infusion with cinnamon and sugar is a valuable drink for patients suffering from delirium tremens as it satisfies the craving in dipsomaniacs. A dose of ten grains of finely powdered capsicum seed, given with an ounce of hot water, two or three times a day, sometimes shows wonderful effects in cases of delirium tremens. • Capsicum can be used in the treatment of a snake bite. • As well as the fruit being used as a spice, the leaves were applied to ulcers and headaches (p.111). • Capsicum is given internally in atonic dyspepsia and flatulence. It is used externally as a counter-irritant in the form of ointment, plaster, medicated wool, etc. for the relief of rheumatism and lumbago. • Oral administration of Capsicum may stimulate the gall bladder reflex. • Capsicum either contains a cholagogue, or acts as a powerful stimulus upon the mucous membrane of the duodenum. • Cayenne pepper is forgotten therapeutic agent against anorexia, liver congestion, and vascular troubles. Capsicum is highly effective in causing hemorrhoids to regress; and these fruits have the same action on varicose veins. The results are attributed to alkaloids or glucosides in the peppers. • Excessive amounts of Capsicum (above 20 grams, thus, nearly an ounce) may induce frequent bowel movements. • It stimulates the appetite, more especially as a hot climate tends to produce anorexia. We have always held the saliva is the key that unlocks the door to digestion. Capsicum, a sialogogue, will stimulate the flow of saliva and will be very helpful to people who have become accustomed to ‘inhaling’ their food and thus robbing themselves of the benefits of saliva in the digestive process. Capsicum would stimulate their flow of saliva as they return to a healthier attitude toward eating. • Capsicum may be valuable in the prevention and treatment of blood clots. It returns the blood to its homeostatis; it will help it clot when it needs to and keep it thin when that is required. • Capsicum is very soothing; it is effective as a poultice for rheumatism, inflammation, pleurisy, and helpful also if taken internally for these. For sores and wounds it makes a good poultice. It is a stimulant when taken internally as well as being antispasmodic. Good for kidneys, spleen and pancreas; wonderful for lockjaw; will heal a sore ulcerated stomach; Capsicum is a specific and very effective remedy for yellow fever, as well as other fevers and may be taken in capsules followed by a glass of water (p. 119). What about side effects? Go to this page within this site for side effect information. So, there you have it. Capsicum is literally one of the greatest health secrets in the world. It's also remarkably inexpensive. I've seen it as low as $1.67 a pound and as high as $35 or so (it was organic certified), but even that $35 a pound figure was astonishingly low, in my view. Big Pharma hates medicinal spices and herbs as they are a powerhouse of nutrition and healing but they don't offer much with profits. It, therefore, takes the dedicated seeker of truth to find out for themselves -- and that is why I put up this website. Conclusion In conclusion, Lastly, if you're interested in supplementing or experimenting with cayenne, you can get more information about buying good quality Capsicum at this article within this site or here for a full product price list. I hope this cayenne pepper health benefits article has been useful to you. Yours in health,

Glenn Reschke