New York's Abortion Law Is Worse Than You Thought » So Right it Hurts…
On January 22, 2019, New York passed a law legalizing abortion up to any point prior to delivery. Any baby can be terminated for hardly any reason at all so long as a woman can get a medical professional to agree that the woman’s life is endangered.

Endangerment of one’s life seems to be a sweeping generalization that could be used in almost any circumstance; driving to work? Your life is in danger. Have an abusive partner? Your life may be in danger. Unemployed and homeless? Your life is almost certainly in danger.

As if this new law alone wouldn’t be enough to rile even the most questionably pro-life of us, New York is also allowing non-surgical medical personnel to perform abortions. What does this mean?

New York is launching a new medical program for Red-Ribbon Nurses. What is a red-ribbon nurse? A small subsection of the extensive abortion law document allows for a child to be delivered via c-section or induction prior to it’s actual due date and then left with a red ribbon tied to its toe indicating to the available medical professionals that the child should be abandoned to die.

A specially trained Red-Ribbon nurse will be summoned to remove the child where-upon it will be terminated. The abandoned child will not be given a name or birth certificate and will eventually end up in a medical waste bin for other scientific procedures as a A specially trained Red-Ribbon nurse will be summoned to remove the child where-upon it will be terminated. The abandoned child will not be given a name or birth certificate and will eventually end up in a medical waste bin for other scientific procedures as a recent PBS article outlined.

This is an abomination against everything that humankind should hold true and dear, and we need to speak out against it. New York is setting a dangerous and disgusting precedent that is unfathomable to behold. Liberals like to compare President Trump to Hitler, but this latest act out of New York is like a page taken from the Holocaust.