Socialist Ocasio-Cortez Demands Free Tuition To Electoral College - T…
NEW YORK – Democratic socialist Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said this weekend that the Electoral College should not be exempt from the push for free tuition to all colleges and universities.

“Students should have the right to attend any college they wish – tuition free – and that includes the Electoral College,” Cortez told a town hall crowd. Democrats in the audience cheered her proposal. “Of course, I don’t, like, really know how things actually work in the real world.”

Hillary Clinton has called for the Electoral College to be torn down. Cortez disagrees. “I’ve never known anybody who attended the Electoral College, but I’m sure it’s a nice campus. Those who teach there probably love their jobs. We just need to make it more accessible to more students. Free tuition will do just that.”

Cortez admitted she didn’t even know in which state the Electoral College was located. “One thing I do know, is that student debt is making slaves out of college students. And that’s not right.”

Speaking of Hillary, she and husband Bill announced today they’ll be going on a tour in the coming months, including stops at college campuses. And yes, a stop at the Electoral College is on their itinerary.

Like this: Like Loading...

Related Proof Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Is REALLY All About Free Stuff BRONX - In a wide-ranging Q & A session following a recent fundraiser for the Socialist Democratic Party, bartender slash economic guru Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez told an audience just how much she loves free stuff. Call it her Bill Clinton "boxers vs. briefs" moment. Below are some of the questions asked… August 1, 2018 In "Politics" Medical Assn Approves AOC Diagnosis As 'Diarrhea Of The Mouth' CHICAGO - Diarrhea of the mouth is kind of a long diagnosis, but so is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's name. So long and annoying that many have started referring to her as simply "AOC." Now, the Board of Trustees at the American Medical Association have honored the freshman socialist politician with her… January 21, 2019 In "Politics" 116th Motherf**king Congress Officially Sworn In WASHINGTON - Newly elected Democrats completed the swearing-in of the 116th motherf**king Congress last week. And judging by early reviews, this new Congress promises to be a real sh*tstorm. Incoming Detroit congresswoman Rashida Tlaib put the swearing-in ceremony in perspective. "Look, I get that taking the oath is a dignified… January 6, 2019 In "Politics"

Comments