How Notre Dame Can Be Rebuilt
The facade of Notre Dame against the blue sky. Photo credit: Getty Getty

French president Emmanuel Macron promised that Notre Dame will be rebuilt in five years after a French president Emmanuel Macron promised that Notre Dame will be rebuilt in five years after a fire ravaged the 12th-century cathedral. Firefighters worked through Monday night and into Tuesday morning to extinguish the flames and to contain as much of the damage as possible. According to French Culture Minister Franck Riester, who outlined the damage that Notre Dame had sustained : "The main structure is saved but there is still a lot of instability. The situation is still precarious. Last night, as we've seen, two-thirds of the roof went up in smoke, the spire collapsed into the building, creating a hole in the vault. Last night, the transept crossing collapsed, in addition to much of the northern transept."

During the fire, the roof shingles, made of 210 tons of lead, melted and 300°C hot lead poured into the cathedral's interior, adding to the damage. During the fire, the roof shingles, made of 210 tons of lead, melted and 300°C hot lead poured into the cathedral's interior, adding to the damage. First photos of the interior show a large hole where the wooden church's spire collapsed, smashing through the stone ceilings.

Natural stone, as was used in the construction of Notre Dame can withstand fire, however, high temperatures can damage the rock's surface. As heat is transferred only slowly into the rock, the interior remains relatively cool as the surface becomes very hot. In response, the rock expands unevenly causing pieces to chip, flake, and peel off. Stone pillars and stone walls can also collapse due to the tension building up inside the rock. It's likely that parts of the stone walls and supporting stone structures of Notre Dame need to be replaced, even if they are still standing. The facade and supporting arches on the outside were not affected by the fire, thanks to the hard work by the French firefighters, who managed to contain the flames and extinguish the fire in less than nine hours.

However, the water used to fight the flames also poses a serious threat to the cathedral's integrity. The wooden structures supporting the ceilings and the larger beams still standing are completely waterlogged, but the walls weren't built to support so much weight.

The roof of Notre Dame was supported by wooden beams that were installed in the cathedral during the 1200s, partially replaced in the 13th century and refurbished in the 19th century. The The roof of Notre Dame was supported by wooden beams that were installed in the cathedral during the 1200s, partially replaced in the 13th century and refurbished in the 19th century. The intricate framework of wooden beams was referred to as the “oldest forest in France” by architects, as it was built 800 years ago and each of the 1,300 beams was made from an individual 300-year-old oak tree. Unlike the stone walls and the bell towers at the front of the building, spared by the fire, the dry, wooden beams fueled the flames and almost the entire framework was destroyed, together with the church's spire, made of 750 tons of oak wood lined with lead. At the moment it is not clear if the lost framework will be replaced with an identical wooden structure or if modern materials, like steel, can be used.

The stone walls are built in such a manner to best work with a framework made of light material as dry wood is. Old trees, needed for the wooden beams, are nowadays rare, as most old-growth forests in Europe were cut down and replaced with monocultures of fast-growing spruce trees. However, in the aftermath of the The stone walls are built in such a manner to best work with a framework made of light material as dry wood is. Old trees, needed for the wooden beams, are nowadays rare, as most old-growth forests in Europe were cut down and replaced with monocultures of fast-growing spruce trees. However, in the aftermath of the French Revolution , Notre Dame was damaged and used as storage buildings for some years. After the French Revolution, it took almost sixty years to rebuild the cathedral. At the time the wooden beams supporting the roof were replaced and in wise foresight, new oak trees were planted near Versailles, outside the city of Paris . The now 200-year-old trees, still there, could be used to rebuild the roof.