Welcome to NotReady08
Not Ready '08 Morning Memo: Obama's Economic Disaster

The Message Of The Day:

On the second day of the Democratic National Convention, Democrats will meet under the banner of "Renewing America's Promise." While much will be said about Barack Obama's economic plans, little will be said about his agenda for higher taxes, more spending, government-run health care and economic isolationism which will only result in "economic disaster." The last thing we need to do in these tough economic times are raise taxes on Americans who are already hurting.

Today, we will hear much about Barack Obama's agenda to tax the "rich," but in the U.S. Senate, Barack Obama voted for tax hikes that would have impacted those making just $42,000 a year. In just three years in the Senate, Barack Obama voted against tax cuts and for tax increases 94 times. In this campaign, he has proposed higher income taxes, capital gains taxes, dividend taxes and Social Security taxes. These tax increases will hurt the economy and hurt the small businesses which are still creating jobs.

Another key Democrat talking point today will be that Barack Obama will change Washington. But in the U.S. Senate, Barack Obama requested nearly $1 billion in pork-barrel spending. Toeing the party line, he has voted for spending bills filled with wasteful pork-barrel projects.

Many Democrats will also say Joe Biden has served in Washington but is "not of Washington." That's talking point is hard to grasp when considering that Barack Obama was only eleven years old when Joe Biden went to Washington.

Finally, today's speeches will also touch on Barack Obama's plan to achieve energy independence. Yet, Barack Obama and Joe Biden oppose new drilling at home and oppose nuclear power. Either they don't understand the seriousness of the energy situation or they aren't giving straight answers to the American people.

At 1:15 p.m. MT, Governor Mitt Romney (R-MA) will hold a press conference at our Denver headquarters to highlight the "economic disaster" that is Barack Obama's tax and spend plan. Governor Romney will be joined by U.S. Representatives Eric Cantor (R-VA), Lincoln Diaz-Balart (R-FL) and Marsha Blackburn (R-TN).

With Senator Hillary Clinton (D-NY) speaking tonight, we have also released a new ad, entitled "3 A.M.," which reprises her very famous ad questioning Barack Obama's judgment and experience. To watch the ad, please see:

Today's Surrogates:

Former Governor Mitt Romney (R-MA)

U.S. Representative Eric Cantor (R-VA)

U.S. Representative Lincoln Diaz-Balart (R-FL)

U.S. Representative Marsha Blackburn (R-TN)

Today's Schedule: