Fox News Feedback: WIKILEAKS RELEASES CANDID PHOTOS OF HILLARY CLINTON
Election Day! I'm going to try and attempt from posting further political posts, no easy task given my well-deserved bias of Hillary R. Clinton, not so much bias but rather my level of disgust for her as a whole. After an eight year Democratic Presidency by Obama our nation’s first black president, which as lacked juris prudence, neglected constitutional law, and worse! It is clearly evident that the very last things our nation and people need are the likes of another Democratic Presidency staring Hillary R. Clinton. The United States as a result of Democratic administration has turned its back on long proven allies, embraced Islamic culture and nations like Iran ( Explains Clinton’s Iranian handler in the White House ) to a nation that has become a laughing stock around the world, lost face and creditability as a whole. It is more than transparent the Democratic Party, Agenda, and Administration puts American born, tax paying citizens second, as if the middle class are America’s minority. A prime example is not approving a cost of living for military families and senior citizens, but a willingness to spend billions of OUR money to import Syrian Refugees whom we cannot vet and do not want. ( Thus risking and placing into jeopardy our nations and citizens safety and security, to me this is TREASON ). Hillary Clinton has indicated she would increase this importation of immigrants to 500% of what Obama has done. Meanwhile, we have senior citizens who have worked hard, built this nation, paid taxes, who are now living hand and mouth daily, eating cans of warmed cat food for dinner as that’s all they can afford after paying for life saving prescriptions. I find this deplorable and at best DISGUESTING! I’d rather see the billions of dollars and my tax money spent on my fellow American’s who need help now, rather than spent on Syrian Immigrants! Keep in mind, you too in the near future will be a senior citizen who might need help, do you really want a Democratic Administration in place? Do you want to be seen, viewed, and treated like a 3rd class citizen if you are old or in the military? Obama’s public rebuke of the military and police also says a lot, when he embraces the Black Lives Movement shit, and invites the surviving parents of killed criminals into the White House, again DISGUESTING! Don’t worry about it although, take pride that you can have a adult male who dresses in drag share the restroom with your minor daughter! A huge accomplishment nationwide. Our nation has become one where people stand and wipe their feet on the American flag, spit on it, and even wipe their ass with it as posted n facebook. The same flag your relatives fought and died for and the principals it stands for, black or white, Spanish, or Mexican, Indian, or Hawaiian, again under a Democratic administration. At least with Trump people have been PROUDLY embracing the American flag and waving it with respect and pride. Donald J. Trump wears an American flag lapel pin, has American flags present at rallies, Hillary no flag pin, originally no flags either until people point it out. Cops have been stalked and killed on OUR streets by criminals embraced by Democrats in hopes of getting minority votes and support, DISGUESTING! Outrageous! and Treasonous! To the basic principles and foundations of our nation and basic public safety ( not saying there is not a need for law enforcement reform but this is not the way to accomplish it ). Sure Hillary R. Clinton talks a great game of doing this, and doing that, and implementing this, but Trump is right, she’s been in politics for 30+ years, a former first lady, Secretary of State, and a Senator, yet no one can name a single great accomplishment! Obama Care a failure too..a lie and deception to the people, how many Democrats went out and bought stock in insurance companies knowing stock prices would go up as American’s would be forced to buy insurance? It was a Democratic money brag worth billions on the backs of American’s to line their own pockets, explaining Clintons 200 Million worth now including being bought like a whore by Islamic Nations. Her husband is a known and proven liar, a rapist, impeached, like my mother use to say an apple does not fall from the tree, do you honestly think Hillary C. Clinton has clean hands? She assisted her husband in his illegal actions! She knowingly lied about Benghazi, engaged in actions that killed a U.S. Ambassador, destroyed evidence under a legal subpoena, flipped flopped on gay marriage, treats her secret service like shit, and thinks everyone is beneath her according to released e-mails, is this someone you really really want as President? Trump and many others are right, SHE BELONGS IN FEDERAL PRISON! Hillary R. Clinton is a Disgrace and she’s the best canadate the Democrats could put forward? Now think of this, Trump is not a career politician, he’s been in the media for 30+ years and not entangled in peoples suspicious deaths, drama, targeted by the DOJ or FBI, no real scandals, his hands are clean unlike Hillary R. Clinton, keep in mind she’s no longer the Secretary of State, was she fired or asked to resign? All I ask is you think about things in their totality, and vote your intelligence and conscious come election day! This is you’re opportunity to be heard clearly and I’ll be voting TRUMP! If you agree please pass this on or cut and repost, our nation and culture may be depending upon it. Thank you…﻿