Twelfth holistic doctor found dead, alleged suicide
I never wanted to write a twelfth article. After writing the eleventh about I never wanted to write a twelfth article. After writing the eleventh about our colleague: prominent Holistic oncologist, Mitch Gaynor MD in NYC , I was truly hoping that it would be the last.

I’d recently read his book as he’d sent us advanced copies. My better half (also an author and holistic doctor) and I were shocked when we found out Mitch “killed himself” outside on his property. It didn’t add up.

Many of his colleagues, patients and close friends, who wrote me daily, didn’t buy into his alleged suicide either.

The details are scarce on the passing of Dr. Marie Paas, but there are several posts about her death on her The details are scarce on the passing of Dr. Marie Paas, but there are several posts about her death on her Facebook page and many who knew her are writing to me saying that it was an alleged suicide.

Comments on her page would indicate this as well.

Her Her website appears to be down as well, though there is a basic homepage, and it contains some telling info.

From an online health From an online health page

She (Dr. Paas) is 100-hour certified in Applied Kinesiology as well as Pediatrics and is a Certified Detoxification Specialist.

Dr. Paas’ Facebook page clearly shows what an avid animal lover she was. She was an advocate for animal rescues as evidenced by her countless positive posts on the subject.

People who knew her are asking on her page if her own pets are alright; that was one of my first thoughts as well as it is so obvious how much she adored animals, including her own.

Her Facebook page said she graduated from Parker college and her chiropractic practice appears to be in Sylacauga, Alabama, which is about a 3 hour drive from the Florida border (not too far west from Atlanta).

If you call the number listed at her business it still has her voice on the machine as of today.

There are several posts on her page of people who are in absolute shock and disbelief right now, and understandably so. Countless people have left posts about what a wonderful person she was, always with a smile on her face.

Our heart goes out to her friends, family, patients and loved ones.

We’ll update this article as we have more information.

Erin Elizabeth, Florida Sunday morning 1:55AM