Dems' Solyndra Debacle Worsens as the Bankrupt Company Prepares to Give Fat Bonuses to Senior Employees



FYI, a similar version of this release below went out to the following districts: Jason Altmire (PA-04), John Barrow (GA-12), Sanford Bishop (GA-02), Tim Bishop (NY-01), Leonard Boswell (IA-03), Bruce Braley (IA-01), Lois Capps (CA-24), Russ Carnahan (MO-03), Kathy Castor (FL-11), Ben Chandler (KY-06), David Cicilline (RI-01), Gerry Connolly (VA-11), Jim Cooper (TN-05), Jim Costa (CA-21), John Garamendi (CA-03), Raul Grijalva (AZ-07), Brian Higgins (NY-27), Jim Himes (CT-04), Ruben Hinojosa (TX-15), Tim Holden (PA-17), Rush Holt (NJ-12), Steve Israel (NY-02), Bill Keating (MA-09), Ron Kind (WI-03), Larry Kissell (NC-08), Rick Larsen (WA-02), David Loebsack (IA-02), Jim Matheson (UT-02), Carolyn McCarthy (NY-04), Mike McIntyre (NC-07), Jerry McNerney (CA-09), Michael Michaud (ME-02), Brad Miller (NC-13), Bill Owens (NY-23), Frank Pallone (NJ-06), Ed Perlmutter (CO-07), Gary Peters (MI-09), Chellie Pingree (ME-01), David Price (NC-04), Nick Rahall (WV-03), Loretta Sanchez (CA-46), Kurt Schrader (OR-05), Adam Smith (WA-09), Betty Sutton (OH-16), John Tierney (MA-06), Paul Tonko (NY-21), Niki Tsongas (MA-03), Pete Visclosky (IN-01), Tim Walz (MN-01), John Yarmuth (KY-03)



McIntyre's Solyndra Debacle Worsens as the Bankrupt Company Prepares to Give Fat Bonuses to Senior Employees

North Carolina Democrat's Solyndra Stimulus Scandal Already Left Taxpayers on the Hook for $535 Million in Guaranteed Loans

Washington --- Once the poster child for Mike McIntyre's stimulus boondoggle, the bankrupt Solyndra company is now a symbol of how his failed scheme wasted taxpayer money on political payback and failing companies instead of creating the jobs promised. But instead of learning from their mistakes, McIntyre and his fellow Democrats continue to deflect blame and insist the stimulus was a good idea, even though the outrage will only increase now that senior Solyndra employees could receive fat bonuses after fleecing taxpayers for hundreds of millions of dollars.



"It's outrageous enough that Mike McIntyre supported a $1 trillion failed stimulus package, but it's even more outrageous that hundreds of millions were spent to fund a failing company like Solyndra," said NRCC Communications Director Paul Lindsay. "Not only is McIntyre responsible for this irresponsible investment, but he'll also have to explain to his North Carolina constituents why Solyndra's senior employees are receiving bonuses at the expense of hard-working American taxpayers."



Amazingly, Solyndra is proposing additional bonuses for employees despite going bankrupt and leaving taxpayers on the hook with a $535 million loan guarantee:







Nearly two dozen Solyndra employees could receive bonuses ranging from $10,000 to $50,000 each under a proposal filed by Solyndra's attorneys in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Delaware." (Jim McElhatton, "Bankrupt Solyndra seeking to pay bonuses," The Washington Times , 1/11/12)

"Now seems an unlikely time for handing out bonuses at bankrupt Solyndra LLC, but that's the plan of company attorneys intending to dole out up to a half-million dollars to persuade key employees to stay put.Nearly two dozen Solyndra employees could receive bonuses ranging from $10,000 to $50,000 each under a proposal filed by Solyndra's attorneys in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Delaware."

CHRIS WALLACE: I am asking you about the President – has no responsibility for Solyndra?



REP. DEBBIE WASSERMAN-SCHULTZ: The President has responsibility for the green jobs programs where he made investments.



WALLACE: How about company Solyndra that went bankrupt?



REP. WASSERMAN-SCHULTZ: But the decisions that were made at Solyndra that ultimately led to their bankruptcy were those of the people who worked for Solyndra. (Fox News' "Fox News Sunday," 1/8/12)

Although Democrats refuse to admit their mistakes, Mike McIntyre will have an even more difficult time defending the failed stimulus when his constituents in North Carolina see Solyndra employees receiving fat bonuses after fleecing taxpayers for half a billion dollars.



Dems' Solyndra Debacle Worsens as the Bankrupt Company Prepares to Give Fat Bonuses to Senior Employees http://ow.ly/8spfe #madeinwdc



###