New NRCC Web Ad: Obama Admin Sings Praises of Frank Pallone’s Donor Jon Corzine
FYI, a similar version of this release below went out to the following districts: Jim Cooper (TN-05), Rush Holt (NJ-12), Nita Lowey (NY-18), Ed Markey (MA-07), George Miller (CA-07), Jerrold Nadler (NY-08), Frank Pallone (NJ-06), Donald Payne (NJ-10), Charlie Rangel (NY-15), Steve Rothman (NJ-09).



New NRCC Web Ad: Obama Admin Sings Praises of Frank Pallone's Donor Jon Corzine Trusted Advisor's Firm Made Enron-Style Bets Losing $1.2B of American Families' and Farmers' Money, Does Pallone Back Obama's Choice to Support Corzine?

Washington --- The National Republican Congressional Committee released a new web ad today highlighting the close relationship between the ethically-challenged Jon Corzine and the Obama Administration. Frank Pallone is now forced to decide whether he will blindly follow Obama, as he usually does, and deem Corzine a "friend" amidst Corzine's sick business practices that lost over a billion dollars in customer money devastating American farmers and families or do the right thing and return the tainted donation he received from Corzine.



"It makes sense that President Obama considers Jon Corzine an ‘ally' of his administration, especially given the fact that both Democrats prioritize destroying any chance Americans have at surviving the economic hardships inflicted on them over the past three years," said NRCC Communications Director Paul Lindsay. "Frank Pallone must return the scandal-tainted money he received from Corzine that he has desperately held onto or risk his constituents dropping him for his blatant support of Washington corruption."



Frank Pallone has taken $11,900 from Jon Corzine. (CQMoneyLine, accessed 11/03/11)





The script for this ad is as follows:



CORZINE: It's great to have a friend in the White House.



OBAMA: Jon Corzine was an ally with the Obama Administration.



BIDEN: He's the smartest guy that I know in terms of the economy and on finance. I really mean this.



CORZINE: As the chief executive officer of MF Global, I truly apologize to all those affected.



BIDEN: And so Jon –



CORZINE: They see their neighbor, um, losing their home.



BIDEN: Thank you.



CORZINE: I simply do not know where the money is.



OBAMA: My friend, Jon Corzine. ###