The measles outbreak is a massive false flag; nearly all outbreaks are caused by infected migrants, not American children
He continues:

Then the CDC reports from local health departments across the country that it’s the illegal aliens, called “migrants,’ that are spreading the measles, the mumps, the rubella, the pertussis, and all these record-level diseases hitting Europe and the United States… and then we’re told that those of us who haven’t taken the hundreds of mandated vaccines are to blame.

This whole thing is a false flag… the measles are real, but the admitted cause is the illegal aliens and the government not testing them at the border… this is outrageous and this is criminal… this is a national health emergency.

Our government has opened the borders and allowed these plagues to come in, and then tells us dangerous vaccines are the answer to what they have brought into the nation.

He’s right, of course. It’s the disease-ridden illegal aliens that are bringing infectious diseases into America, but the CDC and the obedient national media blame “anti-vaxxers” while pushing toxic, deadly vaccines on all Americans via new vaccine mandates that amount to nothing less than medical rape.

Watch the full health freedom alert video on Brighteon.com:

Video Player is loading. Play Video Play Mute Current Time 0:00 / Duration 0:00 Loaded : 0% Progress : 0% Stream Type LIVE Remaining Time -0:00 Playback Rate 1x Chapters Chapters Descriptions descriptions off , selected Captions captions and subtitles off , selected Audio Track Fullscreen This is a modal window. Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window. Text Color White Black Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan Transparency Opaque Semi-Transparent Background Color Black White Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan Transparency Opaque Semi-Transparent Transparent Window Color Black White Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan Transparency Transparent Semi-Transparent Opaque Font Size 50% 75% 100% 125% 150% 175% 200% 300% 400% Text Edge Style None Raised Depressed Uniform Dropshadow Font Family Proportional Sans-Serif Monospace Sans-Serif Proportional Serif Monospace Serif Casual Script Small Caps Reset restore all settings to the default values Done Close Modal Dialog End of dialog window.

Brighteon.com has rapidly become the top video platform for vaccine truth videos. We are just weeks away from rolling out Brighteon 2.0, based on a “censorship-resistant” new infrastructure that will further protect free speech for all.