In an Islamic show of power, 50,000+ Muslims will occupy the Minnesota Vikings US Bank Stadium to celebrate EID al-Adha, the Islamic festival of barbaric animal sacrifice
Let me clarify.

EID al-Adha celebrates“binding of Isaac” is the Torah portion that most people relate with Rosh Hashanah . Though Isaac is the one being bound, the story is referred to as a test of Abraham.

If nothing bad happens over these two days worse than outsiders having to hear them, the precedent will be set that it can be celebrated everywhere, every year. Once it’s a “normal” part of the year, what would happen if an animal or two were reported to have been slaughtered? Some outrage, someone being fined for animal cruelty or slaughtering animals without a license, then nothing. The next year, reports would come from several states. By then, though, it would be racist not to understand that of course there would be a crazy person here & there who would do this. “Don’t you know the majority are peace-loving?”

What is being celebrated? The Binding of Isaac is the story of Abraham’s Test. Would he sacrifice his son to Hashem? At the last instant, Abraham was shown a ram to use in Isaac’s stead.

How do Jws celebrate this? They recount the story during the celebration of Rosh Hashanah, the Jwish New Year.

How do A rabs celebrate this? They’re descended from Isaac’s 1/2 brother Ishmael. Their version has Ishmael being spared. They celebrate by reenacting Abraham’s slaughter of the Ram; while claiming their tortur & the slow & painful death of the animals is for the purpose of giving the meat to poor people. As an aside, you must realize that Abraham’s test somehow encourages Mohammedans to sacrifice humans still.

OK.The best thing that could happen would be for there to be a bloodbath. Let it be so horrific that it can’t be hidden by msm. Let the masses see. If the celebration’s not banned forever outright, then our society was doomed anyway.

I’ve observed enough of Islm’s atrocities; & there are plenty of new ones always to make life even Darker. I know the best links to throw at liberals’ & Mohammedans regarding most of their atrocities when I see them spewing their “peaceful” crap. The number of animals slaughtered would be negligible compared to the number that would otherwise be slaughtered in the upcoming years if this becomes a legal holiday in USA.

I do what I do because I’m compelled. I despise it more than anything in the world. I research all its lies to find the tiny truth so I can disarm it. I speak against it everywhere I can. I talk with psychopath Mohammedans almost every day. I know most of their most disgusting, filthy secrets. This is a cross I bear, not something I enjoy. And I would rather see a dozen or so animals sacrificed to these barbarians in the MN stadium so the truth will be know right away before it gets traction; than to have the liberals complain of all the “Islmophobes who had complained that Mohammedans kil poor animals when they celebrate that Ishmael, ancestor to the A rabs, son of Abraham was not sacrificed. Islm is ridding the world of the Hebrew Bible & NT stories, teaching their alternative in our schools. If this celebration goes off without a hitch, it will soon be done in the capital of every state of the Union every year from here on.

This is how I see it.