The Arch Of Baal Was Put Up In Washington D.C. One Day Before Brett Kavanaugh Testified To Congress
What if Dr. Ford and Judge Kavanaugh are both right?

That would mean someone that resembles Judge Kavanaugh closely enough to pass for him was there when he was a teenager.

Dr. Ford would have mistaken this person as Judge Kavanaugh.

Is that possible?

Because at the age of about 15, I went to Canada with my parents to visit my Aunt. We stayed with her and her husband for at least a week or two. It is far too distant in the past to remember that many details.

When I went to the meeting place where we sheltered to wait for the winter bus for school, my friends all cheered me. What did I do I asked? They said why you bought a moped and have been driving around the neighborhood for at least a week. I was in Canada all week. No one saw the person on that moped again.

To this day, I do not know who that person was that so resembled me.

So I know that people that resemble people are possible.

Our jails have only recently done dna testing on people convicted of rape. Many have been released because the DNA did not resemble the person convicted. Many of these people were convicted and put in jail for years. By recently this started quite a few years ago. Well over 400 people have been found innocent of any crime this way. Their only crime is someone that resembled them closely did the crime they were convicted of.

That is why we treat rape victims with such caution. We have made a lot of mistakes in the past. Only with technology advances has this come to light. People in the moment often come to conclusions that are simply not true.

Mrs. Ford is absolutely 100% certain. I am less so. Near twin people are out there. Identity by appearance and mannerisms alone is no longer enough in many cases. Especially if someone was somewhere else at the time the attack occurred. And that is a key. Were they there when it happened or somewhere entirely different.

Police follow a pattern. That pattern often is looking at the people close to the people that were victimized. Often in something like murder they suspect relatives of doing the crime and they are often right. Not always.

We currently have police allowed to lie. We currently have prosecutors with a good deal of leeway in the liberties they have to convict someone of a crime.

The result is likely to be a whole lot of people victimized by the prosecution of crimes. This DNA thing is just the tip of a very big iceberg.

It is likely to come back to haunt the courts for years to come.

So the question is does the people Mrs. Ford is so certain were the Judge and friends actually the people that did the crime?

Or were there people that looked enough like them that in her condition she was certain that they were the ones guilty?

I have made a lot of assumptions over the years. And I have often been wrong as well as right. When nothing makes sense, the only explanation left is likely to be the answer. No matter how unlikely that may be.

If I am right, both Mrs. Ford and Judge Kavanaugh should have an apology from that committee. Especially those that judged without evidence.