“The NFL Has Hurt Us”: Massive Football Sponsor Pulls Out As Protests Rage Onwards
Advertisement

Papa John himself (pictured) has pulled the plug.

The ink is scarcely dry on yesterdays report about N.F.L. team owners scurrying around to try and replace Roger Goodell and already there is more unrest within the staggered league. Now it seems that one of the biggest advertisers for the game of football is about to walk away over the disrespect being shown by kneelers on the field as the anthem plays.

This is seen as the Wildcard confirms that pizza giant Papa Johns is no longer going to advertise with the N.F.L. Nothing goes together like pizza and beer as the big game plays, but it simply is not worth the backlash from boycotting players anymore. This is because the founder was deeply hurt by the failure that is seen from the game’s leadership.

Jonathan Maze, senior financial editor at Nation’s Restaurant News says the blame for this move lies totally with the N.F.L.

Advertisement

Papa John’s says it has been pulling advertising associated with the NFL. The league, it says, has given some future spots in return. — Darren Rovell (@darrenrovell) November 1, 2017

“The NFL has hurt us. We are disappointed the NFL and its leadership did not resolve this,” said Papa Johns founder and CEO John Schnatter while talking to ABC News. “Leadership starts at the top and this is an example of poor leadership.”

Advertisement

The pizza king also spoke the words that countless fans have said when he added that this kneeling nonsense should have been “nipped in the bud” over a full year and a half ago. This move makes Papa Johns the largest business to cut ties with the league that seems to honor lies about white privilege more than playing football.

Papa John's blames weaker than expected same-store sales on "negative consumer sentiment" with company's association with NFL. $PZZA — Jonathan Maze (@jonathanmaze) November 1, 2017

Advertisement

Will they remain the biggest advertising loss for the N.F.L.? Not likely.

No one even knows if the popular pizza chain known for the little green hot peppers and garlic sauce in each order will ever return to the sport, even if and when the kneeling stops.

Protesters have forgotten that if they wish to try and slander white people as racist or unfair then those same people are going to stand up for themselves.

Papa Johns is the biggest advertiser to bail on the N.F.L., but they likely won’t be the last.

Most whites are not racist and have no desire to hold anyone down no matter what color they are. To accuse so many of it is to see those fans simply walk away from the game.

It seems that they are taking their pizza with them, too.