Help “Topple” the Monument to Communism in California
Who knew there was any memorial to the Confederacy in San Diego? Our progressive politicians managed somehow to find one and destroy it secretly, overnight, without any public disclosure or input. They had to search hard to find one.

However, It is not difficult to find here a huge monument honoring Communism and La Raza ultra nationalism in San Diego. You can see some images towards the end of the video below. If you would like to help us take down this perverse monument, see the contact info for our politicians at the bottom of his page. A short e-mail to all of them would be much appreciated. If writing from another state, tell them so. It will make them more nervous to know that the effort is spreading nationwide. If many write, it will have a big impact.

Carl DeMaio, a local radio show host, interviews a local patriot activist, Jeff Schwilk, about it. Schwilk points out the extreme hypocrisy of our local politicians. They destroy this minor historical plaque, while at the same time continuing to fund a monument to America’s enemies, called “Chicano Park.”

Chicano-ism is an odd mixture of La Raza ultra nationalism, Aztec neo-paganism, indigenous racism and Marxist doctrine. The spiritual father of the Chicano / La Raza movement was Jose Vasconcelos, who was a paid, pro-Nazi propagandist during WWII. Additional information is at the link below:

Vasconcelos wrote a book, called “La Raza Cosmica” (the cosmic or universal race). This book popularized the term “La Raza” (The Race) among Mexicans. It was a reverse racialist book, similar to Nazi doctrine. However, the mestizo (mixed Mexican) race is to be the superior race in his concept.

We realize, the swastikas at Chicano Park, which you see in the video above, swirl in the reverse direction as the standard, Nazi swastika, but they refer to the reverse-racialist, anti-white concept of the Chicano / La Raza movement, which is not Nazism, but has borrowed its racialist concept from Nazism. It is pro-communist at the same time, as contradictory as that may seem. It is actually not that unusual that communist movements also have an ultra nationalist component.

Chicano Park is also a monument to the Aztecs, who performed mass human sacrifice and took part in ritualistic cannibalism.

Please e-mail the Mayor and City Council at these addresses and ask that the anti-American murals at Chicano Park be removed and the park renamed.

Mayor Kevin Faulconer (progressive RINO)

kevinfaulconer@ sandiego.gov

City Council Members

barbarabry@ sandiego.gov

loriezapf@ sandiego.gov

christopherward@ sandiego.gov

myrtlecole@ sandiego.gov

markkersey@ sandiego.gov

chriscate@ sandiego.gov

scottsherman@ sandiego.gov

davidalvarez@ sandiego.gov

georgettegomez@ sandiego.gov