Kids at Philadelphia Islamic Center sing about beheading Jews, becomi…
"We will defend the land of divine guidance with our bodies, and we will sacrifice our souls without hesitation," said the young child. "We will chop off their heads, and we will liberate the sorrowful and exalted Al-Aqsa Mosque. We will lead the army of Allah fulfilling His promise, and we will subject them to eternal torture."

Those are the translated words in a shocking video posted online by the Muslim American Society (MAS) Islamic Center in Philadelphia this week. It was posted on Facebook to celebrate it, then later treated as an oversight. Ultimately, the person in charge of the program was "dismissed."

Watchdog group the Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) alerted the media to the video, and uploaded a copy to YouTube. In it, children at the Center sing songs and read radical statements about Palestine and Israel. The translations, verified by MAS, are truly appalling.

"These are not isolated incidents; they are happening in major centers of the country – including in Pennsylvania," MEMRI said in a statement released to Fox News and other outlets.

The Muslim American Society released a statement on Friday, saying the group "rejects" the "statement" made in the incident, and blamed it first on a lack of vetting.

"While we celebrate the coming together of different cultures and languages, not all songs were properly vetted," said Friday's statement from the Muslim American Society. "This was an unintended mistake and an oversight in which the center and the students are remorseful. MAS will conduct an internal investigation to ensure this does not occur again."

That statement was itself later revised, and now reads in part, "our investigation revealed that the school that organized the event on April 17, 2019 is a separate entity renting space from MAS Philadelphia," and said that "the video from the school was uploaded to the chapter's Facebook page without verifying the content of the video for appropriateness."

The Philadelphia chapter of the Anti Defamation League released their own statement, calling the video "extremely disturbing" on Saturday. "Children should not be indoctrinated to hate," it said. "These young people should never have been asked to make speeches and dance and lip-sync to songs that glorify violence against Jews and the State of Israel. The conflict between Israelis and Palestinians is deeply complex and painful on all sides, and the only chance for a peaceful future is to teach our children to pursue peace."

MAS recently sent out an action alert to its membership, calling for support for Rep. llhan Omar and Rep. Rashida Tlaib. The alert said that the two "have been under attack for speaking out against special interest lobbying on Capitol Hill."

Coincidentally, the special interests they're referring to are Israel and Jewish interest groups like AIPAC.