Second Broward County Sheriff’s Deputy Dead After Exposing Parkland Shooting
Marshall Peterson, a Broward County Deputy Sheriff who dared to question the official narrative surrounding the Parkland shooting, has been found dead under suspicious circumstances. He was 53.

A 28-year veteran of the Broward Sheriff’s office, Deputy Peterson is the second Broward County Sheriff’s Deputy to be found dead in sudden and unexpected circumstances in the month following the Parkland massacre. Deputy Jason Fitzsimon, 42, was found dead on his sofa on April 1.

The Broward Sheriff tweeted this:

It is with a heavy heart that we announce the passing of Deputy Marshall Peterson, a 28-year veteran of the Broward Sheriff's Office, Department of Detention. Deputy Peterson, 53, died at his residence. Thank you for your service, Deputy. pic.twitter.com/ytEwtINkWp — Broward Sheriff (@browardsheriff) April 25, 2018

According to the obituary notice, Marshall Lawrence Peterson was a “loving son, brother, brother-in-law, uncle and friend” who was a popular member of the Sheriff’s office, having served there since 1989. However the obituary does not state why the 53-year-old man, who was apparently in good health, was found dead at his mother’s house.

Deputy Peterson is the second Broward County deputy to be found dead within a month. They were both in the prime of their lives and they died from unspecified, non-job related causes. Unless you count “questioning the official narrative surrounding a highly publicized school shooting” to be a job related cause of death…

On April 1, Jason Fitzsimon was found dead on his sofa. According to police, the 42-year-old had been in excellent health prior to his untimely death.

Deputy Fitzsimons wasn’t just any law enforcement officer. Unlike many of his peers, he took to social media to question the potential agenda behind the February 14 Marjory Stoneman High School mass shooting, suggesting that the event was being used to promote the Democratic Party’s gun control platform in anticipation of the 2018 midterm elections.

And recent personnel decisions involving public officials indicate (e.g. here and here ), an unwritten law of taxpayer-funded institutions is that employees disavow and steer clear of “conspiracy theories” that may call their superiors motives into question.

One post found on Fitzsimon’s Facebook page depicts the Parkland massacre’s main spokesperson, David Hogg, in National Socialist regalia, with the caption, “We will March Until We Disarm Every American.”

Fitzsimons’ Facebook page has since been “scrubbed” of any 2018 posts, which would of course include those that may be calling the Parkland shooting or its aftermath into question.

The circumstances surrounding the deaths of both Deputy Fitzsimon and Deputy Peterson of Broward County are sketchy to say the least. The official cause of Fitzsimon’s death has been attributed to cancer, yet this is contradicted by an obituary found at obittree.com, stating that he “died unexpectedly,” the same cause attributed to Peterson.

The “died unexpectedly” phrase is one morticians and/or loved ones sometimes employ when for one reason or another they are reluctant to disclose the true cause of death, as in the case of a suicide.

Yet as the above obituary makes clear, Fitzsimons does not seem as if he would have been a likely suicide candidate. The law enforcement officer “lived life to the fullest and enjoyed spending time loving on his many friends [sic],”the document reads. Fitzsimons was also the life of the party, according to the obituary’s author(s). “He dreamed to one day be Batman or Kenny Chesney, and you could often find him singing at a local karaoke night or taking selfies while under the disguise of the caped crusader.” Further, the deceased also had a spiritual devotion “in his Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.”

If Fitzsimons in fact died of cancer, the onset must have been extremely sudden. Neither the obituary nor accompanying memorials reference any struggle with the disease, but instead point to his inspiring presence while expressing astonishment at the abruptness of his passing.

Aside from numerous friends attesting to his warm disposition in their memorials, Deputy Fitzsimons appeared to be in excellent health, as various photos suggest.

As is suggested in the aftermath of other recent mass shooting events, Fitzsimons and Peterson may have possessed too much information, or were at the wrong place at the wrong time, and/or asking sensitive questions of their colleagues and superiors on the specifics of the Parkland shooting. It is beyond dispute that Sheriff’s Deputy Fitzsimons had become uncomfortably outspoken regarding the February 14 event.

The record reflects that Deputy Fitzsimons and Deputy Peterson were wonderful individuals and friends who cared about “truth” and the US Constitution. Perhaps these concerns are no longer desired by the management of certain policing agencies. There is indeed ample room for suspicion.

.