CA Gov Jerry Brown Signs Bill BANNING Teachers from Shooting Back at Mass Shooters

Liberals want to ban teachers from having their God-given right to defend the young and innocent from mass shooters. With all this talk about “gun violence” and the need for citizens to give up the 2nd amendment to protect the children, everyone has forgotten that all it takes is another armed individual to restore equilibrium to this whole topic of gun rights.

Unfortunately for the school-aged children in California, Governor Brown would rather see them dead than allow adults to have the right to take out a mass shooter. This is no joke. In response to the recent shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in South Florida, Assemblyman Kevin McCarty (D-Sacramento) introduced bill AB 424.

The catastrophic reach of this bill is appalling and unacceptable in a nation that considers itself to be a The catastrophic reach of this bill is appalling and unacceptable in a nation that considers itself to be a democracy

California Governor Jerry Brown signed a revolting bill banning teachers from being able to shoot back if a mass murder breaks into their school.

This bill, AB 424, comes in reaction to the tragic shooting at This bill, AB 424, comes in reaction to the tragic shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in South Florida.

The bill, AB 424, was introduced by Assemblyman Kevin McCarty’s (D-Sacramento). McCarty introduced his bill after five California school districts chose to allow teachers and/or staff with concealed carry permits to be armed on campus to defend themselves and their students. The five districts were Kern High School District, Kingsburg Joint Union High School District, Folsom Cordova Unified School District, Anderson Union High School District, and Palo Cedro’s North Cow Creek School District. Breitbart News reported that McCarty justified his push to disarm teachers by saying, “A safe learning environment is essential for our children to be successful in the classroom. That’s not possible if a school district allows armed civilians to roam California school campuses.”

Local law enforcement is warning that AB 424 will have a negative impact on communities. But, of course, this doesn’t seem to deter gun control crazed politicians.

The Los Angeles Times reports that the Firearm Policy Coalition (FPC) opposed the bill and the idea of rendering teachers defenseless. The FPC said: “The constitutional right to bear arms is based on the fundamental human right to self-defense. AB 424 undermines these very important principles based on little more than a whim.” Brown also signed legislation expanding the list of persons banned from gun ownership in California. Newly prohibited persons include those found guilty of misdemeanor hate crimes. That bill is aimed at people “using force or the threat of force to interfere with another person’s free exercise of any constitutional right because of the other person’s race, religion, gender, or sexual orientation.”

Meanwhile, over in Ohio, a far different approach is being utilized.

A common sense plan that follows the suggestions of local law enforcement for responsibly keeping the peace and people safe.

Butler County, Ohio, Sheriff Richard K. Jones offered free concealed carry training for 50 teachers and 250 teachers responded within 24 hours. Breitbart News reported that Jones began advertising the free training on Sunday and the immediate response was 50 emails within 20 minutes: On February 20 Fox 91 reported the response had jumped to 250 teachers who wanted training. Jones reveled in the opportunity to instruct them, saying, “We have 250 and growing fast. We will start training fast, next week.” He stressed that he wants teachers to understand what they can do with a gun if an armed attacker enters the classroom. And while he cannot delegate the authority for teachers to carry on a given campus–that is a school board decision–Jones said he wants the teachers to be ready if their school board so chooses. He said, “If the school boards want to give the authority to teachers to be armed…[they] can do that, they have the authority to do it, but I’m going to do my part, and I assume I’m probably the only one in the state of Ohio that’s doing that – but something has to happen.”

Now that sounds more like it….