Chuck's Blog » Blog Archive California - LARGEST INSANE ASYLUM IN THE…
Written by chuck on January 23, 2017 – 6:00 am -

Interesting that the LA Times did this. Lou Dobbs reported this on CNN and it cost him his job. The only network we would see this on would be FOX. All the others are staying away from it. Whether you are a Democrat or Republican, this should be of great interest to you!

Just One State – be sure and read the last part… try for 3 times.

This is only one State… If this doesn’t open your eyes, nothing will!

From the L.A. Times.

1. 40% of all workers in LA County (10.2 million people) are working for cash; and not paying taxes. This is because they are predominantly illegal immigrants, working without a green card.

(Donald Trump was right)

2. 95% of warrants for murder in Los Angeles are for illegal aliens.

3. 75% of people on the most wanted list in Los Angeles are illegal aliens.

4. Over 2/3 of all births in Los Angeles County are to illegal alien Mexicans on Medi-Cal, whose births were paid for by taxpayers.

5. Nearly 35% of all inmates in California detention centers are Mexican nationals; they are here illegally.

6. Over 300,000 illegal aliens in Los Angeles County are living in garages.

7. The FBI reports half of all gang members in Los Angeles are most likely illegal aliens from south of the border.

8. Nearly 60% of all occupants of HUD properties are illegal.

9. 21 radio stations in LA are Spanish speaking.

10. In LA County, 5.1 million people speak English; 3.9 million, speak Spanish. (There are 10.2 million people, in LA County.

(All 10 of the above facts were published in the Los Angeles Times)

Less than 2% of illegal aliens are picking our crops, but 29% are on welfare. Over 70% of the United States’ annual population growth, (and over 90% of California, Florida and New York), results from immigration. Also, 29% of inmates in federal prisons are illegal aliens.

We are fools for letting this continue.

HOW CAN YOU HELP?

Send copies of this letter, to at least two other people. 100, would be even better.

This is only one State…If this doesn’t open your eyes nothing will and you wonder why Nancy Pelosi wants them to become voters!

Nancy Pelosi wants to put a Windfall Tax on all stock market profits (including Retirement fund, 401K and Mutual Funds)!

Windfall Tax on Retirement Income… Adding a tax to your retirement is simply another way of saying to the American people “you’re so dammed stupid that we’re going to keep doing this until we drain every cent from you”. Nancy Pelosi (who was just re-elected and part of this problem) wants a Windfall Tax on Retirement Income. In other words, tax what you have made by investing toward your retirement. This woman is a nut case! You aren’t going to believe this…;

Alas, it is true – all to help the 12 Million Illegal Immigrants and other unemployed Minorities!

This woman is frightening. She quotes… ‘We need to work toward the goal of equalizing income, (didn’t Marx say something like this?) in our country; and at the same time limiting the amount the rich can invest. (I’m not rich, are you?)

When asked how these new tax dollars would be spent, she replied:

We need to raise the standard of living of our poor, unemployed and minorities. For example, we have an estimated 12 million illegal immigrants in our country who need our help along with millions of unemployed minorities. Stock market windfall profits taxes could go a long way to guarantee these people the “standard of living they would like to have” as “Americans”.

(Read that quote again and again and let it sink in.) ‘Lower your retirement; give it to others who have not worked, as you have for your money. Are we stupid or what????

Comments Off on California – LARGEST INSANE ASYLUM IN THE WORLD





Posted in Serious Side