Anti-Islam Legislation in 2013
In 2013, 36 bills or amendments designed to vilify Islamic religious practices were

introduced in the legislatures of 16 states.

Party of the bill’s original sponsors

All 36 bills were originally sponsored solely by Republicans. Mainstream Republican

leaders continued to support the bills. For example, Oklahoma’s Gov. Mary Fallin signed

one such bill into law. Alabama’s Sen. J.T. Waggoner (R-Jefferson, Shelby) was Majority

Leader for a similar bill. In Washington, Rep. Matt Shea (R-Spokane Valley) was Assistant

Minority Floor Leader and Rep. Shelly Short (R-Addy) was the Minority Caucus Vice

Chair. West Virginia’s Del. Linda Sumner (R-Raleigh) was assistant minority whip.

Number of bills that used language of Islamophobe David Yerushalmi

David Yerushalmi, often acts as the U.S. Islamophobia network’s legal counsel. Among

his many anti-Islam writings is a piece for the American Spectator published April 27,

2006 in which he wrote, “Our greatest enemy today is Islam. The only Islam appearing in

any formal way around the world is one that seeks a world Caliphate through murder,

terror and fear.”

Thirty-three (92 percent) of the 2013 anti-Islam bills contained language that was

extracted from American Laws for American Courts, template legislation written by

Yerushalmi that forms the core of most of the anti-Islam legislation seen in the United

States over the last few years.

Yerushalmi authored ALAC for the American Public Policy Alliance (APPA). While APPA

has a professional-looking website, the address it lists in Washington, D.C., is a UPS

store. On it’s website, APPA is very clear that it views Islamic religious principles, or

Sharia, as one of two key threats to “constitutional protections and liberties,” alleging

that these religious principles will be “imposed as a separate legal system in America for

Muslims (and eventually for non-Muslims).”

Fate of bills

Bills became law in Oklahoma and North Carolina. Those laws will be discussed in detail

below.

In late May, the Alabama legislature approved an anti-Islam amendment to the state’s

constitution. The measure will be on the ballot for voters to accept or reject in 2014.

Rev. Richard Killmer, executive director of the National Religious Campaign Against

Torture noted the “unspoken target of this amendment, Shariah or Islamic law.” i

In October, Public Policy Polling reported, “26% of Americans think that Muslims are