There’s $1.9 trillion at stake (China, Saudi Arabia, Germany, and the U.S set to battle)
Dear Money Morning Member, Your time to access Dr. Kent Moors’ latest research is now running short… His findings reveal conclusive evidence of a quantum leap set to turn Albert Einstein’s only Nobel Prize- winning discovery – his little-known theory of “Space Energy” – into the world’s most profitable technology. There’s $1.9 trillion at stake. And governments around the world are rushing to establish a dominant position. China has committed $90 billion. Saudi Arabia is investing $100 billion. U.S. growth is forecast at 2,272% in the next 10 years alone. And Germany is completely transforming their official policy to maintain their position as world leader. The chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission went on record to say “[Space Energy] is growing so fast it’s going to overtake everything… it could double every two years.” Now Kent’s identified three “alpha” players whose scientific advancements position them to outpace the competition by four times or more… in a sector already creating gains of 1,092%, 1,157%, and 1,167%. But it’s imperative you move quickly. Word of Kent’s research is spreading fast. And with the world still fixated on the price of oil, you have just one fleeting chance to get in position for the biggest energy investment payday of your life. I suggest you review all of Kent’s conclusions today … before it’s too late. Sincerely,

Mike Ward

Publisher, Money Morning Mike WardPublisher, Money Morning PS: With the IEA projecting 5,400% growth, it’s now inevitable. Space Energy is set to replace oil, coal, gas, and nuclear – forever. from Money Morning You are receiving this e-mail at as a part of your free subscription to the Money Morning E-Letter. To read our privacy policy click here . Remove your email from this list:

Money Morning | Attn: Member Services | 16 West Madison Street | Baltimore, MD 21201

North America: 888.384.8339; International: 443.353.4519; Fax: 410.622.3050

Contact Customer Service

Website: To cancel by mail or for any other subscription issues, write us at:Money Morning | Attn: Member Services | 16 West Madison Street | Baltimore, MD 21201North America: 888.384.8339; International: 443.353.4519; Fax: 410.622.3050Website: http://www.moneymorning.com © 2015 Money Morning All Rights Reserved.

Nothing in this email should be considered personalized financial advice. Although our employees may answer your general customer service questions, they are not licensed under securities laws to address your particular financial situation. No communication by our employees to you should be deemed as personalized financial advice. We expressly forbid our writers from having a financial interest in any security recommended to our readers. All of our employees and agents must wait 24 hours after on-line publication or 72 hours after the mailing of printed-only publication prior to following an initial recommendation. Any recommendations in this letter should be made only after consulting with your financial adviser and only after reviewing the prospectus or financial statements of the company. Protected by copyright laws of the United States and international treaties. This Newsletter may only be used pursuant to the subscription agreement and any reproduction, copying, or redistribution (electronic or otherwise, including on the world wide web), in whole or in part, is strictly prohibited without the express written permission of: Money Morning. 16 West Madison Street, Baltimore MD 21201.