UN demands U.S. pay reparations to blacks for slavery ⋆ Conservative …
UN -- Pixabay

UN — Pixabay

So much for all the lives lost in the American Civil War. On Tuesday, the So much for all the lives lost in the American Civil War. On Tuesday, the Washington Post reported that a U.N. study says the United States should pay reparations to blacks for slavery.

According to the Post:

This conclusion was part of a study by the This conclusion was part of a study by the United Nations’ Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent , a body that reports to the international organization’s High Commissioner on Human Rights. The group of experts, which includes leading human rights lawyers from around the world, presented its findings to the United Nations Human Rights Council on Monday, pointing to the continuing link between present injustices and the dark chapters of American history.

“In particular, the legacy of colonial history, enslavement, racial subordination and segregation, racial terrorism and racial inequality in the United States remains a serious challenge, as there has been no real commitment to reparations and to truth and reconciliation for people of African descent,” the report stated. “Contemporary police killings and the trauma that they create are reminiscent of the past racial terror of lynching.”

Citing the past year’s spate of police officers killing unarmed African American men, the panel warned against “impunity for state violence,” which has created, in its words, a “human rights crisis” that “must be addressed as a matter of urgency.”

advertisement - story continues below

Apparently, the alleged “experts” at the UN are unaware of the 600,000 who lost their lives fighting a war that ended slavery.

The Post notes the recommendations are “nonbinding and unlikely to influence Washington, after a fact-finding mission in the United States in January.”

“Despite substantial changes since the end of the enforcement of Jim Crow and the fight for civil rights, ideology ensuring the domination of one group over another, continues to negatively impact the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of African Americans today,” the UN panel “Despite substantial changes since the end of the enforcement of Jim Crow and the fight for civil rights, ideology ensuring the domination of one group over another, continues to negatively impact the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of African Americans today,” the UN panel said

Apparently they’re not aware of who we elected to the highest office in the land back in 2008.

Here’s a better idea. Let’s defund the UN and kick it out of the United States.

advertisement - story continues below

Related:

If you haven’t checked out and liked our If you haven’t checked out and liked our Facebook page, please go here and do so.

And if you’re as concerned about Facebook censorship as we are, go And if you’re as concerned about Facebook censorship as we are, go here and order this new book:

Banned: How Facebook enables militant Islamic jihad – Source: Author (used with permission)