MD Found Murdered inside Florida Home today. This makes 6 in 30 days with 5 still missing.
If you are an "Ordained Christian minister" then you should be ashamed that you have never read Genesis, since it is of course, the first book of the Bible. I am well aware that it requires very little to become "ordained" (approximately $35 online) and it's even cheaper to lie on a website (100% free). That being said, you still haven't read Genesis, and have proven your lack of Biblical knowledge so anything you say here should be taken with a grain of sand until you start backing up your comments with real knowledge (not quoting some random scripture).

1. Go read Genesis.

2. Explain the fact that there are two creation stories therein.

"I'm not interested in reading what anti-Christians have to say." << I grew up very Christian (regardless of my current beliefs, since I'm a member of a polytheistic church now and quite happy). If you refuse to acknowledge critical thinking then you are not deserving of the title "ordained Christian minister". If the Pope pointed out the fact that there are two conflicting creation stories in the first book of the Bible then would you go read it? What about the minister at your church? Do you even go to a church? Who would have to point this out to you for you to acknowledge that it is very real? Jesus Himself?

The point is this: you claim to know everything about a certain book that you haven't actually read. I know this because you haven't even read the first book of the Bible. Stop finding some random scripture to support whatever it is you are trying to prove because your beliefs are skewed by a complete misunderstanding of the Bible which you continue to quote. The book is extremely vague and you can find some sentence or passage taken out of context to support *any* argument, so nothing you say is relevant until you face the facts. The truth is that the Bible is not infallible, there are thousands of factual contradictions within the Bible, yet it is claimed to be "absolute truth" by millions of people around the world. It does not matter who points out the thousands of factual inconsistencies in the Bible, they are there, whether you "believe" it or not. All you have to do is go read it and take notes.

Over and out.