Oprah Winfrey's Magazine Promotes The 'Shout Your Abortion' Movement …
Ike, I have a hard time believing that MLK and Coretta Scott King were stupid enough to be duped in the manner that you described. MLK received an award from Sanger in 1966 and Coretta Scott King attended the ceremony to give a speech on her husband's behalf.

Here's Coretta Scott King in 1966 at the award ceremony:

“I am proud tonight to say a word in behalf of your mentor, and the person who symbolizes the ideas of this organization, Margaret Sanger. Because of her dedication, her deep convictions, and for her suffering for what she believed in, I would like to say that I am proud to be a woman tonight.”

Given the extensive planning and coordination conducted by MLK, the NAACP, SNCC, and other activist groups during the civil rights period, do you really think they simply "fell for Sanger's 'tricks' and 'deceptions' regarding abortion"?

Your response conveys a very low opinion of the intelligence of African-American civil rights activists. Somehow, they were cunning and intelligent enough to create a movement that compelled the federal government to pass transformational laws addressing racial/gender/religious/etc. inequality in society, but they were too dumb to see through the subterfuge of some elderly woman? Really?

Yes, Sanger was affiliated with eugenics groups, but that doesn't change the utility of being able to *choose* when to have kids. Given the myriad social issues African-Americans were dealing with in society, being unable to plan childbirth made it that much harder for African-Americans to thrive. That's why MLK and Coretta Scott King supported Sanger's work. They understood how disruptive out of control childbirth could be on a community.

"To this day, we see that the black community continues to pursue abortions at a *much* higher rate than any other racial communities in America.

How can you not absolutely hate this?"

My response is: Why should I hate the idea of women voluntarily terminating their own pregnancies? I respect the right of the owner of the uterus to regulate the uterus. Moreover, given that poverty is the primary reason why so many choose to do so, I respect them for making a rational decision. If you dislike that decision, you could solve the problem by taking away the rationale. How do you feel about a large tax increase to fund universal healthcare, food stamps, and welfare spending? Don't like it? Well, then don't complain when women choose abortion due to economic insecurity.

Question: Do you see an intellectual inconsistency in forcing women to give birth while denying them the resources necessary for the child's survival? If not, why not? If so, aren't you curious why pro-life organizations don't advocate for universal healthcare or other pro-life, anti-poverty measures with the same intensity that they advocate for an abortion ban?