Shutdown Joe Tries to Rewrite History About Voting to Keep the Government Shut Down 16 Times
In a tweet yesterday, Congressman Heck tried to distract from the fact that he was “sticking to his guns” on government shutdown

Las Vegas, NV – Yesterday Congressman Heck released a “fact check” that highlights Heck's votes to shut down the government and his decision to continue taking his pay while tens of thousands of workers had to forgo a paycheck because of a Republican-led government shutdown.

In this “fact check”, Congressman Heck even verified that he took his paycheck. Now Congressman “Shutdown Joe” Heck is trying to rewrite history by claiming in 2013 he shared concerns about the government shutdown.

But what Shutdown Joe doesn’t mention is that he voted 16 times to keep the government shut down. Congressman Heck was “withholding support for a clean budget resolution” and “sticking to his guns on that, even if other House Republicans think it’s about time to give in to Democrats’ demands.”

“Congressman Heck is trying to lie about continually voting to keep the government closed, but one thing he’s not trying to hide is that he accepted his paychecks while he voted against paying hundreds of thousands of federal workers,” said Mairead Lynn, spokesperson for the Nevada Democratic Party. “When Congressman Heck voted to shut down the government, a lot of people continued to work without a paycheck. Heck felt that even though our air traffic controllers and National Guardsmen should not get paid, he still deserved a paycheck for his long, hard 16-day crusade to keep the government closed. More proof that Shutdown Joe puts himself before Nevadans and thinks the rules don’t apply to him.”

How was Nevada affected by shutdown? A few examples.

Air Traffic control workers at McCarran and Reno/Tahoe International Airports had to work without pay. Another 15,000 FAA employees nationwide were furloughed including aviation safety inspectors and trainers of air traffic controllers. (CBS News)

The Reno VA Benefits office and the North Las Vegas VA Benefits office were shuttered, halting the catch up effort on backlog of claims. (Las Vegas Review Journal)

Nevada’s Adjutant General William Burks called the situation “pretty dire” saying the National Guard had to postpone drills and had no money for operations and maintenance. (Las Vegas Sun)

Nevada Gov. Sandoval said Nevada would face “catastrophic” consequences if the shutdown continued. The shutdown continued for another week after he made these remarks. (Las Vegas Sun)

National Guardsmen weren't paid during the government shutdown but had to work because they were essential government workers. (KOLO)