Joanna File Suit Over Contract
HGTV has had enough. Joanna has been showing up late to the construction sites as well as the filmings and now have found out Joanna has been leading a double life. Her disinterest in the show "Fixer Upper" with her hilarious husband Chip Gaines has fallen to the wayside due to her side business. Here we reveal the truth behind what this side business is really all about...

The star of HGTV’s hit TV show, Joanna Gaines, has shocked us all and 2017 has only just started. In recent developments, the reality star revealed that she just started a side beauty business because she is a serial entrepreneur and it's just in her nature. She never expected it to grow as fast as it did. HGTV and the network as a whole was not happy when they found out about this (to say the least) and they made Joanna decide on which direction she was going to go. Being so turned off by the reaction of HGTV and their "power move" she decided to pursue her new skin care line.

But although then high pressure caused some tension in her marriage with Chip, Joanna is not slowing down. The beauty has been busy developing and promoting her skin care line (VLamorous Anti-Aging Serum) and it became the most talked product among popular beauty gurus and vloggers such as Michelle Phan and Bethany Mota. PEOPLE has also confirmed that she is filing suit to end her contract with HGTV to focus on the her company.

"I've got so many things going on," she says. "I'm working on so much."

Read on to see how Joanna Gaines shows off her skin with VLamorous Anti-Aging Serum in exclusive interview with PEOPLE.

"There is a lot of skin products out there that does not work for me and so, my team and I created VLamorous, to help me combat the effects that traveling and filming while taking care of my family had on my skin. It truly is a life AND time saver!"

Now that HGTV confirmed the cancellation of 'Fixer Upper', we convinced Joanna to publicize her product and share with our readers, free, for a limited time.

Here at PEOPLE Magazine we only write about and endorse the best products recommended by the most respected celebrities and industry professionals. After interviewing with Joanna it was clear that we had to try out this revolutionary product for ourselves in order to write a proper story.

Our very own Brittany Sebagh, 54, PEOPLE Magazine's Senior Beauty Editor, volunteered to try out VLamorous. When we approched Brittany about this product, she had her doubts about the validity of the claims after trying out so many products over the years to get rid of skin issues caused by stress and sun damage.

"VLamorous has improved the texture of my skin. My dark spots and eyes bags are getting lighter. I am 54 and had given up on creams and serums to improve my skin. After investing money on countless products, this program is the first I feel has shown results so quickly and dramatically." - Brittany Sebagh

Continue to read about Brittany's experience with VLamorous

Today, People magazine is delighted to disclose the full details of Brittany’s treatment results after just 3 weeks with Joanna's VLamorous. Our beloved Brittany has tried method after method with little or no results, she even considered plastic surgery but was hesitant to go under the knife. Brittany admits that the only thing that stopped her from getting Botox or plastic surgery was her fear of needles.

We were blown away with the results based on Brittany's experience so we went in search of a clear scientific answers on exactly how this product could produce such amazing results in just 3 weeks.

Joanna revealed VLamorous on the Dr. Oz show as "Hollywood's best kept secret." We caught up with Dr. Oz to get more information about the product and to tell us if this product is the real deal.

Dr. Oz explains that the main ingredients in VLamorous, Biosphere and QuSome are both natural ingredients that work together to erase wrinkles and fine lines at the cellular level – below the surface of the skin – which is why they’re so effective.

Here's How It Works

It's actually very simple. You simply use both products before bed. Joanna and Dr. Oz states, "The real trick is to combine VLamorous. These two products both contain high concentrations of pure Bisophere and QuSome in just the right concentrations. His team also discovered that they contain all sorts of anti-oxidants, an ingredient called Dermaxyl (also known as facelift in a jar) and Ester-C (the active anti-aging compound in Bisophere).

Bisophere, The Fountain of Youth:

The first piece of the anti-aging puzzle Dr. Oz discovered was Bisophere. Bisophere penetrates deep into damaged skin and stimulates new collagen – a protein which makes skin appear plump and firm. Dr. Oz said this is why VLamorous is so effective. It was one of the few products on the market that had Bisophere in the right consistency and dosage.

"What Bisophere & QuSome do is get rid of all the old, dead layers of skin and help your skin generate fresh new ones. Our tests show that you can erase almost 10 to 20 years off your face in less than 14 days. But the key is to choose the creams and serums that contain the highest and purest quality ingredients, since they’re not all the same. The only two we found during our research was VLamorous. This is what my wife uses. This is what I recommend to all my celebrity clients." - Dr. Oz

QuSome:

He said the second piece, when combined properly with Bisophere, literally makes your face look two decades younger in weeks! Hyaluronic Acid works by binding to moisture. It can hold up to 1,000 times its weight in water, making it an excellent natural skin plumper. Hyaluronic acid helps your skin repair and regenerate itself after suffering from dryness, environmental stresses, or irritation. He said one of, if not the only products you can buy over the counter with an effective concentration of QuSome was found in VLamorous.

Here are results from Brittany's test of VLamorous together with VLamorous

Day One: I’m in love with this product after just one day of use. My husband and daughter asked me what I did to make my skin look so alive! Overall I am very excited to see what this regimen will do for my complexion.

I don't know how else to describe it! I could feel a warm tingling sensation on my cheeks, around my eyes, and on my forehead.

After both products were absorbed into my skin, my face looked firmer and had a beautiful glow to it.



Day Seven: After five days of using VLamorous, I was shocked at the drastic results.

My skin now looks even toned and feels more moist. I see fewer visible lines and less puffiness around the eyes. Within the week, people told me my skin looked brighter and more refreshed!



Day Fourteen: Holy Cow! I thought I would always have skin that didn’t look or feel the way I liked. Since I started VLamorous, my skin feels softer and smoother. I noticed the biggest difference right when it hit day fourteen.



Since I live in the desert, my skin and eye sometimes gets dry and dull. I use VLamorous, and my eyes looks much better and feels like it has more moisture.





The Verdict:

Using the VLamorous combo, removed virtually 90% of all her wrinkles and problem areas. It tightened her face and neck, removing all signs of sagging, aging, and dehydrated skin.

Will This Work For You?

There are plenty of skincare gimmicks out there, and most of them are ridiculously expensive. With so many options it’s only natural for you to be skeptical about the results, and so we don't want to promise our readers anything, we simply want to challenge you to do what Dr. Oz recommended on the show: try it for yourself!

Remember, you need to use both VLamorous in combination for best results.

For your convenience, I have provided the links to the exact products Dr. Oz recommended. As of the writing of this article they are still offering Free Trials of both VLamorous. Use the links below and you will get the lowest possible shipping price as well.

(*Trial bottles running out fast. Claim now before stock expires*)

Note: Brittany used both VLamorous to erase her wrinkles, we suggest to use both products together to get the best results possible.

Update: Only 6 Trials Still Available. Free Trial Promotion Ends: Thursday, March 30, 2017

Receive A Free Bottle Of VLamorous

Take advantage of our exclusive link and pay only $4.95 for shipping!

Risk FREE Trial!

This special offer ends: Thursday, March 30, 2017