After taking money from Kushner family, Cory Booker breaks with DNC position on probe
Jared Kushner, son-in-law and senior adviser to President Trump, allegedly proposed to set-up a secret and secure back-channel communication system at Russian facilities with the aid of the Russian ambassador to the US.

The situation has resulted in Democratic lawmakers and the Democratic National Committee (DNC) calling for Jared Kushner to have his security clearance reviewed and/or revoked.

Rep. Adam Schiff, top Dem on House Intel Committee, calls for review of Jared Kushner’s security clearance #ThisWeek pic.twitter.com/GfLGIvV0D4 Rep. Adam Schiff, top Dem on House Intel Committee, calls for review of Jared Kushner’s security clearance https://t.co/LmsbFWD4Vt — ABC News (@ABC) — ABC News (@ABC) May 28, 2017

However, Sen. Corey Booker (D-NJ) came to Kushner’s However, Sen. Corey Booker (D-NJ) came to Kushner’s defense

On On CNN ‘s “State of the Nation” Dana Bash asked if Booker agreed with the Democratic outrage.

“I think we need to first get to the bottom of it, he needs to answer for what was happening at the time,” Booker replied. “It raises very serious concerns for me. And that could be a potential outcome that I seek, but I want to understand, at least hear from Jared Kushner, as well as the administration, about what was exactly going on there.”

Booker said he was more concerned about patterns of contact with the Russians and other authoritarian leaders.

Yet, Yet, David Sirota noted that the Kushner family and other people affiliated with the Kushner Cos. have donated generously to Booker. In 2013, they gave more than $41,000 to Booker for his Senate run.

That same year Ivanka Trump held a fundraiser for him and in 2014 she That same year Ivanka Trump held a fundraiser for him and in 2014 she gave $20,400.

The relationship between Kushner and Booker goes back to at least 2009 when Kushner gave Booker $20,000 to run for mayor of Newark. Booker also attended the Trump-Kushner wedding that year.

Booker, who has been cited as possibly eyeing a 2020 White House run, has come under fire for being at odds with the party over his positions on corporate matters.

In the 2012 presidential election, he defended then-Republican nominee Mitt Romney and the private equity industry against Democratic President Obama’s criticisms. And recently, he sided with the Republicans and the pharmaceutical industry by preventing Democratic legislation that would allow Americans to buy lower priced drugs from Canada.

Cory Booker took bribes from pharmaceutical CO’S to vote No on cheaper drugs from CANADA. Cory Booker took bribes from pharmaceutical CO’S to vote No on cheaper drugs from CANADA. pic.twitter.com/kbuQmMERbl — Elizabeth (@ElizabethWade44) — Elizabeth (@ElizabethWade44) May 12, 2017

Booker also backed away from talk of a Trump impeachment.

Progressives are livid.