Canada Is Under A Boil Water Advisory After Dangerous E.coli Bacteria Found In the Water
An E. coli infection can lead to serious illness.

Montreal, Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, British Columbia, Manitoba and Saskatchewan tests water on a regular basis to evaluate the quality of the water that the residents use to cook, clean, and drink.

Inspectors made the discovery on Saturday following a routine test. E. coli can cause infections that result in nausea, vomiting, headache, mild fever, severe stomach cramps, and watery or bloody diarrhea.

Though many recover from E.coli infections on their own, some infections result in hospitalizations. This advisory affects 20,900 households, or around 25,700 people.

A boil water advisory is issued when harmful germs (e.g., E. coli bacteria, giardia parasite)may be in a drinking water supply. Drinking water contaminated with these germs can make people and animals very sick. Boiling will kill the germs and make the water safe to drink.

When a boil water advisory has been issued don’t use the tap water to:

 drink

 cook

 make baby formula

 make juice

 make ice

 wash fruits or vegetables

 brush teeth

 fill a wading pool

 give to your pet



During a boil water advisory, use boiled water, bottled water, or water from another safe public supply not affected by the advisory.

Throw away any ice in your freezer made with the water and sanitize the ice cube trays. Make ice with boiled water that’s been cooled.

To boil water, bring it to a rollin g boil for at least 1 minute.

Be careful not to burn yourself or your child. Only boil as much water as you can safely lift without spilling.

To boil water, use a pot placed on the back burner of a stove or a kettle. If you use an electric kettle, make sure you can hold down the automatic shut off switch to keep the water boiling for 1 minute.

After the water has boiled for 1 minute, let it cool and pour it into a clean disinfected container with a cover. Keep it in the refrigerator until you need it.

Stay tuned for updates.