The U.S. Government’s Department of Health Finally Admits That Marijuana Kills Cancer
Throughout history the main reasons human beings willfully kill other human beings are religion and greed. Although it is surprising that people steeped in a religion that worships a “loving god” revels in killing other humans, it is part of the “convert or kill” mindset that one the major Abrahamic religions, Christianity thrives and prospers on. It is not as surprising that human beings kill others out of greed, but for an industry that claims it exists to “save lives and heal infirmity,” it is astonishing that the pursuit of profit drives their pursuit of death and sickness. For the medical industrial complex, there is nothing as terrifying as a cure, or remedy, for a highly profitable and fatal disease like cancer.

It is little surprise that for a couple of decades at the direction of the multi-national pharmaceutical industry, and more recently the for-profit prison and law enforcement industry, the federal government and National Institutes of Health (NIH) have concealed a highly effective and completely natural remedy and relief for cancer. In just the past two weeks, the federal government and NIH have quietly confirmed that cannabis (marijuana) is very effective at killing cancer cells without harming healthy cells like radiation and chemotherapy. In fact, on the NIH It is little surprise that for a couple of decades at the direction of the multi-national pharmaceutical industry, and more recently the for-profit prison and law enforcement industry, the federal government and National Institutes of Health (NIH) have concealed a highly effective and completely natural remedy and relief for cancer. In just the past two weeks, the federal government and NIH have quietly confirmed that cannabis (marijuana) is very effective at killing cancer cells without harming healthy cells like radiation and chemotherapy. In fact, on the NIH website devoted to the hideous disease, Cancer.gov, they published the truth about marijuana and its effectiveness at combatting cancer in a stunning reversal of over four decades of deliberate fear-mongering and propaganda portraying the common weed as dangerous; all to satisfy the greed of the pharmaceutical industry, prison system, and law enforcement agencies at the local, state, and federal level.

What is even more encouraging is that although the NIH has known for a long time, with mountains of empirical evidence, that the compounds in marijuana, cannabinoids (delta-9 THC and cannabidiol [CBD]), are effective at killing cancer cells, they have advising that cannabinoids are useful in treating cancer and its side effects by smoking, eating it in a baked product, drinking herbal teas, or even spraying it under the tongue .” The U.S. Department of Health also made a partial list of other highly-beneficial medicinal uses of marijuana such as reducing anti-inflammatory activity, blocking cancerous cell growth, relieving muscle spasms in multiple sclerosis sufferers, as an effective anti-viral agent, an anti-bacterial and preventing the growth of blood vessels that supply tumors. What is even more encouraging is that although the NIH has known for a long time, with mountains of empirical evidence, that the compounds in marijuana, cannabinoids (delta-9 THC and cannabidiol [CBD]), are effective at killing cancer cells, they have discovered how it happens. After preaching since the 1970s that marijuana had absolutely no medicinal effect or value for human beings, and putting the weed in the same classification as heroin, the Department of Health’s National Cancer Institute is now “advising that cannabinoids are useful in treating cancer and its side effects by smoking, eating it in a baked product, drinking herbal teas, or even spraying it under the tongue.” The U.S. Department of Health also made a partial list of other highly-beneficial medicinal uses of marijuana such as reducing anti-inflammatory activity, blocking cancerous cell growth, relieving muscle spasms in multiple sclerosis sufferers, as an effective anti-viral agent, an anti-bacterial and preventing the growth of blood vessels that supply tumors.

Some of the other NIH studies have shown that cannabinoids reduce the risk of colon cancer, and are effective in its treatment. One study revealed that delta-9-THC killed or damaged hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer), and killed cancer molecules in “non-small cell lung and breast cancer cells.” One specific study of cannabidiol (CBD) in estrogen receptors showed “it caused cancer cell death while having no effect on normal, healthy breast cells.” Even in advanced cancer stages where it was not diagnosed early, when given as a supplement with chemotherapy, CBD and THC greatly enhance the effectiveness of chemotherapy as well as restoring appetite and relieving nausea.

Obviously with cancer as a major killer of Americans, its treatment is big business and even bigger money for the pharmaceutical industry and “ treatment centers .” As many people have rightly suspected for years, the cure for cancer, or even a more effective and less-stressful treatment regimen, has been held hostage by powerful entities just so the pharmaceutical and hospital industry can continue to raking in hundreds-of-billions of dollars a year to “fight the disease” with radiation, pills, and numerous and endless surgical procedures. For example, on its own, the National Cancer Institute has taken in and spent over $90 billion allegedly trying to find a cure for cancer. The abomination is that the organization knew all along that a profuse amount of well-documented scientific studies proved that a 3,000 year-old “medicinal weed” any American could grow in their garden was effectively killing cancer cells, shrinking malignant tumors, and relieving the effects of the disease. Cannabis is also proven to reduce opioid (painkiller) usage by an average of 47% that drug companies could not allow to become common knowledge. It is likely why the reports that the NIH, Health Department, and National Cancer Center began advising of the weed’s benefits was only in British media, but not America.

There was hardly any reporting in June that President Obama additional review ” of the Public Health Service (PHS). The There was hardly any reporting in June that President Obama eased restrictions on further and more comprehensive cannabis research by eliminating a major roadblock to open up substantial research on the weed’s medical value when it removed “additional review” of the Public Health Service (PHS). The last thing the law enforcement and highly-profitable prison industry wanted was for marijuana’s medicinal value to become public knowledge and face public pressure to decriminalize the weed. There is too much money in incarcerating Americans for using a weed for recreation that may also relieve a plethora of infirmities. As much as the pharmaceutical industrial complex wants to continue getting extremely rich off of slowly killing cancer patients with ineffective and expensive treatments, the law enforcement industry thrives on the continued criminalization of a common weed.

What is appalling really, especially for those who have witnessed or experienced firsthand the horrible suffering of cancer patients, is that there have been several scientific studies over the past twenty years, at least, that produced empirical data proving the effectiveness of cannabinoids in killing cancer. Still, because there is huge money in perpetuating the disease with ineffective drugs, fraudulent treatment centers, and manufacturing radiological machines it took until this past April for the United States government’s National Institute on Drug Abuse to revise their publications and admit the many, many benefits of cannabis for medicinal use.

It is likely that every American in this country has known, or lost, a loved one to the horrid disease and it is absolutely despicable, and frankly evil, that the medical industry helped keep an incredibly inexpensive and highly-effective cancer-killing drug out of reach. It is unclear who in government is responsible for helping conceal the now-proven medicinal benefits of weed, or who in government revealed that for at least a decade the National Institutes of Health and Department of Health have known that instead of being a “ dangerous drug ” like heroin, marijuana kills cancer cells and dog forbid may put a smile on a cancer patient’s face. Marijuana may not be a miracle drug, but with every new revelation that it does so much more than make a user hungry, tired or laugh it is easy to comprehend why every American is not growing and benefitting from its incredible health benefits; keeping it illegal is making the pharmaceutical industrial complex and prison industry incredibly rich while people are suffering and dying.