FBI: Pizzagate Arrests ‘Imminent’ In Washington Pedophile Ring Bust
Share 41 40 1 Tweet reddit Upvote Downvotesubmit

An FBI whistleblower has confirmed that 30 politicians and 40 other individuals are to be arrested in Washington D.C. and New York City in connection with the “Pizzagate” pedophile ring, and more suspects are under investigation as the investigation continues “branching out in unexpected directions.“

The insider at the Federal Bureau of Investigation claims that the FBI has just finished (3 pm 2/2/17) submitting paperwork to the Department of Justice in preparation for the “Pizzagate” arrests which will begin as soon as Jeff Sessions is confirmed as Attorney General.

Mr. Sessions has been briefed on the far-reaching investigation and all of the evidence three weeks ago.

Investigators say they have held files on high-ranking politicians for years. However, they didn’t find a concrete lead until November 2016, when they monitored three suspects after they were allegedly caught using coded language in an internet forum created by the FBI to trap pedophiles.

The police Pizzagate investigation then branched out from there, eventually uncovering a tangled web of crime thriving in Washington D.C.’s corridors of power.

“I’ve never been involved in an investigation that kept branching out in so many unexpected directions,” he said.

According to the anonymous insider:

Information was finally submitted from the FBI to the DOJ today at 3 pm. Mr. Sessions was briefed 3 weeks ago as to the investigation in its entirety. Once assumes his position, arrest warrants will be signed, and arrests will be made. This is also why the Democratic Party in DC has been fighting the Sessions vote. Panic.

Furthermore, starting Monday or Tuesday of next week, you will begin to start seeing arrests of individuals. Over 30 politicians (many are household names), and over 40 other individuals throughout DC, VA and also a handful in NYC. Some may off their selves before they are apprehended, so keep an eye out for that over the weekend, and you will know they are involved in some manner.

The child pedophilia ring/sex trafficking arrests California was not related, at least no evidence yet to suggest that it was. May be wrong has people begin to talk, or make deals on the matter.

Although the insider refused to reveal all the names on the list of those to be arrested by the FBI, they did reveal that Democrat and US Senator, Chuck Ellis Schumer, was one of the high-profile names that will be arrested, as well as Senator Tim Kaine and former Attorney General of Connecticut Richard Blumenthal.

Sen. Jeff Sessions should have his role as Attorney General confirmed next we after he survived his first test floor vote on Thursday, despite almost every Democrat in the chamber voting against Mr. Sessions.

Democratic leaders said their vote wasn’t a statement on Mr. Sessions himself, but rather on the policies they feared he would pursue at the Justice Department, as it’s widely believed that Sessions will bring charges against Hillary Clinton.

Democrats also claim they are not convinced Mr. Sessions will be an independent check on Mr. Trump.

.