I was at Trump's speech today and what CNN is reporting is BULL***T -…
Ok, I was there, front row, attending the Donald Trump event with an audience of retired military leaders. The group was comprised of men and women who have served our nation in combat duty from World War II to the present. The event was originally supposed to be closed to the media, but the decision was made to open it up to the media. And of course, the media did not disappoint by spinning something out of nothing as the video shows of Mr. Trump speaking.

As reported by the Clinton News Network (CNN), “Donald Trump suggested Monday that American soldiers and veterans who commit suicide do so because they can’t handle the post-traumatic stress of war.

“When you talk about the mental health problems, when people come back from war and combat and they see things that maybe a lot of folks in this room have seen many times over and you’re strong and you can handle it but a lot of people can’t handle it. They see horror stories, they see events you couldn’t see in a movie, nobody would believe it,” Trump said Monday, during a panel interview at the Retired American Warriors PAC, in Herndon, Virginia.

Trump’s surrogates said the Republican nominee’s comments were taken out of context, and blamed the media for construing his words. Trump adviser and retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn accused the media reporting on Trump’s comments of, acting as ” the propaganda arm of Hillary Clinton.”

“Mr. Trump was highlighting the challenges veterans face when returning home after serving their country. He has always respected the service and sacrifice of our military men and women—proposing reforms to Veteran Affairs to adequately address the various issues veterans face when they return home,” FLynn said in a statement. Trump senior adviser Sarah Huckabee Sanders also said his comments were taken out of context, adding that he was the only candidate in the race placing a strong emphasis on veterans.

What abject liars and deceivers these people are! On my salute hand, trigger finger, I wear the #22Kill.com ring, that signifies the 22 veterans on average who each day are taking their lives. Mr. Trump stated the obvious: that the challenges cast upon these young men and women by a system that lets them down seems too great to overcome.

I was recently asked to call a veteran and talk to him because he had spoken to his dear friend about suicide. I simply confided to the veteran to be strong, courageous and that we needed him to stay in the fight, take a knee for a moment of rest, but ruck up and I prayed for him. I got an email back that the simple call had enabled him to turn the corner.

The Apostle Paul wrote about this in 2 Corinthians 12:9-10 (NIV), “But he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.” Therefore I will boast all the more gladly about my weaknesses, so that Christ’s power may rest on me. That is why, for Christ’s sake, I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, in difficulties. For when I am weak, then I am strong.”

We all have times of weakness, of stress, and for some we dig deeper and rise above it – and some find it more difficult.

But for the despicable “journalists” of CNN to try and make something of Mr. Trump’s statement represents the lowest of lows.

Why didn’t this article refer to the deplorable situation in our Veterans Administration system, especially with the scandals of Barack Obama, and how these men and women are being let down at their most vulnerable moment?

Why didn’t this article refer to Hillary Clinton speaking of the VA crisis and scandal as some manufactured issue by the GOP? Obama and Clinton are the heartless souls who couldn’t care less about our veterans — but corrupt accomplices at the liberal progressive media will do anything to save Obama and Clinton, and create a chasm between veterans and Donald Trump.

I was there, and Trump’s statement didn’t elicit any response from us, the audience of retired combat veterans. We saw him as someone concerned about the horrific treatment of our men and women in uniform, the deplorable state of our military, and the insidious ideological social agenda being cast upon our military by a president who cannot define our enemy, militant Islamic terrorism. CNN has shown their bias, as if we thought anything different.

 Trump to Veterans: US Military is Depleted Donald Trump is telling a veterans group that the United States' military is "depleted" and says he will expand the nation's armed forces. Trump made the pledge at a Retired American Warriors conference in Herndon, Virginia on Monday. (Oct. 3) AP    Go Behind the Scenes at Cam Newton’s September GQ Cover Shoot

China sees first Tesla autopilot crash

Perseid meteor shower time-lapse

Trump to Veterans: US Military is Depleted

Kanye West Ends Concert for Family Emergency

Tennessee Hail Mary Stuns Georgia In Athens

Reese Witherspoon and Daughter Ava Phillippe Look More Alike Than Ever -- See the New Pic!

Alec Baldwin to Take On Donald Trump

Lamar Jackson, Deshaun Watson: The Next Gen Mobile QBs

Breaking down the Dodgers' postseason chances

Is it time for fantasy football owners to hop on the Carson Wentz bandwagon?

Donald Trump accuses Google of suppressing bad Hillary Clinton news

Back to the hot seat

Why Donald Rumsfeld is supporting Donald Trump in 2016 Presidential election

Sports World Reacts To Lamar Jackson's Record Setting Performance

Michael Strahan Says He's 'Loving' Move to 'Good Morning America'

Heisman Highlight Reel: Week 2

Meet the 2017 Guinness World Records holders

Hillary Clinton slams Donald Trump on 'birther' claims

Twitter’s NFL broadcast scores

Clinton campaign calls out Trump's 'deplorable' comments

Adrian Peterson

Ezekiel Elliott

Mark Ingram

DeAngelo Williams

Jamaal Charles

Georgia Names Greyson Lambert Starter

Amy Schumer Shuts Down Sexist Heckler in Epic Fashion

Ryan Lochte Gets Dumped By Speedo

James Corden Sings Surprise Duet On Stage With Coldplay, Pays Tribute to Prince

Brad Kaaya: Miami Hurricanes Next Heisman Winner?

Georgian Concerned by 'Never Trump' Split in GOP

White House confident in legality of transgender bathroom rules

Watch Cam Newton Show You How to Shop Like an MVP

Louisiana Lafayette Players Lift Car To Help Flood Victims

Taylor Swift Donates $1 Million to Louisiana Flood Relief

James Conner: An Inspiration To His Pitt Teammates

Olympic Cheat Meals with Ryan Lochte, Gabby Douglas and Team USA

James Franco Channels His Inner Riff Raff Again

Deondre Francois FSU QB Highlights

Go Behind the Scenes at Cam Newton’s September GQ Cover Shoot

China sees first Tesla autopilot crash

Perseid meteor shower time-lapse

Trump to Veterans: US Military is Depleted

Kanye West Ends Concert for Family Emergency

Tennessee Hail Mary Stuns Georgia In Athens  To view this page ensure that Adobe Flash Player version 10.2.0 or greater is installed.      http://launch.newsinc.com/share.html?trackingGroup=91854&siteSection=allenwest&videoId=31466668  BACK Embed <iframe width="590" height="332" src="http://launch.newsinc.com/?type=VideoPlayer/Single&widgetId=1&trackingGroup=69016&playlistId=19132&siteSection=allenwest&videoId=31466668" frameborder="no" scrolling="no" noresize marginwidth="0" marginheight="0"></iframe> Privacy Policy | Terms of Use

There are those who’ve raised their right hand to serve and protect this nation, and some do find it hard to cope with the aftermath of combat. And they need help, not the dismissal and disregard as Obama and Clinton have shown. Yes, there are those of us for whom combat does not affect, we find our strength to cope, but when we have a VA system that puts veterans’ suffering at a moment of weakness on hold, or over-medicates them – that’s the real story, which CNN has no interest in covering.

This story is deceitful and should not be regarded whatsoever. It’s apparent that Donald Trump isn’t just running against Hillary Clinton…he’s running against the progressive socialist machine, and that includes the Alinksy spin masters at CNN.

“There’s a reason that hundreds of military leaders around the country have endorsed and signed on and said in that room today to express their support for Donald Trump,” she told CNN’s John Berman. The number of suicides and other grave effects from PTSD in the military has skyrocketed, causing alarm both inside the military and in the public at large.”Ok, let me explain something to these liberal progressive media chuckleheads, having served in several combat zones myself. Yes, there are those who are able to deal with the rigors and challenges of combat better than others. That has been the case throughout the history of combat. To try and insinuate anything out of Mr. Trump’s comments other than what he said at face value is just evidence that he did well at the event — and the objective to find some bit of dirt had to be met.