BREAKING BOMBSHELL : Multiple Reports Tie Clinton’s Podesta Brothers to Child Abduction Case of Madeline McCann
HOLY SMOKES…. Before you read this, please take a deep breath and sit down as this information is chilling. To proceed with the appropriate caution, this story is developing and there is not yet confirmation yet that these reports are 100% accurate and will yield a conviction but take a look at the circumstantial evidence and decide for yourself.

Cassandra Fairbanks of WeareChange.org reports

On Sunday evening, side-by-side images of Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman John Podesta and his brother Tony next to police sketches of potential suspects in a 2007 kidnapping of a three-year-old girl took over the internet.

The resemblance is striking, and Reddit, 4chan, and Twitter rapidly took up the case.

Madeleine Beth McCann should have celebrated her 13th birthday with her family in England this year, but she vanished from her bed during a family vacation to Portugal in 2003. The case gripped the entire world, becoming one of the most high profile missing persons cases in history. Coverage of her kidnapping was comparable to the press interest in the death of Princess Diana.

The circumstantial evidence goes far beyond the striking resemblance.

John Podesta’s first email on Wikileaks is dated May 4th 2007.

Per Wikipedia Madeline disappeared May 3rd 2007.

Did John Podesta WIPE HIS EMAILS the day after Madeline disappeared to destroy evidence?

The abduction occurred in Portugal, where Wikileaks emails show was a destination Podesta traveled to.

In addition, extensive evidence points to the Podesta Brothers having close connections to those involved with potential crimes or at least bizarre rituals involving underaged children.

Watch this video:

The Clinton foundation has long standing ties to convicted Haiti Child Trafficker Laura Silsby.

We also know for a fact John Podesta, Hillary’s Campaign Chair, has close family ties to convicted serial child molester Denny Hastert

In the email below, Podesta’s brother mentions Denny, saying he’s remained “CLOSE” to him.

Denny Hastert was a wrestling coach who was referred to by his sentencing judge as a “serial child molester.”

These are the people who the Hillary campaign, and their family members call friends and keep in “close touch with.”

It’s disgusting.

Recently former Navy Seal Erik Prince told Breitbart News that according to one of his “well-placed sources” in the New York Police Department, “The NYPD wanted to do a press conference announcing the warrants and the additional arrests they were making” in the Anthony Weiner investigation, but received “huge pushback” from the Justice Department.

Prince claimed he had insider knowledge of the investigation that could help explain why FBI Director James Comey had to announce he was reopening the investigation into Clinton’s email server last week.

“Because of Weinergate and the sexting scandal, the NYPD started investigating it. Through a subpoena, through a warrant, they searched his laptop, and sure enough, found those 650,000 emails. They found way more stuff than just more information pertaining to the inappropriate sexting the guy was doing,” Prince claimed.

“They found State Department emails. They found a lot of other really damning criminal information, including money laundering, including the fact that Hillary went to this sex island with convicted pedophile Jeffrey Epstein. Bill Clinton went there more than 20 times. Hillary Clinton went there at least six times,” he said.

“The amount of garbage that they found in these emails, of criminal activity by Hillary, by her immediate circle, and even by other Democratic members of Congress was so disgusting they gave it to the FBI, and they said, ‘We’re going to go public with this if you don’t reopen the investigation and you don’t do the right thing with timely indictments,’” Prince explained.

“I believe – I know, and this is from a very well-placed source of mine at 1PP, One Police Plaza in New York – the NYPD wanted to do a press conference announcing the warrants and the additional arrests they were making in this investigation, and they’ve gotten huge pushback, to the point of coercion, from the Justice Department, with the Justice Department threatening to charge someone that had been unrelated in the accidental heart attack death of Eric Garner almost two years ago. That’s the level of pushback the Obama Justice Department is doing against actually seeking justice in the email and other related criminal matters,” Prince said.

Erik’s claim parallels what Steve Pieczenik states about the Clinton Pedophilia Connection.

Were the Podestas involved with the abduction of Madeline Mccann? We do not know for sure yet.

One thing is for certain. The mainstream media will try to hide this bombshell information and do everything they can to protect their Globalist puppet Hillary Clinton.

They will also likely call this a “vast right wing conspiracy.”

But just remember, this started as a “vast right wing conspiracy” as well.

EDITOR’S UPDATE : #MadelineMcCann is trending on twitter. The people want to know the TRUTH!