WikiLeaks CONFIRMS Hillary Sold Weapons to ISIS... Then Drops Another…
Mary ~ How is a person supposed to ‘fact-check’ information such as this, when the majority of our current administration AND CONGRESS are corrupted, covering up these illegal actions? Do you seriously think they’re going to say “OK, you caught us! Let us clear out our desks and office! We’ll report to the local police station on Monday!”….???? Are you so naïve, that you believe Obama and Hillary did this all by themselves? Corruption in our government is found ON BOTH SIDES OF THE ISLE! With the majority of our government in bed with these criminals!! There are only a handful of people that have shown to be even remotely ”honest” in our current government. Trey Goudy is one of the few, for he believes in following the Constitution, supporting it and how our government was/is supposed to be administered! He has been doing his best to hold EVERYONE ACCOUNTABLE, for their illegal actions. However, he’s been lied to, by those in collusion of corruption, that is so rampant, it’s systemic!! NO ONE is going to admit the truths, for they will go down too! Seriously, what you’re proposing is like asking the successful bank robber(s) to turn himself/themselves in and admit their crimes….Never going to happen! Here’s a question for you…..Why would a man go out on a limb, so far as to force him into exile, where he’s had to live the last 5+ years within an embassy building? Where he doesn’t dare go outside, for fear of being killed, or taken into custody, where he’ll eventually be put away, or 6 feet under!…..Why would a person risk their life, if it wasn’t to expose the REAL TRUTHS??? Those ‘TRUTHS’ which the perpetrators/criminals will do absolutely anything to keep them hidden!I bet you’re one of those whom deny that the new world order doesn’t exist….Right? Well, here’s a news flash…..They’re real, it exists, they are the globalists, and the UN is their one world government! They now make the laws for the world to follow. Anyone (countries, or people) whom oppose them….Find their countries being attacked, or the person ends up in prison or dead!But, don’t take my word about it….Hear the globalists themselves admit to the existence of the ‘new world order’! It’s no longer conspiracy theory! George H. W. Bush, Henry Kissinger, Joe Biden, Micheil Saakasjvili, Bill Clinton, Strobe Talbot, Richard Nixon, Tony Blair, Gordon Brown, Ricardo Lagos, BARRACK OBAMA, Al Gore, Stephen Harper, John Kerry, David Gergen, Paul Martin, David Rockefellar, George Soros, Jacob Rothschild, ALL SPEAK OF AND REFER TO IT! Hear it from their own mouths at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R2c9PMV3ZJg Do you remember Obama saying that America MUST GIVE UP SOME OF IT”S SOVEREIGNTY, to a higher power…That being the UN? So that America can become a part of the global world. That global world is the new world order!Even the POPE is part of this order. Do you remember his speeches, when he came to the US last year? In which he said “The American people MUST ACCEPT less in jobs, housing, and land use!” ….”They MUST ALSO ACCEPT selfless servitude to others!” Then when he addressed the UN meeting in New York, he said to the world leaders there “You must accept, adopt, and sign onto the UN’s 2030 Agenda document. Then you must take those mandates of the UN’s uncontestable laws for the world, and implement them into your governance of your people!” But, again don’t take my word for it….Look up his speeches and watch them in their entirety. Then let that sink in! After which, ask yourself why a sovereign nation, America, or any other sovereign nation, should allow a foreign entity to dictate to them what they can. or cannot do! Research what countries are members of the UN. Notice that those that are not members, all have had foreign forces invade them, for some reason or another! With the exception of North Korea and Russia!Then research the UN’s policy on their initiative of ‘GLOBAL DECOLONIZATION’. They’re decolonizing the world! The UN mandates that no country can deny ‘free migration’ of the world’s people. That’s the real reason why our American government won’t enforce our immigration laws, or why it supports sanctuary cities/strong cities, etc.Do you not realize that our forefathers didn’t have a revolution, to free this nation from foreign control, to give it’s CITIZENS FREEDOM TO CHOOSE AND DICTATE THEIR OWN WAY OF LIFE AND GOVERNANCE, to have it’s sovereignty be given back to a foreign government entity!! The USA can retain it’s sovereignty, and still be a part of the global market…..Or, it should be allowed to! But, instead, over the last century our government has been in collusion to give up America’s sovereignty, and have it allow a foreign entity (the UN) to dictate it’s laws and policies, even when they are in DIRECT CONFLICT OF OUR CONSTITUTION!!! Their power in our government has now become overwhelmingly powerful, and if the American people don’t give up some of our sovereignty, taking it’s orders from the UN, then the UN will send in their international security forces and make us! There are a majority of those in our government that will help them to do this. That’s what we’re facing in all this!I have another question for you…Do you like working your butt off, to afford to take care of yourself and family, to have our government say that you MUST also give more taxes than we already do, to help pay for another’s keep? Because basically that’s what’s happening now. Our taxes go up, costs of merchandise, food, healthcare, home costs, EVERYTHING, has gone up! They claim higher prices are due to raising costs associated with manufacturing the products etc. Yet, many manufacturers are taking their manufacturing over to other countries, because it’s cheaper to make them there….right? So, if they’re making them cheaper…Why are costs going up? It’s because when you pay for something, you’re paying for someone else, probably in another country, or someone else here in America, to get it too (socialism instead of independence and self responsibility/accountability)….But, they can’t afford to pay for it, for some reason or another! Where do you think our government comes up with the monies they give to the UN, or other countries, etc.? What we pay in income taxes doesn’t cover all the monies going out. It’s one thing to want to donate willingly, to the needy. But, to force your family to have to pay for other’s shortcomings, by taking from what you earned for your family’s needs is another! Why is our government taking the citizen’s monies (taxes, etc) and giving it to people that are NOT CITIZENS, or another country, where their governments are putting most of the funds into their own pockets, and not much is really going to the people that need it? Instead of our own government taking care of it’s own citizens, it’s giving our money away, while our own citizens suffer! It’s forced socialism….and THAT’S JUST PLAIN NOT RIGHT!Do you know what the Bilderberg Group is? It’s the world’s wealthy, that get together every year, and they decide what they’ll do for the next year….Planning what they will allow to happen, for everyone else! They plot how they will continue to keep the average person busy, by them trying to make ends meet and afford to take care of and feed their families, so the average person doesn’t have time to investigate what and whom they are…..All the while they’re determining what the world’s people are allowed to have, or do! They find ways to get more money out of the common person, one way or another, to help fund their one world order plan.SO MARY….HOW ARE WE TRULY SUPPOSED TO VERIFY ASSANGE’S EVIDENCE, WHEN THE GLOBAL ELITISTS WILL DO ANYTHING TO PROTECT THEIR POWER AND PLAYERS?? WHY WOULD ASSANGE PUT HIMSELF IN DANGER AND EXILE OF A FOREIGN EMBASSY, TO TRY AND GET THE TRUTH OUT TO THE PEOPLE, IF IT WASN’T TRUTHS?? Could it be that he doesn’t want to live under tyranny, or forced global socialism, and he’s trying to wake the people up, before it’s too late? Of course the global elitists want to smear his ‘reputation’ and hope the people won’t listen to him, or become wise to their plans for the world’s people!Another question….Does our Constitution not state that a person must be a legal US CITIZEN to be able to vote in our elections? When we have a massive amount of illegals in this country, or people here on work visas, but are NOT a legal citizen, WHY WOULDN’T OUR GOVERNMENT WANT TO ENSURE THAT ONLY LEGAL CITIZENS ARE ALLOWED TO VOTE? Do you honestly believe that those here illegally, or whom are NOT legal citizens, will obey the law and not vote, simply because they’re honest and will abide by the ‘honor system’? Or, if our government won’t put in some sort of system to protect against illegal voting, that those illegal voters won’t try to vote and vote for those whom promise to give themselves legality to remain here, with social benefits, at the cost of legal citizens? We are currently facing global socialism vs legal citizen’s sovereignty and rights! Obama WAS NOT JOKING when he said the end of the Republic never looked so good, at the correspondent’s dinner! This election will be the determining factor of whether our country retains it’s sovereignty as a Republic, or becomes under rule of the UN’s global uncontestable laws, with our Constitution and it’s laws replaced….No longer a sovereign Republic!