Department of the Environment and Energy
From Assessing Invasive Animals in Australia (2008) National Land & Water Resources Audit, Canberra

Download the map as a PDF file (PDF - 771.49 KB) Map showing locations of feral cats in AustraliaFrom Assessing Invasive Animals in Australia (2008) National Land & Water Resources Audit, Canberra

Feral cats threaten the survival of over 100 native species in Australia. They have caused the extinction of some ground-dwelling birds and small to medium-sized mammals. They are a major cause of decline for many land-based endangered animals such as the bilby, bandicoot, bettong and numbat. Many native animals are struggling to survive so reducing the number killed by this introduced predator will allow their populations to grow.

Feral cats can carry infectious diseases which can be transmitted to native animals, domestic livestock and humans.

Feral cats are the same species as domestic cats, however they live and reproduce in the wild and survive by hunting or scavenging. They are found all over Australia in all habitats, including forests, woodlands, grasslands, wetlands and arid areas. The map illustrates the estimated abundance of feral cats across the country.

Feral cats are predominantly solitary and nocturnal, spending most of the day in the safety of a shelter such as a rabbit burrow, log or rock pile. They are carnivores, generally eating small mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish and insects depending on their availability.

More general information on feral cats:

Key threatening process under the EPBC Act

Predation by feral cats is listed as a key threatening process under section 188 of Australia’s national environment law, the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 ( EPBC Act).

A threatening process threatens or may threaten the survival, abundance or evolutionary development of a native species or ecological community. If it leads to the further endangerment of a listed native species or ecological community, or if it adversely affects two or more listed threatened species or ecological communities, the threatening process is eligible to be treated as a key threatening process. Once a key threatening process is listed under the EPBC Act a threat abatement plan can be put into place if it is shown to be 'a feasible, effective and efficient way' to abate the threatening process.

The first feral cat threat abatement plan was prepared in 1999 and updated in 2008.

Threat Abatement Plan

The Threat abatement plan for predation by feral cats (2015) sets out a national framework to guide and coordinate Australia’s response to the impacts of feral cats on biodiversity. It identifies the research, management and other actions needed to ensure the long-term survival of native species and ecological communities affected by predation by feral cats.

Cat eating a crimson rosella

Copyright C Potter

Threat Abatement Plan for predation by feral cats - July 2015

National declaration: feral cats as pests

At the Meeting of Environment Ministers (Melbourne, 15 July 2015), Ministers endorsed the National declaration of feral cats as pests . As part of this declaration, Ministers agreed to review arrangements within their respective jurisdictions and, where necessary, to remove unnecessary barriers to effective and humane control of feral cats. Ministers also agreed to consider feral cat management as a priority in threatened species recovery programs, and to pursue the development of a national best practice approach to the keeping of domestic cats.

Review of the Threat Abatement Plan

In 2014, a five yearly review of the Threat abatement plan for predation by feral cats found some significant advances in feral cat research and control since 2008.

The use of remote sensing cameras and GPS tracking collars have improved ease of monitoring and in the near future, the availability of two new baits will add to the tools available to control feral cats. The eradication of feral cats from two Australian islands is complete and on a further two islands, eradication is in progress. The residents of Christmas Island are addressing the threat through a long-term programme to eradicate feral cats and phase out domestic cat ownership on their island.

The Minister for the Environment noted the review of the Threat abatement plan for predation by feral cats in November 2014. He agreed to the drafting of a variation of the threat abatement plan.The Minister for the Environment released the Draft varied Threat abatement plan for predation by feral cats for public comment in April 2015. The 2015 threat abatement plan was made on 13 July 2015.

Visit www.feralscan.org.au FERAL CAT SCAN - Free app Record Feral Cat activity Have you seen a feral cat recently? Record feral cat management activities, including feral cat sightings, eradication and impacts on native species via FeralCatScan – a free app available for download onto iPhone and Android devices. Read more about FeralCatScan

National feral cat workshop

The Department of the Environment and the Invasive Animals Cooperative Research Centre held a National Feral Cat Workshop in Canberra on 21-22 April 2015. Australia’s leading feral cat experts presented their latest research and discussed key measures for the threat abatement plan including impacts, monitoring, control tools, management strategies and community engagement.

Challenges in controlling feral cats

Control of feral cats is challenging as they are found in very low densities over large home ranges and are shy, making them difficult to locate.

The current control methods of shooting and trapping feral cats are quite difficult, expensive and time consuming and require skilled staff. The most effective form of feral cat control over large areas is poison baiting.

Poison baits intended for feral cats must be laid on the ground (as cats, unlike other feral species such as foxes, will not dig up a buried bait).

The Western Australian Government has developed the Eradicat® bait for feral cats for use in Western Australia. This bait comprises a small kangaroo and chicken sausage injected with a synthetic toxin known as 1080 which replicates a naturally-occurring poison found in some plant species in Western Australia. Many native animals in the region have developed resistance to this toxin.

In the northern and eastern states of Australia, poison baits lying on the ground can present a significant hazard to wildlife species. The Department of the Environment has developed new baits for feral cats called Curiosity® and Hisstory® that is designed to minimise or remove this hazard.

Curiosity® bait for feral cats

The Curiosity® bait for feral cats has been a long-term $5.1 million project to develop a humane, broad-scale toxic bait to control feral cats in conservation areas.

Interior of a Curiosity bait showing a toxic pellet

The Curiosity® bait for feral cats comprises a small meat-based sausage containing a small hard plastic pellet encapsulating a humane toxin. Cats do not have molar teeth and tend to chew their food less so they may swallow portions of the sausage including the pellet. Most Australian native animals nibble and chew their food and are likely to reject the pellet. The pellet is designed to dissolve in the cat’s stomach and deliver a rapid dose of the toxin.

The Curiosity® bait for feral cats uses a new humane toxin called para-aminopropiophenone, or PAPP, which is considered best-practice world-wide. In brief, the toxicant, PAPP, converts the animal’s red blood cells to a form that cannot carry oxygen, causing death through oxygen starvation to the brain and other vital organs. It is considered to be humane and death takes minutes to hours. The RSPCA have indicated that PAPP is a clear improvement in humaneness over previous toxins. The mode of action means that secondary poisoning of any other animals from consuming a carcass of a cat that ate a Curiosity® bait containing PAPP is much less likely than when using previously employed toxins.

Testing of Curiosity®

To ensure that Curiosity® baits will be effective in reducing feral cat numbers in the field, various tests including laboratory, cage trials and field trials in different parts of Australia have been conducted. The outcomes of each of these tests have resulted in additional improvements to the bait to ensure that optimal outcomes are achieved — the final bait composition has achieved efficiency rates (reduction in feral cat numbers) of up to 80 per cent in ideal field conditions. In the controlled situation of pen trials on feral cats for the final formulation and others on preliminary formulations. The testing has demonstrated that 97% of the cats voluntarily consuming a Curiosity® bait died.

Optimal conditions have been specified for the bait packaging to maximise outcomes for land managers, including using the bait at times when feral cats are food stressed, such as in winter.

Field efficacy trial reports

Other trials using Curiosity® bait for feral cats

Use in the eradication of feral cats from Tasman Island, Tasmania in 2010. The Tasmanian Parks and Wildlife Service has produced a video on the eradication of feral cats from Tasman Island - Tasman Island Natural Values Restoration Project - removing feral cats

Field efficacy testing Curiosity® bait for feral cats French Island, Victoria 2008. There is no stand-alone report of this field efficacy study. In summary, a 60 km2 component of French Island National park was baited in Autumn 2008. 75 per cent of the feral cats fitted with transmitter collars died as a result of bait consumption.

Non-target species assessment

A desktop assessment has been conducted to assess the risks to non-target vertebrate species in Australia from Curiosity® bait for feral cats.

Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority registration

The Curiosity® bait for feral cats is under assessment by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA) for registration as an agricultural chemical product for vertebrate pest control.

If registration is successful, it will be classified as a schedule 7 toxin and sales will be restricted. This means that Curiosity® baits will only be supplied to, and used by, appropriately trained and authorised persons. State and territory government authorities may also apply restrictions.

Request for expressions of Interest - Commercialisation of Curiosity® bait for feral cats

The Department of the Environment and Energy sought expressions of interest from entities interested in manufacturing and selling the Curiosity bait for feral cats in 2018.

Hisstory® bait for feral cats

The Hisstory® bait for feral cats has been developed to complement the Curiosity® bait for feral cats. Hisstory® baits are similar to Curiosity® baits in being a small meat-based sausage containing a small hard plastic pellet encapsulating the toxin. In this case the toxin is sodium fluroacetate or 1080.

Like the Curiosity® bait, minimising the hazard to wildlife species is based on most Australian animals nibbling and chewing their food and being likely to reject the pellet. However, there are a few animals that eat their food whole and will eat a bait and pellet. Of those animals, goannas are highly susceptible to Curiosity’s PAPP toxin — this potential hazard to goannas can be mitigated in southern Australia by limiting baiting to cooler months when goannas are in torpor. Further north, the potential hazard is mitigated by using the 1080 toxin. While goannas are susceptible to the PAPP toxin, they are tolerant to a cat-sized dose of 1080 toxin. This means Hisstory® baits will be suitable for sites in northern Australia where goannas are typically active all year round.

Testing of Hisstory®

Testing of the Hisstory® bait is necessary to ensure the bait is effective on feral cats and ensure the risks to native species is minimised as we expect.

A number of trials, both in captive and open situations, will be conducted.

Once the Department is satisfied with the testing, a registration will be sought from the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority as an agricultural chemical product for vertebrate pest control.

Field efficacy trial reports