University at Albany's East Campus Biotech Company Makes Major Fibromyalgia Discovery

Researchers Reveal a Rational Biological Source of Pain in the Skin of Patients with Fibromyalgia

RENSSELAER, N.Y. (June 20, 2013) -- A major breakthrough in fibromyalgia was discovered by Integrated Tissue Dynamics LLC (INTiDYN), a biotechnology company housed and supported at the University at Albany’s East Campus in Rensselaer, New York.

Published in the peer reviewed journal Pain Medicine, the official journal of the American Academy of Pain Medicine, the study details the first physically detectable pathology providing a logical rationale for the debilitating symptoms of fibromyalgia.

Fibromyalgia

The unique microscopic analyses were conducted at INTiDYN by former and current Albany Medical College researchers, Frank L. Rice, PhD, and Phillip J. Albrecht, PhD. INTiDYN was founded at the UAlbany's East Campus which is developed and maintained by the University at Albany Foundation.

Fibromyalgia is a severely debilitating affliction characterized by widespread deep tissue pain, tenderness in the hands and feet, fatigue, sleep disorders, and cognitive decline. However, routine testing has been largely unable to detect a biological basis for fibromyalgia, and standard diagnosis is based upon subjective patient pain ratings, further raising questions about the true nature of the disease.

For many years, the disorder was believed to be psychosomatic and often attributed to patients' imagination. Currently approved therapeutics that provide at least partial relief to some fibromyalgia patients are thought to act solely within the brain where imaging techniques have detected hyperactivity of unknown origin referred to as "central sensitization." However, an underlying cause has not been determined, leaving many physicians still in doubt about the true origins or even the existence of the disorder.

The breakthrough discovery by scientists at INTiDYN provides a biological rationale for this enigmatic disease. The study was conducted in collaboration with renowned Albany Medical Center neurologist and pain specialist Dr. Charles E. Argoff, the study primary investigator, and his collaborators Dr. James Wymer also at Albany Medical College and Dr. James Storey of Upstate Clinical Research Associates in Albany, NY.

"Instead of being in the brain, the pathology consists of excessive sensory nerve fibers around specialized blood vessel structures located in the palms of the hands," said Dr. Rice, President of Intidyn and the senior researcher on the study. "This discovery provides concrete evidence of a fibromyalgia-specific pathology which can now be used for diagnosing the disease, and as a novel starting point for developing more effective therapeutics."

Nerve Endings Come In Many Forms

Three years ago, INTiDYN scientists published the discovery of an unknown nervous system function among the blood vessels in the skin in the journal Pain, the official journal of the International Association for the Study of Pain.

"We analyzed the skin of a particularly interesting patient who lacked all the numerous varieties of sensory nerve endings in the skin that supposedly accounted for our highly sensitive and richly nuanced sense of touch," Dr. Rice explained. "Interestingly however, this patient had surprisingly normal function in day-to-day tasks, but the only sensory endings we detected in his skin were those around the blood vessels."

Dr. Rice added, "We previously thought that these nerve endings were only involved in regulating blood flow at a subconscious level, yet here we had evidence that the blood vessel endings could also contribute to our conscious sense of touch… and also pain."

The fibromyalgia study was funded by investigator-initiated research proposals approved by Forest Laboratories and Eli Lilly. Both pharmaceutical companies have developed FDA-approved medications with similar functions (Serotonin/Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors, SNRI) that provide at least some degree of relief for many fibromyalgia patients.

"Knowing how these drugs were supposed to work on molecules in the brain," Dr. Albrecht added, "We had evidence that similar molecules were involved in the function of nerve endings on the blood vessels. Therefore, we hypothesized that fibromyalgia might involve a pathology in that location."

As the results demonstrate, they were correct.

To analyze the nerve endings, Drs. Rice, Albrecht, and postdoctoral researcher Dr. Quanzhi Hou, used INTiDYN’s unique microscopic technology to study small skin biopsies (less than half the size of a pencil eraser) collected from the palms of fibromyalgia patients, who were being diagnosed and treated by Drs. Argoff, Wymer and Storey.

Referred to as ChemoMophometric Analysis (CMA), the technology originated from research by Dr. Rice at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden. The study was limited to women, who have over twice the occurrence of fibromyalgia than men. What the team uncovered was an enormous increase in sensory nerve fibers at specific sites within the blood vessels of the skin. These critical sites are tiny muscular valves, called arteriole-venule (AV) shunts, which form a direct connection between arterioles and venules (see diagram).

Dr. Rice describes their function, "We are all taught that oxygenated blood flows from arterioles to capillaries, which then convey the deoxygenated blood to the venules. The AV shunts in the hand are unique in that they create a bypass of the capillary bed for the major purpose of regulating body temperature."

A Thermostat for the Skin

In humans, these types of shunts are unique to the palms of our hands and soles of our feet which work like the radiator in a car. Under warm conditions, the shunts close down to force blood into the capillaries at the surface of the skin in order to radiate heat from the body, and our hands get sweaty. Under cold conditions, the shunts open wide allowing blood to bypass the capillaries in order to conserve heat, and our hands get cold and put on gloves.

"The excess sensory innervation may itself explain why fibromyalgia patients typically have especially tender and painful hands," said Dr. Albrecht. "But in addition, since the sensory fibers are responsible for opening the shunts, they would become particularly active under cold conditions, which are generally very bothersome to fibromyalgia patients."

A Role in Regulating Blood Flow throughout the Body

Although they are mostly limited to the hands and feet, the shunts likely have another important function which could account for the widespread deep pain, achiness, and fatigue that occurs in fibromyalgia patients.

"In addition to involvement in temperature regulation, an enormous proportion of our blood flow normally goes to our hands and feet. Far more than is needed for their metabolism," noted Dr. Rice. "As such, the hands and the feet act as a reservoir from which blood flow can be diverted to other tissues of the body, such as muscles when we begin to exercise. Therefore, the pathology discovered among these shunts in the hands could be interfering with blood flow to the muscles throughout the body. This mismanaged blood flow could be the source of muscular pain and achiness, and the sense of fatigue which are thought to be due to a build-up of lactic acid and low levels of inflammation fibromyalgia patients. This, in turn, could contribute to the hyperactivity in the brain."

Dr. Albrecht also points out that alterations of normal blood flow may underlie other fibromyalgia symptoms, such as non-restful sleep or cognitive dysfunctions. "The data do appear to fit with other published evidence demonstrating blood flow alterations to higher brain centers and the cerebral cortex of fibromyalgia patients,"he stated.

Senior Research Chair of the Alan Edwards Center for Pain Research at McGill University, Dr. Gary Bennett, commented after seeing the results. "It is exciting that something has finally been found," he remarked. "We can hope that this new finding will lead to new treatments for fibromyalgia patients who now receive little or no relief from any medicine."

This discovery of a distinct tissue pathology demonstrates that fibromyalgia is not "all in a patient’s head,"which should provide an enormous relief to those suffering with fibromyalgia, while changing the clinical opinion of the disease and guiding future approaches for successful treatments.

About Integrated Tissue Dynamics LLC (INTiDYN): Integrated Tissue Dynamics LLC, located within the Capital Region’s TechValley at the University at Albany’s East Campus in Rensselaer, NY, provides flexible and scalable pre-clinical and clinical research and consulting capabilities on skin and nerve related chronic pain afflictions in collaboration with the pharmaceutical industry, government agencies, academia, and a network of pain specialists throughout the United States. The Intidyn ChemoMorphometric Analysis (CMA) platform can be used to detect chemical and structural changes in the skin and other tissues related to chronic pain, numbness, and itch associated with a wide variety of afflictions, including diabetes, shingles, complex regional pain syndrome, carpal tunnel syndrome, sciatica, fibromyalgia, psoriasis, chemotherapy, unintended side effects of pharmaceuticals, and others.

Sorry, the browser you are using is not currently supported. Disqus actively supports the following browsers: Firefox

Chrome

Internet Explorer 11+

Safari This page is forcing your browser to use legacy mode, which is not compatible with Disqus. Please see our troubleshooting guide to get more information about this error. We were unable to load Disqus. If you are a moderator please see our troubleshooting guide Aida Candelario • 10 months ago • 10 months ago Many Dr's think that fibromyalgia is a neurological problem and that the solution to that is giving patients antidepressant. Thank you for your understanding the facts about this illness... JMAS • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I have been suffering from fms and cfs for 40 yrs the only drug I take now is one tegratol at night. I was anorexic as a teen but gained a ton of weight that no matter what I eat will not budge one pound. I was lifting weights, swimming laps and running each day till I could move no more I eat healthy but I do crave sugar more then anything. I never sleep lately I can not remember anything my brain never stops even while watching tv I will drift off thinking about anything and everything except what is on. I dont even know how to go on I am happy about this development just wish it had come so much sooner as I know I will not see it in my lifetime. my heart goes out to you all and hope you see it Marney Charles • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I was diagnosed with fibromyalgia over 25 years ago after having a herniated disc. I go to the gym 2 hours 3 times a week, take amitriptyline for sleep and try to keep sugar out of my diet. I am 73 years old and led and active life. I am not pain free but it is not limiting. A cure would be great. I will keep my fingers crossed. sandra • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I have got fibro plus lupus and like all off you in constant pain it ruins your life plus I am in hospital just after suffering two mini stroke I would love a cure for all x Gina • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I'm in the UK and was diagnosed with fibromyalgia in 2014. If this is the cause I pray for a cure. This illness, condition, disease call it whatever has totally destroyed my life. Where I used to be so fit and active I'm 49 going on 89 on a good day! Gail • 1 year ago • 1 year ago This makes total sense to me because I have noticed from the start that I would often wake up with red and slight swollen palms of hands and that they would almost be throbbing. This is always a lot worse when I am having a flare up. Vivian Lisboa • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I am Brazilian and I live in Brazil, I am a law degree and work for the government and decide to keep living. I continuous follow the latest news on the Fibro and American researchers are engaged in this quest masterfully. Impossible to describe the joy of being able to prove that the Fibro is not a mind disease, created by me, unintentionally or traumatically. I never accepted that I am happy, funky and even learned to live positively with daily pain, since abandoned any pharmacological treatment. None was effective and I had weight gain . I am very grateful and celebrate this news and I regret being on the other side of America, because I would love to be part of this milestone study in science. Brenda K Loveless • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I was diagnosed with CFS (Chronic Fatigue Syndrome) and Fibromyalgia nine years ago at a clinic specializing in that. Finally after two years of applying for SS Disability benefits because I could no longer hold down a job, with the knowledge and diagnosis added by the doctor at Fibro and Fatigue Center in Dallas, it was approved. Unfortunately there were not adequate funds to continue treatment for any length of time as there was improvement. Just last month, however, in doing research online I discovered a nutritional supplement Fibrolief. After taking the recommended 4 capsules/day for a month, there is some relief already evident and the product claims that it may take up to 4 months for maximum benefits. It is not cheap but considering all the ingredients, less costly than trying to take even several supplements separately. This is the only thing to give me any relief from the constant pain between my shoulder blades and that includes seeing an excellent chiropractor on a regular basis. I am 65, have osteoarthritis in neck and thumbs, all kinds of problems with my feet and yet I really feel like most of you have more severe problems than I do. It is encouraging that someone is finally doing research in fibromyalgia and that gives me hope. gail • 1 year ago • 1 year ago i live in Canada and was part of a study with my hands being cold,and warm and in elevating my heart rate. It was a study and I have not heard from them. So after reading this article it gives me hope that there will one day be a simpler way to diagnose FM rather than making so many of us feel like it was all in our heads.

Sounds very similar to what this Dr. has discovered. Dina W • 1 year ago • 1 year ago Any FM or chronic pain sufferers out there that know about any research study or place to get testing to identify excessive sensory nerve fibers around specialized blood vessel structures in the hands that could be responsible for fibro and chronic pain patients? April Miller • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I have Fibromyalgia, Chronic Fatigue syndrome, Depression and Anxiety among other things. I was in a car accident in 2002, and I did not get diagnosed with these things until 2004 and after. I have noticed, that both heat and cold really bother my Fibromyalgia, also eating wheat affects me and anytime I end a relationship in my love life, I lose weight, and then when I have another relationship with a guy, I gain back all the weight I lost and add even more weight. I also have noticed that I get really hot and start sweating and I feel like there are times I still can't get cooled down. I don't know if it has to do with prescription drugs I am taking for Fibromyalgia or if its because of other things affecting me in my body. I have heard other people talk about having Fibromyalgia with Lupus and other things. I first thought years back, that I had Lupus and not Fibromyalgia because of the butterfly rash you can get on you face, which I do get a lot when I am hot, and also things that I was going through at that time sounded like someone I knew that had Lupus, so i decided to get checked out for that. It turned out that I do not have Lupus which I was happy about, but I still hated to be in pain. I have taken Gabapentin with other numerous prescription pills for Fibromyalgia. It is really hard to have relationships including work, family, and friends because they don't understand what we go through with having Fibromyalgia, or really with any chronic pain. I have had many ruined relationships, including a marriage I had years ago, because of my Fibromyalgia. Less than a year ago, I started having major back pain in my lower back. I went to the doctor about it, and he was like its just Fibromyalgia. The thing is I know how Fibromyalgia pain affects my body. I felt like there was something wrong. A couple of months after that I started noticing that the pain from my lower back was causing me pain down my legs and to my feet. I was having problems with my hands and feet going numb. I of course contacted the doctor again about it, and finally after many attempts to find out what was going on, my doctor sent me to a orthopedic place. They recommended physical therapy, because nothing showed up on the X-Rays that they did. I have been in physical therapy many times, and sometimes it helps and sometimes it doesn't. I went to have physical therapy and that made my pain in my back much worse. I started missing work so much more and I had just started my new job at the end of February of this year. I started worrying about losing my job with all this going on. I went back to the orthopedic again, and they did an MRI. I found out that I have a degenerative disc in my lower back on one side, and that I have a fluid like sac in my spinal cord that is not supposed to be there and it is really rare to have it. The orthopedic recommended me and referred me to go this Wednesday the 22nd of July to see a Neurosurgeon. I have waited like 2-3 months to go. I have been in the ER so many times this past year because of the pain. The reason I have told you guys about all of this is because I wanted to share what has been going on with me up to this point. I also feel like you might be able to relate to this. After I found out about what the MRI showed, I decided to do some research online of what this could be and what the options may be for me. I read that it could be syringomyelia. I read about this and saw what kind of pain you could have with this, among other things that go along with Fibromyalgia. It got me thinking that maybe I have had this along and it might not have developed fully until now. According to the research, It says it can take years to develop, and the best thing to do for this in my spinal cord is to either have a shunt put in, or actually have surgery, Which having surgery scares me a lot, but I feel like I have done everything I could possible do to help myself with my pain. I was thinking that if I do have surgery and it takes care of my pain, then maybe I can get my life back and be able to work a full time job, and just be happy, because right now I am really miserable and depressed. I was wondering if any of you have or had syringomyelia? I am just wondering if I really do have Fibromyalgia, or if I have both of these things. I am not trying to jump to conclusions about this, but it just seems really strange to me that I have this in my spinal cord. It could turn out to be nothing, but with all the pain I feel, something has to be going on. Still my regular doctors think that the pain I am having is a Fibromyalgia flare up, and when I mentioned syringomyelia to him, he didn't want to hear it. I am really anxious and worried about going to see the neurosurgeon. This past week, every day that goes by, has made my body hurt more and I think its because of stress of worrying. I just hope the neurosurgeon has answers for me. I hope things get better for all of you that have Fibromyalgia, or other things going on. Mary • 2 months ago • 2 months ago Wow, this sounds like me...I was diagnosed with fibro/cfs in '89" by the very first rhumetologist I saw for this chronic pain. I'd never heard of fibro & cfs but over the years it's progressed so badly, I went on disability retirement way before I was ready to quit working. I was the recipient in rear end collision, my neck hyper extended bc I saw the top inside of my car when I was hit. The car we owned at that time had a half soft top and the metal wrinkled where the front door closes, halfway down the car. She was driving over 40 mph and never hit the brakes. That's when the fibro set in for me. My body, hands, feet, I'm SO SENSITIVE, to light, smell sound, touch.....EVERYTHING. I'm so miserable I've contemplated suicide many times. If it werent for my husband that only has a Right arm to live with, I would've done it long ago. So there's a documented article about how fibromyalgia works on our bodies, it's mostly due to do with our feet and hands. Have you heard about this? I just read about it this evening. It came from the University of Albany NY?, and is quite extensive reading. Here's the post: University at Albanys East Campus Biotech Company Makes Major Firomyalgia Discovery- University at Albany - SUNY. I've asked if anyone in the fibro rooms have heard about this discovery, but haven't gotten back to that page yet. We had so many things in commom as I read your post, I had to write you and let you know you have company. I have low back pain-weakness also, and am using a cane to walk with, which I hate. Good Luck with all this info coming out maybe we'll all benefit one of these days. I have scoliosis, RA, OA, fibro, cfs, sleep apnea, insomnia etc, it's a long list. Best wishes to you. Tricia Veale • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I also have fibro but I don't know about the other one but I don't know were you live but Emory in Atlanta I know is the best or the Mayo Clinic in Jax for your other problem. I went to Emory for brain surgery and he saved my life. Dr. Barrow. They have very good Neurosurgeons. Thanks for sharing feel well I know its so hard to do. Sheila • 1 year ago • 1 year ago Thank you so much for sharing.....you've given me "hope" that it's not just me that suffers so. Good luck with the neurosurgeon and God Bless!!! Patricia Schneider • 1 year ago • 1 year ago April, how did your appointment go with the Neurosurgeon. The visit I had with mine was very informative and helpful Are you better? Have you found some answers? Nature cures • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I wonder how many of you here..have taken the drug/antibiotic floroquinolones (Cipro/Levaquin..etc.)? I think there is a connection between that drug and fibromyalgia. Barb McKenzie • 1 year ago • 1 year ago Wow Suzan, I had a patient at my pain specialist come up to me asking if i'd ever been on Cipro... saying the same thing. I found out the hard way I am allergic to "SULFA" DRUGS they pump the wonder drugs into us... we get feeling better from whatever infection..... Now they are putting disclaimers on the TV left right and center. We need to make our Federal Governments make the pharmaceutical companies more accountable. Raynea Call • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I had surgery on my left knee in 1976, and they had to sacrifice the saphenous nerve branch (sensory nerve branch). Since 1976 I have had all the symptoms of chronic fibromyalgia and was finally given diagnosed with fibromyalgia in 2003. Could the loss of the saphenous nerve branch have anything to do with My fibromyalgia? Jeannette Fibro Longmuir Barne • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I am sadly getting over dose of needing sweet stuff which is driving me mad as was anorexic and low am so fat awful looking that even the back end of bus looks better than me and yes sleep pain sadly it drain's you to the point of get sick to death with it give you example ( went to mother in laws and as long as am out with her am fine but as soon as got back to her home in chair I fell a sleep sadly made me look awful as well as upsetting my husband sadly it not got stop button wish it had then I would been able to stay awake am sorry that made my husband up set ) do any of you get this have reasonable day all soft hugs Jeannette x Isabella Taylor • 1 year ago • 1 year ago i get the sweet stuff craving quite a lot but not as much as when younger and wondered whether it was the aspartaine in chewing gum (chicklets) to which i was totally addicted to (at least five, six or seven 'packets of five chicklets' a day every day for years). used to chew just until sweetness went. Caused throat irritation too. i did not know the sweet craving was linked to fybromyalgia. davidr • 2 years ago • 2 years ago Since 2004, I've gone from being a steady 12 stone to 18 stone. I don't eat a lot and when I do it is healthy food since we're vegetarian and we tend to stick to fresh stuff. Jeannette Fibro Longmuir Barne • 2 years ago • 2 years ago sadly am with you am putting on weight like crazy sending you fibro higs jeannette x davidr • 2 years ago • 2 years ago Thanks Jeannette. I'm off to see an endocrinologist on Thursday. Someone told me to go. They've been going for about nine months and are nearly back to 'normal' (whatever that is). MummaT • 2 years ago • 2 years ago Yes I have problems with weight gain, I've been told that my metabolism doesn't work properly 😔

I was diagnosed in 2000 and had been in pain for about 3 years before diagnosis x Donna Duguay • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I was diagnosed in 2006 that was after 3 years of dealing with pain and doctors telling me it was all in my head, they put me on Lyica. Could anyone tell if they are having problem with weight gain, also is they another medication that can be taken. Or will there be a time that it can be cured without medication. Isabella Taylor • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I put loads of weight on with lyrica - it seemed to work for a long time but then i got a tolerance to it and like many other therapies the side effects became unbearable - brainfog was worse and i suffered with overheating and feelings of nausea query linked to them - or possibly hormone replacement therapy which i was on for approx 35 years but which the GP has documented as much less of a time span after i took myself of the HRT. Dianne Browne Lafleur • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I have had weight gain every time I take anti-inflammatories If I go off them for a few weeks I am going down in weight. I don't know why that is but it happens. Isabella Taylor • 1 year ago • 1 year ago i am wondering about whether anti-inflammatory drugs are the answer as i have read recent research to say that with fybro there is increased lactic acid and reduced inflammation anita • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I was diagnosed about 6 months ago but have been suffering for many years(at least 8) they put me on lyrica too, to help me relax and to sleep. I didn't think it was doing much except making me more fatigued, so I weined off it, only to realise it was helping me sleep, but made it harder to drag myself out of bed in the morning. also recently ive been excessively itchy all over my body especially back ,neck and head, I thought it might be a reaction from coming off lyrica but im not sure. does anyone know if fibro can cause itching? also my memory seems to be getting worse than ever! I hope this helps them find a cure or at the very least a better medication for sufferers as it effects our whole lives, work ,relationships and self esteem! it sucks Emily • 2 years ago • 2 years ago How long have you been on Lyrica- Pregabalin for? It can take a while for a dose to build up in your system and so side effects to the medication can take a while to materialise. Also, Lyrica is a medication which works on the nerves in the body. It is used to reduce nerve pain, and in epilepsy patients to reduce seizures. It is used for fibromyalgia for this reason, not for you to relax and sleep, but for the nerves to become less painful; which in turn will help you to sleep due to lessening of symptoms. If you are having dose induced symptoms then it may be worth talking to your dr about when in the day you take the medication- is this once, twice or three times? Usually it is spread evenly throughout the day, with higher doses being taken in the evening due to the effects of drowsiness. Lyrica can effect cognitive (memory) however, you need to note that side effects often and do disapppear over time. Although itchiness is a sign of intolerance so it is worth talking to your dr about this. Gabapentin is another medication which works in a very similar line to lyrica and so may be an alternative option. I am not a dr by the way- I have epilepsy and so a fairly in depth knowledge of anti epi meds, and I take lyrica and have also taken gabapentin.

Also important to note that if you can, be on the lowest possible dose of nerve meds as possible as they are harder to wean off and take anti inflammatory meds as and when you may need them as well. the Lyrica is a preventative drug the others are a helping hand.

Hope this is useful somewhat. Good luck! Isabella Taylor • 1 year ago • 1 year ago i had both pregabalin and gabapentin and was also really fatigued and suffered with brainfog - also a deterioration in my teeth on the gabapentin and had to have quite a few extractions - there is an alleged link to dental deterioration i think mainly in the gabapentin. Barb McKenzie • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I have had Fibromyalgia for decades. Just diagnosed in the new millenium but pain since i was in my teens... DOES ANY ONE KNOW THAT FIRBO, LUPUS, AND MS HAVE SYMPTOMS THAT OVERLAP ONE ANOTHER...IS THERE PROOF THEY ARE RELATED Dawn McClelland • 1 year ago • 1 year ago I was diagnosed over 10 years ago with Fibromyalgia (back when most Drs were telling patients that it's was all in their head and they called it 'crazy person disease) Thankfully after being told its in my head by 4 Rheumatologists, I found a Dr that believed it was a "real" condition, I was diagnosed with severe Fibro and was put on Lyrica even before Lyrica was FDA approved for Fibro. I still had a feeling he was missing something. I was having constant joint pain especially in my hands. After much testing we found I had severe Osteoarthritis which would explain but osteo usually doesn't affect a specific joint in fingers that I was having pain and swelling in. After so much research I kept saying that I think I have Rheumatoid Arthritis but every time my Dr tested for RA it came out negative. So for 8+ years I was not getting treatment. 3 years ago my Dr ran a CCP test 'specific for RA' and it came out to be a Severe Positive. FINALLY I got the proof of what I knew for years. Unfortunately the damage done to my joints is so severe and debilitating now for not being treated with RA meds. There is so much that is being learned about Fibromyalgia and one finding is there is a connection between Fibro and Rheumatoid Arthritis. I was told that my Fibro is believed to have been triggered by Rheumatism in my body, ultimately the RA. I have also heard about Fibro and Lupus. RA and Lupus both are Autoimmune Diseases. Possibly they will find a connection between Autoimmune Illness and Fibromyalgia. If you ever have a feeling that something is wrong and Dr is missing it, keep trying Drs until you find one that first Believes You and second Will dig deep to find what is ailing you. You know your body and you know if something is not right. Don't accept 'Its Nothing' when you know it is Something. I need double knee replacements and shoulders, ankles, and hips are right behind my knees due to the years of not being treated for RA. The damage is irreversible. If you believe you might be suffering from Lupus, talk to your Dr. There are many tests that can be done to diagnose Lupus. Wish you luck. Isabella Taylor • 1 year ago • 1 year ago Your symptoms mimic mine in relation to being diagnosed with osteo and previously with allodynia (old term for fybro) since 1997. My joint pain is chronic and it feels too severe for it to be osteo which they put down as normal age related deterioration (though mine was said to be early onset degeneration) sometimes so debilitating that i canot function and it also affects my balance. i have had two recent MRI scans which were reported as having several TIA's with damage to the right thalamus and the left cerrabellum of my brain but they are now telling me that my latest scan shows that my symptoms are more related to severe migraine with aura - they now seem to be detracting from what was orriginally diagnosed and there was a comment in one letter from the cardiologist who writes that - wait for it....."there was 'talk of' fybromyalgia" and usually my blood tests for RA are said to be within normal range but i have one printed result that shows they were raised for RA factor but am told this does not mean that i have it, so i am left not knowing what my diagnosis is and feel that things are being selectively written as a means of preventing disability allowance in line with government cuts. i really don't think the medical profession really gives a thought to pain and suffering and that they cover up for each other and close ranks when a misdiagnosis or mistake has been made. I read that the CCP test is best for diagnostics but keep forgetting to ask the GP. Barb McKenzie • 1 year ago • 1 year ago Dawn...I was sent to a Rheumatologist...who (get this..was practicing in a Menopause clinic. I had one test that was slightly positive...it was called ANA they down played that... This female doctor...she tested the trigger points...and said...YOU HAVE FIBROMYALGIA!! AND YOU WON'T DIE FROM IT.. She referred me back to my own GP. Ever since then my health has gotten worse. I was diagnosed with Degenerative Disc Disease...(with a don't worry you won't die from that either! forget about the pain...it's just old age A WEAR AND TEAR DISEASE JUST LIKE YOUR OSTEOARTHRITIS!!!) Ever since then....My GP treats me like i"m nuts... I have been diagnosed with bleeding in my stomach.... which they treated...it's called G.A.V.E..(Gastric Antral Vascular Ectasia)... I have heart disease...I have Atrial Fibrillation for which I had the tissue inside my heart burnt and a pacemaker put in. 3 operations....1st one..the wires came loose and was shocking my external chest wall...hurt like heck....they fixed that with a 2nd operation.... and then a 3rd operation was required to put in a new pacemaker....because the battery was dying. ....the wires inside my heart were okay... I've been extremely obese was 350lbs so I had the surgery to cut down the size of my stomach...that's when they found the bleeding... I have been diagnosed with Graves disease .....was losing my hair,......sent to an endocrinologist....now my thyroid is supposed to be hypo or..underactive....grrrr.... and the list goes on... but all I get is "DON'T MICRO MANAGE YOUR HEALTH BARB"... I've had this GP 35 years and because i ask questions....I'M NUTS... SEE I do have a psychiatric history... but, give me a break... I had a rotten childhood...rough teens.........and i've been working on all of this. So I lost 170lbs... and my legs are swelling up and blistering ...as if i was still 350lbs... I get rashes.... I've had tumors made up of fat removed..."Lipomas" I want to thank you DAWN for SHARING my sister has LUPUS...MY DECEASED SISTER HAD MS MY OTHER SISTER HAS CELIAC AND FIBROMYALGIA AND RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS...AND this year I am showing signs of rheumatoid arthritis in my finger joints...and toes...red, stiff, and swelling... and to wrap up this comment MY GP REFUSES TO SEND ME TO AN ORTHOPEDIC SURGEON TO REPAIR MY COCCYX BONES ARE BENT... due to injuries...from falls.... I don't have cancer...but you know ....THEY JUST DON'T CARE...AND TREAT ME LIKE IT'S ALL PSYCHOLOGICAL... WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE....MY CARDIOLOGIST IS SENDING ME FOR ULTRASOUNDS FROM MY HEART, ALL MY ABDOMEN AND MY LEGS... WISH ME LUCK please keep sharing..... Isabella Taylor • 1 year ago • 1 year ago truly shocking treatment for you to have to go through, i really feel for you. this is what the medical profession does but they usually put your problems down to what they call "unresolved issues" which is a way of twisting blame - your psychiatric problems are probably to do with how you have been treated by the medical profession and any unresolved issues are probably to do with the real anxiety your condition causes - although they will probably say your anxieties are causing your condition. i hope you get appropriate care and that you start to feel better soon ;) Jean Chandler • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I have Lupus and Fibromyalgia. My mother also has both. We are told they are not related but I have a lot of overlapping symptoms.

I too was not Dx until I was an adult but I am sure I had it sooner. Google Sensory Processing Disorder. See if it doesn't describe you as a child. I swear fibro and SPD are the same thing. Jacqui • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I have fibromyalgia and have been suffering with it for the past 30 years. Funnily enough in contrast to this study I do not find the cold as much of a problem as the humidity. I know this is the case with other sufferers who live in my part of the world. We live in the tropics in Far North Queensland, Australia, and I have also lived in South West Wales, UK, and as such have experienced both weather extremes. I wonder how long this research will take to become a reality in terms of a cure! baggzy • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I have fibro and I am terrible with hot sticky weather.. in the winter the cold cotracts all my nerves and causes muscles not to work very painful..in simmer they are to lax and I just flake out with heat and swell up, its not a ptetty sight! anita • 2 years ago • 2 years ago yes I suffer more in the heat too! Annjeff • 2 years ago • 2 years ago Is there anywhere in Great Britain where fibro sufferers can get this skin test on the hands? Chris Dunkerley • 2 years ago • 2 years ago Am thinking the same Annjeff, don't know of anyone in the UK who has been offered/had this skin test (talk to lots of people on FMS sites online and read everything I can get my beady eyes on, so far zilch info on this possible diagnostic test here in the UK). Read somewhere, sorry can't remember where, that the NHS here in UK simply doesn't yet have the sophisticated technology required to investigate this further. Don't know if this is true or not. Am a tiny bit sceptical about this fairly recent US finding because it may explain why our pain levels are so very high but doesn't explain the cause of so many of the other 60 symptoms that Fibromyalgia Syndrome sufferers have no choice but to endure. Hasten to add here that we don't all have all 60 symptoms, although there are some people who actually do, my heart goes out to them big time. As you know, it's hard enough coping with the pain, fatigue, sleep problems, endocrine probs oh you know the list goes on. If I find out where/how we can access this test in the UK will defo let you know, if you find out first please would you let me know. Have just made a note of your name on here, otherwise fibro-fog will defo descend and will forget. Am most interested in the 4 stages of fibro when you get a chance if poss. With my thanks and gentlest hug xx Darlynn Robinson • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I was diagnosed in 1993 with it Irene Bahle • 2 years ago • 2 years ago My name is Darlynn also and I have fibro too. This is such an exciting development for all of us who have been suffering for years. Loxton • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I feel the heat really bad ( amongst all the other symptoms to do with fibro), I literally drip with sweat, all around my head, and it is so embarrassing when we go out. If only I could stop this, I would put up with all the other stuff. baggzy • 2 years ago • 2 years ago Omg this has been happening to me for yesrs and years.. now some could be said to be because of menopause.. I hate it,I go around with loafs of kitchen towels ( tissues just disintegrate);

You do have to get checked out with doc that your meds arnt reacting with one another.. some of mine were and after doc change them wsd better for awhile but not now.... Lolita Millers • 2 years ago • 2 years ago If I do anything at all, I begin to sweat. At first I thought it might be from menopause, however, that was not the case. The one thing I can share is that wearing all cotton clothing makes a big, big difference. It is not a cure but it will help. Also, you may want to buy one of those pocket fans. I find that it lessons the duration of sweating. Myna • 2 years ago • 2 years ago I live in the desert in the Southwest USt. I have the same sweating around my head really badly, perspire all over body, but the face and head is the worst. I've thought it is because I always wear sunshine on my face. Any thoughts on this? Darlynn Robinson • 2 years ago • 2 years ago It maybe hormones at least thats what the endocrinologist told me , she put me on clonidine

Irene Bahle • 2 years ago • 2 years ago Loxton that may be hyperhydrosis. I have it also. I don't ever feel clean because of all the sweating. My hair is always wet.