Friends, Want to read about how the Theatre House paid...
Want to read about how the Friends,Want to read about how the Theatre House paid for lights on the Clay Wade Bailey Bridge ? Read on.... Sorry for the length of this. This is also a plea for HELP.

I moved into the Theatre House in December and had Duke Energy transfer electric and gas to our company. The first month you have to pay deposits and so forth, there’s prorated bills and December was cold. The net is that the the bill was expensive, about 3K. We paid our bill in January. I called to inquire, but they said these are all the services/meters that come with the building

In February, I get another sticker shocking bill. I’m thinking… Wow, to build a business to pay Duke seems like a pretty big buzzkill. I call Duke and share that there are 7 meters listed on my bill, but I can only find 4 connected to my building. I told them that I’m happy to pay for the services that I receive, but can’t locate the other meters. They simply tell me these bills and meters are associated with the building. They said to call the landlord and an electrician. I asked if they could do an investigative order (to locate meters).

In March, I get another sticker shocking bill—though a bit less expensive. I call to find out some details. They said they did do the investigative order—which they never confirmed with me. Duke Energy found the extra meters that we’re paying for across the street. Again, I asked if these were connected to our building because it wasn’t obvious that they were. Duke said to contact the landlord and electrician.

At this point, I’ve spent about 12 hours resolving locations, on the phone and so forth. I’m not sure where these meters go to. So I’m like, screw it. Turn them off. On March 19th, they shut off the meters.

NOTHING happens in my building. Nothing. Turns out they weren't connected to our building. This story gets better, but worse (for me).

Tuesday, March 20th, I see a Duke electrician looking at the meters across the street. Guess what we’ve been paying for? Turns out that we’ve been assigned the meters and payment responsibilities for the Clay Wade Bailey Bridge lights. That’s right. The electrician is like, “who had these turned off?” Of course, I’m like, “yours truly.” He proceeds to explain these are supposed to be assigned to the Kentucky Department of Transportation. Someone is going to get in trouble. Lesson here: Want to get attention, turn off the lighting on the bridge.

I call back two-days later with a minor victory in hand and say, "can we get a refund and please stop sending me bills?" The gentleman on the phone says that they must do another investigative order to verify the integrity of the data the electrician. After grilling me about the person's name, phone number and number--which I didn't do. It's not my responsibility to correct their data (I'm 100% wrong about this btw). No follow up or response within the week that follows. I call back. And back. And back. And back.

I’m about 27 hours into this issue. Here’s what Duke tells me (and asks me if I know anyone at KDOT too, so they can resolve):

- Duke cannot assign my billed amounts to anyone because they can’t find someone at Kentucky Transportation Department to accept responsibility. Accounting won’t let them.

- Even though this is their mistake, I have to keep calling back. I’ve talked to no less than 15 people and had to explain this from scratch to at least and all seem in disbelief this happened, but have no power to fix.

- Duke clearly mistakenly assigned this to @Theatre House, yet their responsibility to fix is not existent. It’s mine apparently.

- I’ve been promised call backs, by several people, including Andrea, Sarah and Kayla. To date, I’ve received two of the seven callbacks promised and they simply said they are awaiting to contact someone with more authority.

I keep asking for a ledger of the assignment of the meter to the building and to me that should go back to last year. They’ve yet to produce it.

- Lingering non-sense, so they stopped billing me, but rolled accounts and owed money to my other active accounts. Therefore ongoing, I have to call, explain this to someone else, get an adjusted bill and then pay or something else EVERY month. That’s a two hour assignment.

Were this your business (or mine), the problem isn’t the customer’s, it is my problem. I take it out of the customer’s hands and say, we’ll manage. This is so unbelievable… At first, they said it was my issue, I have to contact the landlord and electrician. Then when it’s their issue, inertia.

I’m at the end of my rope. I have a weekly reminder to call and another one to get my bill corrected. I’m open to thoughts or contacts in KDOT or Duke that can help me solve this non-sense.