Hillary Clinton on "The View" Talks Trump, Emails, the FBI and More
Democratic front-runner Secretary Hillary Clinton visited "The View" on Tuesday April 5th, 2016. No Hot Topics were off limits as Hillary Clinton discussed her 2008 campaign, Donald Trump, abortion, religion and her 2016 Presidential run during her appearance. She also explained why she is proud of the campaign she and Democratic opponent Bernie Sanders have run and addressed her upcoming interview with the FBI. Watch the highlights below.

143156_0316_web|143156_0316||3000|2188|0

Hillary Clinton Says of Trump and Sanders "I Have More Votes"

Hillary Clinton on ‘The View’: Says of Trump and Sanders ‘I Have More Votes’|Hillary Clinton joins The View Hot Topics table.|Hillary Clinton joined “The View” co-hosts at the Hot Topics table and shared what she learned from the 2008 election which is to be as focused as possible on what she's done and what she will do. She wants to unify people with her campaign. Hillary Clinton says Donald Trump has insulted and demeaned everyone and that she has "more votes than he does" in the primary elections. She is proud of the campaign that she and Democratic opponent Bernie Sanders have run. It's been good for the Democratic party and the country. Watch "The View" WEEKDAYS at 11e|10c|p.

Hillary Clinton joined the co-hosts at the Hot Topics table and shared what she learned from the 2008 election which is to be as focused as possible on what she's done and what she will do. She wants to unify people with her campaign. Hillary Clinton says Donald Trump has insulted and demeaned everyone and that she has "more votes than he does" in the primary elections. She is also proud of the campaign that she and Democratic opponent Bernie Sanders have run and feels it's been good for the Democratic Party and the country.

Hillary Clinton Explains How "You Can Be a Feminist and Be Pro-Life"

Hillary Clinton Says ‘You Can Be a Feminist and Be Pro-life’ on ‘The View’|Hillary Clinton discusses abortion and religion.|“The View” co-host asks Hillary Clinton about her recent comments about abortion. Hillary Clinton says she supports Roe v. Wade because it is an important statement about women making a most difficult decision. They should have that authority not the government. She also respects the opinions and beliefs of every woman on this issue. She believes you can be a feminist and pro-life. Candace asks Hillary about her faith. Hillary Clinton says she takes her faith very seriously; it has gotten her through some very difficult times. She also believes you have to show respect and support for religious freedom. Watch "The View" WEEKDAYS at 11e|10c|p.

Hillary Clinton addressed her recent comments about abortion saying she supports Roe v. Wade because it is an important statement about women making a most difficult decision. She also respects the opinions and beliefs of every woman on this issue and believes you can be a feminist and pro-life. Candace asks Hillary about her faith. Hillary Clinton says she takes her faith very seriously; it has gotten her through some very difficult times.

Hillary Clinton Discusses Supreme Court Nomination and E-mail Scandal

Hillary Clinton Discusses Supreme Court Nominee and Email Scandal on ‘The View’|Hillary Clinton addresses investigation into her e-mail.|Hillary Clinton speaks with “The View” co-hosts about President Obama’s Supreme Court nomination. She feels some things should be beyond partisan politics and nominating a Supreme Court justice is one of those things. Hillary Clinton also addresses the FBI preparing to interview her about the personal e-mail scandal. She feels this will be put behind her as nothing inappropriate was done. There is a double standard in a lot of ways as she was not the only person in office to use a personal e-mail. Watch "The View" WEEKDAYS at 11e|10c|p.

Hillary Clinton feels with regards to President Obama's pick for the new Supreme Court Justice that some things should be beyond partisan politics and nominating a Supreme Court justice is one of those things. As the FBI is preparing to interview her about the personal e-mail scandal she believes this will be put behind her as nothing inappropriate was done.

First Gentleman vs. First Dude: What Would Bill Clinton's Title Be in The White House?

Hillary Clinton Hints at Bill’s Title in The White House If She Wins Election on ‘The View’|Hillary Clinton talks about being a grandmother.|Hillary Clinton talks about being a grandmother. If she wins the election she says Bill Clinton may become the First Gentleman or the First Dude. Hillary also tells “The View” co-hosts what shows and music she likes and reveals her celebrity crush is George Clooney. Watch "The View" WEEKDAYS at 11e|10c|p.

Hillary Clinton loves being a grandmother and gushes about her granddaughter Charlotte. If she wins the elections she says Bill Clinton may become the First Gentleman or the First Dude.

At the end of the interview Hillary Clinton posed for a selfie with "The View" co-hosts. Be sure to watch the full episode of today's show right here.

143156_0890_web|143156_0890||3000|2078|0

RELATED: Watch Hillary Clinton on Jimmy Kimmel Live!>>

WATCH: Interviews with Politicians and Pundits on "The View">>