Feminism in America – Manda’s World
If you follow me on Facebook or know me personally, you will know I am very much a believer in science above all. Everyone has their own opinions on every topic possible, so here is my two cents regarding feminism.

Whether you identify as man, woman or an orange; biologically we are born different. Men are born with more muscle mass and built for physical endurance and women have more efficient brains and whether you like it or not, women are built more delicately. Which more brain efficiency sounds pretty empowering if you ask me. Let me give a prime example of how different males and females are, “On average, men connect front to back [parts of the brain] more strongly than women,” whereas “women have stronger connections left to right,” and “Male brains have more connections within hemispheres to optimize motor skills, whereas female brains are more connected between hemispheres to combine analytical and intuitive thinking”, said study leader Ragini Verma, an associate professor of radiology at the University of Pennsylvania medical school.

With that being stated, I consider myself to be an independent strong woman who has just as many opportunities for the same education, working rights, and the ability to vote. I embrace our biological differences and I understand men and women prosper in different ways. Why not be proud of our differences? So, for the thousands of people marching for women rights, what rights are you marching for that you don’t already have? These marches were directed more towards the hate of the newly elected president Donald Trump and really had nothing to do with women suffrage. I am not oppressed in my country and I stand strong for the women before me who have given everything for me to have these rights. I am able to walk out of my house wearing the clothes I want, drive where I want and not be beaten or killed for my choices. When you are woman in the public eye and you use your status to threaten the white house and the people in it, you are not trying to help women, you are just plainly a terrorist. The women involved in the women’s march on Washington DC on January 21st, 2017 did not speak about equality, but instead spoke of their hate for the Donald Trump. A prime example is the infamous Madonna who is now being investigated by the CIA due to her comment: “thought an awful lot about blowing up the White House.” But wait, I thought you were marching for women rights, not to make threats against Trump and his family? In America everyone woman is allowed to vote, work and live the American dream just as any man. I would like to touch base on is: the fact that many people/women who marched in Washington DC for women rights left large amounts of trash behind and essentially degraded themselves by walking around naked and grabbing their genitals for attention.

Photo Credit: Liveleak

Nothing screams empowerment more than having no self-respect for yourself and acting like a heathen. It was quite a disgusting and disgraceful display of feminism and what it stands for. Whether you like it not, you will be dehumanized and degraded if you run around naked looking for attention. In regards to the heaps of trash left behind by the so-called feminists, I would like to know how do you expect anyone to listen to what you have to say when you trash public and private property?

I’m sorry, but this whole march had nothing to do with women’s rights, it was a hate march against Trump. Enough said.

Let’s give some statistics for REAL women suffrage:

Saudi Arabia:

1. Is the only country in the world that doesn’t allow women to drive.

2. Only 13% of women of Saudi Arabian women are in the working force compared to over 60% of American women in the working force.

-source: Bureau of Labor Statistics

Afghanistan:

1. As many as 80% percent of marriages in Afghanistan take place without the consent of the bride, who is often a child. Many of them see killing themselves as the only way out.

2. Research by Global Rights estimates that almost 9 out of 10 Afghan women face physical, sexual or psychological violence.

3. The literacy rate for females over the age of 15 is 12.6% compared to 43.1% for males, and only 40% of females attend primary school and 6% attend secondary school. Currently, there are 70 private universities in Afghanistan; over 200,000 students attend college — but only 18% are women, and 82% men.

-sources: Afghanistan Ray of Hope Foundation, Global Rights, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

These are just a few examples of what true women suffrage is and this is what women should be marching for. In America, women (and women of color) have more rights than ever and have equal rights. American women are not oppressed and do not have (what I would consider) to be true/real women suffrage. Here is a excellent example for women (and women of color) who have received an education in America. Numbers don’t lie and I see every woman having the same equal opportunity to achieve greatness in our land of the free.

Percentage distribution of associate’s degrees and bachelor’s degrees conferred to U.S. citizens by degree-granting postsecondary institutions, by race/ethnicity and sex: 2012–13 . Photo Credits and Statistical data from the National Center for Education: Percentage distribution of associate’s degrees and bachelor’s degrees conferred to U.S. citizens by degree-granting postsecondary institutions, by race/ethnicity and sex: 2012–13. Photo Credits and Statistical data from the National Center for Education:

Note: I love feedback and sparking healthy debates regarding controversial topics. Do not expect to get into an argument with me, I will gladly listen to opinions and respond accordingly.

Featured photo credit to Red White Blue News.