Fluoride Officially Classified as a Neurotoxin in World’s Top Medical Journals
E vidence on the negative health impacts of Fluoride from several sources i n recent years has been growing , pro mpting a movement to remov e industrial sodium fluoride from the world’s water supply.













More recently, a report from the world’s most prestigious medical journal, The Lancet, has officially classified fluoride as a neurotoxin , This puts it in the same category as arsenic, lead and mercury.





T he news of the classification was anno unced by author Stefan Smyle, who cited a report published in The Lancet Neurology, Volume 13, Issue 3, in the March 2014 edition, by authors Dr. Phillippe Grandjean and Philip J. Landrigan, MD.





Fluoride Classified Along with Mercury, Lead and Other s





The are five different similar industrial chemicals that have been deemed developmental neurotoxicants:

 L ead

 M ethylmercury

 P olychlorinated

 B iphenyls

 A rsenic and toluene.





The summary goes on to state that six additional developmental neurotoxicants have also now been identified:



 M anganese,

 F luoride,

 C hlorpyrifos,

 D ichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane,

 T etrachloroethylene

 P olybrominated diphenyl ethers.

The authors added that even more of these neurotoxicants remain undiscovered.





I n the report, the author s note that neurodevelopmental disabilities, including attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, dyslexia, and other cognitive impairments, are now affecting millions of children worldwide in what they call a “pandemic of developmental neurotoxicity.”





In addition to fluoride in our cit ies water supplies, the substance can also be found in certain foods . H eavily processed brands of tea that may be grown in polluted areas are prime culp rits.





Have you ever noticed the warnings on toothpaste labels ?





M any parents have begun eschewing fluoridated toothpaste brands altogether and are using more natural brands such as Earthpaste, Dr. Bronner’s toothpaste line, or even making their own from a combination of ingredients such as coconut oil, organic neem leaf powders, essential oils like peppermint or cinnamon, and other natural ingredients.





The fluoride added to our water supply is mostly seen as a cumulative toxin that accumulates in our bodies and can manifest itself in problems over time, including dental fluorosis, or far worse health problems.





Global Fluoride Prevention Strategy Recommended





T he Lancet report goes on to propose a global prevention strategy . It s ugge sts that “untested chemicals should not be presumed to be safe to brain development, and chemicals in existing use and all new chemicals must therefore be tested for developmental neurotoxicity.”





And continued: “To coordinate these efforts and to accelerate translation of science into prevention, we propose the urgent formation of a new international clearinghouse.”





The Lancet report correlates with 2013 findings by a Harvard University meta-analysis funded by the National Institutes of Health that concluded that children in areas with highly fluoridated water have “significantly lower” IQ scores that those who live in areas with low amounts of fluoride in their water supplies.





Sodium fluoride in drinking water has is currently being linked to various cancers. It is functionally different than the naturally-occurring calcium fluoride, and commonly added to drinking water supplies and used by dentists who posit that it is useful for dental health.





Fluoridation is Actually Uncommon in Europe





Currently, fluoride is added to water supplies across much of North America, but as this list of countries that ban or reject water fluoridation shows, the practice is actually not too common, or banned entirely throughout most of Europe and in several other developed nations across the world.