HUD Proposes Law Restricting RV’s, Campers, Tiny Houses, as Residence…
The recreational vehicles, campers, and tiny houses have become a more affordable and preferable choice in low-income or a reason to not be taxed as much by owning a home. People on the go or living off the land don’t require as much from the State. Even eradicating the homeless in cities such as Denver,

451 7th Street S.W., Washington, DC 20410

Telephone: (202) 708-1112 TTY: (202) 708-1455 The recreational vehicles, campers, and tiny houses have become a more affordable and preferable choice in low-income or a reason to not be taxed as much by owning a home. People on the go or living off the land don’t require as much from the State. Even eradicating the homeless in cities such as Portland, Dallas, and Los Angeles by tearing down their makeshift shelters. For years the government has been cracking down on citizens who are polishing their skills in minimizing the involvement in the matrix and exiting the rat race. Learning to survive comfortably with less by unplugging from the burdensome requirements that larger permanently fixed residences demand is catching the eye of The Department of Housing and Urban Development. 451 7th Street S.W., Washington, DC 20410Telephone: (202) 708-1112 TTY: (202) 708-1455

Government will do what they do best and limit and make illegal anything we do to be more independent and moving into smaller homes is their next target. View the proposed law here.

The Law States:

[This proposed rule would modify the current exemption for recreational vehicles in the Manufactured Home Procedural and Enforcement Regulations. Under the current exemption, questions have arisen regarding whether park model recreational vehicles are regulated by HUD’s manufactured home program. These park models are being produced with patio roofs, screened in porches, and other extensions that exceed the 400 square foot maximum exemption in the current regulations. Additionally, some of these models are being marketed as suitable for year round living. The Law States:[This proposed rule would modify the current exemption for recreational vehicles in the Manufactured Home Procedural and Enforcement Regulations. Under the current exemption, questions have arisen regarding whether park model recreational vehicles are regulated by HUD’s manufactured home program. These park models are being produced with patio roofs, screened in porches, and other extensions that exceed the 400 square foot maximum exemption in the current regulations. Additionally, some of these models are being marketed as suitable for year round living.

HUD’s proposed rule would permit recreational vehicle manufactures to certify that a unit is exempted from HUD’s regulations. Specifically, HUD’s proposed rule would define a recreational vehicle as a factory build vehicular structure, not certified as a manufactured home, designed only for recreational use and not as a primary residence or for permanent occupancy, and built and certified in accordance with either the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1192-2015, Standard for Recreational Vehicles, or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A119.5-15, Recreational Park Trailer Standard. In addition, to provide consumers notice regarding the manufacturing standards used to construct the unit, HUD’s rule would require that units claiming the exemption display a notice that identifies the standards used to construct the unit and states that the unit is designed only for recreational use, and not as a primary residence or permanent dwelling.]

If this Draconian law is passed, the evil curse of government will be extended to the lives of the free roaming human beings. Being unattached to the grid is a no-no in the eyes of these indoctrinated so-called officials. The Freedom to live where and how one chooses is under assault, this law will dismantle the force field of liberty when it pertains to the utilization of the earth as a home.