Muslims Say Fallen U.S. Soldiers Should NOT Be Honored on Memorial Da…
by Gina Cassini | Top Right News

The Muslim Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) has decided that Memorial Day should not honor those American soldiers who have died, instead, it should honor those Muslim terrorists who were killed by American soldiers.

You read that right. As nearly all Americans come together on Memorial Day to honor those who paid the ultimate sacrifice for the country’s freedom and safety, two CAIR officials spent the holiday weekend differently: questioning whether U.S. troops deserve to be honored and tweeting that the country was “established upon white supremacy.”

The Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) , a group labeled by the Justice Department as a U.S. Muslim Brotherhood entity and “un-indicted co-conspirator” in a terrorism-financing trial, disingenuously claims that it is a moderate organization.

Yet, on May 23, Zahra Billoo, the radical executive-director of CAIR’s San Francisco Bay Area chapter , tweeted that she “struggles with Memorial Day each year” about whether to honor American soldiers who died in wars:

She also quoted another CAIR official, Dawud Walid, the executive-director of CAIR’s Michigan chapter , as questioning whether they should honor American soldiers that died in “unjust” wars and occupations.

That’s a direct insult to American soldiers currently serving in Afghanistan and those that have returned from Iraq, as CAIR officials consistently describe those wars with that terminology. Billoo quoted Walid as saying:

Billoo did, however, find one “soldier” she felt comfortably honoring. On May 26, she promoted an article from the anti-Semitic and anti-American Nation of Islam that asked for help for a “black liberation soldier” named Imam Jamil al-Amin:

convicted of murdering a police officer in 2000. He is also anti-American, stating “if America doesn’t come around, we’re gonna burn it down,” and “ Al-Amin was a member of the Black Panthers terrorist group and wasin 2000. He is also anti-American, stating “if America doesn’t come around, we’re gonna burn it down,” and “ I say violence is necessary . It is as American as cherry pie.”

Al-Amin also said the U.S. Constitution is “diametrically opposed to what Allah has commanded.”

THIS is who CAIR wants to honor on Memorial Day? A racist, anti-American cop-killer?

Walid, the other CAIR official, took it further yesterday Tweeting:

So a Muslim organization that Barack Obama invites to secret White House meetings , and wants you to believe is as American as apple pie, is caught once against denouncing America, and supporting Muslim jihadists.