Are FLOWER SEEDS the new party drug?
Published: 11:59 EST, 5 May 2016 | Updated: 13:04 EST, 5 May 2016

Flower seeds are the new party drug, police are warning.

Hawaiian Baby Woodrose, Sleepy Grass, and Blue Morning Glory are sold in garden stores to grow climbing vines, long grass, and flowers.

But there has been a surge teenagers across America crushing up and swallowing the legal products to replicate the effects of LSD.

This week, Massachusetts police issued a warning to parents after a number of teenagers were hospitalized with extreme psychotic reactions in Seekonk, near Providence, Rhode Island.

And now Home Depot stores in the area are pulling the seeds from shelves in a bid to curb the situation.

Garden fodder is the new LSD? Blue Morning Glory seeds (pictured) are planted to grow delicate blue-and-white flowers. The seeds are black. Teenagers are crushing them or licking them to induce a psychotic high

The seeds contain LSA (lysergic acid amide), a hallucinogen similar to LSD.

When swallowed whole or crushed into tea, they affect a person's sight, vision, and sense of time, often making them feel extreme euphoria and extreme fatigue.

Like LSD, it can also provoke psychotic episodes, flashbacks, overwhelming paranoia, and vomiting.

Seekonk Police Chief Craig Mace said investigators have found the seeds on high school and middle school campuses across the town.

It is hardly the first instance of people using natural products to induce a high, he warns.

'We as human beings have a tendency to come up with different ways to become impaired, or however you want to describe it,' Mace said in a statement on the department's Facebook page.

'Here we have a natural product that’s intended for ornamental purposes, and somehow, someone figured out that it could cause a hallucinogenic effect,' he continued.

'Parents should know if their children are into planting flowers or not, so if they see these things in the household, the radar should be on, the red flag should go up.'

Home Depot in Seekonk has pulled the products. When swallowed whole or crushed into tea, they affect a person's sight, vision, and sense of time, often making them feel extreme euphoria and extreme fatigue

Though purchasing the seeds is legal, extracting the LSA is illegal.

Hawaiian Baby Woodrose is a yellow/light brown seed which grows in a furry pod.

Native to South America and Africa, the seeds can be planted to grow invasive but beautiful leafy vines.

The seeds' psychotic properties were first recorded in the 1960s.

Blue Morning Glory seeds are planted to grow delicate blue-and-white flowers.

The seeds are black. Drug users crush them or lick them to induce a psychotic high.

Sleepy Grass seeds looks like pieces of buckwheat. They grow long grass on dry soil, like that commonly seen across the plains of the Midwest and in the arid South West like Arizona.