Assange : Bernie Sanders Was Threatened To Drop Out Of The Race - USA…
WikiLeaks editor Julian Assange has accused Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton of committing “extortion” by hyping fears over the possibility of a Republican victory in order to attract left-wing voters. Sanders supporters are waiting with bated breath for the next email dump from Julian Assange, the founder and editor in chief of Wikileaks. Because the DNC rules are suspended If Hillary Drops Out The Second Candidate With The Highest Number Of Delegates Gets The Nomination. He released hacked emails last month showing Democratic National Committee officials plotting to defeat Mrs. Clinton’s chief rival, Vermont Sen. Bernard Sanders.Wikileaks editor-in-chief Julian Assange promised to release more damning emails about the Clinton Foundation, and warned he has enough evidence on Hillary Clinton making secret deals with an alleged Islamic State sponsor for the FBI to indict her.”We have more info and we will publish everything when the time is right some of these materials can get Hillary Clinton to lose the nomination.Was Bernie Sanders threatened to drop out of the race? Well, Assange gave a response to that question in an interview with John Pilger an Australian journalist based in the United Kingdom and his answer won’t surprise many!

⇓VIDEO BELOW⇓

John Pilger made an interview with Assange and is planning to use this material for his next documentary about Wikileaks founder! We gonna report with every major info from this interview in the nex few days! You can read the first part of the interview in a link below!

Pilger: Julian, we cut you off earlier when you were talking about what you felt were the most significant emails that you have released. Is there any last one that you’d like to mention? And also, do you have any thoughts on Bernie Sanders? I mean what is your opinion why Bernie Sanders drop out of the race?

Assange: Look, I think—you know, we know how politics works in the United States. Whoever—whatever political party gets into government is going to merge with the bureaucracy pretty damn fast. It will be in a position where it has some levers in its hand. And Bernie Sanders was independent candidate trying to get the nomination trough the Democratic Party and if you ask me he did get the nomination,but he was threatened to drop out!

Pilger: What do you mean by that will your next leak contain information about Bernie Sanders?

Assange: Of course we’re very interested in revealing the truth about any candidate and yes we have some material about Bernie Sanders that will be published!

Assange isn’t focusing entirely on Clinton however, urging anyone with information on Bernie Sanders to come forward!

 “If anyone has any information on Bernie Sanders that is from inside the Democratic Party, which is authentic, it’s not like some claimed witness statement but actually internal documentation, we’d be very happy to receive and publish it,”

PLEASE SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON FACEBOOK AND TWITTER IF YOU BELIEVE THAT NEXT ASSANGE ATTACK ON CLINTON WILL BRING HER DOWN!