Facebook flags the Declaration of Independence as hate speech | Daily…
Published: 15:08 EDT, 5 July 2018 | Updated: 17:48 EDT, 5 July 2018

Facebook has flagged a portion of the Declaration of Independence as 'hate speech'.

Local newspaper The Liberty County Vindicator in Texas had been posting daily bits of the Declaration of Independence in anticipation of the Fourth of July.

But on Monday their content was flagged after it posted an excerpt from the 'Bill of Particulars' against Britain's King George III that included speech calling Native Americans 'merciless Indian Savages'.

A day after the hate speech violation, the post was restored.

Facebook has flagged a portion of the Declaration of Independence as 'hate speech' Monday

This is the post that Facebook flagged but later allowed back online, the editor suspects it was deemed harmful for its message on Native Americans

Back at it again! The following day the post was restored after Facebook reviewed the post

Facebook dropped an apology in comment section of the post saying 'Sorry for the mistake'

'He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions,' the passage said.

After the paper tried to post the excerpt, they received an automated notice saying the post 'goes against our standards on hate speech', according to The Vindicator

While it is unclear what key words triggered Facebook's filter, the editor for the paper says it was likely 'Indian Savages'.

The excerpt, from paragraphs 27 to 31 of the Declaration, was a list the people's grievances against the king.

'He has abdicated Government here, by declaring us out of his Protection and waging War against us. He has plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed the lives of our people,' part of the excerpt says.

An original copy of the US Declaration of Independence from 1776 on display in Philadelphia

A copy made in the 1780s (pictured) is believed to be the only other signed parchment copy in existence

Newspaper staff said there was no review request after receiving the violation notice.

The following day Facebook restored the post with the message: 'It looks like we made a mistake and removed something you posted on Facebook that didn’t go against our Community Standards. We want to apologize and let you know that we’ve restored your content and removed any blocks on your account related to this incorrect action.'

The new copy was found with the papers of British aristocrat Charles Lennox, known as the 'radical duke' for his support of America during the revolution

The local paper thanked Facebook for restoring the post.

As the US' founding document has been flagged as hate speech online, a rare physical copy of the Declaration has been found at a British archive.

The parchment manuscript was discovered at the West Sussex Record Office in the English City of Chicester and is said to have belonged to aristocrat Charles Lennox, the Third Duke of Richmond, nicknamed 'Radical Duke' who was known for supporting the rebels.

Tests supported the hypothesis that it was produced in the 1780s, West Sussex County Council said earlier this week - just a few years after the declaration itself was issued in 1776.

The document 'is the only other contemporary manuscript copy of the Declaration of Independence on parchment apart from the signed copy at the National Archives in Washington DC,' known as the Matlack Declaration, a council statement said earlier this week.

There are other printed parchment copies and handwritten copies on paper but the Sussex Declaration, as it has been dubbed, and the Matlack Declaration in Washington are the only two known ceremonial parchment copies of the declaration.