Levi Strauss: Do Not Bring Your Legal, Concealed Carry Firearms Into Our Stores
SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Levi Strauss & Co. CEO Chip Bergh is posting an open letter to customers, asking law-abiding citizens to refrain from bringing their concealed carry firearms into Levi Strauss stores.

Bergh said his letter represents a “request” rather than a “mandate” or all-out ban, but he hopes customers will honor the request and enter Levi Strauss stores unarmed.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Fortune published Bergh’s letter, where he wrote:

Providing a safe environment to work and shop is a top priority for us at Levi Strauss & Co. That imperative is quickly challenged, however, when a weapon is carried into one of our stores. Recently, we had an incident in one of our stores where a gun inadvertently went off, injuring the customer who was carrying it. So, while we understand the heartfelt and strongly-held opinions on both sides of the gun debate, it is with the safety and security of our employees and customers in mind that we respectfully ask people not to bring firearms into our stores, offices or facilities, even in states where it’s permitted by law. Of course, authorized members of law enforcement are an exception.

The “incident” Bergh referenced was an accidental discharge whereby a Commerce, Georgia, customer lawfully carrying a gun accidentally shot himself and sustained non-life-threatening injuries.

Bergh pointed out that Levi Strauss has stores in “Paris, Nice, and Orlando”–the locations of three of the largest terror attacks of the last year–suggesting these three attack played a role in the decision to ask law-abiding citizens to disarm before entering stores throughout the US. Bergh did not mention that November 13, 2015, Paris attack took place in a gun-free zone, as did the June 12, 2016, Orlando Pulse attack. In both these instances, law-abiding patrons were disarmed in the very way Bergh seeks to disarm law-abiding patrons in his stores.

Moreover, in Nice, a gun was not even used. Rather, 84 people were killed by a terrorist who ran over them with a large truck.

 Levi’s CEO requests customers to leave guns at home while shopping for jeans Levi’s CEO requests customers to leave guns at home while shopping for jeans Levi’s CEO Chip Bergh posted an open letter on LinkedIn requesting customers not to bring their guns with them into the company’s stores, offices or facilities. In the letter Bergh explained there was an incident in which a gun accidentally went off in a store, injuring the customer carrying it. Bergh said, “It boils down to this: you shouldn’t have to be concerned about your safety while shopping for clothes or trying on a pair of jeans.” Yahoo    Obama Marks His Final Veterans Day

LeBron has goal in mind to impact community, be a role model for today's youth

Giuliani: "I have no expectations"

Levi’s CEO requests customers to leave guns at home while shopping for jeans

Wisconsin to Start President Vote Recount

Petraeus Says Meeting With Trump ‘Went Very Well’

Apple and Onion Stuffin' Muffins

Kaley Cuoco Jokes She 'Can't Choose' Between Boyfriend Karl Cook and Her Dog -- See the Pic!

Raw: Gas Pipeline Rupture North of Kansas City

Ali Wentworth on Her First Thanksgiving with Hubby (which involved fire trucks...)

James Marsden Shares a Smooch With His Celebrity Crush Helen Mirren

Rapper Q-Tip on Kanye West’s Remarks About Donald Trump

Breakfast-for-Dinner Turkey Benedicts

Adoree' Jackson is this week's Dickies Hardest Working Performer of the Week

Hidden Figures

Is Lamar Jackson The Heisman Frontrunner Still?

Photographer Captures Hilariously Candid Photo For Family's Christmas Card

Adele Declares She's Taking a Hiatus 'To Have Another Baby'

Obama: Take a Wait-and-See Approach With Trump

Chrissy Teigen Claps Back Over Sexy AMAs Dress

Kansas Fan Caught Sleeping During Game

Olympic gold medalist snowboarder hits tee shot… right into a poor cameraman

Meghan Markle Wraps Up Filming 'Suits' While Boyfriend Prince Harry Launches Caribbean Tour

Raw: First Major Snow of Season Hits New York

Granite Construction CEO: We'll Build a Wall If Asked

Matt Ryan Has Jersey Retired by Boston College

Jalen Hurts to Calvin Ridley Combination Is Heating Up For Alabama

FOX Audio operator flattened by Minnesota Vikings

American Music Awards: Watch the Biggest Moments of the Night!

Video shows sinking ship rescue

SportsFlash Video: Strong to be fired at UT

Raw: Runner Hit By Deer During Race

Oregon's Chris Boucher's Monster Slam Dunk

Kendall Jenner Explains Why She Deleted Her Instagram Gushes Over Niece Dream Kardashian

Kap on not voting: 'More than one way to create change'

UNC Basketball: Top Dunks vs. LBSU

Ryan Declares Dawn of New Unified Republican Government

Nick Saban Is Used To Being No. 1

Sylvester Stallone's Daughters Make History

Game-Winning Goal In OT Sends Wake Forest To ACC Championship Game

Obama Marks His Final Veterans Day

LeBron has goal in mind to impact community, be a role model for today's youth

Giuliani: "I have no expectations"

Levi’s CEO requests customers to leave guns at home while shopping for jeans

Wisconsin to Start President Vote Recount

Petraeus Says Meeting With Trump ‘Went Very Well’  To view this page ensure that Adobe Flash Player version 10.2.0 or greater is installed.      http://video.breitbart.com?ndn.trackingGroup=90085&ndn.siteSection=90085_dynamic_mlt&ndn.videoId=31692265  BACK Embed <iframe width="590" height="332" src="http://launch.newsinc.com/?type=VideoPlayer/Single&widgetId=1&trackingGroup=69016&playlistId=19132&siteSection=90085_dynamic_mlt&videoId=31692265" frameborder="no" scrolling="no" noresize marginwidth="0" marginheight="0"></iframe> Privacy Policy | Terms of Use Autoplay: On | Off

Bergh said he knows some individuals will react to the request to disarm by boycotting Levi Strauss, but he “concluded that most boycott threats around this topic ultimately blow over.”

Bergh said, “You don’t need a gun to try on a pair of jeans.”