BREAKING: DOJ Issues Shocking Orders on Confederate Flag Tattoos
Advertisement - story continues below

Last summer, the social justice warriors of America declared war on the Last summer, the social justice warriors of America declared war on the Confederate flag , claiming that it was a racist symbol that should be taken down all across America.

Since then, the Since then, the Confederate flag has slowly begun disappearing, but it still remains very popular. The Smoking Gun reported that the Justice Department has now taken its war against the flag a step further and is using it as evidence of racial bias.

The case in question involves Charles Butler, 33, and Robert Paschalis, 25, who are being charged with a hate crime after beating up someone because he was African-American.

Advertisement - story continues below

Now, admittedly these two were undoubtedly racists, but it was how the Justice Department chose to identify them that should worry us.

In the affidavit, the FBI details the evidence it has to show that Butler was a racist.

“(His Facebook page had photos of) Adolph Hitler, burning crosses, Nazi war eagles, Aryan Nationalist Alliance logos, Confederate flags, the Ku Klux Klan, references to President Obama as a monkey, and various white pride symbols,” reads the affidavit.

Advertisement - story continues below

Notice anything strange? The Confederate flag is used as evidence that he is racist. Now it is pretty clear from the laundry list of other things that Butler was racist (normal non-racist people don’t post photos of Hitler or the KKK on their Facebook pages), but the Notice anything strange? The Confederate flag is used as evidence that he is racist. Now it is pretty clear from the laundry list of other things that Butler was racist (normal non-racist people don’t post photos of Hitler or the KKK on their Facebook pages), but the Confederate flag is not evidence of this.

The affidavit goes further stating that Butler has “numerous tattoos indicative of white supremacy, including the German War Eagle, a portrait of Adolph Hitler, a Swastika and a Confederate flag.”

Once again the flag is being used to Once again the flag is being used to identify someone as racist when just the portrait of Hitler would have been enough.

Advertisement - story continues below

Unlike Nazi symbols, many Americans view the Confederate flag as a Unlike Nazi symbols, many Americans view the Confederate flag as a piece of history, and as indicative of a rebellious spirit. The Justice Department has simply decided that anyone with the flag is automatically a racist.

Maybe next it will determine that anyone raising a fist in the air doing the Black Panther salute is a racist as well, just to be fair.

Share this on Facebook and Twitter and let us know if you think Confederate flags are racist.