Woman Slices Off Rapists Genitals, Forces Him To Eat It At Gunpoint -
0  Tweet

29.9k  Share

17  Share

2  Pin

0  Mail

0  Share

NEWS 4 – A gruesome scene unfolded in a Fayetteville, North Carolina neighborhood after a convicted child molester kidnapped a 19-year-old woman and took her back to his home and assaulted her. Kimberly Walt was walking home from her friends house on Sunday afternoon when she says she was approached by Robert Williams, a three-time convicted felon. Williams asked her if she wanted a ride to where ever she was going, Walt replied “No thank you.” That’s when she said Williams drove off, but when she turned the corner he jumped out of the bushes, grabbed her and threw her in his car.

Williams took Walt to his home where he proceeded to assault her for several hours. According to police reports, Williams fell asleep after drinking massive amounts of alcohol and Walt was able to untie herself. She then approached Williams, tied him up, and in a bit of rage, grabbed a knife and “castrated him.” Walt stated that he woke up screaming and yelling, as she walked over with his “parts” and toss them in the microwave. “I threw that bastards junk in the microwave, grab the plate, fork and a steak knife and cut it up like hot dogs,” said Walt and a recorded statement. “I grabbed a gun that he had left on the kitchen counter, walked over to him, and forced him to eat it. I have no remorse and I am not sorry. That bastard deserved it and he’s going to hell.”

According to Williams statement, he said he was afraid to die and complied with Walt’s “morbidly disgusting request.” Williams was transported to a local hospital, bandaged up, and booked into the Fayetteville County Jail. Due to the circumstances, Walt will not be charged with any crime. Some are even calling her a hero. “Now we don’t have to worry about that pervert doing this to anyone else,” said Donna who lives in the neighborhood. “If we castrated every child molester, we would never have this problem.”