Chelsea Clinton used foundation to help pay for wedding: email
Chelsea Clinton used her family foundation’s cash to pay for her wedding, living expenses and taxes on gifts of cash from her parents, according to a bombshell email made public Sunday.

Doug Band, formerly a top aide to President Bill Clinton, griped about the former first daughter’s spending in a Jan. 4, 2012, email released by WikiLeaks.

“The investigation into her getting paid for campaigning, using foundation resources for her wedding and life for a decade, taxes on money from her parents…,” Band wrote to John Podesta, now Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman.

“I hope that you will speak to her and end this. Once we go down this road…”

Band’s message is contained in a chain of emails that were hacked from Podesta’s Gmail account. WikiLeaks has released more than 50,000 of the stolen emails over the past 32 days.

Earlier in his correspondence with Podesta, Band said he had “just received a call from a close friend” of Bill Clinton’s.

Band said the pal revealed that Chelsea had told one of George W. Bush’s daughters that she was looking into transfers of money from the Clinton Global Initiative to the Clinton Foundation.

“The bush kid then told someone else who told an operative within the republican party,” Band wrote, eschewing capitalizations.

Band — who was revealed in previous leaked emails to have called Chelsea a “spoiled brat kid” — also said he had “heard more and more chatter” about the former first daughter “and bari talking about lots of what is going on internally to people.”

The mention of “bari” is an apparent reference to Bari Lurie, Chelsea’s chief of staff at the Clinton Foundation.

“Not smart,” Band added.

Podesta responded: “You are perfecting your skills for understatement.”

Other hacked emails revealed Sunday that Podesta thought Hillary Clinton’s former chief of staff at the State Department, Cheryl Mills, “didn’t want her to run” for president due to the private server/email scandal and had likely told Clinton that using a private computer server was OK.

The new emails extended a chain of messages, released last month, in which Neera Tanden, a Clinton ally and president of the Center for American Progress think tank, fumed about who “told Hillary she could use a private email” and asked “has that person been drawn and quartered?”

“Don’t you think Cheryl?” Podesta asked Tanden on July 25, 2015.

“I repeat, why hasn’t this person been drawn and quartered? I’m reading wolf hall. There is something to be said for the power of torture,” Tanden answered.

“At least we now know why Cheryl didn’t want her to run,” Podesta wrote.

Clinton’s campaign declined to comment.

Also Sunday, the WikiLeaks revelations led to a report that Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel — President Obama’s first chief of staff — communicated with government officials and political figures using a private email account similar to the one set up by Hillary Clinton.

Emanuel registered a rahmemail.com personal email domain on May 16, 2011, the same day he was sworn into office, the Chicago Tribune reported. Clinton used the domain clintonemail.com.

Emanuel’s use of the private email account was revealed in hacked Podesta emails last month, and a subsequent search of Clinton emails released by the State Department showed he used it to communicate with her when she was secretary of state, the Tribune said.