Remember the Seattle CEO Who Raised All Salaries to $70K, Here's What…
Do you like this article?

Back in April we told you about Dan Price , CEO of Gravity Payments, who said he would pay every single one of his employees $70,000 annually.

Every single one, from the lowest skilled workers on up.

Now, as expected, Price has fallen on hard times financially, even having to rent out his own home.

Employees who work for Gravity are now leaving the company, “spurred in part by their view that it was unfair to double the pay of some new hires while the longest-serving staff members got small or no raises.”

This was always going to be the outcome.

If everyone hits the jackpot, does anybody really win the lottery?

Dan Price, 31, tells the New York Times that things have gotten so bad he’s been forced to rent out his house. “I’m working as hard as I ever worked to make it work,” he told the Times in a video that shows him sitting on a plastic bucket in the garage of his house. “I’m renting out my house right now to try and make ends meet myself.” The Times article said Price’s decision ended up costing him a few customers and two of his “most valued” employees, who quit after newer employees ended up with bigger salary hikes than older ones. Grant Moran, 29, also quit, saying the new pay-scale was disconcerting “Now the people who were just clocking in and out were making the same as me,” he told the paper. “It shackles high performers to less motivated team members.” The Times said customers who left were dismayed at what Price did, viewing it as a political statement. Others left fearful Gravity would soon hike fees to pay for salary increases. Brian Canlis, co-owner of a family restaurant, already worried about how to deal with Seattle’s new minimum wage, told Price the pay raise at Gravity “makes it harder for the rest of us.”

And to think, all of this came about within a few short months.

Liberal logic, for ya. One man with good intentions loses so much because he doesn’t understand how economics work.

Socialism: We all fail together!