Ripon College Bans Poster For 9/11 Memorial Claiming It Singles Out And/Or Harasses Muslim Students
A Young Americans for Freedom (YAF) chapter at Ripon College in Wisconsin was told by campus administrators that they could not hang their flyers publicizing their 9/11 memorial because “students from a Muslim background would feel singled out and/or harassed,” according to YAF.

The flyers are provided by YAF for their " 9/11: Never Forget Project" and feature pictures from various terrorist attacks including 9/11, the 2017 Pulse nightclub shooting, and the 1979 Iranian hostage crisis, among others.

Administrators were critical of the poster, claiming that some of the events “don’t have anything to do with 9/11,” citing ISIS ( and the Iranian hostage crisis, of which one administrator claimed, “I’m not sure I think the Iran hostage issue was Islamic terrorism.” which was previously named Al Qaeda in Iraq until 2013) and the Iranian hostage crisis, of which one administrator claimed, “I’m not sure I think the Iran hostage issue was Islamic terrorism.”

Poster for YAF's 9/11: Never Forget Project

The administration reportedly told the chapter that objections were brought to the administration and the bias incident team because the posters focus “relentlessly on one religious organization, one religious group, one religious identity,” and that “associating that one religious identity with terrorist attacks which go back far before 9/11 and after 9/11— creates for some students here an environment which they feel like they are not able to learn.”

Members of the Bias Protocol Board also said that the poster does not add “to the conversation about 9/11, or about the politics of terrorism, or about national security or responses to it that couldn't be done easily and more constructively without it.”

Administrators also raised concerns about the poster only displaying terrorism committed by Islamic terrorist organization. “It seems like the only terrorist activities brought up in this poster are those done by extremist Islamic groups, and so if I’m Muslim on this campus, like, ok, it sends the message that all terrorism happens by Muslims,” administrators reportedly said.

One administrator also said “the intent is admirable to talk about why we are killing each other,” according to YAF, but questioned why the club was focusing on 9/11 instead of school shootings.“That’s very admirable, and I support that, but what about school shootings?” the administrator asked. “We’ve had almost a school shooting a day for the last ten days, and we’re continuing to up the body count.”

The chapter used the same posters for their memorial last year, causing a bias report to be filed and resulting in a review and a meeting ahead of the planned memorial for this semester, according to YAF.

“Just as remembrances of horrific events carried out in the name of Nazism or Communism include honoring other victims of those ideological treacheries, so does the remembrance of the attacks carried out by radical Islamists on September 11, 2001,” YAF spokesman Spencer Brown said in an article.