22nd. OCTOBER, 2013 CONSTITUTION OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM (Order made und…
22nd. OCTOBER, 2013

an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $4,000,

imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or both.

Fraudulent collection of zakat.

239. ( 1) Any 'A mil who collects zakat or {itrah and issues receipt thereof but does

not surrender the amount collected to the Majlis within such period as

determined by the Majlis is guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction

to a fine not exceeding $8,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or

both.

(2] Any 'Amil who collects zakat or fitrah and does not issue receipt thereof

or issues false receipt is guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a

fine not exceeding $8,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or both.

(3) The Court shall, whether or not the 'Amil has been convicted under

subsection (1) or (2), order the collection of zakat or {itrah to be forfeited and paid

to the Majlis.

Build etc. mosque without permission.

240. Any Muslim who builds, dedicates or erects a mosque or uses any existing

building as or for the purposes of a mosque without the permission of the Majlis

under the Religious Council and Kadis Court Act (Chapter 77) is guilty of an

offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $10,000 and the

Court may, for satisfactory purposes subject to any rights of a third party, order

the person convicted to close or demolish the building.

Breach of secrecy.

241. ( 1) Any Member of the Majlis or its servant other than those expressly

authorised to do so, divulges any secret relating to the proceedings of the Majlis,

which it is his duty to keep its secrecy, to any person other than His Majesty the

Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan and any Member of the Majlis is guilty of an offence

and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $2,000, imprisonment not

exceeding 6 months or both.

(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to the matters which have been submitted

to and have received the approval of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan.

(3) In this section, "proceedings of the Majlis" means any matter which has

arisen at any meeting of the Majlis.

Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in any stage of judicial proceeding.

242. (1) Any person who intentionally insults or interrupts any public servant

while the public servant is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding is guilty of