10 Days, 10 Reasons Congressman Southerland is Out of Touch: Voting to End the Medicare Guarantee

Congressman Steve Southerland has repeatedly proven that his Washington Way is out touch with North Florida’s values. So for 10 days, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee is highlighting the top 10 reasons why Congressman Southerland’s dysfunctional politics represent everything North Floridians hate about Congress.

Today’s reason: Congressman Southerland voted to end the Medicare guarantee for seniors, and today is the 49th Anniversary of Medicare being signed into law.

“Congressman Steve Southerland has repeatedly proven that his Washington Way is totally out of touch with North Florida’s values,” said David Bergstein of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. “Congressman Southerland complains that his taxpayer funded salary isn’t enough and defends his perks – then he votes to make seniors pay more by ending the Medicare guarantee that they’ve earned. That’s just one example of how Congressman Southerland’s dysfunctional politics represent everything North Floridians hate about Congress.”

And in case you missed it, here’s the first reason Congressman Southerland’s Washington Way out of touch with North Florida.

BACKGROUND:

Congressman Southerland Voted for Republican Budget That Ends the Medicare Guarantee. In April 2014, Congressman Southerland voted for their FY 2015 budget proposal. According to AARP: “Chairman Ryan’s proposed budget fails to address the high costs of health care and instead shifts costs onto seniors and future retirees… Removing the Medicare guarantee of affordable health coverage for older Americans by implementing a premium support system and asking seniors and future retirees to pay more is not the right direction.” [H Con Res 96, Vote #177, 4/10/14; AARP Press Release, 4/01/14]

Tampa Bay Times: Under Southerland budget the “Rich Get Richer” and “Medicare and Medicaid are Particularly at Risk.” “Floridians should be concerned about all these misplaced priorities, but Medicare and Medicaid are particularly at risk […] Congressional Republicans want to exacerbate the nation’s yawning income inequality while making life harder for those at the bottom.” [Tampa Bay Times, 3/30/12]

Palm Beach Post: Congressman Southerland Voted for Budget Proposal that “Would Shred the Safety Net,” Forcing Seniors to Rely on Insurance Companies. In 2013, Southerland voted for the House Republican budget. The Palm Beach Post wrote, “Rep. Ryan’s stated goal of saving the safety net and protecting the most vulnerable is perverse because his budget would shred the safety net and imposes new suffering on the most vulnerable. For health care, he would relegate the poor who receive Medicaid to the tender mercies of state legislatures […] and the elderly on Medicare to the charitable impulses of insurance companies.” [HCR 25, Vote #88, 3/21/13; Palm Beach Post, 3/14/13]