Church Shooter in Southerland Springs, TX Identified as Devon Patrick…
Church members seemed to have known the perpetrator, whom some call a convert to Islam

The shooter is dead. He has been officially identified as Devon Patrick Kelly, a former US Air Force enlisted man and Sunday school teacher.

The shooter walked into the church in Southerland Springs Texas at 11:45 am Sunday morning. Churchgoers knew the shooter who carried automatic weapons.

The shooter is dead. He has been officially identified as Devon Patrick Kelly, but Mustachio Tweeted: "#texaschurchshooting shooter is 29 year old US Airman turned Muslim convert, Samir Al-Hajeed. His manifesto is making its rounds on the web."

A LinkedIn page in the shooter's name shows that Devin Kelley served in the U.S. Air Force "from his 2009 high-school graduation until 2013," The Daily Beast reported. According to The New York Times, Kelley is from Comal County, which is not the county where the church is located. His motive and why he targeted the Wilson County church is not clear. Comal County is located northeast of San Antonio, Texas. The gunman is 26-years-old, The Times reported. The Daily Beast reported that Kelley was a "resident of New Braunfels, a suburb of San Antonio." Kelly's Facebook page was quickly scrubbed.

Update 5:32 p.m.: CBS News reports Devin Kelley received a dishonorable discharge from the Air Force after being court-martialed in May 2014. The reports states it is unclear if Kelley died from a self-inflicted wound or if police shot him.

Pres. Donald Trump is in Japan on an official trip to Asia. He tweeted "May God be with the people of Sutherland Springs. The FBI is on scene, and I am monitoring the situation."

At least 27 people were killed and around 27 injured in a Texas church shooting Sunday morning, law enforcement sources told ABC News.

The alleged shooter is dead, and it appears there is no longer an active threat at the First Baptist Church in Sutherland Springs, about 40 miles southeast of San Antonio, police told ABC News.

A person who said she works at a gas station across the street from the church told ABC News she heard rapid gunfire at around 11:15 a.m., leading congregants from the church as well as customers at the station to run inside for cover.

"We heard several shots and we all started running inside the store," she said.

"It lasted about 15 seconds. I yelled, 'Get down! Get inside!' and we all went into hiding," said the woman, who said she is 49 but declined to give her name.

She said the gas station locked its doors. "We have not reopened," she said.

She then that within minutes of the gunfire, emergency personnel had arrived at the scene.

"There were officers that were checking the wounded in here were asking them questions," she said.