Holistic Doctor Found Dead in Parking Lot Before Seminar | Health Nut…
Wasn’t it just last week I was reporting on Wasn’t it just last week I was reporting on yet another holistic doctor in Michigan, also headed to a seminar, who had a heart attack in the car on the way to event ? And that same week, another Michigan holistic doc had a heart attack, too? She was only 32 and her colleagues were shocked. There are also other doctors who allegedly died right before attending events or just after…

I’ll be doing a story on that, as literally at one event last year- three died within weeks- and then this year at the same yearly event, one died weeks before he was to speak there.

Holistic Doctor Jeff Bradstreet MD also died just weeks after the well known Autism One conference where he had allegedly said he had “big news” he would be sharing soon on some breakthrough information. He was found dead weeks later in a river with a gunshot wound to his chest.

The latest in my holistic doctor deaths series, which is well over 50 in a year, is Dr Armond Bert who was actually found dead around Valentine’s day. We would have reported it sooner but we only just heard about it.

Dr. Armon Bert, who was reported missing by his family, was found in his car in the parking lot of a Kirkwood Lowes store (St Louis suburb), the “apparent’ victim of a heart attack (how do they clock his death at exactly 10:04 AM if they found him in the car?).

Perryville police contacted the family with the sad news which was received from the Kirkwood Police Department.

According to reports, a Kirkwood police officer discovered Dr. Bert in his car with the seat reclined.

Dr. Bert had been missing since Friday (which we believe was Feb 19th of this year, 2016).

According to a family member he had been expected to spend Friday night at a friend’s house and then attend a seminar in St. Louis on Saturday.

Dr Bert received his master’s degree in mechanical engineering and worked at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio.

He then went to school to become a chiropractor at Palmer College of Chiropractic in Davenport, Iowa, and graduated in 2000. Armon worked for Dr. Bobb Chiropractic Center in Silvis from 2000 to 2008 before moving to Perryville, Missouri. For the past eight years, Armon owned and operated Perryville Chiropractic Center.

Armon was of the Catholic faith. He was a member of Perryville Rotary Club and had served as president. He also was a die-hard St. Louis Cardinal baseball fan.

Survivors include his two brothers , Lenny (Carole) Bert of Chester and Norbert Bert, also of Chester; three sisters , Gerri (Charles) Keeble of Oak Ridge, Missouri, Mary (Prentiss) Wilson of Percy and Sandy Kisro (friend, Neal Bierman) of Campbell Hill; and many nieces, nephews, cousins and friends. Rest in peace, our heart goes out to his family and friends. We’ll update you when we learn more about the event he was about to attend and what he was lecturing on.

Don’t miss an update, keep up Don’t miss an update, keep up here

Erin Elizabeth XO