Prank backfires painfully after Singaporean woman tries to photocopy her breasts
File photo of a woman photocopying her breasts. Source: WPLX Media

A 25-year old Singaporean woman is recovering in hospital after an attempted prank involving a photocopier backfired painfully for her yesterday afternoon.

According to local media reports, the woman was dared by her friends to strip naked and run inside a convenience store in Bishan. Once inside, she was to take a photocopy of her breasts using the store’s machine.

Despite her initial reluctance, the woman agreed to the dare after her friends called her a coward. Speaking to the media, one her friends spoke of her regret for being involved in the incident.

“We thought it was just a harmless prank,” she told journalists. “If we knew she would get hurt, we would never had dared her to do it.”

The convenience store clerk, who witnessed the incident, told of his shock at seeing a naked woman running into the store. “She ran past the counter and went straight to the photocopier,” he said. “I was too stunned to move, I’ve never seen something like that before.”

The clerk explained that he watched on, powerless to intervene as the woman lifted the tray of the photocopier and placed her breasts on the glass. “It must have been cold because gave out a little cry as they touched the glass,” he said. “I yelled out to her, ‘don’t do it!’, but she ignored me and pressed the ‘copy’ button.”

According to the clerk, there was a moment of silence as the copier’s beam scanned across the woman’s breasts. This was followed by a howl of pain. “The woman started screaming and cursing,” he said, and he quickly rushed to her aid.

“Her breasts were bright red,” he told journalists. “The beam of light from the copier must have burned them.” The clerk grabbed a bottle of water from a nearby fridge and splashed it over the woman’s breasts. Her friends, who had been waiting outside, rushed into the store to see what was taking so long.

“We called for help immediately,” said her friend who spoke to journalists. “We were so shocked that she’d been burned by the copier. We didn’t anticipate that at all.” The woman was rushed to hospital where doctors treated her burnt skin.

“We would strongly advise people to never place their body parts on a photocopier,” said one of the medical team who treated the injured woman. “In particular, sensitive areas such as the breasts or genitals are very susceptible to being burnt by the light emitted by copiers. There’s also the risk of being electrocuted from the machine’s high voltage wiring.”

For the woman involved in the incident, the medical staff are confident she’ll make a quick recovery. “The quick actions of the clerk by dousing her breasts in cold water should limit the extent of the burns,” said a doctor.

For his role in helping the woman, the convenience store clerk is being hailed as a hero. “I was just doing my job,” he told journalists. “As long as she makes a full recovery, that’s all I am worried about.”