Tetyana Obukhanych, PhD is creating lectures
MY MISSION



To share my knowledge of Immunology with those who seek more clarity about immunization, immunity, and the immune system, and who understand that the science is never settled.MY EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUNDI graduated summa cum laude with a BA in Biochemistry and then earned a PhD in Immunology. Upon completion of my PhD research thesis (on immunologic memory) at The Rockefeller University in New York, I held postdoctoral research training appointments in prominent immunology laboratories affiliated with Harvard Medical School and Stanford University School of Medicine.WHY I LEFT THE MAINSTREAM RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENTDuring my post-doctoral years, I realized that the so-called 'academic freedom' of the mainstream research establishment has been subjugated to a pharmaceutically-driven paradigm. Built on fear and misunderstanding of our relationship with all parts of Nature, the mainstream paradigm capitalizes on manmade chronic disease created as a collateral damage in our never-ending war on germs. At the end of my post-doctoral training, I made the decision to leave the mainstream establishment, whose value system, priorities, and directions I could no longer embrace.My 2012 e-bookmarks my own humble milestone: the disillusionment with the vaccination paradigm. Since then, I've been lecturing at integrative medicine conferences and public educational events to promote better understanding of the unintended consequences of mass vaccination programs and highlight the immune system's own requirements for optimal function in dealing with infections and avoiding disease complications.I am one of the Founding Directors of, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization of doctors, scientists, and attorneys dedicated to safeguarding informed consent in vaccination and educating the public on infectious disease, the immune system, and medical ethics of informed consent.I am also involved withBBCH is a private online community of parents and professionals who joined in to contribute their knowledge and experiences in science, medical or nursing fields, social work, and law to help each other better protect their children's health in a current paradigm that leaves more and more children chronically ill. BBCH welcomes new members.MY WORKI strive to seek out and present modern research that continues to refine the knowledge of how our daily choices (e.g. through nutrient depletion, oxidative stress, or toxic burdens) can create specific immune system vulnerabilities that allow viruses or bacteria to become threatening to our health or survival. Being informed about what the immune system needs to have in order to function as intended helps us avoid setting it up to fail by what we do (or don't do) on a daily basis. It also allows us to overcome the fear of 'germs,' whether or not they are targeted by vaccines, by understanding the reasons for the historic reduction in mortality from infectious diseases over time, even prior to vaccine introductions.I've documented my scientifically-referenced perspective -- that the immune system, in its fully functional state, can ensure our peaceful co-existence (i.e., without deadly or crippling outcomes) with viruses and bacteria -- in a 6-part webinar course calledand I continue to create more lectures.THANK YOU FOR YOUR SUPPORTThank you for becoming my Patron and supporting my work in creating lectures on how to be responsible stewards of our own immune systems in a sustainable paradigm of health.LIVE LECTURES WILL RESUME IN SEPTEMBER 20181. What are lectures focused on in general?My lectures are primarily focused on the immune system, vaccines, and children's health. I announce the topic of each new lecture 1-2 weeks in advance on BBCH Facebook page and via e-mail to Patreon subscribers and BBCH members. To see the scope of topics from a prior year, click HERE 2. When do lectures or Q&A sessions happen?See announcements at the top of the page.3. How long does a lecture last?One hour.4. Where are lectures held?Lectures are held via a teleconferencing platform called Zoom. Lecture slides are displayed via screen share. Q&A during and after the lecture. Download zoom app HERE 5. Who can attend?Patreon supporters and BBCH members. Eligible participants receive an invitation message via e-mail with a private url and back-up call-in instructions, one day in advance.6. Are lectures recorded?Starting September 2018, lectures will be recorded. Patreon supporters are invited to participate in live lectures only. To receive access to the archive of lecture recordings, please become a BBCH member.7. What languages are lectures offered in?My lectures are offered in English only. Although I was born and raised in Ukraine, I pursued my higher education in the United States, where I lived ever since.