Substance Use Among Persons in Families Receiving Government Assistance
Patterns of Past Month Substance Use Past month heavy alcohol use. Among all persons aged 12 to 64, 6.4 percent report past month heavy alcohol use. The prevalence of past month heavy alcohol use among persons in assisted families is 5.9 percent, not significantly different from the rate of 6.4 percent among persons living in families benefiting from no government assistance (Table 1). The prevalence of 9.5 percent among males in assisted families is not significantly different from the prevalence of 9.9 percent among males in unassisted families (Figure 1). The prevalence is also similar among females in assisted and unassisted families, but is lower than the rate among males. For both males and females aged 18 to 25, the prevalence among persons in assisted families is lower than the prevalence for persons in families receiving no government assistance. However, for both males and females aged 35 to 49, the prevalence of heavy alcohol use among persons in assisted families is higher than the rate for persons in families receiving no government assistance. Past month illicit drug use. Among all persons aged 12 to 64, 7.2 percent report past month illicit drug use. The prevalence among persons in assisted families (9.6 percent) is higher than among persons in families receiving no government assistance (6.8 percent). For both males and females, and across all age groups, the prevalence of past month illicit drug use in assisted families is about the same or greater than the prevalence among families receiving no government assistance (Figure 2). Substance use by type of assistance program. Prevalence of past month heavy alcohol use among persons aged 12 to 64 receiving Medicaid is lower than among persons not receiving Medicaid (Table 1). The prevalence of past month illicit drug use among persons in families receiving Medicaid, cash assistance, non-cash assistance, or Food Stamps is higher than among persons in families who do not benefit from any of these types of assistance.



Figure 1. Persons Aged 12 to 64: Prevalence of Past Month Heavy Alcohol Use by Age and Family Assistance Status: 1999-2000 Figure 2. Persons Aged 12 to 64: Prevalence of Past Month Illicit Drug Use by Age and Family Assistance Status: 1999-2000