OUTRAGEOUS: What Obama Just Did To The White House Logo Will Make You Sick…
1.9k shares

SHARE

TWEET

PIN

It’s no secret that Obama despises everything America stands for and what you are about to see is proof of this.

One needs to look no further than what the Muslim-in-Chief did to the White House logo, when he had it redesigned in 2009 immediately after he was sworn into office.

top of the logo. Davis at Conservative Tribune points out that almost everyone knows what the White House logo is supposed to look like — a portrait of the North Face of the White House — but what few people have noticed over the past few years was the change at the

For many years, the White House logo had the American flag flying on the top of the White House — as it does in real life. In Obama’s redesigned version, there is no American flag, just a white flag.

Here is the logo before Obama:

And here is the logo after Obama whitewashed it:

The white flag is a common symbol for surrender, which has many people wondering if Obama was trying to secretly signal to America’s enemies that he was surrendering.

Obama HAS surrendered in reality. Look at what he has done to our country- and the entire world frankly.

It really comes as no surprise that Obama took our flag off of the logo. All he has done has disgraced old glory from day one. Obama apologizes to nations for our success and superiority on a daily basis. I’m amazed he didn’t put an ISIS flag on it!

He has done his best to transform America into a third world cesspool, similar to the country that he was born in- Africa.

We know that when Donald Trump becomes president, he will put our flag back on the White House logo.

Until then, let’s just hope we can survive the duration of the Obama presidency.

We HAVE to take back our country NOW or America will never be the same.

God Bless.

VOTE FOR DONALD TRUMP AND TOGETHER WE WILL MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!

Please share this on Facebook and Twitter!

1.9k shares

SHARE

TWEET

PIN