UPDATE: Missing Vegas Security Guard On Clinton Foundation Payroll – …
Something fishy is going on. The unarmed security guard who allegedly distracted Las Vegas shooter Stephen Paddock, sustaining a wound to his leg, has completely disappeared. Gone. Vanished.

Ever since a lone gunman somehow managed to shoot more than 500 people, the media has been gushing over Jesus Campos, but now even police have no idea where he is . The Chicago Tribune reports:

He was hailed a hero by many, even as the story changed. Twice. Now, the man that many want to honor and who can help bring clarity about the timeline of the shooting has vanished from the public eye, less than two weeks since the Oct. 1 massacre, which left 58 people dead and more than 500 others injured. David Hickey, president of the Security, Police, and Fire Professionals of America union, said it had been four days since he last saw Jesus Campos. “We have had no contact with him…. Clearly, somebody knows where he is,” he said.

Campos disappeared after a series of interview, and new information about him explains why: he isn’t the hero everyone thinks he is.

Originally, Lombardo said Campos was shot at 9:59 p.m. the night of the attack – before the “lone gunman” even opened fire. Later, the story changed to 10:05.

In fact, there are many inconsistencies in the official story. Wakeup World reports:

However, it is far from proven that there were actually real bullets fired that killed real people. Consider these 3 pieces of eyewitness testimony that used to be in this video (now taken down … surprise, surprise!) A man down on the ground had claimed that: “Someone has tapped into the sound system. There’s no hits, no hits. It’s the sound system.” Another person in the same video had shouted 3 times (now here ): “They’re not real gunshots.” A third person had stated (now available here ): “I really don’t see anybody actually injured.”

In addition, there was no smoke near the window the gunman was firing from. An AR-15 firing for 10 minutes straight would have emanated plumes of smoke.

Then there’s this tidbit from Fox News. It’s two sentences, but they’re very interesting sentences: Until last month, Campos worked a second job at the Clinton Foundation’s Las Vegas office where he had been providing security services for more than five years. He resigned suddenly just before the attacks.

Of course, many find the timing suspect including police, who are currently making finding Campos a “top priority.”

This is a breaking story. We will update when more information is available.

.