Virgin Islands Grabbing Guns Ahead Of Irma
U.S. Virgin Islands Gov. Kenneth Mapp signed an emergency order allowing the seizure of private guns, ammunition, explosives and property the National Guard may need to respond to Hurricane Irma.



Do You Think This Emergency Order Is Unconstitutional? Yes No Login with your social identity to vote Thanks for participating in this survey, in order to vote you must register with your email address. SECURITY WARNING: Please treat the URL above as you would your password and do not share it with anyone. See the Facebook Help Center for more information. SECURITY WARNING: Please treat the URL above as you would your password and do not share it with anyone. See the Facebook Help Center for more information. Log In Sign in Signed in in Sign in with LinkedIn .

Sign out. Completing this poll entitles you to Daily Caller news updates free of charge. You may opt out at anytime. You also agree to our Completing this poll entitles you to Daily Caller news updates free of charge. You may opt out at anytime. You also agree to our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use

Mapp signed the order Monday in preparation for Hurricane Irma. The order allows the Adjutant General of the Virgin Islands to seize private property they believe necessary to protect the islands, subject to approval by the territory’s Justice Department.

Mapp issued an emergency declaration Tuesday and mobilized National Guard units to prepare for the massive storm.

“This is not an opportunity to go outside and try to have fun with a hurricane,” Mapp “This is not an opportunity to go outside and try to have fun with a hurricane,” Mapp said . “It’s not time to get on a surfboard.”

Irma strengthened to a Category 5 storm Tuesday, with wind gusts hitting 175 miles an hour. Irma’s eye is expected to pass just north of the heart of the U.S. Virgin Islands on Wednesday and bring four to eight inches or rain and 60-mile-per-hour wind gusts.

The National Hurricane Center is calling the storm “extremely dangerous.” Weather forecasters say Irma is headed towards the Florida coastline, and should bring devastating conditions to the region in the next four or five days.

GOP Florida Gov. Rick Scott and Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo Rosselló both declared states of emergencies in anticipation of Irma.

Scott said President Donald Trump “offered the full resources of the federal government as Floridians prepare for Hurricane Irma.”

Irma comes more than one week after Hurricane Harvey brought devastating floods to the greater Houston area.

Click below to read a copy of the order:

Follow Michael on Follow Michael on Facebook and Twitter