Does Billy save the front row for his biggest fans? — Forum | The Off…
As one of the lucky ones, YES, he does give away the entire front row (and the second one too)! I won't bore you with the details, but I am a huge Billy Joel fan, and I passed my enthusiasm on to my husband. We are 31, and when we got married 5 years ago, we chose Just the Way You Are for our first dance. Piano Man was our last dance. Anyways, I have been to three of his concerts, and I always buy tickets the second they go on sale online. "Best Available" always end up being nosebleed seats because they get snatched up by connected people who probably make a fortune reselling them. Anyways, on our way up to Cleveland this April, I was telling my husband about how in A Matter of Trust: The Bridge to Russia, Billy Joel was talking about how he didn't want the bored rich dudes in the front row; he wants his biggest fans to be up front. I wondered aloud about how cool it would be to sit in the front row (seriously). Anyways, while we were looking for our seats in the upper deck, a crew man approached us and offered us front row tickets. My response was just, "Why?" He said, "I just look for couples who look like they are having a good time together, and I thought you'd enjoy them." I'm thinking, "This is too good to be true." My husband was actually rude to him, thinking he was trying to scam us! I finally took the tickets, figuring we had nothing to lose. I took the tickets to an usher and said, "Some guy just gave us these tickets, they are fake, right?" The usher was totally confused--he had no idea what was going on. He took the tickets to investigate. At that point, I was sure they were fake. An usher should know if front row seats are being handed out, right? He came back five minutes later and said, "Well, I have news...they are real!" and he escorted us to our seats. It was cute how excited he was for us. I was total disbelief. I was like, "Oh my God, the movie thing...it just happened!" We had an absolute blast. We weren't doing anything to draw attention to ourselves; we were just looking for our seats. I'm sure we were smiling and laughing and having a good time, but we were just being ourselves. On a related note, my husband ran into the crew guy who gave us the tickets and apologized! The front row was made up of a diverse bunch, but you could tell they were big Billy Joel fans! Billy, if you're reading this, you made my dreams come true :-) Thank you! And thanks to the awesome crew guy, whoever you are! You know how to spot the true fans!