Rep. Wilson Has Never Supported A Pro-Veteran Bill
Rep. Frederica Wilson has cast herself as the champion of veterans and their families with her recent attacks on President Donald Trump over comments he denies making to a Gold Star family.

However, when it was time to cast a vote for veterans, the record shows that the Florida Democrat has not supported key legislation — or any legislation supporting veterans at all, for that matter.

For example, on Oct. 1, 2013, she opposed what was known as “H J Res 72 – Veterans Benefits Continuing Appropriations Resolution, 2014,” which For example, on Oct. 1, 2013, she opposed what was known as “H J Res 72 – Veterans Benefits Continuing Appropriations Resolution, 2014,” which VoteSmart.org said was “a motion to suspend rules and pass a joint resolution that appropriates funds for military and veterans’ benefits and payments for fiscal year 2014.”

Advertisement – story continues below

The vote came at a time when a federal shutdown was a possibility. The resolution sought to ensure that veterans and their families would not be caught up in the partisan conflict on Capitol Hill.

As noted by As noted by Fox News , that same year she took another swipe at veterans.

The article said Wilson opposed “a bill that could have ensured that families of four soldiers slain in Afghanistan in 2013 received death and burial benefits.”

Advertisement - story continues below

In July 2015, Wilson likewise had the opportunity to vote on the VA Accountability Act of 2015, a proposal which sought to authorize “the Department of Veterans Affairs to remove or demote a department employee based on performance or misconduct.”

As seen above, Wilson not only opposed the VA Accountability Act of 2015, but numerous other pieces of legislation that were designed to help veterans.

Advertisement - story continues below

In fact, when it came time for other bills that would tighten up the ability of the VA to discipline staff in the name of better care for veterans, Wilson was there to vote no every time — except for once, when she didn’t vote at all.

And many have caught on to the Democrat’s record, taking to Twitter to give their opinion.

Rotten Dem Rep. Wilson Routinely Votes Against Our Wonderful Veterans, Military Families and VA Rotten Dem Rep. Wilson Routinely Votes Against Our Wonderful Veterans, Military Families and VA https://t.co/QuNZNhDnWx — David Waddell (@DavidWaddell5) — David Waddell (@DavidWaddell5) October 19, 2017

Dem Wilson no friend of veterans, vote record shows – Shame on her for politicizing the death of a vet. Dem Wilson no friend of veterans, vote record shows – Shame on her for politicizing the death of a vet. #Slime https://t.co/4APt48mrPE — Nina J Tomasieski (@NinaMorton) — Nina J Tomasieski (@NinaMorton) October 19, 2017

Advertisement - story continues below

In June, the Trump administration’s massive overhaul of the VA came before Congress as the “ Department of Veterans Affairs Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017.”

Wilson rejected the wide-ranging plan to improve care for veterans and became one of only 55 members of Congress to oppose the bill.

At that time, she’d signed her name to a At that time, she’d signed her name to a letter from several Democrats objecting to Trump’s military policy of not telegraphing troop movement to Congress or the media, a policy Trump said he follows to better protect the lives of men and women serving overseas.