Ralph Northam, advocating infanticide is worse than blackface
opinion

Blackface is bad. But slaughtering deformed babies is worse, Northam

Scott Jennings | Opinion contributor Published 4:03 PM EST Feb 4, 2019

Except for the quiet sobbing of a grieving mother, silence filled a dark hospital room in the middle of the night. Holding her daughter, whose spirit had slipped quietly into heaven before her body emerged into this world, the mother wept until her tear ducts ran dry.

There is no more desperate feeling than that of a parent holding a dead child. You would do anything. You would pay anything.

But at that moment there is nothing to do but pray. And cry.

Those memories flooded back to me last week as I watched Democrats in Virginia calmly describe their ghoulish plans to murder babies as they were being delivered, and after. State Delegate Kathy Tran (D) testified in favor of her legislation allowing abortions up to the moment of birth:

"I mean, through the third trimester," Tran said. "The third trimester goes up to 40 weeks."

"Okay, but to the end of the third trimester?" Majority Leader Todd Gilbert (R) asked her.

"Yup, I don't think we have a limit in the bill," Tran replied.

"Where it's obvious that a woman is about to give birth, she has physical signs that she's about to give birth, would that still be a point at which she could request an abortion if she was so certified?" Gilbert asked. "She's dilating,” he added.

"My bill would allow that, yes," Tran said, as calmly as any grocery store butcher goes about their business.

Related: Planned Parenthood makes big money move to fight right-wing attacks

The Tran testimony shocked me, but not as much as what happened next. Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam (D) took it a step further by advocating for abortion after delivery.

“…If a mother is in labor, I can tell you exactly what would happen. The infant would be delivered. The infant would be kept comfortable. The infant would be resuscitated if that's what the mother and the family desired, and then a discussion would ensue between the physicians and the mother. So I think this was really blown out of proportion,” Northam said during a radio interview. Don’t worry — if we miss on the first try we’ll certainly get them on the second, Dr. Mengele.

The governor of Virginia — a pediatrician, by the way — advocates murdering children after delivery and he thinks everyone else is blowing it out of proportion. During his campaign, Northam supported “high quality, affordable health care for all Americans.” I don’t usually think of killing a live human post-birth as “health care,” but I’m not angling to direct the next "Faces of Death" movie the way Northam apparently is.

Northam gave a specific reason for committing this sort of murder — “severe deformities.” Everyone should watch his interview and demand answers from every Democratic candidate they meet. Do you believe in slaughtering children post-birth because of deformities? It’s a simple yes or no question. Don’t let them off the hook in Iowa, New Hampshire, or your state capitol.

This all happened a few days after the New York legislature passed and Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) signed legislation allowing abortions up to 40 weeks. Activists whooped loudly in the state Senate chamber as Democrats passed their bill, and more cheered as Cuomo signed it at a pep rally fit for the Grim Reaper.

“This evening is sweet,” Cuomo exclaimed before enraptured liberal supporters, “because we won!” Cuomo even ordered the spire atop One World Trade Center to be lit pink to celebrate. A place built to remember the thousands of innocent lives lost on 9/11 became a monument to the slaughter of thousands of innocent babies.

Disgusting.

Fighting crime: How a Louisville police team hunts down robbers, killers and rapists

I can’t imagine what lies in the heart of someone who cheers for more abortions. I can’t imagine feeling “sweet” over authorizing doctors (and even non-doctors, in the case of New York’s law) to terminate babies over deformities.

Our little girl had deformities. I can assure you that no one held a pep rally when she died.

But there was cheering — sweet, sweet cheering — this week for a 2017 speech made by a man named Frank Stephens. His congressional testimony recirculated on social media at a time when our nation needs a reminder that all life is precious.

“I am a man with Down syndrome, and my life is worth living,” Stephens said. “Politicians change laws; I want to change hearts.” Stephens added: “Is there really no place for us in the world?”

History will remember Northam as the disgraced Democrat who wore blackface, maybe a Ku Klux Klan robe, and nearly moonwalked at a press conference to explain why. I’ll remember Ralph for calmly calling for infanticide — exposing the darkest part of the American Left’s radical abortion agenda — before the Universe delivered his much-deserved comeuppance.

Scott Jennings is a CNN Contributor and Partner at RunSwitch Public Relations. Reach him at scott@runswitchpr.com or @ScottJenningsKY on Twitter.

One mom's story: Bekah Bischoff wanted a perfect birth, but instead she almost died

Published 4:03 PM EST Feb 4, 2019