Indians Killed in American Genocide Memorialized in Moscow? - Indian …
One of the suggested images for a proposed American Indian memorial in front of the American Embassy in Moscow.

The Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation recently announced a proposal to build a memorial commemorating the genocide of American Indians in front of the American Embassy in Moscow. (According to the The Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation recently announced a proposal to build a memorial commemorating the genocide of American Indians in front of the American Embassy in Moscow. (According to the Observer the Civic Chamber of Russian Federation is comparable to U.S. House Committee on Oversight in the U.S.)

Civic Chamber member Valery Korovin told the Observer , “This monument must become the silent reproach of the modern American elites which had significantly deviated from the idealistic principles that were laid into the foundation of the American state.”

Although the Federation is planning to forward the proposal to President Vladimir Putin’s administration, the form of and funding for the memorial are vague.

Vladimir Larin, a video blogger in Moscow, and a handful of friends, got the idea for the memorial after learning of the Vladimir Larin, a video blogger in Moscow, and a handful of friends, got the idea for the memorial after learning of the Ukraine famine memorial unveiled in Washington D.C. last year

The 1932-33 famine, known by Ukrainians as Holodomor or “death by hunger,” came about, many historians say, when Russian dictator Joseph Stalin deliberately starved them in reprisal for their resistance to Soviet collectivism policies.

The bronze sculpture depicts stalks of wheat symbolizing the seizure of Ukrainian grain by the Soviets and is located near the U.S. Capitol.

“The U.S. is always looking for ways to promote its work in world democracy and decrying Russia’s wrongdoing,” Larin told ICTMN via Skype. “They ignore the genocide against the American Indians that they committed in creating their own country.”

Larin and friends put the proposal before the Civic Chamber and are encouraged that the project is receiving some media recognition. Now they hope to gather funding and support through Crowdfunding. They also hope that Native peoples in the U.S. will support their efforts by suggesting a design for the memorial and sending videos to create more public awareness about the memorial. Larin’s fellow memorial creators are video bloggers, filmmakers and web designers.

“Perhaps a wealthy American Indian will support us,” he suggested.

Larin has created a Larin has created a Facebook page featuring a couple of suggested images, one of an especially red-complexioned Plains-style Native.

Russians have a special place in their hearts for the American Indian, according to Larin.

“We know what it is to have your land invaded and destroyed,” he said.