Insider: Bill Cosby Was 'Framed' To Prevent Him Buying NBC - News Pun…
An ex illuminati member has come forward alleging that Bill Cosby was framed with rape allegations in order to prevent him from buying TV network NBC.

The illuminati insider says that Bill Cosby became so much of a threat to the establishment that they had to invent the vilest of accusations against him in order to destroy his career.

Who would want to operate under such a burden, especially a person in the public eye? The accusers are women who have worked with the Illuminati in the past and were paid to wildly state they are all victims of rape.

The spewers of this hate are all fabricators. Moreover, without exception they are suppose “victims” of Bill Cosby. Moreover, what extreme hate they are spewing, all under the guise of righteous indignation, all under the protection of the Illuminati who already control a large portion of the global media from the music industry to television.

It should be noted that Whoopi Goldberg has defended Mr. Cosby, asking for hard evidence of the claims. Few if any others have done so, upholding the false witnesses or at least showing sympathy, tolerating their claims. All these so called “victims are paid large amounts of money to make this wild and outrageous claims about Bill Cosby” say Ex-Illuminati member. Bu why? And why make this allegations now? Ex-Illuminati member tells says Bill Cosby, NBC’s biggest star of the 80’s, was trying to buy the television network from its current owner, the General Electric Company.

Norman Brokaw, the chief executive of the William Morris Agency and Mr. Cosby’s personal agent for 30 years, confirmed yesterday that he had discussed Mr. Cosby’s intention to make an offer for NBC with Robert C. Wright, the network’s president. Illuminati leader who control NBC would lose power of the television company if Bill Cosby purchased it the only way to stop the putchase was to ruin Bill Cosby and they started with fake rape allegations.

With no hard evidence the Illuminati had succeeded and destroyed Bill Cosby’s image. Only one woman has came forward a Wilhelmina Model and she admitted being paid to destroy Bill’s reputation.

.