R.I. Governor Signs Executive Order To Seize Guns - Conservative Dail…
Advertisement

Democratic Governor signed an executive order allowing the federal government to seize firearms from the homes of individuals they deem are dangerous. Rhode Island’s Democratic Governor signed an executive order allowing the federal government to seize firearms from the homes of individuals they deem are dangerous.

overreaching order allows law enforcement officers to take guns away from those in “red flag” cases. Gina Raimondo’s overreaching order allows law enforcement officers to take guns away from those in “red flag” cases.

Advertisement

The measure, which satisfies just about everything on gun-grabbers’ wish list, claims the government is legally allowed to determine which citizens should or should not have the right to bear arms.

Many would agree that a person with a mental illness should not have a gun, but Many would agree that a person with a mental illness should not have a gun, but Raimondo’s executive order allows for the Rhode Island government to determine which individuals can have a gun.

Advertisement

She also signed the order in front of a large gun control crowd, which they applauded because it erodes the She also signed the order in front of a large gun control crowd, which they applauded because it erodes the Second Amendment for citizens of the state.

“We cannot wait a minute longer for Washington to take action to prevent gun violence,” “We cannot wait a minute longer for Washington to take action to prevent gun violence,” Raimondo said. “The executive order I signed today is an immediate step we can take to make residents safer. It sets the table for a complementary legislative effort.”

The order states that when a judge rules a person has a “red flag” — someone they deem dangerous — they can take that person’s guns without even making an arrest.

The ruling gives police and investigators the authority to carry out dictatorial actions to The ruling gives police and investigators the authority to carry out dictatorial actions to confiscate weapons from the home of an individual.

Advertisement

order sets an incredibly low standard required to seize a person’s lawfully owned firearm without an arrest occurring. Raimondo’s order sets an incredibly low standard required to seize a person’s lawfully owned firearm without an arrest occurring.

If there are no grounds to legally arrest someone, why are police allowed to If there are no grounds to legally arrest someone, why are police allowed to confiscate someone’s guns

Some argue this case could be appealed to the Supreme Court given the severity of it as many Americans are fuming over this order.

This ruling is another scathing attempt by Democrats to This ruling is another scathing attempt by Democrats to infringe on Americans right to bear arms and defend themselves against a threat.