Holistic Doctor Found Dead After Missing For Weeks
It brings me no joy to break the news of yet another doctor, found dead. It’s getting more and more difficult to even write these updates for you all; I can’t wrap my head around how this is still happening and why the mainstream media is continuing to ignore it.

Dr Clogston went missing on the 15th of March, but wow, was seen by a GOOD FRIEND on the 20th (how does that work!?) and then found dead in his cars weeks later? And authorities say that’s not suspicious (at this point I can’t help but question authority quite a lot. We’re at nearly 40 doctors in mysterious deaths in well under a year)

We sat on this story for awhile but finally realized that given the book on acupuncture that Dr Clogstin co-authored and the fact that innovative services including acupuncture and EEG biofeedback (neurofeedback)” as well as “functional testing (an integrative medical approach that aligns with many of the principles of Ayurvedic medicine)” , it seemed that he, sadly, belonged with our group of holistic doctors who have tragically died, many of suspicious causes. We sat on this story for awhile but finally realized that givenand the fact that his LinkedIn profile states his San Marcos clinic, where he was the medical director, uses “, it seemed that he, sadly, belonged with our group of holistic doctors who have tragically died, many of suspicious causes.

Dr. Curtis Clogston, 68, who had been reported missing by his wife and kids on March 15th, was found inside an overturned Mini Cooper located just outside Boerne, TX. Although Kendall County investigators don’t suspect foul play (of course they don’t), an autopsy has been requested. The good news is that family after family are hiring private investigators because they either don’t believe the authorities are correct or some think they are straight out lying and doing coverups.

He had allegedly been in the car, on his alleged USUAL route, for weeks.

His wife of three years, Danica MacRae, knew something was wrong when his office said he hadn’t been in since Monday, the last day she spoke to him. That Monday, while on her way home from a trip to New Mexico, they spoke and he informed her that he’d had a case of food poisoning, and went home early that day.

(Editor’s note: MANY of the doctors have had food poisoning prior to their untimely deaths or causes OTHER than food poisoning) Holistic MD – well known Dr Hicks had what they thought was food poisoning just weeks ago and then allegedly had a heart attack on vacation and died suddenly. Then we have our friend and colleague (Editor’s note: MANY of the doctors have had food poisoning prior to their untimely deaths or causes OTHER than food poisoning) Holistic MD – well known Dr Hicks had what they thought was food poisoning just weeks ago and then allegedly had a heart attack on vacation and died suddenly. Then we have our friend and colleague the famous Manhattan Holistic MD Dr Gaynor who allegedly had food poisoning or a bug and then just decided to up and kill himself in light of just being on Dr Oz, yet again another new book coming out.

The Department of Public Safety, believes that Clogston went off the road and crashed, hitting two trees before his car came to rest in some brush. Clogston has lived in his home for 30 years. That’s 30 years of driving that same route in some form or fashion. How did they not find him on that road, for 3 weeks?

Our hearts go out to his family, friends, patients and co-workers.