5 chiropractors die in accidents in recent months, 3 single car | Hea…
Most of the deaths reported to me, I am able to rule out as being particularly suspicious.

But these 5 DC’s deaths just leave me with a few questions.

5 chiropractors die

Two chiropractors were driving with their kids (in neither case were the moms with them) and both crashed into large semis in front of them. The cases are so similar I actually keep confusing the two. In fact, I thought it was one case until I realized the names were different. It could be a big coincidence, but I’ll just report the facts:

The first was the well respected Dr. Thomas Eynon D.C. 43 , traveling with his 3 children. The first was the well respected, traveling with his 3 children. From the article:

A Longview chiropractor was killed Saturday in a wreck that left three children hospitalized. Thomas Eynon DC, 43, of White Oak died after he lost control of his Chevrolet Avalanche on U.S. 271 just south of FM 16 in Smith County. The accident happened just after 12:00 p.m. Saturday, on Highway 271 just south of FM 16.Smith Co. Trooper Jean Dark notes that 43-year-old Thomas Bernard Eynon of White Oak was behind the wheel when his Chevy Avalanche possibly hydroplaned and crashed into a parked 18-wheeler on the side of the road. Eynon was pronounced dead at the scene.

Sadly their 5 year old son did not make it either. There is a Go Fund me page for the Eynon family with much more details where you can donate as the mom is now left with the children to care for. Two of these children were severely injured and their father and brother were killed in the accident.

Then we have the beloved David Knotts 45, and his 2 children. He had a practice since 2007 called “Natural Health Chiropractic” with an emphasis on holistic care. not in the car, also crashes into a semi with his kids in the vehicle: Sadly their 5 year old son did not make it either.as the mom is now left with the children to care for. Two of these children were severely injured and their father and brother were killed in the accident.Then we have the belovedand his 2 children. He had a practice since 2007 called “Natural Health Chiropractic” with an emphasis on holistic care. From the article on their tragic crash where again, a father, with the momin the car, also crashes into a semi with his kids in the vehicle:

A crash in the state of Wyoming left (Dr David) Knotts and his two young daughters, ages 6 and 9, dead. They had been vacationing together at Yellowstone National Park and were heading home Wednesday night, June 24, when the crash happened on Interstate 80 near Cheyenne. Police have said a semi truck was stopped, hauling an oversized load, when Knotts approached from behind at highway speed and collided with the truck. Police and fire crews were already there but he and his children died at the scene.

We are so sorry and cannot even imagine what the family or the girl’s mother is going through. If there is a Go Fund me or any source fund raising account please contact me here on the site and I’ll add it to the page. We’ve lost so many doctors we knew recently and our heart goes out to the family.

Now the other cases were three separate chiropractors driving in vehicles with no one else in the car. I’ve had a few patients of the doctors write me asking to report on this and I’d actually met one of the chiropractors who died here on the East coast of Florida, in a single car accident on a road he drove on nearly every day where he lost control of his car and it flipped. As far as I can find yet, there is no explanation as to why this happened. He was well loved, definitely holistic minded and missed by so many. If there is a Go fund me page or more info I’ll be happy to list it. Just write me at the contact page. Now the other cases were three separate chiropractors driving in vehicles with no one else in the car. I’ve had a few patients of the doctors write me asking to report on this and I’d actually met one of the chiropractors who died here on the East coast of Florida, in a single car accident on a road he drove on nearly every day where he lost control of his car and it flipped. As far as I can find yet, there is no explanation as to why this happened. He was well loved, definitely holistic minded and missed by so many. If there is a Go fund me page or more info I’ll be happy to list it. Just write me at the contact page. From the article about Dr. Snow DC

William Snow, 46, (DC) of Ormond Beach, on the East Coast of Florida, was killed about 11:40 p.m. on State Road 40 near Airport Road on April 18 when his car overturned. An Ormond Beach woman in another car was not injured. The crash is still under investigation by the Highway Patrol. The report states that Snow was driving a 1984 Volkswagen westbound when he lost control for an unknown reason and crossed into the median. The car overturned onto its roof in the eastbound lanes.

There is a video up top where I report standing on Granada Blvd the street where Dr. Snow lost his life.

Then we have another well loved father and chiropractor who left behind a wife and four children. A patient who says she was a patient of Dr. Coffman wrote me to tell me that they thought I might want to investigate and report on their doctor’s death. He mysteriously lost control of the wheel of his car too and (like the last Dr Snow) crossed over the line Then we have another well loved father and chiropractor who left behind a wife and four children. A patient who says she was a patient of Dr. Coffman wrote me to tell me that they thought I might want to investigate and report on their doctor’s death. He mysteriously lost control of the wheel of his car too and (like the last Dr Snow) crossed over the line according to the latest report I can find on his untimely death.

July 13, 2o15: Dr. Chris Coffman, 55, was driving a 2004 grey Toyota Camry north on Lesourdesville-West Chester Road when he crossed the center line and struck an oncoming 2002 Mitsubishi Eclipse, officials said. Coffman was taken to West Chester Hospital, where he later died of his injuries. The driver and passenger of the Mitsubishi that was struck were also transported to West Chester Hospital and were later released. The accident remains under investigation by West Chester Police Department, but no charges are expected.

Dr. Coffman is survived by his wife Robbin and their four children. If anyone has a Go Fund me account or other fundraiser site that is verified I would be more than happy to share on here. My heart goes out to their friends and family and of course, the patients, of all of these families.

The fifth chiropractor is Janelle A. Bottorff 50, was in a single car accident in Alabama. From the article about her death. The fifth chiropractor is Dr. was in a single car accident in Alabama. From the article about her death.

The Alabama State Police released the crash report which claimed the life of Dr. Janelle Bottorff. The single-vehicle crash occurred at 8:25 p.m. Friday, March 6 th on I 65 near Flomaton. Dr. Janelle A. Bottorff, 50, of Walkerton was killed when the 2015 Chevrolet Malibu she was driving left the roadway and struck a bridge support column. Bottorff was pronounced dead at the scene. The crash occurred on Interstate 65 near the 69 mile marker, 15 miles north of Flomaton. Alabama State Troopers continue to investigate the fatal crash.

Accidents do happen (though the ones with the 2 fathers up top, both without moms in the cars, both with kids in the car who sadly died was extremely coincidental, if nothing else)

I’m not including these officially in my holistic series of doctors who have been found dead or murdered, but have had more than one of their patients write me saying that they would like me to do a story on them. Again if someone has go fund me links other than the ones I’ve provided, I’ll update the story immediately. I will keep reporting on the Holistic doctor series too and if anyone truly believes one of these are suspicious (besides the patients who have already written me who felt a few of them were) then just contact me here on the contact page of the site or on my Facebook page in bio below.

Thanks and again heart goes out to family and friends of all the chiropractors and their children who died in these accidents.

Erin Elizabeth, August 1st, 2015, East Coast of Florida