Cancer Institute Finally Admits Marijuana Kills Cancer
Each year cancer kills nearly 600,000 Americans. However now, the National Cancer Institute has released a report stating marijuana kills cancer

Cancer kills nearly 600,000 Americans per year. And this year alone, over 1.6 million people will be diagnosed. So much time and research has gone into the cure of cancer in the last few decades. Yet, because of the stigma associated with marijuana, this wonder plant has been largely ignored by governments and researchers as a potential cure – or a key piece to a cure at least.

The admission In August 2015, the marijuana kills cancer . In August 2015, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) released a report on their website which stated, “Marijuana kills cancer”. Yes, you read that right – We know that cannabis can be used for We know that cannabis can be used for medicinal purposes to relieve symptoms of many chronic illnesses. In fact, marijuana has actually been used for medicinal purposes for over 3000 years. The potential The potential benefits of medicinal Cannabis for people living with cancer (and other chronic illness) include: Anti-nausea

Anti-nausea Appetite stimulation

Appetite stimulation Pain relief

Pain relief Improved sleep Photo credit: Flickr

So, how does cannabis kill cancer? There are 21 chemical components found in marijuana called There are 21 chemical components found in marijuana called cannabinoids . These chemicals activate specific receptors found throughout the body to produce pharmacologic effects in the central nervous system and the immune system. This is the physiological and biochemical changes in the body produced by a drug in therapeutic concentration. (delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol) is the primary psychoactive ingredient found in marijuana. However, there are other compounds such as cannabinol (CBN), cannabidiol (CBD), cannabichromene (CBC), cannabigerol (CBG), tetrahydrocannabivarin(THCv), and delta-8-THC that can have pharmacologic effects. For example, CBD is known to have significant analgesic and anti-inflammatory activity without the high that THC produces. THC (delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol) is the primary psychoactive ingredient found in marijuana. However, there are other compounds such as cannabinol (CBN), cannabidiol (CBD), cannabichromene (CBC), cannabigerol (CBG), tetrahydrocannabivarin(THCv), and delta-8-THC that can have pharmacologic effects. For example, CBD is known to have significant analgesic and anti-inflammatory activity without the high that THC produces. During a 2-year study, groups of mice and rats were given various doses of THC by tube feeding. Tests were also done of a variety of cancerous cells. Photo credit: Flickr