Micro Energy Trader
For more than a century, energy has created more wealth than any other sector. And it remains just as lucrative today. But you can’t just throw darts anymore. Traditional “buy and hold” investing is no longer the right – or the most profitable – approach. Everything we know about energy is changing – our sources, how we trade it, how we produce it, even how it’s financed. Indeed, the new wave of mega-profits will go to investors who understand these changes… and exploit them. For more than a century, energy has created more wealth than any other sector. And it remains just as lucrative today. But you can’t just throw darts anymore. Traditional “buy and hold” investing is no longer the right – or the most profitable – approach. Everything we know about energy is changing – our sources, how we trade it, how we produce it, even how it’s financed. Indeed, the new wave of mega-profits will go to investors who understand these changes… and exploit them. Energy Advantage makes it easy. After 31 years advising the world’s leading energy producers, as well as governments, policymakers, and Wall Street, Dr. Kent Moors is now showing individual investors how to make the real money in energy.

Unearthed in the Andes Mountains, these mysterious crystals contain

what MIT researchers call energy’s “Holy Grail.”

And they could ignite a $7.2 trillion economic revolution !

A discovery made 13,000 feet up in the Andes Mountains is going to forever alter the global energy industry.

Take a look at this picture.

The locals call the mysterious crystals you see here “Oro Blanco.”

Translated, that’s “White Gold.”

However, Goldman Sachs has a different name for it.

“The new gasoline.”

– Goldman Sachs

But that may very well be the understatement of the century.

You see, Oro Blanco is 1,693-times more powerful than the gasoline that runs your car.

Which is why Goldman Sachs is predicting it will eventually “replace gasoline as the primary source of transportation fuel.”

But MIT, Forbes , and The Daily Mail have made an even bolder declaration.

“The Holy Grail”

– MIT, Forbes , The Daily Mail

They believe unlocking this crystal fuel’s potential is akin to discovering “The Holy Grail.”

And in a few moments, you are going to agree with them.

Especially, if you decide to become one of the early investors who get in on the ground floor of this energy source.

Because it’s set to create a new generation of millionaires.

And you could be one of them.

Now before we delve into this amazing situation, I need to tell you something.

And it might give you a temporary case of sticker shock.

This superfuel will run you $49 a gallon.

At first it sounds pricey.

But Oro Blanco, what I call “OBL,” is actually one of the greatest bargains you’ll ever come across.

Check this out.

Let’s say you own a typical mid-sized American car.

So you can probably drive about 25 miles on a gallon of gasoline.

Maybe 40-50 if it’s a hybrid-electric model like a Toyota Prius.

Care to guess what would happen if you retrofitted your car to run on OBL?

50 miles to the gallon? Maybe 100 MPG? Or 500 MPG?

Not even close.

I’d like for you to imagine:

Pulling into your local gas station on empty

Pulling into your local gas station on empty Putting only a single gallon of this superfuel in your tank

Putting only a single gallon of this superfuel in your tank And driving 42,325 miles before having to stop at that same gas station again .

That’s like driving from New York City to Los Angeles and back SEVEN times on a single gallon.

So you’re probably asking yourself, “ how is this even possible?”

I’ll give you two reasons.

One of them is simple science. And the other sounds like magic.

First off, this crystal fuel can withstand extreme temperatures.

Consider gasoline.

It might start boiling at 104 degrees Fahrenheit.

When it does, some amounts will evaporate.

That’s potential fuel that is vanishing into thin air.

OBL doesn’t have this problem.

It doesn’t boil until it hits 2,457 degrees Fahrenheit.

So it utilizes its full energy potential, while remaining stable at temperatures much higher than any car engine can produce.

Now, the second reason.

This is the secret that gives these tiny crystals the ability to contain such an immense amount of energy.

Astrophysicists have observed “OBL” being produced by dwarf stars and cosmic rays colliding.

The explosion is so intense, it causes the stars to burn up to 100,000 times brighter than they did before.

It also sets off a Galactic process known as stellar nucleosynthesis, which gives birth to this superfuel.

Now obviously, if this was the only way in which OBL formed, we’d be fresh out of luck.

After all, mining asteroids and energy exploration missions in outer space are a ways off.

Fortunately, here on earth, OBL is created by another violent event.

The collision of tectonic plates deep in our planet’s crust.

These seismic forces produce a mysterious crystallized substance that is very powerful and very rare.

It’s present in just .0007% of the earth’s crust.

And only under perfect conditions is it able to make the journey to the surface.

Which is why it primarily exists in the Andes Mountains.

In very acute areas of this region, tectonic plates will shift, twisting the ground above like a wrung towel and leaching a liquefied mixture of OBL through the rocks.

It then bubbles up and settles into hydrothermal pools.

Over time, the arid climate will cause the water in these celestial ponds to evaporate.

And what’s left behind is OBL.

It is so light that it floats on water.

It’s so soft that it can be cut with a butter knife.

And its “energy density” is unrivaled.

Here’s a way to understand this.

Just imagine every solar installation that currently exists in every country.

Just imagine solar installation that currently exists in country. Now imagine multiplying those installations by 1,000.

Now imagine multiplying those installations by 1,000. In one year’s time, OBL could double that total energy production .

This is why the titans of industry are now rushing to secure strategic reserves.

Recently, every major auto manufacturer has journeyed to the Andes Mountains.

They’re waging what the locals call:

“La Guerra.” Translation: The War over OBL.

And the battle lines are being drawn.

Volkswagen has announced plans to produce two-to-three million cars per year… all powered by this crystal fuel.

Ford’s CEO, Mark Fields, wants to convert almost HALF of his fleet to run on it.

Chevy, Honda, Mercedes, BMW, Jaguar, Land Rover, Lincoln – you name it.

Experts now believe “OBL” will soon power 35 out of every 100 new cars…

And it will add half a trillion dollars in new revenue to the auto industry virtually overnight .

So with every major car company fighting to secure as much of this rare substance as they can, “La Guerra” is heating up.

And they’re not just competing with each other!

The applications of OBL go far beyond the automotive industry.

In short, OBL is a “universal fuel.” It can be used for everything. And it will soon be everywhere.

This year it was announced “OBL” will become the fuel of the international space station. And it won’t need a refill until at least 2024.

This year it was announced “OBL” will become the fuel of the international space station. And it won’t need a refill until at least 2024. The Pentagon has categorized it as a “strategic” fuel. And because it’s a critical element in our most advanced weaponry, military stockpiles have been classified a “state secret.”

The Pentagon has categorized it as a “strategic” fuel. And because it’s a critical element in our most advanced weaponry, military stockpiles have been classified a “state secret.” OBL is also in the early stages of being integrated into the U.S. electrical grid. It is so efficient that it would take less than six cement trucks-worth to power the ENTIRE country during peak hours.

Even cellphone manufacturers are now planning to use OBL-enhanced technology to power tens of millions of mobile devices. This crystal fuel will enable them to transmit signals 30-times farther and 1,000-times faster.

This superfuel could also make the United States’ dream of complete energy independence a reality.

Scientists have developed a way for OBL to exponentially increase the power production of every domestic energy source.

That includes oil, natural gas, solar, wind, geothermal, nuclear, hydro… all of the above and more .

And as you’re about to see, even though the hotbed for this crystal fuel is in the Andes Mountains, it’s the United States that has outmaneuvered other nations to control it.

We’re going to be the biggest benefactors.

And it’s going to put complete energy independence within our grasp.

Now, as you can imagine, this has sent shockwaves throughout the ranks of the OPEC cartel.

The oil derricks that span the deserts of the Middle East have lined the pockets of sheiks and the Saudi Royal Family with untold riches for decades.

But according to reports from media outlets like CNBC, whoever controls OBL will be able to form “the new OPEC.”

So the Kingdom has been forced into a desperate game of catch up.

Saudi Arabia has partnered with Japan’s SoftBank in a massive joint venture.

It’s launching this year with $20 billion earmarked for OBL technology.

But American companies have already beat them to the punch.

Google was one of the first to capitalize on this energy phenomenon.

The search giant has 61,814 employees in offices spanning every major country.

And Google has plotted out a $1.8 billion plan to independently produce 100% of its own energy.

OBL is a central piece of this plan.

Walmart is undertaking a similar mission… and is projecting to SAVE as much as $1 billion per year !

Apple has put up $1 billion with the hope of using OBL-powered technology to save many, many times that amount.

So has Total S.A., one of the top 10 largest oil companies in the world.

But these four giants aren’t alone…

Facebook

Facebook Amazon

Amazon AT&T

AT&T Costco

Costco Target

Target KaiserPermanente

KaiserPermanente Johnson &Johnson

Johnson &Johnson FedEx

They are all making major investments in OBL-related initiatives.

Meanwhile, many of the richest and most famous businessmen are getting in for a different reason…

OBL’s nearly unlimited profit potential !

Take Peter Thiel.

Thiel is the famed venture capitalist behind Facebook and PayPal. And today he’s President Donald Trump’s tech advisor.

It was recently announced that Thiel’s firm led a $15 million investment in an OBL technology start-up.

Warren Buffett, Elon Musk, and Sir James Dyson are all vying to win the race for this superfuel as well.

But they’re going to face stiff competition from other members of the billionaire’s club.

Bill Gates and his friends just anteed up…

and their opening bet is $1 billion!

Gates has assembled a veritable All-Star team of successful entrepreneurs who are pushing their financial muscle into OBL-related ventures.

He’s partnered with:

Jeff Bezos , founder and CEO of Amazon Ray Dalio , founder of the world’s most successful hedge fund Mark Zuckerberg , founder and CEO of Facebook Richard Branson , founder of Virgin Group Jack Ma , Executive Chairman of Alibaba Group Reid Hoffman , Co-founder of LinkedIn Meg Whitman , CEO of Hewlett Packard Marc Benioff , CEO of Salesforce.com Michael Bloomberg , CEO of Bloomberg Hasso Plattner , Co-founder of SAP George Soros , Chairman of Soros Fund Management

Together they’re putting up $1 billion just to kick things off.

But they aren’t even the biggest group that’s angling to make a killing from this superfuel .

An international group called Mission Innovation will be investing $30 billion a year by 2021.

In short, an incredible amount of capital is going into rapidly expanding innovations that will require OBL.

This is where it gets really interesting for you…

Despite the massive investments starting to pour in, OBL is still a tiny player on the energy scene.

The entire industry accounts for only $29 billion.

To put it another way, currently the worldwide market for OBL is one-twelfth the size of just one oil company – Exxon .

But that’s about to change in a BIG way.

This $29 billion market is on the verge of exploding to $7.2 trillion!

That’s based on projections by the International Energy Agency.

Ahead : The OBL Treasure Trove That is Going to Mint Millionaires! Outside of a Ghost Town in Death Valley, an amazing OBL discovery has been unearthed. Potentially valued at $20.4 billion, this could make some very lucky people very rich. And time is running out to partner with the tiny miner that has secured the rights to this treasure!

So we’re potentially looking at an incredible 24,728% growth rate!

Which makes its nickname “White Gold” even more fitting.

However, this superfuel is quickly becoming more valuable than all of the “real gold” in the world.

And a breaking development in this story could deliver you a once-in-a-lifetime windfall.

As I mentioned, ever since it was first discovered, one of the only places on earth known to contain high accumulations of OBL was 13,000 feet up in the Andes Mountains.

But a tiny miner has just stumbled upon a treasure trove of it, spread across seven deposits right here in the United States .

And they’ve recently secured the rights to this 15,000-acre discovery.

It’s a desolate place, located hundreds of miles from the nearest city, where the natural conditions just happen to be perfect for OBL to form.

To be clear, ONE tiny $92 million company has positioned itself to control the booming OBL market in the United States.

And their single discovery could be worth 225X more than their current market cap.

This is a quickly developing situation.

So I’m going to give you the full scoop.

Recently, the insiders at this company started buying up all the shares they can.

They know what’s coming.

And it’s critical that you learn how to stake your claim, while this microcap stock is still trading for around $1.50 a share.

It’s dirt cheap.

As far as I’m concerned, the more you can allocate to this opportunity the better.

Because you’re about to see how this miner could make you 1,233% over the next year .

However, if you extend your horizon a little bit, this 1,233% windfall could turn into a torrent of money.

You might even be able to add another “0” to that payday… 12,330%!

But before I go any further, you should probably know who I am.

My name is Dr. Kent Moors. And I’ve lived what some might call a very interesting life.

For the last four decades, I’ve worked for the U.S. intelligence community.

Many of my missions in Vietnam, behind enemy lines in the Soviet Union, and especially those I’ve conducted recently, are still classified to this day.

However, I can tell you that I have earned three Presidential Citations from Presidents Nixon, Reagan, and Clinton.

And hanging in my office are 23 commendations from the U.S. Intelligence Community – including the intelligence equivalent of the Medal of Honor.

My sensitive work has helped me develop connections.

Connections that placed me atop two State Department task forces.

Connections that placed me atop two State Department task forces. Connections that have made me a consultant to the IEA, EIA, and OPEC.

Connections that have made me a consultant to the IEA, EIA, and OPEC. Connections that have made me an energy policy advisor to 9 oil majors, as well as 29 governments around the world.

In fact, the U.S., the U.K., Russia, China, Iraq, Australia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, and Kazakhstan are just a few of the nations that turn to me.

Bottom line: I’m the guy who gets deals done.

When an old friend of mine, who also happened to be the former President of OPEC, needed to ensure a $13 billion oil refinery deal went smoothly, he called me to make that happen.

And I did.

When one of my contacts wanted access to 393 million barrels of oil reserves in Argentina, he sent me in to investigate this $40 billion project.

And it was a success.

When Sinopec, China’s $8 billion energy titan, wanted a piece of $2 trillion worth of unconventional oil claims in Pennsylvania and Wyoming, their executives flew to my vacation home in the Bahamas.

And we carefully mapped out this incredible international deal.

When Former Polish President Lech Walesa wanted to build a strategy for easing energy conflicts between Eastern Europe and Russia, he came to me.

And we plotted the best course of action together.

I’m not telling you all of this to brag.

But so that you take everything I’m about to say very seriously.

This OBL situation is the most exciting energy development I’ve seen in my career.

This is one of those moments in time, where generational wealth is created.

And you can get in on the ground floor.

Just look at what’s happening in the automotive industry.

Demand for OBL in the car market is now set to rise by 310,000 metric tons per year.

That is eleven-times more than the total amount being produced today!

Now consider this…

The billionaire CEO of just ONE prominent car company has already said that in order to meet his firm’s OBL demand they “need to absorb the entire world’s production.”

And, remember, it’s not just the automotive industry fighting tooth and nail to get their hands on this stuff.

Some of the largest and richest corporations – like Apple, Google, Amazon and Walmart – are planning to run their entire operations almost exclusively with OBL-enhanced systems.

Plus, consortiums of the world’s most successful billionaires are piling money into securing this superfuel .

And there’s precious little to go around!

You don’t have to be a genius to know that with these levels of scarcity and demand…

If you control OBL, you can pretty much name your price .

In fact, the price of OBL going into last year doubled up to $13,000 per metric ton.

And now it’s closer to $25,000 .

That means, the price of OBL has doubled TWICE in the past 14 months.

But almost nobody knows about it… yet .

And it just so happens that one little miner, led by the most successful management team I’ve ever seen, could dominate this soaring market…

Because they found a treasure trove of this rare substance – not high up in the Andes Mountains… but right here in America .

This $92 million miner recently acquired what could soon be considered the most valuable piece of land in the world.

Opportunities like this come along, if you’re lucky, once or twice in a lifetime.

This could be even bigger than the fracking boom.

A few years ago, we all saw how the fracking revolution unlocked vast amounts of previously inaccessible oil and natural gas deposits in the U.S.

It minted millionaires overnight in places like North Dakota, Pennsylvania and Texas.

Now I believe this same story is beginning to play out again.

Only this time it’s happening with OBL.

Of course, there are no guarantees. But if it’s anything like the last energy boom, one small investment could give you a legitimate shot at becoming a millionaire.

This tiny miner has discovered what appears to be THE MOTHER LODE of “OBL”…

And it’s in our own backyard.

This discovery spans 15,000 acres.

And it’s situated in a windswept plane at the foot of the Sierra Nevada mountains where:

Continental plates are colliding

Continental plates are colliding Sending hot water boiling up through the cracks in the earth’s crust

Sending hot water boiling up through the cracks in the earth’s crust And leaching this precious crystal into evaporating ponds in the desert, where it can be mined.

Currently there are seven known OBL-filled deposits lying just under the surface waiting to be extracted.

This company’s own “blind” estimates suggest the property’s reserves could approach 816,000 metric tons.

The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) has recently conducted no fewer than four studies in the region confirming this superfuel is there.

And at $25,000 per metric ton…

We could be looking at a $20.4 billion OBL treasure trove!

It’s literally beginning to burst out of the ground.

And it’s all controlled by this tiny $92 million company.

Right now, this soon-to-be energy titan is building a facility to mine their OBL find.

And the great thing is, they don’t have to pave a single foot of road or pound even one railroad spike into the ground to move their stash.

Their discovery lies right in the middle of already functioning highway and railroad systems.

So it turns out that good fortune (along with brilliant management) is shining down on this diamond in the desert.

But if you wait until they put even one speck of OBL onto a train or 18-wheeler, you risk missing your chance at the kind of payday investors normally only dream about.

Now, nothing in the market is guaranteed, and this is a small stock.

In fact, shares are only trading for about $1.50 – literally pocket change!

And I’m expecting a major announcement that will send this stock to the moon, and enrich savvy investors.

As we speak, this firm is rushing to complete an important study that will confirm exactly how much OBL can be mined in the seven deposits under its newly acquired property .

I believe the results will be announced within the next three months.

Possibly within the next few weeks.

Remember, there could be 816,000 metric tons of OBL in play, potentially worth $20 billion.

That would be a massive windfall for this $92 million company.

It would represent a 225X boost to their current market cap.

And for years now, members of the “dream team” behind this small firm have been repeatedly making early investors a fortune in similar ventures.

“They are quite possibly the most successful resource team in modern history.”

The executive chairman is an entrepreneur, geochemist, and geologist with over 35 years in the mining industry.

He built his first company, a lithium miner, from the ground up and sold it two years later for near 1,500% gains .

He built his first company, a lithium miner, from the ground up and sold it later for . He then founded a uranium miner that he sold two years later for a 2,000% return .

He then founded a uranium miner that he sold later for . Then he took a potash mining operation from a market cap of $10 million up to $1.8 billion. This time he cashed out for a 4,000% payday in two and a half years .

And with this OBL venture, he’s teamed up with one of the world’s most successful commodities billionaires .

Another energy mogul with an incredible track record.

This billionaire funded and developed a uranium miner that made early investors 6,950% .

This billionaire funded and developed a uranium miner that made early investors . He was one of the architects of a gold mining firm that delivered a 2,161% windfall.

He was one of the architects of a gold mining firm that delivered a windfall. He also backed a diamond miner when it was trading for $0.10 a share. A couple years later, it was trading for $200…

He also backed a diamond miner when it was trading for $0.10 a share. A couple years later, it was trading for $200… That’s a nearly incomprehensible 199,900% payday !

This Mining Dream Team Has Already Delivered Once-in-a-Lifetime Windfalls…SIX TIMES! This Mining Dream Team Has Already Delivered Once-in-a-Lifetime Windfalls…SIX TIMES!

To give you an understanding of how “take it to the bank” successful these guys have been, consider this…

If you had somehow been able to invest just $500 into each of these six success stories, you could’ve cashed out with $1,085,555.

Obviously, these gains are definitely rare and exceptional.

But even a fraction of these returns could radically enhance your net worth.

Look, I’ve facilitated energy deals between governments and companies of all sizes.

Ahead: This Tiny Miner’s Other “Secret”… Could transform a potential 1,233% windfall into 12,330%! Wait until you see this.

That includes consulting with 9 of the world’s top 10 oil companies on deals worth millions .

I’ve worked with the Bank of England and the Russian Central Bank on energy investments worth billions .

And I’ve even advised Li Hui, an executive with China’s largest oil company on $2 trillion worth of natural gas investments.

In my four decades in this industry, I’ve analyzed the management teams behind over 500 companies in the energy and commodities industries.

As a result, I understand the intricacies of the energy markets like no one else on the planet.

And I’ve never seen so many massive gains pulled under one roof – many delivered within two years .

Now, please mark my words.

Once the results from this miner’s OBL study are made public, this $1.50 stock could easily jump to $20 per share.

That’s enough to turn every $500 invested today into more than $6,600.

However, they have another OBL secret up their sleeve that could, in a couple of years, add another “0” to that 1,233% windfall.

Transforming it into an amazing 12,330% payday.

That means that same $500 could grow into over $62,167!

I’m going to tell you about that in just a few moments.

But here’s what you need to understand right now.

To put it bluntly, situations like this rarely present themselves.

This is a truly historic opportunity.

And I want to show you how to capitalize on it.

So I’ve compiled all of my research into a special intelligence briefing called:

The “White Gold” Rush: Capture a 12,330% Windfall From This Tiny Miner’s OBL Treasure Trove!

In the old days, some folks were lucky enough to stumble upon a huge oil discovery on their farm.

Others braved harsh conditions to pan for gold and silver in the Yukon Territory.

But today with The “White Gold” Rush in your hands, you can learn how to make one small investment, and from the comfort of your own home find yourself at the center of the most exciting treasure hunt in modern history.

This Could be the Beginning of a $7.2 Trillion Energy Dynasty.

Here’s How to Get in on the Ground Floor!

In The “White Gold” Rush , I’m going to take you deep inside the OBL energy phenomenon.

I’ll show you how this superfuel forms in our solar system through a process known as stellar nucleosynthesis.

You’ll also see how it’s created from the collision of tectonic plates beneath the earth’s crust. I find this fascinating. And you will too.

But more important, this superfuel is going to make people a boatload of money.

Have You Ever Transformed $500 into $62,167? The “OBL” hidden in these celestial ponds could make that a reality!

In just the last fourteen months, the price of OBL has doubled… and then doubled again!

But that’s just a drop in the bucket.

We’re at the very early stages of this $29 billion market unleashing a $7.2 trillion energy revolution.

Every major player in technology, energy, and finance is essentially cutting blank checks to fund innovations that utilize OBL.

In fact, in nine years it’s estimated that ALL new vehicles will run on OBL technology.

But fueling our cars is only one of the many uses being implemented. OBL is going to be everywhere.

And those who control the sources of this superfuel now, are positioned to become millionaires in the very near future.

After today, you could be one of those people.

Outside a Death Valley Ghost Town, the “White Gold” Mother Lode Has Been Unearthed.

And I’m Going to Give You a Treasure Map with a Big Fat X Marked on it!

A Potential $20 Billion Treasure Trove… Plant your flag now, and a fortune awaits you! This OBL discovery is 18 times bigger than Central Park in New York City. And it’s so packed with this superfuel, it’s bursting out of the ground. You could scoop it up with wheelbarrows! Or you could make a small investment in the miner that controls it and cash in BIG!

There are only a few places on the planet where OBL has been found. And each location is just as mysterious as the superfuel itself. But this discovery takes it to a new level.

It spans 15,000 acres in one of the most barren and uninhabitable areas of the United States – Death Valley. And the only trace of civilization is a long-abandoned Ghost Town that sits outside the property.

But it’s here that the motherlode of OBL has been unearthed.

Already, the USGS has conducted countless studies of this region. And every one of them confirms the presence of massive amounts of OBL.

So in The “White Gold” Rush , I will provide you with an exciting treasure map of this location.

You’ll be briefed on each of its seven known OBL deposits.

And when you hear how much this find could be worth, it’s going to blow your mind.

This Death Valley discovery may be hiding 816,000 metric tons of OBL.

At current projections, this could be worth $20 billion.

Yet, a global shortage and feverish demand might just cause that number to double or triple!

Fortunately, with one small investment now, you can get a big piece of this treasure trove.

And you’ll be positioned for a once-in-a-lifetime payday!

“A Dream Team” Controls This Legendary OBL Discovery! And You Can Join Them on Their Next Multi-Billion Dollar Venture!

This Dream Team’s Death Valley Discovery Could Contain Enough OBL… …To Power the U.S. Electrical Grid For the Next 124 Years. So how long before this $1.50 stock could be trading for $20? According to my intel: Not long.

This story basically writes itself.

A team of All-Star geologists and chemical engineers made this OBL discovery.

Then they bought the land it’s sitting on, and formed a tiny company.

As we speak, this mining firm has a market cap of only $92 million.

And shares are trading for $1.50 apiece.

They are dirt cheap.

So you can load up on this stock for veritable pocket change.

And that’s exactly what I suggest you do.

Because this same team has an impossible to ignore track record of transforming their finds into mind-blowing windfalls.

Your Partners Are the Very Definition of the Serially Successful! Lithium Miner: 1,500% windfall

Lithium Miner: 1,500% windfall Uranium Miner: 2,000% windfall

Uranium Miner: 2,000% windfall Potash Miner: 4,000% windfall

Potash Miner: 4,000% windfall Uranium Miner: 6,950% windfall

Uranium Miner: 6,950% windfall Gold Miner: 2,161% windfall

Gold Miner: 2,161% windfall Diamond Miner: 199,900% windfall In the The “White Gold” Rush , you’ll get the chance to take part in their next major discovery!

In recent years, they’ve built companies from scratch that became worth:

$2.4 billion… $3.1 billion… $1.8 billion… $6.2 billion… Just to name a few.

In The “White Gold” Rush I’m going to introduce you to each of the founders and top level execs.

You’ll receive a deep briefing on their company.

And I’ll layout their plans for extracting this OBL treasure trove.

But you won’t have to wait until their deposits start producing to reap the rewards.

As I’ll explain, this small miner is set to make an announcement regarding the amount of OBL under their control.

This could happen in a matter of weeks or months.

If they confirm the initial projections and are sitting on 816,000 metric tons of this superfuel , their stock could rapidly shoot up 1,233%.

But this miner has another secret that could transform a 1,233% windfall into 12,330%!

Now I have to admit, I’ve been holding something back from you.

Up to this point, I’ve only told you about this miner’s discovery in the United States.

But they have just secured another massive property that is bursting with OBL.

And it’s located far away, where the “White Gold” story first began…the Andes Mountains.

Nestled between two areas menacingly known as Dead Man’s Lake and Little Devil’s Flats lies 20,000 acres of OBL-rich land.

So this miner’s new discovery is bigger than the one they are also developing near Death Valley.

It also contains more OBL.

According to a recent survey, this chunk of land holds over 2.8 million metric tons of this superfuel .

That equates to $70 billion of the most “in-demand” energy source in the world.

As fast as the price of OBL has been going up, this could be the very definition of a conservative estimate.

And just like with their U.S. property, this miner will have no problem bringing their treasure trove to market.

That’s because the Andes Mountain location is also connected to railways and roads.

And a thriving sea port nearby has ships ready to carry tons of OBL at the drop of a hat to an ever-growing number of desperate customers.

This superfuel discovery in the Andes Mountains is enough to enrich early investors all on its own.

History has been pretty clear on this.

Whenever a small miner finds OBL in the Andes Mountains, it makes a killing.

For instance, one OBL miner jumped 2,440 % in less than a year.

Another, 1,855% in two and a half months.

And a third skyrocketed an incredible 1,191% in a little over two-and-a-half years.

Frankly, these situations pale in comparison to the opportunity in front of you now.

The math is impossible to ignore.

Between their Death Valley and Andes Mountains discoveries, this $92 million miner could be sitting on $90 billion worth of “White Gold”!

That means their market cap would have to grow 978X just to match their current reserves of OBL.

If this natural resource Dream Team can get just 14% of their treasure trove out of ground and into the market, this $1.50 stock could wind up trading for $185 per share!

That’s a 12,330% payday that can be yours.

Just imagine if this very successful team of miners can extract even more OBL from their discoveries.

We might not have to imagine.

Because there is a crystal clear sign that some very important people anticipate this exact outcome.

Over the last year, this Dream Team has LOADED UP on the stock!

The CEO has upped his holdings by 4.4 million shares.

The Executive Chairman now controls upwards of 2.7 million.

The CFO and COO have locked up 1.7 million shares.

Even the billionaire Founder of this miner has doubled his holdings.

Altogether, they have quietly hoarded 21% of all available shares .

They know what’s coming.

And you’d be wise to follow in their footsteps.

Play your cards right and you could turn a modest $50 stake into $6,217.

Play your cards right and you could turn a modest $50 stake into $6,217. If you up your ante to $500, you could be rewarded with $62,167.

If you up your ante to $500, you could be rewarded with $62,167. And if you go big with a $5,000 investment that could hit nearly $621,670.

It doesn’t matter if you are someone who is rich, middle-class or have modest means, the important thing is that you position yourself to get in on the ground floor now.

Which is why I’d like to send you a FREE copy of The “White Gold” Rush: Capture a 12,330% Windfall From This Tiny Miner’s OBL Treasure Trove!

Simply put, it has everything you need to know about this company, right down to its ticker symbol.

Now, because this is a small stock and there is always risk in the market, I strongly advise that you follow my suggested buy-in price very closely.

And certainly don’t invest more than you can afford to lose.

That said, OBL is on the verge of becoming a dominant player in the $7.2 trillion global energy markets.

It’s becoming the center piece of bold initiatives by the major players in technology, automobiles, and even space travel.

In the coming months and years, this is going to create a nearly non-stop series of windfall opportunities.

And I want to help you learn how to get in on the ground floor.

So I have put together an exciting package of investment research reports. It’s called:

The Roadmap for the OBL Revolution

And I would like to send it to you for free.

Altogether, it contains five unique investment opportunities.

The tiny miner showcased in “The White Gold Rush” was just the first.

You’ll also receive:

FutureGrid: Bank 10X as OBL Brings Our Power Grid into the 21st Century!

The utility industry is enormous. It creates $381 billion in revenue a year.

Yet our power grid is shockingly out of date. It hasn’t been significantly upgraded in 135 years.

This has caused a surge in blackouts. And they are economically crippling costing our country $150 billion annually.

It’s time to modernize the power grid. And the solution is OBL.

Right now, a small utility company in Southern California could reward investors handsomely for being a first mover with this superfuel.

It’s just opened the largest OBL-powered plant in the country.

And its share price has already doubled since it broke ground on this project.

But now that it’s going to be pumping out massive amounts of electricity with the help of OBL, you could be looking at a 10X payday if you strike now!

And it also sports a hefty dividend that’s spiked 160%.Making this an under-the-radar income play as well!

Next, with the third report you’re going to tap into another major opportunity for OBL.

$hock and Awe: The Pentagon’s $45 Billion OBL “Supergun” Could Return 18X Your Money

Take a look at this:

That’s a 23-pound “smart bullet” slicing through six half-inch steel plates like they’re sticks of butter. It can travel at Mach 7 and hit a target that’s 100 miles away in a mere 67 seconds.

And it’s being fired from a futuristic canon that is set to be deployed on battleships around the world.

So what’s the secret to this superweapon’s immense power? You guessed it, OBL.

In this investment report you’ll get the details on a small $382 million defense contractor that has been awarded the contracts for this classified project. This could deliver them a $45 billion payday and potentially send their stock soaring 1,869% within two years.

That’s enough to turn every $1,000 invested today into $19,690.

And with the fourth report in this package, you’ll have the chance to pocket yet another tech windfall. a

The OBL Gatekeeper: Triple Your Money From This Superfuel’s Patent Pipeline

In the world of tech, if you control the patents, you control everything.

And this small firm has 115 of them for OBL technology.

OBL innovations for commercial buildings like the Empire State building? They have the patents.

OBL-powered cars? They have the patents.

And every time a major company wants to rollout a breakthrough that involves one of this firm’s patents, they have to cut them a check.

And this firm also rewards its investors with a lot of checks. They’ve been averaging eight a year. So get in now, and you’ll be making a lot of trips to the mailbox to collect extra cash.

Plus, when you’re ready to cash out, I’ve pegged your potential return at 297%!

And in this final report, I’m going to take you inside a powerful circle of influence, power, and wealth.

The OBL Billionaire’s Network: Join the Ranks of the World’s Richest!

The big players in OBL are many of today’s economic icons.

Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, Richard Branson and Jeff Bezos are all pouring piles of money into startups that are looking to capitalize on this superfuel.

The innovations and applications are mindboggling.

Self-landing space rockets

Self-landing space rockets Self-driving delivery trucks

Self-driving delivery trucks Formula one race cars

Formula one race cars Smart energy grids

Smart energy grids Drones

In this special report, I’m going to pull back the curtain and reveal how you can profit from their bold plans.

The total value of these five amazing OBL resources is easily $295.

However, if you step forward right now, you won’t have to pay a red cent for them.

The Roadmap For the OBL Revolution Can Be Yours For FREE!

I’m going to send this package to the first 500 people who respond today.

As you can imagine, I don’t anticipate there being any left in a few hours, much less tomorrow.

Especially since I’m also including one more surprise. A 60-day, no-risk trial to my one of a kind monthly newsletter, Energy Advantage .

With Energy Advantage you’ll have a unique edge that almost no one else in the world can provide to you.

Energy Advantage is designed to exploit the energy market’s most significant moves… before the mainstream money does.

This priceless advantage has enabled me to deliver hundreds of double-digit wins, and 70 triple-digit energy scores to my readers:

When you subscribe to Energy Advantage , you’ll be right there following me, getting a “first look” chance to turn these breaking situations into massive gains.

Every year, I travel the world attending the most historic energy summits.

Just days after they declared an “Oil War” on U.S. interests, I consulted with key OPEC ministers at the fabled Burj Al Arab hotel in Dubai.

AND the information from that meeting resulted in a 165% gain in less than three months for readers who followed my recommendation.

In September, I was in Algiers in North Africa convening with OPEC leaders, advising them on the value of cutting production – which they finally chose to do.

AND I showed readers a possible 190% gain in one month .

And every March, I’m called by the Queen of England to Windsor Castle to meet with people who control as much as 90% of the world’s energy reserves.

AND last March I recommended a trade that handed readers who invested a 107% gain in less than a month .

You see, at these summits, I act as both a deal-maker and advisor, so I know what major energy deals are coming down the pike.

In fact, I’m one of about 50 people in the world that can tell you what is going to happen in the energy industry days, months, or even years before anyone else.

And to make sure you get dozens of opportunities to profit, as a member of Energy Advantage you will receive:

Monthly Editions of Energy Advantage: Intel from the Frontlines Every month, I release a new edition of Energy Advantage highlighting coming shifts that will influence the most lucrative industry on earth: Energy! Often on the heels of summits where I’m involved in brokering massive deals, you’ll get the names of the companies with the best chance of creating huge gains for investors.

Every month, I release a new edition of highlighting coming shifts that will influence the most lucrative industry on earth: Energy! Often on the heels of summits where I’m involved in brokering massive deals, you’ll get the names of the companies with the best chance of creating huge gains for investors. Weekly Energy Advantage Digital Debriefings Each week, I give you a front row seat to the most exclusive energy summits and the backroom deals where fortunes are really made.You’ll get privileged information from these meetings, so you can act on it well before anyone else even catches wind of what’s about to happen.

Energy Advantage Profit Alerts The energy markets can move fast. But you’ll never have to wait a month – or even a week – wondering what to do. Whenever the moment arrives to maximize your energy profits I’ll release a real-time Profit Alert with specific instructions for capturing any gains!

The energy markets can move fast. But you’ll never have to wait a month – or even a week – wondering what to do. Whenever the moment arrives to maximize your energy profits I’ll release a real-time Profit Alert with specific instructions for capturing any gains! Energy Advantage Virtual Roundtable Sessions I will hold conference calls and exclusive online webinars you will be able to dial into. I’m going to give you unprecedented insights into my meetings around the world. And I will explore any upcoming investment targets I’m currently vetting.

I will hold conference calls and exclusive online webinars you will be able to dial into. I’m going to give you unprecedented insights into my meetings around the world. And I will explore any upcoming investment targets I’m currently vetting. 24/7 Access to the Energy Advantage Members-Only Website This is where you will be able to see every recommendation I’ve made and the research that backed it up. You’ll also be able to access my complete Energy Advantage portfolio, where every one of my 22 current recommendations is tracked in real time.

Now, you’re probably wondering: How much does it cost to get all of my research, recommendations, and to get connected into my network?

Well, I think you’ll be happy with my answer…

The “ordinary” rate for an annual membership to Energy Advantage is $299 .

But today you will receive something “extraordinary.”

Accept a one-year membership to Energy Advantage , by filling out the simple form below, and you’ll be able to join for ONLY $39 !

That’s a savings of 87%!

That’s less than what it would cost to take your spouse to Olive Garden for dinner!

PLUS, you’ll also receive the FIVE special reports that make up The Roadmap for the OBL Revolution FREE:

Special Report #1: The “White Gold” Rush ($99 Value)

Special Report #2: FutureGrid ($49 Value)

Special Report #3: $hock and Awe ($49 Value)

Special Report #4: The OBL Gatekeeper ($49 Value)

Special Report #5: The OBL Billionaire’s Network ($49 Value)

The total value of The Roadmap for the OBL Revolution is $295 .

And it’s yours for free with this offer.

I’m also including a 60-day, 100% money back guarantee.

If at any time during the next two months you feel Energy Advantage isn’t right for you, simply contact my team. And I will immediately refund every penny you paid to join.

And regardless of your decision I insist you keep The Roadmap for the OBL Revolution as my way of saying thank you.

Remember, my position at the heart of the global energy markets gives me access to knowledge and deals most people never lay eyes on.

I’m talking about unique opportunities hidden in the nooks and crannies of the global geo-political landscape.

These are the kinds of opportunities that are discussed behind closed doors… in boardrooms and royal palaces in far corners of the world.

Most important: These are the kinds of plays that can create tremendous riches, very quickly.

According to the International Energy Agency, the world needs to see $48 trillion in energy investments over the coming years.

Energy Advantage will show you exactly how to get in front of this tidal wave of money…

And with my 100% Money-Back Guarantee , this is a no-brainer.

So please, don’t waste another moment.

Click the big green button below to go to our secure Energy Advantag Membership form.

It will show you exactly how to get everything I’ve detailed here, including the profit recommendations, the exclusive briefings, the Special Reports… everything… absolutely free.

In addition, it will show you how to secure a risk-free trial of Energy Advantage without obligation.

I think you’ll agree: That’s as fair as it gets.

We are at the precipice of a whole new world.

Remember, the OBL market is on the verge of a rapid 24,728% expansion.

It’s being spearheaded by politicians, energy magnates, and billionaires from industries where legendary fortunes are regularly made like:

Energy

Energy Mining

Mining Technology

Technology Military

Military Infrastructure

And a majority of these people have me on speed-dial.

They’re all confirming what I already know…

The shift to OBL is inevitable and it will be rapid .

If investors fail to act now, by the time they catch up, the big gains will have already been made.

That’s why I’m rushing free copies of The Roadmap for the OBL Revolution to the first 500 people who respond to this urgent message, today.

Time is of the essence.

Just click on the button below to get started.

Or if you prefer, call our staff at 800.672.0745 (443.353.4351 for international callers) and mention your Priority Code: EEADT476. They’ll answer any questions you may have about the service and sign you up right away.

The opportunity is right in front of you.

I urge you to seize it today…

Sincerely,

Dr. Kent Moors

Editor, Energy Advantage

P.S. Even if you decide to cancel your subscription for a full refund, you keep everything, including the critical Special Reports in The Roadmap For the OBL Revolution (a $295 value). You have absolutely nothing to lose! And your potential upside is virtually unlimited. Please don’t miss out… Only 500 people today will get all this at an amazing, crazy-low price. So act now.