Report: Puerto Rico Teamsters Union, “Frente Amplio”, Refuse to Deliv…
This was my response to Dan Rather, after reading His response to President Trump tweet to governor of Puerto Rico.

In reading the above article I can see the frustration President Trump has towards the

Governor. My prayers are that these people get their act together to help their people, instead of waiting on a union disputed.

Excuse me, Mr. Rather but your response to the tweets from President Trump having his opinion toward the mayor of San Juan, is his right of freedom of speech.

President Trump said Puerto Rico is “totally unable” to handle the catastrophe on its own. President Trump said The United States is working hard and is “fully engaged in the disaster and the response and recovery effort. President Trump is trying within his powers of our government to get aide to Puerto Rico in a timely matter. President Trump does not have a money bag he has to go through Congress to request more aide. And as you have seen in past Congress does not act fast on anything!

Even though aide has been hard to get to all the people in need,

Thousands of Puerto Ricans have already received water and rationed food. United States has even sent military aide to help with the bottleneck of distribution of aide to the Puerto Rican People.

By now, telecommunications are back for about 30 percent of the island, nearly half of the supermarkets have reopened at least for reduced hours and about 60 percent of the gas stations are pumping.

But that is not fast enough for their governor although Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States they have faulted on loans to our country in the past, they do not pay federal income taxes. They do not pay payroll taxes, including Social Security, Medicare, and unemployment tax. Welfare in Puerto Rico is mainly funded by the United States. Yes they are Americans as you stated, but just like any other disasters it takes time and especially a island that infrastructure was in bad shape before the hurricane, So I asked you Mr Rathers why would anyone slams our President when The United States is helping. I don’t know why President Trump tweets, but we as Americans do not see the whole picture and it is not fast enough for the Puerto Rican people. I am not there and my prayers are with the Puerto Rican people. But I do feel they need to recognize it takes time, to rebuild, distributes supplies and equipment. And their government personnel that are able to help try to do their part in helping their island after this natural disaster.

Also The United States has been hit in 2017 with several natural disasters from hurricanes, fires, floods and tornadoes. These people who live in these states pay taxes

and they lost everything, even life’s we’re loss. If a private industry or citizen wants to donate money or time to help the Puerto Rican people that is honorable, and I praise them, but no matter how much we blame one another, it’s no help to these people. Hardest thing for anyone is to understand why bad things happen, it’s easy to blame, but that’s not helping these poor souls, so if you have The solution to expedite in a better way, I would rather read a article with a solutions than blaming!