Man Arrested for 'Barbecuing' Pedophiles to Death

Florida 'pedo hunter' caught setting fire to child abusers

| @NeonNettle By: Jay Greenberg on 9th June 2018 @ 6.04pm

© press Jorge Porto-Sierra was arrested for killing pedophiles by setting them on fire

A Florida man has been arrested after he was caught rounding up pedophiles and burning them alive on a barbecue.

50-year-old Jorge Porto-Sierra confessed to police that he wanted to "barbecue all the child molesters and kill them" when he was taken into custody.

Officers were called out to the Friendly Village Inn & Motel in Kissimmee, Florida, following reports of a "disturbance" at the hotel.

Police arrived to find Porto-Sierra attempting to abduct a man who was staying at the hotel, thought to be a notorious sex offender.

A spokesperson for the Osceola County Police said the suspect has cooperated fully, confessing to multiple crimes.

He has now been charged with four counts of premeditated murder and remains in custody pending trial.

© press Police were called to a disturbance at a Florida motel

Barbecue child abusers

According to the police report , a man was standing outside his room when Porto-Sierra jumped out of his car and began screaming at the individual.

Terrified, the man ran back into his room, prompting Porto-Sierra to break one motel’s windows and pour gasoline inside.

The enraged Porto-Sierra also reportedly yelled, “You’re going to die child molester! I’m coming in!”

Meanwhile, the man and his roommate escaped through the back window.

In addition, Porto-Sierra allegedly attacked two other individuals inside a car in the hotel parking lot, first by pouring gasoline into the car through an open window.

When the driver attempted to flee, Porto-Sierra got into his black Ford Focus and started ramming their car.

Deputies then arrived on the scene, where they say Porto-Sierra surrendered right away.

Waiving his Miranda rights, Porto-Sierra confessed and told the authorities, “they raped kids, they are child molesters that all live here and deserve to die.”

© press Police say Porto-Sierra is cooperating fully and has confessed to multiple crimes

Osceola County is known for being a sex offender haven, as it isn’t in the restricted range of schools, playgrounds, and churches, and there is a history of registered sex offenders living at the Friendly Village Inn & Motel.

WESH 2 News reported that at least two of the four victims have so far been confirmed as convicted sex offenders.

Investigators are still gathering evidence on the others victims.

When the police asked why he didn’t follow through with the plan, Porto-Sierra responded, “because you got here too soon.”

He is currently in custody at the Osceola County Jail without bond.