President Donald Trump has never had the flu shot… and never got the flu, either – coincidence?
Natural News) President Donald Trump says , “I don’t like the idea of injecting bad stuff into your body, which is basically what they do.” If you don’t know it by now, most people who get the flu are those injected with the flu vaccine, year after year after year.

The influenza vaccine insert tells you in plain writing that you should not get more than one vaccine in a lifetime, but who reads the vaccine insert and who cares about the warnings and side effects, right? You only read the ingredients on food and personal care products, and rely on medical doctors to inform you that the flu jab contains high levels of mercury, listed as thimerosal, plus formaldehyde (for embalming dead folks) and aluminum (the leading cause of Alzheimer’s ).

Why would President Trump , a man who shakes more hands in a day than most people living on planet Earth, never get a flu shot, but somehow never get the flu? It’s simple: The flu shot is a huge scam that’s heavily marketed to every living American, including the elderly, pregnant women and babies just 6 months young.

You may think it’s tough to catch the U.S. government and the CDC telling boldfaced lies, but it’s not. The CDC blatantly lies to every American every year, saying that mercury has been removed from childhood vaccines, but the influenza vaccine (nicknamed the flu shot for good reason) is literally laced and loaded with mercury, some jabs containing up to 25,000 times the amount the EPA says is too much to consume from tap water or fish.

Imagine that. Not only are you severely overdosing yourself or your child with a known neurotoxin and brain-damaging chemical, but with a vaccine you are bypassing the normal bodily defense systems and filters, including the skin, the lungs and the digestive tract.

Flu vaccines are shot directly into muscle tissue, entering the blood and sometimes crossing the blood/brain barrier. Can you say autism spectrum disorder while ignoring this message?

In October of 2015, on Opie Radio, Trump was interviewed and stated the truth about the influenza vaccine. Listen for yourself here.

More damage rewards paid out by the vaccine industry for flu shot injuries and deaths than all other vaccines combined

Any way you slice it, President Donald J. Trump is a brilliant man. He defied all odds to win the presidency, and he stands up for truth and ethics, despite the false image the mass media has painted of him. He combines common sense, research and heartfelt care to make informed decisions about many topics. Trump has repeatedly aired his concerns about vaccine safety and how chemical ingredients can injure humans, whether those people are adults, children or infants. Too many shots too close together are simply bad news. Today, vaccines, including the flu vaccine, are the most devastating form of chemical violence in history.

Every three months, the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (NVICP) updates its data on the alarming statistics of humans suffering the dire health consequences of injecting mercury, formaldehyde and aluminum into their muscle tissue. The vast majority of vaccine injury cases settled, including for several deaths, are for the flu shot.

Why are so many American children allergic to peanuts and in need of EpiPens?

Have you ever wondered why hundreds of thousands of U.S. children are allergic to peanuts? A hundred years ago, peanut allergies were unheard of, yet today, as many as 2 million U.S. children are allergic to them. What changed? The flu shot.

The influenza vaccine is brewed in peanut oil that’s not listed as an ingredient because only “ trace amounts ” remain – not enough according to the FDA and CDC to harm people. Peanut oil has been used in vaccines since the 1960s, but because it doesn’t “show up” in the final vaccine product, the manufacturers are allowed to leave it off the package inserts.

Peanut oil is just one “growth medium” that vaccine manufacturers use to make vaccines, like egg embryo (protein) and casein (milk). This is what they use to make MMR and influenza vaccines. Are you having peanut oil injected into your child’s muscle tissue, then wondering why he/she goes into anaphylactic shock when a package of peanuts or peanut butter is opened anywhere in the room?

Peanut allergy has suddenly emerged as the number one cause of death from food reactions, and more pregnant women, children and infants are getting the flu shot than ever before in history. Coincidence?

Best way to avoid the flu and severe food allergies is to avoid the flu shot altogether

Mass hypersensitivity is a co-feature of modern chemical medicine, but it’s kept secret. This is the precise reason why many doctors in the early 1900s were dead set against vaccines; the advertised benefit was not worth the risk.

Foreign protein in the blood is a universal trigger for allergic reactions in all animals. Scientists know this to be fact. Food anaphylaxis is a violent reaction that requires an initial sensitization involving the injection of certain proteins, followed later by ingestion of that same food. Get it? You get the shot injected into your muscle tissue, causing an unnatural fight or flight immune reaction, then later you eat the food. Vaccines were first brewed in eggs, meat, milk and diphtheria proteins. Scientists began using peanut oil to brew vaccines in the 1960s

Interested in avoiding the flu and preventing food allergies? Avoid the flu shot. You can build natural immunity to viruses by consuming oil of oregano, organic garlic and many other natural remedies

Sources for this article include: