Pepsi admits its soda contains cancer-causing ingredients
When the Center for Environmental Health released test results showing that Pepsi intentionally covered up the presence of high levels of 4-Mel in its popular When the Center for Environmental Health released test results showing that Pepsi intentionally covered up the presence of high levels of 4-Mel in its popular soft drinks in 2013, the company denied both the presence of this chemical in its beverages and the fact that it was dangerous. 4-Mel, which is short for 4-Methylimidazole , is a compound that is formed in the manufacturing of caramel coloring, and is a known carcinogen

Since then, the drinks maker has fought against complying with California state requirements to place a Since then, the drinks maker has fought against complying with California state requirements to place a cancer warning label on the beverages that contain the ingredient, which include not only Pepsi, but also Diet Pepsi and Pepsi One.

Settlement in class action lawsuit

Now, a settlement in a class action lawsuit against Pepsi has gained preliminary approval from a federal judge in California. As part of the proposed settlement, Pepsi has agreed to ensure its caramel coloring’s 4-Mel levels do not exceed 100 parts per billion in products that are being shipped for sale within the U.S. They will also be required to test the soda using specific protocols.

The soft drink giant also agreed to these measures in a different lawsuit that was settled in a California state court last year. The new settlement, however, expands the reach of these measures from California to the entire country.

Pepsi failed to warn consumers that its drinks contain known carcinogens

The lawsuit accused The lawsuit accused Pepsi of failing to warn people that its beverages contain 4-Mel, which California has officially recognized as a cancer -causing chemical.

A 2014 Consumer Reports test showed that the 4-Mel in Pepsi exceeded the permitted level of 29 micrograms per bottle or can, which would mean that they were in violation of common law and consumer protection statutes in the state of California.

Violates Prop 65 in California

In particular, this violates California’s Proposition 65, which has been in place since 1985, and requires manufacturers to provide consumers with clear warnings when their products will expose them to toxic or In particular, this violates California’s Proposition 65, which has been in place since 1985, and requires manufacturers to provide consumers with clear warnings when their products will expose them to toxic or cancer-causing chemicals

The state’s Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment set the cutoff at 29 micrograms because that level creates a risk of The state’s Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment set the cutoff at 29 micrograms because that level creates a risk of cancer of one in 100,000.

Citing a 2013 Mintel and Leatherhead Food Research report, Consumer Reports said that Consumer Reports disagreed, however. Citing a 2013 Mintel and Leatherhead Food Research report,said that caramel coloring is the world’s most widely used food coloring. At the time, Pepsi tried to say that because Prop 65 refers to exposure per day rather than exposure per can, and that the average amount of diet soda that its drinkers consume daily is less than a can, there was no need to place a warning on it.disagreed, however.

“No matter how much consumers drink they don’t expect their beverages to have a potential “No matter how much consumers drink they don’t expect their beverages to have a potential carcinogen in them. And we don’t think 4-MeI should be in foods at all. Our tests of Coke samples show that it is possible to get to much lower levels,” toxicologist Dr. Urvashi Rangan said.

Is drinking soda really worth risking cancer and obesity?

It simply does not make sense for people to expose themselves unnecessarily to an ingredient that merely serves to color their food, and consumers have the right to be aware of what they are putting in their bodies. The popularity of books like It simply does not make sense for people to expose themselves unnecessarily to an ingredient that merely serves to color their food, and consumers have the right to be aware of what they are putting in their bodies. The popularity of books like Food Forensics serves to illustrate the growing desire by Americans to know what ingredients their food products contain.

The The cancer -causing caramel coloring in Pepsi is not the only reason consumers should steer clear of it. Soft drinks are also believed to be behind the nation’s obesity epidemic

A UCLA study found that adults who consumed one sugary drink such as a soda every day had a 27 percent higher likelihood of being classified as overweight than those who did not drink such beverages. Moreover, drinking just one soda each day adds up to a total of 39 pounds of sugar each year! That means that regular soda drinkers can cut their risk of obesity and cancer in one fell swoop simply by giving up the habit for good.

A quick note from our founder-

Over the past year, my friend Dave at PaleoHacks has been Over the past year, my friend Dave at PaleoHacks has been working on a secret cookbook with world-renowned Le Cordon Bleu chef Peter Servold.

Well, today this new this new incredible Paleo Cookbook is finally available to be Well, today this new this new incredible Paleo Cookbook is finally available to be shipped right to your door for FREE

That's right -- as a That's right -- as a special launch promotion , we're offering our brand new Paleo fat loss cookbook to you for free (Chef Pete lost 60 lbs using these recipes!) -- All you have to do is just cover a small shipping cost (international shipping is a bit more).

Get your Get your FREE copy of Paleo Eats Here . (Grab this today, because we only ordered a small batch of these cookbooks for this freebie promotion, and they will sell out FAST!)



Help us create more awareness! Please SHARE this article...



Mobility

Mobility Pain Relief #1 muscle that eliminates joint and back pain, anxiety and looking fat By By Mike Westerdal CPT

I bet you can’t guess which muscle in your body is the #1 muscle that eliminates joint and back pain, anxiety and looking fat.

This “ hidden survival muscle ” in your body will boost your energy levels, immune system, sexual function, strength and athletic performance when unlocked.

If this “hidden” most powerful primal muscle is healthy, we are healthy.

Is it…

Take the quiz above and see if you got the correct answer!

P.S. Make sure you check out the next page to get to know the 10 simple moves that will bring vitality back into your life! P.S. Make sure you check out the next page to get to know thethat will bring vitality back into your life!

To begin, I apologize for the dark nature of today's email. To begin, I apologize for the dark nature of today's email.

However I promise what you'll discover today will be completely worth it.

Imagine a rotting corpse draped over your body from head to toe...

...suffocating tissue, restricting blood flow, damaging joints and infecting your healthy cells.

Shockingly, that nightmare is a reality for most :

64% of women and 74% of men carry too much body fat according to the National Institutes of Health.

It's choking their organs, assaulting their metabolism and sucking their energy dry.

But here's the worst part:

For most, this bodyfat has become "calorie-resistant":

It's completely unaffected by even the strictest diets... and most intense exercises.

This zombie fat is essentially... "dead tissue".

That's important for those who have 10, 25 or 50 or more pounds to lose...

AND for those who aren't technically overweight, but have what's called "pocket obesity"...

...unsightly patches of fat that cling to specific places, like:

just above your hips, lower belly, where your butt and legs meet... and even arms, neck and face.

However, there's good news:

Obesity researchers have now discovered a "metabolic jumper cable":

It jolts dead bodyfat back to life.

This allows your metabolism to burn it as calories and re-energize your entire body.

First though, here's the #1 reason why bodyfat becomes calorie-resistant:

It lacks blood flow. This has 3 effects:

Not enough oxygen or nutrients reach fat cells, so they become unresponsive.. Released fat can't be sent to other tissues to be burned, so fat cells suck it back in... 3) Metabolic hormones carrying the "burn calories" message don't reach the fat cell...

All this means one thing:

Your body can't transform into energy, the 135,000+ of calories the average person stores as fat!

You become a metabolic zombie: NO energy to think. NO energy to move. NO energy to motivate.

Update: calorie-resistant bodyfat can be now removed...

The discovery of this "metabolic jumper cable" can now reverse this process:

It wakes up un-responsive bodyfat with a powerful calorie-burning hormonal jolt....

It wakes up un-responsive bodyfat with a powerful calorie-burning hormonal jolt.... It pops open fat cells, sucks out the fat, sending it off before its yanked back in...

It pops open fat cells, sucks out the fat, sending it off before its yanked back in... It shuttles fat to your brain, heart, lungs, kidneys - even your bones - to be burned as energy.

Not only do those layers of "zombie fat" start coming off, but your entire body just works better.

Plus, as your whole body burns more calories, those patches of pocket obesity whittle away.

This "metabolic jumper cable" isn't any exercise, machine or pill.

It's a little-known, calorie-burning hormone we all have... just waiting for the right spark to come alive.

It's not It's not thyroid , leptin, ghrelin, insulin, adiponectin, HGH or any other "fat loss" hormone you may know.

And on And on this next page , you'll find out precisely how to unleash its calorie-burning power:

PS - Studies show that not only can healthy levels of this powerful calorie-burning hormone devour bodyfat and fortify soft muscle, but it can also reduce your risk of diabetes by 53.7%, a heart attack by 83.3% and stroke by 51.4%. PS - Studies show that not only can healthy levels of this powerful calorie-burning hormone devour bodyfat and fortify soft muscle, but it can alsoof diabetes by 53.7%, a heart attack by 83.3% and stroke by 51.4%. Here's more of the scientific proof...

In April, 2009, researchers stunned the medical community when they reported chronic inflammation as the root cause of several major diseases.

See, every year 610,000 people in the U.S. die of heart disease. See, every year 610,000 people in the U.S. die of heart disease. Cancer claims another 584,000...stroke 130,000...Alzheimer's disease nearly 85,000 — and the list goes on.

Truth is, we now know... chronic inflammation is responsible for 7 out of the top 10 leading causes of death in the United States! Hundreds of studies and scientific reviews prove it.

Fortunately, newer research shows you can prevent-even reverse-most major diseases by "turning off" inflammation. And in our new book, we show you how to do just that.

If you or a loved one is suffering from a debilitating condition-and you"re not sure what the culprit is-now's the time to find out...while you can still do something about it!

--> Grab your FREE copy of this groundbreaking soft cover book today (while supplies still last.) (while supplies still last.)

If you haven't heard of Claude Davis yet do yourself a huge favor and If you haven't heard of Claude Davis yet do yourself a huge favor and watch this video . He's going to be the talk of 2016.

One of the smartest guys I ever had the pleasure of meeting, Claude set-up a One of the smartest guys I ever had the pleasure of meeting, Claude set-up a unique system that changed his life forever.

I already tried it myself and let me tell... you I was completely blown away... His surprising tactics could make your life easier and give you the peace of mind you deserve.

Don't just take my word for it... Don't just take my word for it... watch his short video and decide for yourself.

Is Bread Really the Staff of Life… or the Stuff of Disease?

For most us, there are few foods more comforting than bread.

Fluffy biscuits, crusty baguettes, flaky croissants… even a simple slice of toast topped with melted butter can taste like heaven.

And that smell… few scents are quite as pleasant as And that smell… few scents are quite as pleasant as fresh bread baking in the oven

But there is a lot of confusion as to where bread fits into a healthy diet.

The Bible practically commands followers to eat it: “Give us this day our daily bread…” The government put it at the base of the food pyramid. And for centuries, it has been called “the staff of life.”

Of course, there are some who disagree…

Well-known cardiologist, Dr. William Davis, calls wheat “the perfect chronic poison.”

And for a poison, we sure eat lots of it…

The average American consumes 55 pounds of wheat flour every year, making refined flour the #1 source of calories in the American Diet – a situation that nutrition expert Chris Kresser describes as, “a public health catastrophe.”

Is it the perfect poison… or an essential daily food?

Is “gluten-free” bread better for you than regular bread?

And can you still eat bread… while maintaining a lean body and optimal health?

The answers to these questions may surprise you!

Be sure to read #5 – the biggest surprise of all!

Recently, Doctor of Naturopathy, weight-loss expert and best-selling Amazon author Liz Swann Miller, creator of the Red Smoothie Detox Factor, revealed 2 of the secrets to easy, steady weight loss. Secrets the big food corporations do their best to hide from us.

Secret #1: Enjoy real food. Don’t fall for the lie that you have to deprive yourself to lose weight.

Secret #2: stop eating out. You will automatically eat less without even noticing.

Then start detoxing your body with tasty, nourishing smoothies that are just as easy on your wallet as they are easy to make.

Because a single day of enjoying Liz’ smoothies demonstrated the radical power of her superfood-packed red smoothies to make me feel incredibly good.

Now prepare yourself for one of the biggest weight loss secrets there is. A secret that, when you use it properly, can transform your body and your health.

You probably know most of us eat too much processed food. What you may not know is that it’s full of toxic chemicals and substandard, dirt-cheap ingredients designed to make you eat more …and force you to gain weight.

Here’s how it works.

“That stuff is just a lot of calories your body can’t use,” Liz told me, “Some are poison . And all these foods are stripped of the anti-oxidants and anti-inflammatories that help your body detox. The result? Your body expends huge amounts of calories to eliminate some toxins—the rest, it stores in your fat to protect you. This is why most people are hungry all the time. They’re not getting energy they need.”

“So… what’s going on with me? Why am I losing weight but not going hungry?”

Liz paused, then dropped the bombshell.

Your body is designed to burn fat. You just have to let it.

“What? I thought we were designed to store fat?!?” We were Skyping and I was practically shouting. Then I heard Liz say…

What good is a fat reserve if you can’t burn it?

Mind blown.

Liz continued: “You’re drinking smoothies packed with phytonutrients, anti-oxidants and anti-inflammatories that pull toxins out of you like a tractor beam. Allowing your body to burn those toxin-filled fat stores… and releasing tremendous amounts of stored energy.”

So that’s why I’m losing weight without going hungry.

Watch Liz’ free presentation. It’s packed with revolutionary weight loss information—information that works. Because it’s based on how nature.

Click the button only if you want to wear smaller clothes, breathe easier, move more freely and just plain feel better.

Which calories help you lose weight…and which ones help you gain it…

Which calories help you lose weight…and which ones help you gain it… The “diet” foods…some of them vegetables…that lead to weight gain and diabetes…

The “diet” foods…some of them vegetables…that lead to weight gain and diabetes… The “low-fat” foods that can dramatically increase your risk of cancer .

The “low-fat” foods that can dramatically increase your risk of cancer . And the superfoods that rescue your body from this assault by detoxing you…

Revitalizing your metabolism so you can Shed pounds as well as toxins, renew your body and reset your internal clock by up to 7 years.

Because until now, the Red Smoothie Detox Factor has been available only to Liz’ private clients. But now that she’s perfected it to work for almost everyone, almost every time, Liz is sharing it with rest of us so we can feel better and look better.

Get Red Smoothie Detox Factor before the price goes back up.

Because Liz offers a ridiculously good guarantee. You have 60 days to decide you love the Red Smoothie Detox Factor . If you don’t love it—for any reason, or even no reason at all —Liz will refund your money. 100%. No questions asked.

Sponsored Health Resources

In the years that I've been working on this website project I've come across some amazing resources by some very special people. I'd like to share them with you here.

NOTE: I update these links often so please check back to see what's new!

1) Everyone knows green smoothies are healthy right? Have you heard of a “red” smoothie? If not, check out this story…

2) Forget what you've read about 10-day lemonade cleanses, 7-day detoxes with green juices and Gwyneth's gruel. All you need to do, and this is perfect for Saturday or or anytime really, is a simple 1-day cleanse.

3) This “ hidden survival muscle ” in your body will boost your energy levels, immune system, sexual function, strength and athletic performance when unlocked.

4) I thought it was virtually impossible for a website to be able to tell me anything even a little bit insightful after only submitting my name and date of birth... I was wrong!

5) Turmeric is amazing. The problem is - It's hard to absorb!

6) Wonder why your stomach still sticks out even though you're hammering the core exercises every day? It's a common myth that bulging belly is due to weak abdominal muscles.

7) Even if you're the most active of athletes, you may still suffer from tight hip flexors due to the amount of time you spend each day planted to a chair .

Enjoy! Let me know how these work out for you. And if you run across anything I've missed please let me know.

Rick D.

wisemindhealthybody.com