QUESTION: What Would YOU Do If Muslims Attacked You For Drinking BEER?
Don't be putting the "North" in MAO'bamas camp.

You may say NY,Boston,Chitcago and "the big cities up north".

Most of the north is flyover country with lots of dirt roads and forests dotted with farms pal.

And WE mostly are well armed hunters, Patriots and God fearing Bible believers.

*Who* do you think the Liar-N-Chief was talking about in San Franqueerdo when he stated how rural Americans-

"are bitter, they cling to their guns or religion"

Hence the term "Bitter clingers"-

It was small town Pennsylvania- which basically identical to rural Ohio, upstate NY, or New England or the rest of "North" country = thats alot of states, area and people. More than the southern states, where NM, AZ, southern Ca are mostly(D).

Even in northern Ca, Oregon+Washington state the rural is opposite the large urban areas, esp Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, S Dakota.

Sorry to say- it is to much of a mixed bag all over the nation, tho rural+small town areas are majority Conservative/libertarian.

From Independent thru moderate Reagan (D's) thru the Repblican gamit.

City folks are mostly detached from the land and earth that sustains them in their artificial lifestyle propped up by the labor producing goods and raw materials by rural people = food, energy, lumber/paper, water, minerals/aggregates and peace and quiet recreation to escape their city prisons cells and lifestyles.

They must have "city-guilt" and why they bypass us rural folks that sustain them to idealize nature as a god by sending big cty checks to Green Peace, Sierra Club, PETA and the varies wildlife funds that lobby the unelected BLM, and federal wildife service -etc= who breath down OUR necks as if WE were criminals for existing on "their" land and ruining the city folks's ideal of wilderness everywhere outside of their pathetic onclaves.

How do these wing-nut near-do-wells think they can exist without us providing EVERYTHING for their thankless utterly detached from true reality butts ~?