Truth Behind Trump's Wall, something I came across on Facebook, does …
I don't know the steel industry, but it doesn't matter, all manufacturing follows the same formula; it doesn't matter if you're making toy Hot Wheels or Lambos. The golden rules of manufacturing are:

Initial setup is the most expensive and time-wasting part. The more units you make, the cheaper each unit is. Government contracts are like printing money.

In order to produce any given thing, you have to have the correct tools and machinery to do so. In the case of steel that would be foundries to produce the steel and mills to shape it to spec. The more uncommon in size and purpose a product is the less likely it is that any given company will have the milling tools to produce it. If the tool needed to do the job is already owned by a company, they have an enormous cost and speed advantage. Thus if one specific US company - say, one partially owned by Trump's buddy - happens to be the only one able to mill a specific size of rod/slat/whatever, and that "just so happens" to be the one Trump wants to use, then by default nobody else will get the contract.

Nobody else will be able to do the job cheaper and be able to steal the contract out from under the other company. Any company that wanted to try and get it anyway would have to invest capital and time getting the milling equipment, raising the price and delay. Trump wants the wall mucho pronto and so the contract would still go to the original company. Because of tariffs Trump put into place, sourcing the steel slats from a foreign manufacturer would be indefeasibly expensive.

Trump, likely in one of those closed-door meetings with Putin, decided to switch to the steel slats, possibly before he even put the tariffs in place for the express purpose of ensuring that the only viable contractor to do the job would be his friend's company. That company then gets a juicy government contract (known for inflated costs and guaranteed income) and their stock value rises. Trump then later can collect on this either via kickbacks, favors, etc. either days or years later.

Basically, once you know who makes the steel, and know a little about manufacturing, it becomes glaringly obvious that Trump is in it for - wait for it - Trump. That is the entirety of Trump's psychology. Even his own children are just an extension of himself, and the better they are at staying that way (Ivanka) the more he likes them. That's also why Jared's primary skill-set involves making his father-in-law as happy with him as possible, but that's a discussion for a different thread.