What a powerful image. #SHAREIT
Ok, let me help all of you out!



Hitler turned Germany into a Fascist State!





If you went to school here, drive on the roads, use public utilities, call the cops, call the fire department, or use any service run by city, state or the federal government then you have used one of the many socialist programs here in the USA!



My Grandfather was in the SS, My Grandmother was a Jew!



My Mother was born in 1931. She was raised by her Grandmother until 1936, when she went to live with her father and his wife! My mother was the product of an affair!



She was raised in a very small town on the Austrian border. Her Grandmother disappeared along with all the other Jewish families! The only explanation given to my mother was that they all moved!



The fact that my Grandfather was in the SS was kept secret from everyone for many years.



No one had guns unless they were military! You were either with Hitler or against him!



They didn't just kill Jews! They killed Gypsies, gays and lesbians, the mentally and physically disabled!



My mother was hidden in plain sight and survived the war! She was not even aware that her mother was a Jew until 1986, when she met her! She abandoned my Mother and saved herself, so there is no love lost there!



My Mother (A Jew)was in the League of German Girls! This was not an option, it was mandatory for German Girls!



Many of the German people had no clue what was going on! Some that knew lived in fear!



The Vast majority that knew what was going on were in the military or Rich!



The news in Germany was controlled. The people were fed nothing but lies!



The picture above is powerful! It should be used!



I believe in the right to bear arms! I have my concealed carry!



Now, let me let you all in on a little secret!



Democrats do not want to take your guns!



Gun legislation to keep guns out of the hands of the mentally ill or Criminals hands does not mean taking your guns! Keeping kids safe is also a good thing!



You are now being fed lies! Wake up and don't become a herd of sheep!



Politicians get people's votes by making them fear the other side! Don't listen to what they say now! Look into what they have done in the past and make a decision based on their record!



You also need to stop worrying about your guns and start buying ammo! All this nonsense is just going to keep driving the prices up!



Here is a big shocker for you! I'm a registered Democrat! I come from a family full of Military Vets and also have many still serving, including my son! I've lost 2 family members in service to this Country! My dad in 1971 and my brother in law in 2007. I have 4 family members who are disabled Vets!



So, I am personally attached in every way, shape and form to these issues and arguments!



Everyone just needs to wake up! Do your own research on these candidates! Every piece of legislation has all kinds of things attached to them! Read what the trade offs were!



Look into Donald Trumps Business practices. He filed Bankruptcy on several companies. He was born with a silver spoon in his mouth!



Look at Hillary Clintons votes as a Senator and her actions as the Secretary of State!



Both of these candidates are dangerous to our Country!



Seriously folks! We need to be afraid if either of them becomes president!