BREAKING: U.S. Traitor La David Johnson Wanted Out Months Ago
A screen grab of Sgt. La David Johnson’s Facebook page. Johnson was described by colleagues as an easy-going soldier who had a change of attitude when Donald Trump was elected President.

Washington, DC – On Tuesday, the Washington, DC – On Tuesday, the New York Times reported that as far back as two months ago, Sgt. La David T. Johnson, who betrayed his own squad by helping set up an ambush in Niger, which would ultimately cause the death of three American soldiers, as well as his own, was ready to come home. Torneisha Ghent, 24, who along with her brother, Johnson, grew up in Carol City, a neighborhood in north Miami-Dade County said,

“He (Johnson) was ready.”

According to Ghent, Johnson said in an hour-long video chat that he was ready to come home and that he wanted to see his children again and return to his wife – then four months pregnant with their third child. The New York Times article however does not make clear “how” he intended to come home. According to fellow Green Beret, Adrian, who asked not to give his last name as investigations into Johnson’s actions in Niger are still ongoing and who was in country with Johnson at the time, via Skype,

“I overheard part of the video chat that Johnson was making. He was at the motor pool and it’s a pretty noisy place, so it’s hard not to overhear.” “I thought he was talking to his wife, but turns out it was his sister. He seemed genuinely desperate to come home. I get that, we’ve been out here a long time.”

Adrian then goes on to say that he did notice something different about Johnson, but only put things together after the massacre at Niamey, Niger – where the Islamic militant ambush occurred, adding,

“There was a lot of commotion when the survivors came back to camp.” “It was chaos, there were stretchers, a lot of blood, IVs, everything, it looked like a scene out of a war movie.” “Then I asked about Johnson, cause he’s in the motor pool but that was when everyone fell silent.” “So I kept on asking ‘Where’s Johnson?’, but nobody would say anything, but they gave me this look which said that he was dead, but not just that – something else.”

As it turns out, Adrian heard rumors later on at the motor pool that Johnson may have had something to do with the ambush, but didn’t believe the rumors at first.

“I thought – no way. Not Johnson. He’s a career soldier, loves the military, loves this country and loves the flag. No way he’s cooperating with the enemy.”

However, Adrian has his own theories. Although not close, Adrian claims that from the short conversations he had with Johnson, over the last few months something changed.

“He seemed to be more concerned about race and stuff, but the Johnson I remember never let that sort of thing get him down – he was always happy-go-lucky. Always had a big goofy smile for you.”

Instead, posts from his Facebook page showed that Johnson, who was stopped by the police repeatedly while growing up in Miami-Dade County, never seemed to let it get him down. In a Facebook post in 2012 he said,

“Think Big. Think Positive. Think Smart. Think Beautiful.”

However, Johnson’s Facebook post was made soon after Obama had won a second term in the White House – a time when Johnson may have been more determined than ever that anything was possible for a person of color.

Demonstrators climb on a destroyed Baltimore Police car in the street near the corner of Pennsylvania and North avenues during violent protests following the funeral of Freddie Gray April 27, 2015 in Baltimore, Maryland.

Gray, 25, who was arrested for possessing a switch blade knife April 12 outside the Gilmor Homes housing project on Baltimore’s west side.

According to the According to the New York Times , Johnson, who was 25 when he died, grew up in a gritty suburb with some of the highest crime and poverty levels in Florida – one of its few distinctions was having one of the highest police “stop and frisk” rates in the country. He watched his mother suffer for years with tuberculosis before she died when he was 5 years old. His father was mostly absent. His sister said that while many of his peers dropped out of school and drifted into crime, Johnson remained focused and upbeat.

He went on to work as a produce stocker at Walmart – a job he kept during high school and until he joined the Army. Those who served with Johnson said he wanted to provide the best life possible for his family and managed to turn his early knack for fixing things into a successful military career, making sergeant within three years.

For many blacks, Barrack Obama represented the highest pinnacle of black achievement. However, the quality of life for blacks has been on a steady decline during the Obama administration.

Johnson was apparently good with his hands as well. According to Staff Sgt. Dennis Bohler, who supervised Johnson during training at Fort Bragg in North Carolina,

“He would cut all the Africans’ hair. He had a little set up in his tent. He bought a bicycle and he took the wheel off of it and was riding in Africa with one tire.”

It was by cutting the hair of the Nigerien soldiers as well as the Africans who came from the nearby villages and would hang around outside the compound of the camp that Johnson started forging friendships with the locals. According to Adrian,

“Johnson would spend hours working on the Land Cruisers as they would break down often in the rough terrain, but he was always happy to show some of the locals who were interested in mechanical things how to fix this or replace that.” “He picked up French from the French contingent that was deployed with us and actually got pretty good at it. He said he’d use his new language skills to sweet talk his wife when he got back Stateside.”

However, it was his ability to speak French that ultimately would allow the ambush by Islamic militants to happen in the first place. Another fellow soldier who was also deployed with Johnson and wanted to be known only as Alex, said,

“I noticed Johnson once had a long and what looked like a serious conversation with a kid from one of the villages outside the camp. I knew this kid, you’d see him often during the (Muslim) call to prayer and he’d be trying to sell us DVDs and stuff.” “Anyway, a day before Johnson headed out on patrol, he spoke to this kid in broken French, I have no idea what they were saying, but there was a lot of gesticulating, like he was trying to tell him something about numbers or something.”

As it turns out, Johnson had been pointing to his watch, to try and tell the young Muslim child the numbers of the American squad who would be heading out to Tongo Tongo the next day. Although Alex and Adrian did not know it at the time, they both had separate clues that if put together would have demonstrated that Johnson was giving out details of the following day’s patrol to speak with the village chief at Tongo Tongo – a known Islamic militant sympathizer.

Tongo Tongo is a village in southwestern Niger and is ideal for Islamic militants to launch ambushes from.

Although the U.S. and French contingent regularly patrolled the area, the timing and size of their movements are deliberately kept secret, to make planning an ambush that much more difficult. Niger does not allow close air support cover of ground troops by the U.S. or French forces to engage with ground targets. Which is why the route that U.S. and French patrols take, as well as the number of troops in each patrol is kept erratic so that the enemy – in this case Islamic militants – is not able to set up an ambush or guess the number of troops it would need to engage with.

According to Dr. Parul Cedilnik, a clinical psychologist from Applied Psychology Services in Stuttgart Germany and who has experience treating U.S. servicemen and women from the U.S. military garrison in Stuttgart,

“It’s entirely possible for a high-functioning and exemplary soldier to fall into a condition of ‘battle fatigue’ where they no longer identify with the cause which they’re fighting for or with their individual unit.” “Such individuals become ‘detached’ so to speak, from their friends and because of the long separation from home, may act in a manner entirely inconsistent with their personalities.”

When asked to comment on the allegations made by the Nigerien forces that Johnson betrayed his squad in order to get shipped back stateside, Cedilnik said,

“It’s entirely possible.” “Johnson was an exemplary soldier, but the stress of a new child and the thought of his wife thousands of miles away having to take care of three kids on her own may have placed enormous strain on him, which he himself may not have been aware of.” “Many people think that a pregnancy is only stressful on a woman – but it’s not. Often times, men are just as stressed if not even more stressed – especially if they are away from home for long periods of time during the pregnancy.”

A screengrab of La David Johnson’s Facebook page showing a photo of him before he shipped out for his first deployment.

Johnson was on his second deployment in Niger, but unlike his first deployment, Donald Trump was now his President and not Barrack Obama and according to one soldier who just shipped back from Niger and who was familiar with Johnson, although not close and spoke on condition of anonymity, citing ongoing investigations,

“That changed him.” “Johnson is not a political guy. Heck, aside from Frederica Wilson, he probably couldn’t name you a single other Congressman or Senator from his state.” “He just wasn’t that into it. But the Colin Kaepernick thing was different. It’s not like Kaepernick hasn’t been protesting for awhile, but back then we had a black president and CNN wasn’t broadcasting it day and night. The police shooting in Baltimore, the BLM (Black Lives Matter) movement, I mean, we watched CNN when we were in country – it was on ALL the time.” “All day and night they were going on about racism – after awhile I suppose it gets to you.” “He started hanging out more with the other blacks in country, with the Nigerien soldiers, with the Africans, not with the white guys.” “So one day I go up to Johnson and ask him ‘What’s up? Why you acting like you don’t know us anymore?’ Then he stands up and pushes me aside, now he’s not a big guy or anything and I’m like six-four and he stares at me in the eye and just says ‘You don’t f*cking get it.’ and walks away.”

If Johnson was about to betray his squad to Islamic militants, there were no obvious signs. According to Adrian,

“It was his second deployment and it’s not like he volunteered for it ya know?” “His wife was barely a couple of months pregnant at the time. He pleaded with the C.O. (Commanding Officer) for some extra time stateside, but the C.O. said ‘no’ – the mission was crucial.” “People tend to get a bit cranky, especially when each deployment gets longer and longer, you can’t just assume that the next grouch is going to give up the position of your squad – it’s just not something you think about.”

Staff Sgt. Bryan Black, Sgt. La David Johnson, Staff Sgt. Dustin Wright and Staff Sgt. Jeremiah Johnson were killed in an ambush in Niger which was setup by Sgt. La David Johnson.

Only Johnson will know what was going through his mind when he decided to make the ultimate betrayal. Whether it was the desire to return home that caused him to come up with a plan to get the squad sent home or whether it was a desire to stop serving President Donald Trump who he thought was a “white supremacist” and a “racist” will never be certain. Dr. Parul Cedilnik added,

“When soldiers are ‘in country’ for extended periods, especially if there are extenuating circumstances at home, such as the birth of a new child or the impending birth of a new child, they may take on personalities which they may not have had previously.” “It’s entirely possible that Johnson may have viewed the news coverage of Trump and thought that Trump was a racist and questioned his service to this president. We can’t be certain.”

What is certain however is that President Donald Trump, White House Chief of Staff John Kelly and Secretary of Defense James Mattis knew about Johnson’s betrayal – although unable to publicly announce it, they have dropped numerous hints to the mainstream media. Which is why President Trump was provided a very specific script to address the difficult situation to Johnson’s widow Myeshia Johnson. It is no secret that President Trump wears his heart on his sleeve and for him to find kind words to say about a traitor to our country and to our flag was probably asking too much of possibly the most patriotic President in modern times.