Abortion in Canada: breaking down the law, policies and practices
OTTAWA — The divisive abortion debate resurfaced this week when a motion in the House of Commons to condemn sex-selection abortions was ruled out of order, prompting the backbencher Conservative who proposed it to accuse his own party of trying to muzzle him.

Abortion and the definition of human life continue to polarize Canadians, and the rules around this sensitive topic remain a regionally inconsistent patchwork of guidelines and best practices. Here’s a status report.

What does the law say about abortion in Canada?

In a landmark 1988 ruling, the Supreme Court of Canada struck down Section 251 of the Criminal Code dealing with abortion, on the grounds it violated a woman’s Charter right to “life, liberty and security of the person.” The law, which had been enacted in 1969, permitted abortions to take place only if an accredited four-member hospital committee determined a pregnancy would put a woman’s life or health in danger. The Supreme Court, however, ruled access to abortion was inconsistent across the country and its 1988 ruling meant that it became legal for any doctor to perform abortions in a hospital, clinic or doctor’s office if they so chose. The court also noted, however, that the “protection of fetal interests by Parliament” is “a valid governmental objective,” which, some suggest, effectively opened the door to Parliament to draft a new law aimed at balancing the interests of mother and unborn child. Attempts to do so have gone nowhere, which means that today, there are no laws restricting abortion based on fetal viability and a woman can legally get one at any point during her nine-month pregnancy as long as she can find a doctor willing to perform it.

How do women and their doctors decide? “It’s not a one-size-fits-all,” says Society of Gynecologists and Obstetricians of Canada president Douglas Black. “It’s a discussion that takes place in doctors’ offices between the physician and the woman and they make their informed choice with the help of us in the privacy of our own office and then we carry out their wishes according to the rules of the law and according to our own ethical comfort zone.”

Practically speaking, how widely available are abortions in Canada?

According to the National Abortion Federation (NAF), a professional association representing abortion providers in North America, abortion services are available in Ontario up to 24 weeks’ gestation and are covered by the province’s health plan regardless of whether they’re performed in a hospital or a clinic. Fully funded abortions are available in Quebec up to 23 weeks’ gestation, while the same is true up to 20 weeks’ gestation in Alberta. British Columbia offers abortions up to 20 weeks’ gestation and covers all costs except medications. Saskatchewan provides abortion services up to 14 weeks’ gestation and covers the cost of abortions performed in hospital. According to the NAF, there are no clinics in the province but the government will pay for women to obtain abortions at two clinics in Alberta.

Manitoba funds abortions up to 16 weeks’ gestation, Newfoundland and Labrador up to 15 weeks’ gestation and Nova Scotia up to 15 weeks’ based on ultrasound results. New Brunswick covers abortions at hospitals up to 16 weeks but women need permission from two doctors in order to proceed. There are no abortion clinics in Prince Edward Island but the province will fund abortions done in hospital up to about 15 weeks’ gestation if a woman can obtain a referral from a doctor. Nunavut and the Yukon offer and fund abortions up to 12 weeks’ gestation, the Northwest Territories, up to 14 weeks. The Yukon and Northwest Territories will cover the cost to send women out of the region for later-term abortions.

Black believes abortion clinics are equipped to handle terminations up to 17 weeks’ gestation but expects anything beyond that would be done in hospital. He does not know how many doctors in Canada perform abortions.

Some provinces and professional organizations offer guidelines on abortion. What do they say?

The Society of Gynecologists and Obstetricians of Canada offers a detailed, 14-page guide on induced abortions. The document clearly states it’s “not meant to support either side of the abortion debate,” but is rather a comprehensive clinical guide for physicians outlining the latest techniques, medications and procedures for abortions. Dr. Black said the guideline is already more than six years old and that it may be time for an update.

Other guidelines are published in the Canadian Medical Association offers a two-page policy , the Ontario College of Physicians and Surgeons offers a comprehensive, 55-page guideline, the College of physicians of Quebec offers a detailed, 24-page guide and others, such as the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan’s three-page guideline .

There was a political issue earlier this year about aborted fetuses being born alive. What was that about?



According to Statistics Canada, 491 babies were born alive between 2000 and 2009 following an abortion, only to die shortly after. This means, once fully separated from their mothers, they were either breathing or had a beating heart. Other “signs of life” include “pulsation of the umbilical cord or definite movement of voluntary muscles, whether or not the umbilical cord has been cut or the placenta is attached.”

According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, in 2010-2011 there were another 119 babies born alive following an abortion performed at a Canadian hospital after 20 weeks’ gestation; they died shortly after. The 2012 Canadian Coding Standards used by the organization suggest the decision to abort later term is often due to a major anomaly. It offers several examples including that of a mother who seeks an abortion at 23 weeks’ gestation after learning the fetus suffered from anencephaly, or the lack of a brain. In the example, the baby survived for an hour. Other common reasons for a late abortion, according to doctors, are chromosomal abnormalities such as Down syndrome or cardiac defects that are “incompatible with life.” A late abortion might also be sought if the pregnancy has put the mother’s life at risk. B.C. physician Beth Taylor, however, said patients in her province seeking abortions beyond 24 weeks’ gestation are referred to specialists in the United States.

Dr. Warren Hern, a so-called “late-term abortion specialist” based in Boulder, Colo., said he sees several dozen Canadian patients a year. He has no “upper limit” in terms of how late he will perform an abortion but says he has never, in more than 30 years, aborted a live baby.

How do we track abortions, live-birth abortions and stillborns in Canada?

Until 2006, Statistics Canada collected abortion statistics as reported by hospitals and clinics across the country. Since then, the Canadian Institute for Health Information has taken on the duty, though provincial reporting is inconsistent and the figures do not capture the number of Canadians who go out-of-country to receive an abortion. In 2006, figures suggest there were 91,310 abortions performed in Canada. Recent figures from CIHI suggest there were 92,524 abortions performed in Canada in 2011, excluding Quebec.

Stillbirths, deaths that occur before the fetus is separated from its mother — be it naturally or through abortion — are tracked by provincial and territorial vital statistics registries as long as the pregnancy lasted 20 weeks or more, or if the “product of conception” weighs more than 500 grams. Quebec disregards gestation and only registers stillbirths weighing at least 500 grams, according to Statistics Canada. The Canadian Coding Standards say live born babies resulting from abortions during the first 19 weeks of gestation are “considered pre-viable for the purposes of classification” and are therefore not recorded in vital statistics. That’s why it’s difficult to ascertain abortion rates from stillborn data, since many abortions occur in early pregnancy. A baby that’s born alive and subsequently dies is captured in death statistics. In the case of a live-birth abortion, the underlying cause of death would be listed as “termination of pregnancy affecting fetus and newborn,” in other words, abortion.

What do other countries say about abortion?

Many countries, including the United Kingdom, New Zealand Norway and France, restrict abortion beyond a certain point in gestation. Many also require at least two physicians to sign off before an abortion can take place.

Abortion in the United States was legalized in 1973 following the famous U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Roe vs. Wade. According to the UN, however, individual states may prohibit abortion after “fetal viability” or restrict access depending on how far along a woman is in her pregnancy. According to the National Abortion Federation, more than 500 bills limiting access to abortion are filed in state legislatures each year, and over the past decade, more than 350 anti-choice bills became law.

tcohen@postmedia.com

Twitter.com/tobicohen