Need Your Help to Stop Tiny Houses from being Illegal!
@Gordon

The RV designation is much more simple to attain than what you are terming “Mobile Home”. What you are referring to is a HUD code home and the proper term is “manufactured home”. This is a much more stringent code than RV designation and would probably be a quicker way to shut down tiny houses of any type. Below is an excerpt from and article at SFGate.com summarizing some of the HUD code:

Under HUD guidelines, manufactured homes must be a minimum of 400 square feet in size. They must have ceiling heights in habitable rooms and bathrooms of at least 7 feet, while ceilings in hallways and storage areas must be at least 6 feet 6 inches. Manufactured homes must have at least two outside doors located at least 12 feet from each other in single-wide units and 20 feet in double-wide units. Each bedroom must have at least one window to the outside along with easy access to an outside doorway. In addition, each bedroom meant for one person must have at least 50 square feet of floor space; those meant for two individuals must contain at least 70 square feet. The house must have an adequate number of windows for ventilation. Kitchens and bathrooms must also have mechanical ventilation systems.

Additionally the HUD code also specifies wind and snow loads dependent on the area of the country for which it will be built. In addition fixtures and appliances have minimum requirements which would necessarily increase the required size of the structure.

In many jurisdictions in conjunction with financing entities axles and wheels are required to be removed thus eliminating the propensity to move it about to avoid repossession in such an instance. Additionally very specific methods for anchoring the house to the ground are determined by the jurisdiction having authority and will consist of pre-engineered elements from ground pads to metal ties and ground augers.

@ Lisa D

Your inability to recognize what is blatantly evident in this ruling is shocking but typical for sheeple. If you would read the rule and HUD’s comments you can see this is all about control. It mentions roof top deck and screened in porches that effectively increase the proscribed living space thus bypassing the RV rules. What they are effectively saying is freedom and choice is not to be tolerated. By limiting the duration of time one can live in a RV designated structure people are effectively bound to live in government approved housing of its whim. The countless retirees that live in RV communities in places such as FL and AZ will be forced into more expensive or undesirable accommodations. This ruling has very far reaching effects beyond what it will do to THOWs and the tiny house community at large.

WAKE UP! and realize this is about control.

.