Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Drops Bombshell: “Trump Could Be Greatest President In History!”
During an interview on CNN, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., son of the late-Robert Francis “Bobby” Kennedy dropped a bombshell that has every liberal sobbing. Kennedy said,

“Donald Trump could be the greatest president in history if he wanted to, he could easily be the next Teddy Roosevelt.”

Can you hear the sobs coming from liberal protesters when a left-wing icon like Robert F. Kennedy Jr. finally admits the truth?

Kennedy continued,

“Well, I think Donald Trump can be, you know, any kind of president he wants. He’s actually — he has this extraordinary opportunity because he’s coming into office less burdened by obligation than probably any president in our history with the possible exception of Andrew Jackson.”

“And you know, both of them, Jackson and Trump came in, they were — people were sickened, they were outraged when Jackson came in and they thought it was the end of the world and he became a — unless you were an American-Indian, he became a very good president in defending the country against corporate power and really democratizing America in many ways.”

“Trump does not have obligations, he could really be an extraordinary president.”

Wow.

But he wasn’t done confirming every single liberal’s worst nightmare,

“You know, I think he can do anything he wants because he is not — he is not bound by ideology. He is less bound by ideology than any president probably that we’ve had this century.”

“He said to Leonardo DiCaprio the other day that he wanted to be the next Teddy Roosevelt, and he can easily do that.”

“I think he can be any kind of president he wants. I think he could be the greatest president in history if he wanted to.”

Yes, but he will need help in fighting off the establishment. If Trump can convert a few establishment liberals like Robert Kennedy, his mission will be that much easier to implement. We still have to get John McCain and some republican holdouts in line but with democrat support it gives Trump some leverage.

Giving the guy who wrote the art of the deal some leverage means the American people will get the best deal we have ever gotten. In our history, cementing trump’s place at the top of Presidents.

Error loading player: No playable sources found

What do you think about this comment below.

Related Items: News