University of Colorado Denver
Faculty

Callie Marie Rennison, Ph.D. - Professor, Director of Equity and Title IX Coordinator for CU Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus

Page Content



School of Public Affairs

P.O. Box 173364 - Campus Box 142

Denver, CO 80217 - 3364

Phone: (303) 315 - 2813

Fax: (303) 315 - 2229

E-mail: University of Colorado DenverSchool of Public AffairsP.O. Box 173364 - Campus Box 142Denver, CO 80217 - 3364Phone: (303) 315 - 2813Fax: (303) 315 - 2229E-mail: Callie.Rennison@ucdenver.edu

Dr. Callie Marie Rennison is a Professor in the School of Public Affairs (SPA), and the former Associate Dean of Faculty Affairs in SPA. Currently, she is the Director of Equity and Title IX Coordinator for the CU Denver | Anschutz Medical Campuses.

Areas of Interest : Nature, extent, and consequences of violent victimization with an emphasis on research methodology, quantitative analysis, measurement, and crime data. Her research examines violence against several groups including women, African Americans, American Indians, and Hispanics. In addition, much of her research has focused on victim interaction with the criminal justice system and college student victimization.

Bio: Callie Marie Rennison earned her Ph.D. in 1997 in political science from the University of Houston, University Park, where she also received a B.S. in psychology, M.A. in sociology, and M.A. in political science. In 2016, she was awarded the Bonnie S. Fisher Victimology Career Award from the Division of Victimology in the American Society of Criminology. She has also served on a National Academies Committee examining domestic sex trafficking of minors in the United States and was a Senior Researcher at the Department of Justice's Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Her research has appeared in many venues including prestigious journals such as the Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Justice Quarterly, Violence and Victims, and Violence Against Women. To date, she has authored several books. In 2015, Sage Publications released the Introduction to Criminal Justice: Systems, Diversity and Change (with Dr. Mary Dodge). The second edition of this book was published in January of 2017. In 2016, Callie, with co-editor Dr. Carlos Cuevas, published the Wiley Handbook on the Psychology of Violence. And in fall 2018, a Research Methods text authored with Timothy C. Hart will be published by Sage Publications.

Callie has taught a variety of undergraduate and graduate courses including Research Methods, Statistics, Murder in America, Crime and the Media, and Introduction to Criminal Justice.

Recent Publications:

Re nnison, Callie Marie & Addington, Lynn A. (in press). Comparing violent victimization experiences of male and female college-attending emerging adults. Violence Against Women .​ Rennison, Callie Marie, Kaukinen, C., & Meade, C. (in press). The extent, nature, and dynamics of sexual violence against college women. In Catherine Kaukinen, Michelle H., Miller, & Rachael Powers (eds.) Addressing and Preventing Violence against Women on College Campuses. Temple Publishing.

Rennison, Callie Marie. (in press). National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). The Encyclopedia of Research Methods and Statistical Techniques in Criminology and Criminal Justice. J.C., Barnes and D. Forde (Eds.). Wiley Publishing.

Rennison, Callie Marie, & Timothy C. Hart. (2018) Research Methods in Criminal Justice. Sage:Thousand Oaks, CA.​ Renn ison, Callie Marie & Dodge, Mar y. (2017). Introduction to Criminal Justice: Systems, Diversity an d Change, 2nd Edition. Sage:Thousand Oaks, CA.​

Rennison, Callie Marie. (2017). Current Controversies: Disadvantage as a Catalyst for Sexual Victimization. Sourcebook on Violence Against Women, Third Edition. C.M. Renzetti, J.L. Edleson, & R.K. B ergen (eds.). Sage Publications.

Rennison, Callie Marie & DeKeseredy, Walter S. (2017). Situational contexts of rural violence. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 33(2). Hart, Timothy C., Rennison, Callie Marie, & Miethe, Terance D. (2017). Identifying patterns of situational clustering and contextual variability in criminological data: An overview of conjunctive analysis of case configurations. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 33(2). ​ Bosick, Stacey & Rennison, Callie Marie. (2016). Life course and reporting violence to the police. Violence and Victims, 35(1), 957-984.

Rennison, Callie Marie, Jacques, Scott & Allen, Andrea. (2016). Victim injury, firearm presence, and social distance. Violence and Victims, 34(1), 726-750. ​



Cuevas, Carlos & Rennison, Callie Marie (Eds.). (2016). Handbook on the Psychology of Violence. Wiley-Blackwell.​