Top Leading Cancer Scientist Found Dead in Tree in Fetish Body Suit |…
Top Leading Cancer Scientist Found Dead

It is with heavy heart that I break this sad news about another death.

This will not be added to the official list of deaths, as it was “accidental”.

One of the country’s leading cancer researchers was found dead in a rubber body suit in woodland in a “bizarre sex fetish”, an inquest heard today.

Professor Alan Clarke, 52, was discovered by his wife and neighbors in a blue and black rubber suit three hours after taking the family’s dog for a walk.

He was the director of the European Cancer Stem Cell Research Institute and the Cancer Research UK, and was found dead in a hooded mask in a rubber body suit hanging from a tree.

The hearing was told that Prof Clarke’s wife Kathryn and neighbors went looking for him after he failed to return home from walking the dog.

The father-of-two was already dead, hanging from a tree, dressed in the rubber suit.

The inquest heard he had been planning to take his family to the seaside the following day. Clarke’s wife said he had never talked about committing suicide.

Mrs. Clarke said this about her husband, “He had too much to live for.”

Coroner David Bowen said, “There was nothing to suggest there was any third party involved in his death.”

Bowen said he wasn’t sure, given the attire Mr. Clarke was dressed in, that his death was a suicide.

He said: “I consider it far more common that his death was in the attempt of some sort of sexual gratification that went wrong.” Mr. Bowen concluded Prof Clarke’s death as “misadventure”.

We’re glad to report the dog was safe and unharmed and found in the woods nearby barking (too bad the dog can’t talk).

What are your thoughts?

Our heart goes out to his wife (who is battling cancer) and family. You can Our heart goes out to his wife (who is battling cancer) and family. You can read here about the 30+ other mysterious deaths this past year

UPDATE: There has been word in some of the new articles that Clarke had the blue and black suit prior to his death (the one he was found wearing in a tree) but no word on the rest of the outfit.

Also the same article states he was always in casual wear and never in a suit. We’ll wait and see, but it seems odd that the coroner would readily give such intimate details of his death to the public.

Watch this video and note at 2:45…