Publication 970 (2016), Tax Benefits for Education | Internal Revenue…
Coordination with Pell grants and other scholarships.

You may be able to increase your American opportunity credit when the student (you, your spouse, or your dependent) includes certain scholarships or fellowship grants in the student's gross income. Your credit may increase only if the amount of the student's qualified education expenses minus the total amount of scholarships and fellowship grants is less than $4,000. If this situation applies, consider including some or all of the scholarship or fellowship grant in the student's income in order to treat the included amount as paying nonqualified expenses instead of qualified education expenses. Nonqualified expenses are expenses such as room and board that aren't qualified education expenses such as tuition and related fees.

Scholarships and fellowship grants that the student includes in income don't reduce the student's qualified education expenses available to figure your American opportunity credit. Thus, including enough scholarship or fellowship grant in the student's income to report up to $4,000 in qualified education expenses for your American opportunity credit may increase the credit by enough to increase your tax refund or reduce the amount of tax you owe even considering any increased tax liability from the additional income. However, the increase in tax liability as well as the loss of other tax credits may be greater than the additional American opportunity credit and may cause your tax refund to decrease or the amount of tax you owe to increase. Your specific circumstances will determine what amount, if any, of scholarship or fellowship grant to include in income to maximize your tax refund or minimize the amount of tax you owe.

The scholarship or fellowship grant must be one that may qualify as a tax-free scholarship under the rules discussed in chapter 1. Also, the scholarship or fellowship grant must be one that may (by its terms) be used for nonqualified expenses. Finally, the amount of the scholarship or fellowship grant that is applied to nonqualified expenses can't exceed the amount of the student's actual nonqualified expenses that are paid in the tax year. This amount may differ from the student's living expenses estimated by the student's school in figuring the official cost of attendance under student aid rules.

The fact that the educational institution applies the scholarship or fellowship grant to qualified education expenses, such as tuition and related fees, doesn't prevent the student from choosing to apply certain scholarships or fellowship grants to the student’s actual nonqualified expenses. By making this choice (that is, by including the part of the scholarship or fellowship grant applied to the student’s nonqualified expenses in income), the student may increase taxable income and may be required to file a tax return. But, this allows payments made in cash, by check, by credit or debit card, or with borrowed funds such as a student loan to be applied to qualified education expenses.

Example 1—No scholarship. Bill Pass, age 28 and unmarried, enrolled full-time in 2016 as a first-year student at a local college to earn a degree in law enforcement. This was his first year of postsecondary education. During 2016, he paid $5,600 for his qualified education expenses and $4,400 for his room and board for the fall 2016 semester. He and the college meet all the requirements for the American opportunity credit. Bill's adjusted gross income (AGI) and his MAGI, for purposes of figuring his credit, are $30,400. Bill claims the standard deduction of $6,300 and personal exemption of $4,050, resulting in taxable income of $20,050 and an income tax liability before credits of $2,548. Bill claims no credits other than the American opportunity credit. He figures his American opportunity credit based on qualified education expenses of $4,000, which results in a credit of $2,500 and a tax liability after credits of $48 ($2,548 - $2,500).

Example 2—Scholarship excluded from income. The facts are the same as in Example 1—No scholarship , except that Bill was awarded a $5,600 scholarship. Under the terms of his scholarship, it may be used to pay any educational expenses, including room and board. If Bill excludes the scholarship from income, he will be deemed (for purposes of figuring his education credit) to have applied the scholarship to pay his tuition, required fees, and course materials. His adjusted qualified education expenses would be zero and he wouldn't have an education credit. Therefore, Bill's tax liability after credits would be $2,548.

Example 3—Scholarship partially included in income. The facts are the same as in Example 2—Scholarship excluded from income . If, unlike Example 2 , Bill includes $4,000 of the scholarship in income, he will be deemed to have applied that amount to pay for room and board. The remaining $1,600 of the $5,600 scholarship would reduce his qualified education expenses and his adjusted qualified education expenses would be $4,000. Bill's AGI and MAGI would increase to $34,400, his taxable income would increase to $24,050, and his tax liability before credits would increase to $3,148. Based on his adjusted qualified education expenses of $4,000, Bill would be able to claim an American opportunity credit of $2,500 and his tax liability after credits would be $648.

Example 4—Scholarship applied by the postsecondary school to tuition. The facts are the same as in Example 3—Scholarship partially included in income , except the $5,600 scholarship is paid directly to the local college. The fact that the local college applies the scholarship to Bill's tuition and related fees doesn't prevent Bill from including $4,000 of the scholarship in income. As in Example 3 , by doing so, he will be deemed to have applied $4,000 to pay for room and board. Bill would be able to claim the American opportunity credit of $2,500 and his tax liability after credits would be $648.