COMMITTEE RULES
1. The Chair shall preside at meetings when present, except when the committee is

considering a bill of which they are the sole or lead author. Whenever the Chair is

not presiding, the Vice Chair shall assume the duties of the Chair. In the absence of

both, a member designated by the Chair shall preside.

2. The committee shall meet in regular session on the day and hour designated by the

Committee on Rules. With permission of the Rules Committee, special meetings

may be called by the Chair by giving reasonable notice to all members of the

committee and specifying the matters to be considered at the meeting. The notice

provisions of Joint Rule 62(a) apply. No matters may be considered at a special

meeting other than those specified in the notice.

3. (a) Five members constitutes a quorum. No bill may be voted out of committee

except on the affirmative vote of five members. The affirmative vote of five members

is required to table a bill, remove it from the table, or reconsider a vote on a bill.

However, a bill may be amended by a majority of those present and voting.

(b) The committee may, with the unanimous consent of the members present,

substitute a roll call from the prior bill, provided that the members whose votes are

substituted are present at the time of the substitution.

4. No action may be taken on any bill outside of a duly constituted committee meeting.

5. The Chair shall set the hearing of the bills and arrange the calendar for committee

hearings. Notice of hearing of bills shall be given to the author and any other

persons requesting notice. A bill may not be considered in the absence of the author

without their consent. However, a bill may be presented by the author’s

representative if the representative is authorized in writing by the author and

approved by the Chair.

6. A bill may be set for hearing only three times. A bill is “set” whenever notice of the

hearing has been published in the file for one or more days. If a bill is set for hearing

and the hearing is postponed at the committee’s initiation and not the author’s, the

setting for hearing of the bill does not count as one of the three times a bill may be

set. If the hearing notice in the file specifically indicates that “testimony only” will be

taken, the committee may not vote on the bill at that hearing.

7. Bills, including constitutional amendments and resolutions, shall be heard by the

committee in file order, unless specially set by the Chair at the Chair’s discretion.

8. (a) Meetings shall be open to the public, except where otherwise provided or