This Man One Ups Tesla By Inventing An Electric Car That Never Needs Charging
 We're creating viewer supported news. Become a member! I'm in!

The concept of the electric car has been around for a very long time, and as with any other world revolutionizing technology, it’s taken a while to actually bring them out and have them on the market. It would be great to just throw out all of the red tape that delays the process, but our world doesn’t work that way, in fact, it’s quite the opposite and in an industry dominated by oil, it’s hard to make your presence felt.

Giant corporations have monopolies on technologies like this, and they themselves are going to want to control the clean energy market, just as they have been with regards to oil. Clean energy technology has huge implications, not just from an environmental standpoint, but a geopolitical one as well. Perhaps that’s why it’s taken so long for many of them to see the light of day, and many of them never do. It’s great to see companies like Tesla out there, but by now, it should be illegal for any manufacturer to make a car that runs on oil rather than electricity or some other form of green technology.

Take for example, the “Invention Secrecy Act,” it was written up in 1951. Under this act, patent applications on new inventions can be subject to secrecy orders. These orders can restrict their publication if government agencies believe that their disclosure would be harmful to national security.( source )( source)

Could this be the reason why so many revolutionary inventions never saw the light of day?

As reported by the Federation of American Scientists, there were over 5000 inventions that were under secrecy orders at the end of Fiscal Year 2014, which marked the highest number of secrecy orders in effect since 1994. Steven Aftergood from the Federation of American Scientists reports:

“The 1971 list indicates that patents for solar photovoltaic generators were subject to review and possible restriction if the photovoltaics were more than 20% efficient. Energy conversion systems were likewise subject to review and possible restriction if they offered conversion efficiencies in “excess of 70-80%.” (source)

Pretty crazy, but definitely gives you something to think critically about, which is what we’re all about here at Collective Evolution and why I put the information above in this article, but let’s get to it.

We are pleased to report a new development from Sangulani Chikumbutso, who has now become the first Zimbabwean to design and make an electric powered vehicle and a hybrid helicopter, among other gadgets through his company, SAITH Technologies.

What’s so special about this? It’s that he is producing electricity via electromagnetic waves; radio frequencies. As his website explains,

“By revealing undisclosed substance (industry secreted) to radio wavelengths, the Eco-friendly power generator has the capacity to funnel the power generated into function electrical energy. His assertion is always that he has moved past the rules of preservation of energy as generally comprehended as equivalent shift of energy from a single form to a different one proclaiming that this kind of “discovery” displays the application of basic gel battery packs in series of 220 volts generating a greater output in electrical power (500,000 Watts). We aren’t certain how this claim could be allayed, therefore we wish at some discussion board researchers will put the statements to test.”

This may be old news to some, but Collective Evolution recently came across it. A news broadcast from Zimbabwe aired the story, one of Africa’s news leaders SABC Digital News.

Absolutely ZERO Publicity/What’s Happening Now

You would think that an electric car that does not require a charge, and can basically run indefinitely (as long as the parts stay intact) would be huge news. But, it’s not, and it seems such technologies never are.

Keep Evolving Your Consciousness Inspiration and all our best content, straight to your inbox. GET THE BEST Marketing by

Related CE Article:

A Man Who Invented A Free Energy Machine Just Passed Away ( Video of Machine Located Within The Article

So what’s happening now? According to the Zambian Observer

“The United States government has given Zimbabwe’s prolific inventor Maxwell Chikumbutso a new home in its populous state of California. Chikumbutso is the founder of Saith Holdings Inc. under which he made headlines for his serial innovations which include the world’s first ever green power generator which can produce electricity using radio frequencies, an electric powered car which doesn’t consume fuel, a fuelled helicopter and many more.”

Right now, he is residing in California. Why did they do this? Was it because they came across a revolutionary with the power to change the world, or is it because they want to keep that which threatens their entire geo-political framework close to home so they can keep an eye on it, and control it? Who knows. But it’s always important to question the intentions of our government.

HERE, it also describes the whole process. When I read the article in the Zambian Observer , coupled with the fact that the United States government instantaneously showed interest on a story that hasn’t received any publicity, I thought of Stan Meyer, another person who actually invented a water powered car, which also received very little attention when it came to making the news available to the masses. Today, it’s a fairly well known story due to the mass awareness that has been created around the story. Stan’s invention was picked up very briefly by a local news station in Ohio. You can view his patent, it also describes the whole process.

According to a news broadcast that aired decades ago, the Pentagon sent over a Colonel to check out the technology…



– Leonard Holihan, from the Advanced Energy Research Institute at the time ( “We recently took a scientific delegation to witness Stan’s work…and came back saying, this is one of the most important inventions of the century.”– Leonard Holihan, from the Advanced Energy Research Institute at the time ( source

You can read more about it and watch that broadcast in the article below: