CA Gov Jerry Brown Signs Bill BANNING Teachers from Shooting Back at Mass Shooters
Free Pocket Survival Guide Claim Your Free Pocket Survival Guide Now: We'll ship it straight to your door. Get one for your backpack, car glove box or anywhere else you & your family might encounter an emergency situation. There are hundreds of survival skills... under pressure, there's no way to remember them all! × Close

California Governor Jerry Brown signed a revolting bill banning teachers from being able to shoot back if a mass murder breaks into their school.

This bill, AB 424, comes in reaction to the tragic shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in South Florida.

The bill, AB 424, was introduced by Assemblyman Kevin McCarty’s (D-Sacramento). McCarty introduced his bill after five California school districts chose to allow teachers and/or staff with concealed carry permits to be armed on campus to defend themselves and their students. The five districts were Kern High School District, Kingsburg Joint Union High School District, Folsom Cordova Unified School District, Anderson Union High School District, and Palo Cedro’s North Cow Creek School District. Breitbart News reported that McCarty justified his push to disarm teachers by saying, “A safe learning environment is essential for our children to be successful in the classroom. That’s not possible if a school district allows armed civilians to roam California school campuses.” 

Local law enforcement is warning that AB 424 will have a negative impact on communities. But, of course, this doesn’t seem to deter gun control crazed politicians.

The Los Angeles Times reports that the Firearm Policy Coalition (FPC) opposed the bill and the idea of rendering teachers defenseless. The FPC said: “The constitutional right to bear arms is based on the fundamental human right to self-defense. AB 424 undermines these very important principles based on little more than a whim.” Brown also signed legislation expanding the list of persons banned from gun ownership in California. Newly prohibited persons include those found guilty of misdemeanor hate crimes. That bill is aimed at people “using force or the threat of force to interfere with another person’s free exercise of any constitutional right because of the other person’s race, religion, gender, or sexual orientation.” 

Meanwhile, over in Ohio, a far different approach is being utilized. Move to the last page: