Rothschilds, NXIVM Sex Cult Connected to Alleged Child-Trafficking Bunker Found in Tucson
Spread the love











Like 14

Tweet

Tweet Share 14

Tucson, AZ — As we Tucson, AZ — As we reported yesterday, a group of veterans known as Veterans on Patrol (VOP), which looks for homeless veterans around the area and offers them help to get them on their feet, spotted solar lights while on patrol and followed them until stumbling upon an underground bunker, that according to the group, is being used for child trafficking.

“The solar lights are what gave it away,” said Lewis Arthur. “If we hadn’t been walking on the right trail we would have never seen it, we would have walked right past it.”

When the veteran group reached the site, what they found was truly ominous. Around the site, the group found trees equipped with restraints, a stroller, a crib, hair dye, and pornographic material. Inside the bunker, they found a dresser and two crates. The area inside was only big enough for children to fit inside.

Big League Politics Big League Politics reported that “after alerting local and federal law enforcement about the situation and receiving no help, Veterans on Patrol rallied local volunteers together to physically dig up the site.”

The situation came to a head Sunday afternoon when, according to the group, they dug up a bloody knife, female underwear, and the plane ticket of a potentially missing girl from Seattle. The group is trying to contact the girl’s family for verification. They filmed the finding live on Facebook, and shortly thereafter, the police showed up and arrested two members of the group for trespassing.

Additionally, Additionally, CEMEX received a $7 million contract from the Clinton Global Initiative, nearly two and half years after the quake, to build houses in Haiti during Clinton’s tenure as Secretary of State in 2012.

Now, here is where the connections get interesting, the CEO of Bronfman E.L. Rothschild is Lady Lynn Forester de Rothschild, who is both a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and confidante of Hillary Clinton. As we Now, here is where the connections get interesting, the CEO of Bronfman E.L. Rothschild is Lady Lynn Forester de Rothschild, who is both a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and confidante of Hillary Clinton. As we reported back in May 2016 during her presidential campaign, “Hillary Clinton attended a $100,000-a-head fundraiser hosted by none other than Lynn Forester de Rothschild, a prominent New York businesswoman, and supporter of Mrs. Clinton.”

Further evidence of this close relationship between Forester De Rothschild and Clinton was revealed throughout 2016, when Further evidence of this close relationship between Forester De Rothschild and Clinton was revealed throughout 2016, when The Free Thought Project examined Wikileaks’ searchable archive of Clinton’s emails.

Lynn Forester de Rothschild wrote an “love to catch up” — and “I remain your loyal adoring pal.” Clinton responds, “let’s make that happen,” and signs her response, “Much love, H.” Lynn Forester de Rothschild wrote an email on April 18, 2010, in which she tells Hillary she would“love to catch up”— and“I remain your loyal adoring pal.”Clinton responds,“let’s make that happen,”and signs her response,“Much love, H.”

On September 23, 2010, Clinton “I was trying to reach you to tell you and Teddy that I asked Tony Blair to go to Israel as part of our full court press on keeping the Middle East negotiations going …” On September 23, 2010, Clinton emailed Lynn Forester de Rothschild (an email chain marked by heavy redaction) saying,“I was trying to reach you to tell you and Teddy that I asked Tony Blair to go to Israel as part of our full court press on keeping the Middle East negotiations going …”

Rothschild responds, thanking Clinton for “personally reaching out to us,” and adds, “You are the best, and we remain your biggest fans.”

This correspondence gives insight into how the Rothschild family works behind the scenes to use their enormous clout in the forwarding of a geopolitical agenda using their bought and paid for politicians as a means to an end.

Ironically, the Mayor of Tuscon also happens to be named Jonathan Rothschild.

Despite a lack of cooperation by law enforcement, and local media ceasing reporting on the situation, VOP is “hopeful to bring cadaver dogs on site to search the area,” reported BLP.

While it seems almost unbelievable, here is where the story gets even more convoluted and begins to potentially intersect with the NVIMX sex cult. The Chairman of the Board of Bronfman E.L. Rothschild is Matthew Bronfman, one of the heirs to the Seagram’s Liquor fortune:

Bronfman’s sister, Clare Bronfman is the Operations Director of the Clinton-connected NXIVM sex cult, while his other sister, Sara Bronfman, is a Clinton Global Initiative member.

In response to the recent arrests of NXIVM members Keith Raniere and Allison Mack, Clare Bronfman made a In response to the recent arrests of NXIVM members Keith Raniere and Allison Mack, Clare Bronfman made a statement on her website denying the accusations against Raniere, and praising him and the NXIVM programs.

Frank Parlato, a former NXIVM publicist-turned-whistleblower Frank Parlato, a former NXIVM publicist-turned-whistleblower told the New York Post that Bronfman is among the harshest leaders in the organization.

“She’s the enforcer—the brutal one. Clare’s running the [operation] now, and she’s the most ruthless of them. I’m issuing an absolute warning now. Clare Bronfman is a true fanatic, and if there’s a Jim Jones situation, everyone will commit suicide but her.” Parlato said.

As TFTP over a reported $150 million, came from the trust funds of Seagram heiresses, Sara and Clare Bronfman. As TFTP reported on April 27, the majority of the funding for NXIVM,

Their involvement with Raniere allegedly began in 2002 and has been very public and controversial, with other members of the Bronfman family The Bronfman family has very close ties to the Rothschild banking dynasty , with members of both families belonging to many of the same companies, including their joint financial firm, Their involvement with Raniere allegedly began in 2002 and has been very public and controversial, with other members of the Bronfman family distancing themselves from the sisters in the press., with members of both families belonging to many of the same companies, including their joint financial firm, Bronfman & Rothschild. Additionally, at least three high-ranking members of the organization, including Nancy Salzman and the Bronfman sisters, are Additionally, at least three high-ranking members of the organization, including Nancy Salzman and the Bronfman sisters, are members of Bill Clinton’s foundation, the Clinton Global Initiative, which requires an annual $15,000 membership fee.

Perhaps now you can begin to see why both the news of the bunker in Tucson — with a Rothschild mayor — and the NVIMX sex cult’s connections to the centers of financial and political power are not featured front and center on CNN, MSNBC, FOX, etc.

Tellingly, a quick search for Allison Mack’s arrest report or charges—as reported by the mainstream media—will not yield any mention of children.

Although this extremely important detail is being left out of most mainstream reports, one of the main charges in the sex trafficking of children . Although this extremely important detail is being left out of most mainstream reports, one of the main charges in the criminal indictment against Raniere and Mack is

Exactly why the media is refusing to report this continues to remain a mystery.

The power-elite of society use the media to pacify and control the masses, as the lack of attention given to these startling connections reveals the depths to which the public narrative is sculpted and molded by the ruling oligarchy to keep themselves insulated from scrutiny – and the truth hidden from public view.

According to According to PJMedia, who reached out to local law enforcement, the site is under investigation and they are not ruling out the possibility of a child trafficking camp.

Tucson police spokesperson Officer Hawkins responded to PJM, saying, “There is an active investigation that is ongoing.” Hawkins says that while police don’t think it looks like a trafficking camp, they aren’t ruling it out. “We responded to the report of the camp on the 29th [of May] and our last visit to the area was June 2,” he said. “Cadaver dogs were sent to the area and did not find anything.” … CEMEX communicated to police that they did not want the VoP on their property and the veterans have removed themselves. VoP has been encouraging other searchers in the nearby area to find more camps that are similar, but police say they have done extensive searches and found nothing. “It appears to be a homeless camp or it could be used by border crossers, we’re not sure yet,” said Hawkins, adding that the TPD will get to the bottom of it.

While there is clearly no smoking gun, the connections in these cases most certainly warrant greater media scrutiny and investigation. If there is to be anything resembling a truly free press in the US, mass media needs to stop being afraid of offending political-elite entities such as Media Matters and the Atlantic Council, and start being the watchdog for the people!

Spread the love











Like 14

Tweet

Tweet Share 14

DASH cryptocurrency and The Free Thought Project have formed a partnership that will continue to spread the ideas of peace and freedom while simultaneously teaching people how to operate outside of the establishment systems of control like using cryptocurrency instead of dollars. Winning this battle is as simple as choosing to abstain from the violent corrupt old system and participating in the new and peaceful system that hands the power back to the people. DASH is this system.

DASH DASH digital cash takes the control the banking elite has over money and gives it back to the people. It is the ultimate weapon in the battle against the money changers and information controllers.