VIDEO=> Antifa Flag Raised Up Over Hennepin County Govt. Center in Solidarity with Charlottesville
Uuuuuuh? Not! The Klan was originally a militia that was founded as a repelling force against Northern robber barons that flooded down South just after the Civil War stealing Southern folks land and in many instances stealing Southern land holders property at gun point. Now that was the Klan's origin. Not that it stayed that way. Over the years it was taken over by people wanting to use that power to oppress ethnic minorities and by the 1950's the Klan was heavily infested by US Govt agent provocateurs. Fact!

The Klan degraded from it's original noble purpose just like the original Hells Angels motorcycle club that was started by WW2 fighter and bomber pilots just after the war in the later1940's-early 1950's.

Just like the original Black Panthers was originally founded in Oakland, CA. to defend black neighborhoods from actual police brutality that was going on there in the 1960's. Over time the Black Panthers degraded to what they eventually became.

What you don't evidently get is that the powers that be/globalists/those trying to destroy America since the end of the American Revolution hate it when Americans of any ethnic group unite and start repelling their efforts to steal,kill and destroy America's freedom. The most effective way they destroy those self defense groups over the decades is to get their deep state/globalist government agents infiltrated in to those groups and destroy their reputation from within.

It's like that even with a individual gaining too much of a ear of the American public such as a single radio host that has millions of daily listeners and many times that daily of their website content. The deep state/powers that be if you will hate that and will always seek ways to either get control of that person's voice or destroy it.

By the way I am deep South born and raised and never once even seen a Klan march ever! Only silly ignorant people think the Klan have any political power or sway in America. Fact of the matter is the Democratic party has been bought out by globalism since back in the 1920's of which the Klan would be in 100% opposition to globalism and or the destruction of our national sovereignty which the Democratic party have been on board with helping globalist deep state forces achieve for several decades.

Guess who is the money behind the push for globalism? Yea! Right! The same robber barons national and international that hate the idea of a Free Republic who have rights and rights to own property.

The world is a bit more complex than your simple minded baseless assumptions about the Klan and fact of the matter is the Klan is not out to destroy America and it's freaking sad that you can't seem to grasp that.

P.S.

Before you spout BS back to me, I am not even white so I am not looking at the world from a white man's perspective. No one can tell I have any white genetics traces in me except for my light green eyes. 2/3rd Cherokee/Apache 1/3rd Scottish.

I fly the Stars and Crossbars flag to trigger the weak minded ignorant of history fools.