MAN PARDONED BY OBAMA 3 MONTHS AGO ARRESTED FOR MURDER | The Undergro…
You would NEVER know that Obama is half white by the wayAmerica’s is NOT great like it was !

Make America great again:

Back to the time when our leader and his administration followed and enforced our laws and constitution. It is against the law to support and encourage illegals in this country.

http://www.fairus.org/issue/illegal-aliens-taking-u-s-jobs

The sanctuary cities are ALL breaking our laws. Hiring illegals is against our immigration laws!

http://www.cnsnews.com/commentary/tom-fitton/obama-admin-rewards-sanctuary-states-and-cities-making-americans-less-safe You would NEVER know that Obama is half white by the wayAmerica’s is NOT great like it was !Make America great again:Back to the time when our leader and his administration followed and enforced our laws and constitution. It is against the law to support and encourage illegals in this country.The sanctuary cities are ALL breaking our laws. Hiring illegals is against our immigration laws!

We need to go back to a time when our citizens came first and we knew that our president was doing everything in his power to protect us from terrorists.

http://www.discoverthenetworks.org/viewSubCategory.asp?id=844 We need to go back to a time when our citizens came first and we knew that our president was doing everything in his power to protect us from terrorists.

We need to go back to a time when our first responders and military personnel was held in the highest regards.

http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/number-police-officers-killed-job-rose-sharply-2016/ We need to go back to a time when our first responders and military personnel was held in the highest regards.

We need to go back to a time when our schools were NOT under constant threat because of political correctness and could teach our real history without criticizing our actions.

All countries have times in their history that they are not pleased with, but it is sad when children are taught to disrespect our country.. Our schools rate 48th in the world. Worst than some third world countries.!

http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/The-killing-of-History–why-relativism-is-wrong-3484 We need to go back to a time when our schools were NOT under constant threat because of political correctness and could teach our real history without criticizing our actions.All countries have times in their history that they are not pleased with, but it is sad when children are taught to disrespect our country.. Our schools rate 48th in the world. Worst than some third world countries.!

Go back to a time when we had plenty of manufacturing jobs and job growth for our CITIZENS that want to work.

http://www.americanmanufacturing.org/issues/issue/jobs Go back to a time when we had plenty of manufacturing jobs and job growth for our CITIZENS that want to work.

Go back to a time when everyone did NOT depend on government support in order to eat and actually were able to survive without assistance from the government

http://www.cheatsheet.com/money-career/whos-on-welfare-9-shocking-stats-about-public-assistance.html/?a=viewall Go back to a time when everyone did NOT depend on government support in order to eat and actually were able to survive without assistance from the government

Go back to a time when people of religion did NOT have to defend their right to practice their religion.

http://thefederalistpapers.org/first-amendment-2/town-refuses-to-give-in-to-atheist-bullies-heres-how-you-win-against-these-people

Go back to a time when our children were raised in a two parent household. ( 75% of black children are born to unwed mothers, Go back to a time when our children were raised in a two parent household. ( 75% of black children are born to unwed mothers,

60% Hispanic children born to unwed mothers and 30% white children are born to unwed mothers)

http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/opinion/readersrespond/bs-ed-baltiimore-race-letter-20150318-story.html

What do you think is great about today’s world. ? It can’t be our morals, it can not be our patriotism nor our values. What is it!! What do you think is great about today’s world. ? It can’t be our morals, it can not be our patriotism nor our values. What is it!!

I support DONALD TRUMP because I truly believe that our nation is in danger of being like France, Germany and other nations that are not protecting their countries. They are being destroyed within by Moslems.

Under the Obama administration , our country was attacked by radical Muslims , that were vetted!

We need to remember 9-11 and honor ALL the people that died by securing our country. Welcoming unvetted refugees, increases the likelihood of more attacks!

President Obama left Our Country with a national debt of nearly 20TRILLION DOLLARS, this is more than ALL previous presidents combined.

http://www.usdebtclock.org President Obama left Our Country with a national debt of nearly 20TRILLION DOLLARS, this is more than ALL previous presidents combined.

This fact along should encourage us to take care of our financial situation , before we take on more debt?

Who do you think supports our refugees and illegal immigrants?? We do! 90% are on some government support including financial help.

http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2015/09/10/more-than-90-percent-of-middle-eastern-refugees-on-food-stamps/ This fact along should encourage us to take care of our financial situation , before we take on more debt?Who do you think supports our refugees and illegal immigrants?? We do! 90% are on some government support including financial help.

It is about Trump’s stand to follow the law and put AMERICAN CITIZENS first!

This is the Main reason we voted TRUMP into office.. America First!!!!

This is how it really works. We have a country; they have a country. We invite you to come work and play in our country( the immigration laws) .

You come uninvited and break our laws. We now have to enforce OUR laws and protect our country from drug dealers , terrorists and people that disrespect our laws.

To make certain that they pay for the fence that we HAVE to install, we charge 35% fee on

goods from our country , travel into Our Country and any MONEY sent to their country.

https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c2010.html This is how it really works. We have a country; they have a country. We invite you to come work and play in our country( the immigration laws) .You come uninvited and break our laws. We now have to enforce OUR laws and protect our country from drug dealers , terrorists and people that disrespect our laws.To make certain that they pay for the fence that we HAVE to install, we charge 35% fee ongoods from our country , travel into Our Country and any MONEY sent to their country.

Our government needs to COMPLETELY secure our borders and start enforcing ALL of our immigration laws NOW.! Had our government secured our borders and enforced OUR immigration laws, we would not be having these problems nor these discussions. he acts!