‘Horrific’ Hillary Clinton Snuff Film Circulating On Dark Web
An “extreme snuff film” featuring Hillary Clinton and Huma Abedin raping and mutilating a prepubescent girl is circulating on the dark web, according to sources familiar with the material.

The video, code named Frazzledrip, has been circulating on the dark web since Monday, according to reliable sources who have viewed the material and confirm the content is “worse than any nightmare.”

“The people who are coming back from viewing this tape are just not the same.”.

Many people are unable to watch the video due to the horrific nature of the content, according to sources familiar with the tape.

In the video, they take a little girl and they fillet her face, according to reports, and then they take turns wearing the little girl’s face like a mask. It is believed they were terrorizing the young girl, deliberately causing the child’s body to release Adenochrome into her bloodstream before bleeding her out and drinking the blood during a Satanic ritual sacrifice.

Adrenochrome is an oxidation product of adrenaline (ephinephrine, norepinephrine) that is extracted from a living donor’s adrenal gland. According to those familiar with the elites’ drug of choice, the high is “intense” and “exotic”.

It is understood the file was recovered from Anthony Weiner’s laptop, located in the “ Life Insurance ” folder.

Reliable sources familiar with the dark web claim the snuff tape was dropped by an unknown user and began circulating early last week. The dark web is a part of the World Wide Web that is only accessible by means of special software.

In theory the dark web allows users and website owners to remain anonymous and operate untraceably, however due to the highly sensitive and illegal nature of the video content, extreme caution is advised before dealing with the file.

Ownership and distribution of a video of this nature is illegal and could result in jail time for those attempting to spread the word about the sickening discovery.

“This is a nightmarish snuff film featuring the mutilation and rape of a young girl. If you come across this video, do not download it and do not forward it to anybody. You could be punished severely by the law. Is this a trap for those among us who are desperate to bring HRC to justice? Anything is possible at this point. But from what we can see, the video is real. But you must be very, very careful.”

#frazzledrip Just be careful. If you are downloading any videos, remember you don't know who is watching please take my advice! #opPedoHunt — ANONYMOUS AMERICA (@K0RANlSBURNING) April 15, 2018

.