Fiscal Year 2018 Budget Summary and Background Information Table of C…
51

Non-personnel costs cover such items as travel, rent, mail, telephones, utilities, printing,

information technology (IT) services and security, contractual services, equipment, supplies,

and other services. The total request for non-personnel activities in fiscal year 2018 is

$168.0 million, an increase of $13.0 million from the fiscal year 2017 annualized CR level of

$155.0 million.

The overall increase of $6.8 million is needed for: (1) improvements to the Department’s IT

security to ensure the integrity of Department of Education data as well as to prevent potential

IT security breaches; (2) the upgrade of the Department’s core financial system from Oracle

version 11i to Oracle Release 12 because the current system is on extended support at a

premium cost to Department and presents security risks to the Department’s data; (3) personnel

compensation and benefits increases related to a proposed 1.9 percent pay raise in January

2018; (4) necessary spending to transition to new computer network services and IT

infrastructure contracts; and (5) development of a new Impact Aid System to replace the current

system that is dangerously past its lifecycle, potentially jeopardizing timely awards to more than

1,100 Impact Aid recipients.

Student Aid Administration

The Student Aid Administration account provides funds to administer the Federal student

financial assistance programs. The Higher Education Act Title IV programs, which provide

funds to help students and families pay for the cost of education and training beyond high

school, are the Nation’s largest source of financial aid for postsecondary students. This account

supports functions across the student aid lifecycle including: educating students and families

about the process for obtaining aid and student loan repayment options; processing student

financial aid applications; disbursing aid; servicing loans; collecting on defaulted loans; and

ensuring enforcement and oversight of the Title IV programs.

Ensuring the smooth operation of the complex financial transactions and assisting the many

participants involved in the student financial aid programs while safeguarding the interests of

both students and Federal taxpayers is one of the Department's greatest management

challenges and highest administrative priorities. Primary responsibility for administering the

Federal student financial assistance programs rests with Federal Student Aid (FSA), the Office

of the Under Secretary, and the Office of Postsecondary Education.

In fiscal year 2018, FSA will provide $134.2 billion in new Federal student aid grants and loans

(excluding Direct Consolidation Loans) to almost 12.2 million postsecondary students and their

families. These students attend more than 6,000 active institutions of postsecondary education

accredited by dozens of agencies.

SAFRA ended the origination of new loans under the Federal Family Education Loan (FFEL)

program. Since July 1, 2010, all new loans are originated and serviced through the Direct Loan

(DL) program administered by the Department of Education. Although all new lending is made

through the DL program, lenders and guaranty agencies continue to service and collect

outstanding loans from the FFEL portfolio in addition to the significant number of FFEL loans

owned by the Government and serviced by the Department. The Department currently

contracts with 9 servicers to service the Department’s portfolio of approximately 42 million

borrowers.

The Student Aid Administration account represents 73 percent of the Department’s total