Sylvester Stallone: ‘Pathetic’ Obama Is ‘Closet Homosexual Living A Lie’
Barack Obama is a “closet homosexual” who has “lived his whole pathetic life as a lie” according to Sylvester Stallone, who says “I have nothing against homos, but I can’t stand liars.”

“Everybody who is anybody in Chicago knows all about the real Barack Obama,” Stallone said on the set of Creed 2 . “I’ve spent a lot of time in Chicago and the stories you hear about that guy – wow. It just disturbs me and concerns me that we had a liar and a fraud in control for eight years.“

Referring to President Trump’s “refreshing honesty“, Stallone said “At least we can trust the guy we have in there now. We know where we stand with him. With Obama we had a snake oil salesman, a total actor, working against our interests.”

Stallone also warned his social media followers about Obama’s deceitful nature during the midterm elections in 2010, declaring Obama to be a “Manchurian candidate” placed in power by the New World Order to hasten America’s demise from the inside.

He tweeted, “I voted, did you? Gotta get the Manchurian Candidate out of the drivers seat before were ALL soaring off a cliff into Oblivion … Be smart.”

For those who had not seen the film, Sly then explained, “The Manchurian Candidate was a movie about fake president who was put there by foreign enemies to destroy America. Scary concept. Rise up!”

I voted did you? Gotta get the Manchurian Candidate out of the drivers seat before were ALL soaring off a cliff into Oblivion…Be smart. — Sylvester Stallone (@TheSlyStallone) November 2, 2010

Sylvester Stallone’s dislike of liars and frauds is well known in the industry.

The New York native rose to fame playing Rocky Balboa in the Rocky boxing anthology. He has previously explained his personal theory for why the humble, everyman boxer remains an enduring favorite.

“He inspired so many to be true to themselves, their real selves – no bullshit, no lies – and reach their dreams.“

Stallone is currently filming a sequel to Escape Plan, as well as Creed 2, a Rocky spin-off film that sees the older Balboa train the grandson of a former rival.

.