Fiscal Year 2019 Budget Summary and Background Information Table of C…
60

(DL) program administered by the Department of Education. Although all new lending is made

through the DL program, private lenders continue to service and collect outstanding non-

defaulted loans from the FFEL portfolio, while guaranty agencies and the Department continue

to service and collect loans assigned to the Federal Government. The Department currently

contracts with nine servicers to service the Department’s portfolio of over 32 million borrowers.

The Student Aid Administration account represents 74 percent of the Department’s total

discretionary administrative budget. The fiscal year 2019 request would provide $1.8 billion to

administer student aid programs, an increase of $205.9 million over the fiscal year

2018 annualized CR level. Thirty-seven percent of the increase is due to higher servicing costs,

which result from growth in the number of borrowers and shifts of existing borrowers from

in-school to more expensive in-repayment statuses and costs associated with transitioning to

the Next Generation Processing and Servicing Environment. In addition, the fiscal year 2019

request includes funds necessary to maintain operations for student aid application processing,

origination and disbursement functions and student aid IT system hosting; enhance IT security;

and costs associated with implementing the IRS Data Retrieval Tool.

The Budget supports Federal Student Aid (FSA) in undertaking a monumental student loan

servicing upgrade. FSA is reorganizing its fragmented servicing and operating infrastructure in

order to provide an innovative, world-class financial services experience for its customers. The

Next Generation Financial Services Environment at FSA will start with a mobile-first, mobile-

complete engagement layer for all customer interactions that will link with an integrated but

nimble new system. Integrated into every aspect of this modernization effort will be state-of-the-

art cyber security protection. The end goal of this technical reorganization and modernization

effort will be to provide better service for FSA's over 40 million customers, including students

and institutions, across the student loan lifecycle. The new environment will help increase

awareness and understanding of Federal student aid opportunities and responsibilities, improve

FSA’s operational flexibility, and enhance cost and operational efficiency, producing better

outcomes for students and taxpayers.

Office for Civil Rights

The Department’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR) investigates discrimination complaints, conducts

compliance reviews, monitors corrective action plans, and provides technical assistance on civil

rights issues. Since fiscal year 2007, the number of complaints doubled through fiscal

year 2017, while the number of investigative staff decreased by 10 percent over the same

period. The FTE level is projected to be 529 in fiscal year 2019.

The fiscal year 2019 request for OCR is $107.4 million, a decrease of $0.3 million from the fiscal

year 2018 annualized CR level. About $79.3 million, or 74 percent, of the request is for staff pay

and benefits for 529 FTE. The remaining $28.1 million is for non-pay projects and includes

$3.5 million for information technology services, including the contract for the Civil Rights Data

Collection. The requested funds would ensure essential program support to resolve complaints

of discrimination filed by the public and to ensure that institutions receiving Federal financial