In Loving Memory – Green Health Wellness
My Dear Friends,

As I read all of your beautiful words to me, I feel driven to write to you now. There is no one more shocked of his transition than myself. John was never ill. He never complained. He enjoyed great health from my eyes, but he was also a terrible patient. Great at giving advice, but not so much with taking it.

Like me, there are many people who are suffering, so I would like you to hear why I know John timed leaving his physical body so perfectly.

He loved me beyond words. He didn’t have many words, but every action of every day showed love for me. Love like I have never known. He laughed at every joke, and beamed when I walked into the room. He was so proud I was his wife. He held me each night with so much love. He could be fast asleep and hear me stir and get up, and he would pop out of bed. He didn’t want to be in the bed without me. I will never doubt that love, and know he knew my love for him.

We left for our vacation in Cancun with dozens of our closest friends. People he loved. We played for 5 days and had so much fun. We had deep conversations, glorious beach walks, and abundant laughter. He then fell ill with what we thought was food poisoning. His symptoms showed us that he would be fine in time, so I continued to check on him throughout the day, as he encouraged me to be with our friends. In the evening he took a turn, so we rushed him to the hospital, all of us certain it was just dehydration. After numerous tests, we found his arteries were extremely blocked. He went in for surgery, but hours later suffered a second heart attack, as I watched him take his last breath.

For those of you who know how important Abraham-Hicks is to us, you will enjoy hearing that it was Dr. Abraham who delivered the news to me (even more odd since we were in Mexico.)

A dozen of my closest friends, and Jessie, filled the room and held me. There could not have been better words offered to me. We cried and even laughed a few times. Where else could that many supportive people assemble for me so quickly? This was no accident. His parting gift.

In the past few years, John’s thirst for energy medicine exploded and it became his main focus. I hold a vast amount of information at my home, that I hope someone will one day use. His desire to understand it at every level has been reached.

I have no idea what I’m going to do now. Please be patient with me and my staff as we figure out, “Now what?”

If you have photos of him, please post them as comments on our Facebook pages. I love hearing all the stories of the lives he changed.

His personal Facebook page, Dr. John Hicks, featured postings only from him. He loved his quotes. I had no involvement with that page at all. To truly know him, that is where you will most likely understand who he was.

I am shattered, but I know time will help. I will feel him with me forever.

Love,

Betsy