ACLU Demands That Body Cams Are Turned Off During Inauguration While They Intend To Record Police
🚨If the left's lips are moving, they are apparently lying or deluded. The same applies to their supporters, enablers, Fake Newsers, and advocates.

Don't buy their CDs or the products they hawk on TV, don't go to their inane movies, don't visit their stupid sites, don't listen to them on the radio.

Don't watch them on their Fake News TV, don't buy tickets to see them do ANYthing, and especially don't watch or attend their dumb, leftist-activist "shows."

Are they the oily, lying, "Shmuck Shroomer," political type?

Or the lying, insane, "You can Keep Your Doctor," I-rule-the-world, type?

Or the "Pajama Boy," t-Shirted, Marxist-indoctrinated, spoiled, over "educated," multi-multi-billionaire, web or silicon mogul type?

Or the blathering, "Holy," Islamist, devoutly corrupt, Marxist, "priestly" type, from some other world?

Or the radical, leftist, multi-millionaire, arrogant, self-agrandizing "media" liar type?

If so, they would be your leftist, Islamist, One-World, slave-master wannabes. Your Rulers in waiting. And they are coming after you and your family, just as they are coming after Donald Trump and his family.

And...you have only to see the bloated, vacuous, debauched-looking face of their newest poster shill, John "The Tea Party Spit On Me" Louse," the failed, "great civil rights leader," to see how they roll in their own, filthy, stinking lies about Donald Trump and you.

Their despicable "heroes," like John Louse, and—Her The Stumbling Zombie Witch of New York—they demonstrate they stop at Nothing to grasp and clutch at their rotting, stinking, filthy goals for YOU.

Don't believe any lying word they say. Ignore their lies. Defund them; block their plots.

"Find them; fix them in place; isolate them; and ridicule them." (To paraphrase their leader, Saul Alinksky)

Think: would you maybe wipe them out financially? Or have them praising Trump? All in about 6 weeks? 👍🏼

.

Oh...by the way...we don't "protest;" we don't "riot;" we don't "organize," create "snowflake cells," or "do Twitter," in place of action.

But there are some things we could know how to do—if we are maybe bulldozed into a corner.

Will you pass these ideas onward and forward to your mailing lists and resources? It's your Move, isn't it?

.

.