Guess who just received a $100 Million Dollar Donation from Saudi Arabia?
President Donald Trump’s maiden international trip seems to be profiteering for his family. His first visit to Saudi Arabia has been serendipitous for both the Islamic nation and for the Trump family, or to be more precise, his favorite daughter Ivanka.

During the trip, Ivanka and her husband Jared Kushner, who were in the two of President Trump’s international trip, could manage to cut a deal worth of $100 billion with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

The country has been officially the largest arms sale in the U.S. history, and the Saudis repaid by The country has been officially the largest arms sale in the U.S. history, and the Saudis repaid by donating $100 million to Ivanka Trump’s female entrepreneurship fund, which Ivanka has been promoting with the help of the World Bank.

This explains that Ivanka’s fund is proving to be an ethical minefield for her. To clarify further, donations from the Saudis is the first, she already received donations This explains that Ivanka’s fund is proving to be an ethical minefield for her. To clarify further, donations from the Saudis is the first, she already received donations from other foreign governments from Canada to Germany to the United Arab Emirates.

Although Ivanka Trump didn’t fail to point out that she didn’t directly solicit donations but the fact her father is the President which works in favorable for her since the countries trying to curry favor with the Trump administration would hypothetically write a check to his daughter’s entrepreneurship fund.

Ironically, Kushner’s arms deal with the Saudi government couldn’t be more favorable for the Kingdom which is currently engaged in a war with Yemen. The deal offers new aerial defense systems by Lockheed Martin, along with new tanks, combat ships, and fighter jets.

The kingdom of Saudi Arabia is already in the hot water for international controversy and condemnation from human rights watchdogs.

In March, In March, Human Rights Watch referred to a Saudi-led attack on a refugee boat leaving the coast of Yemen as a war crime, when gunfire from a helicopter killed at least 32 civilians and wounded another 29 (including six children).

VERY IMPORTANT! DEAR READERS AND FRIENDS PLEASE SHARE THIS INFORMATION MAXIMUM AND EXPOSE DONALD TRUMP AND HIS POLICIES. THIS IS THE ONLY WAY TO CREATE AWARENESS AMONG PEOPLE. KINDLY HELP US TO REACH ALL OVER AMERICA AND WORLD. THANK YOU!