Alien hunter claims to have spotted a 'hairy spider monkey' and 'slug animal' on Mars among several bizarre sightings
However, all of these things could just be rocks on the red planet

They also appear to show a snail, slug, another alien and a face in a rock

Published: 15:23 EST, 30 December 2016 | Updated: 15:23 EST, 30 December 2016

Many conspiracy theorists have taken the initiative to find life on Mars by analyzing every picture that is sent back to Earth from the red planet.

Now, one Martian researcher believes to have found a trove of evidence captured by the Curiosity Rover that he says ‘are all signs of life on Mars’.

The bizarre sightings include a slug alien, a snail and a four-legged creature that ‘looks like a hairy spider monkey’ staring directly at the rover.

Scroll down for video

A UFOlogists he's found proof there is life on mars in images sent back by the Curiosity Rover, The bizarre sightings include a slug alien, a snail and a four-legged creature that ‘looks like a hairy spider monkey’ (pictured) staring directly at the rover

WHY WE SEE FAMILIAR OBJECTS ON MARS Pareidolia is the psychological response to seeing faces and other significant and everyday items in random stimulus. It is a form of apophenia, when people see patterns in random, unconnected data. There have been multiple occasions when people have claimed to see religious images and themes in unexpected places. On the red planet, one of the most famous is the 'face on Mars' spotted by one of the Viking orbiters in 1976. This was later proven to just be a chance alignment of shifting sand dunes. .

Curiosity has been feeding alien hunters images since first landing on the dusty planet in 2012.

Its main goal was to determine whether the area surrounding Gale Crater ever offered an environment favorable for microbes.

The crater's main appeal for scientists is geological layering exposed in the lower portion of its central mound, Mount Sharp.

However, over the past six years, the NASA machine has visited a range of places on Mars and according to some, has seen a lot of strange things on its journey.

‘I found this four legged alien creature on Mars and it looks like a hairy spider monkey,’ Scott C Waring shared on his blog UFO Sightings Daily.com this week.

‘The longer upper arms are holding it up as well as its shorter lower legs.’

‘If you add light to the face, you can easily make out two eyes’.

And Waring believes the ‘alien’ is staring right at the rover as it rolls by.

The original image is of MSL 1276-M34 SDS, which is an area cluttered with rocks.

Can you spot the four-legged creature? This 'alien' appears to be the same color as its surroundings, which suggests it may just be an oddly shaped rock standing up in the dust

‘The longer upper arms are holding it up as well as its shorter lower legs.’ ‘If you add light to the face, you can easily make out two eyes’, said Scott C Waring with UFO Sightings Daily. And Waring believes the ‘alien’ is staring right at the rover as it rolls by

And this 'alien' appears to be the same color as its surroundings, which suggests it may just be an oddly shaped rock standing up in the dust.

Along with the creature that is said to look like a hairy spider money are other sightings that Waring suggests 'prove' NASA is hiding life on Mars from the public.

He suggests there is an alien figure laying down, a slug-like animal crawling out from underneath the rocks and a snail taking a stroll through the dusty planet.

A face was also spotted carved into the side of a rock, which is a very popular sighting on Mars.

CURIOSITY'S MISSION ON MARS When Curiosity landed in Mars' Gale Crater in 2012, the mission's main goal was to determine whether the area ever offered an environment favorable for microbes. The crater's main appeal for scientists is geological layering exposed in the lower portion of its central mound, Mount Sharp. Mars Curiosity update v f Loaded : 0% Progress : 0% w 0:00 A Previous f Play A Skip LIVE d Mute w 00:00 Current Time 0:00 / Duration Time 2:06 t Fullscreen g Need Text Video Quality 272p 172p i k m h n j Foreground --- White Black Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan --- Opaque Semi-Opaque Background --- White Black Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan --- Opaque Semi-Transparent Transparent Window --- White Black Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan --- Opaque Semi-Transparent Transparent Font Size 50% 75% 100% 125% 150% 175% 200% 300% 400% Text Edge Style None Raised Depressed Uniform Dropshadow Font Family Default Monospace Serif Proportional Serif Monospace Sans-Serif Proportional Sans-Serif Casual Script Small Caps Defaults Done Minimize u Expand t Close × Share this j n l h More m Up next Man accused of killing toddler while drink drivi… f Cancel Related videos Man accused of killing toddler while drink driving … Mom finds angry note on her car for using handicapped … Man finds Melbourne Commonwealth Bank unlocked on New Year's Day These exposures offer access to rocks that hold a record of environmental conditions from many stages of early Martian history, each layer younger than the one beneath it. The mission succeeded in its first year, finding that an ancient Martian lake environment had all the key chemical ingredients needed for life, plus chemical energy available for life. This map shows the route driven by NASA's Curiosity Mars rover from the location where it landed in August 2012 to its location in December 2016, which is in the upper half of a geological unit called the Murray formation, on lower Mount Sharp. Now, the rover is climbing lower on Mount Sharp to investigate how ancient environmental conditions changed over time. .

Many amateur Martian researchers believe that millions of years ago a battle raged across the surface of the red planet and ended when the King of Mars was decapitated.

And since the death of this ‘significantly powerful’ being, his subjects have created many monuments to honor him.

In addition to sharing a range of images with his follower, Waring also gives a speech of how ‘the public no longer needs to depend on the US government to drop feed’ them ‘information about life on Mars and other celestial bodies’.

Along with the creature that is said to look like a hairy spider money are other sightings that Waring suggests prove NASA is hiding life on Mars from the public, which include an alien (left) laying down and a slug-like animal (right) coming out from under the rocks

Scott Warning has shared many sightings with his followers and even called out them with this post, which included a sighting of a snail on mars, that they no longer needs to depend on the US government to drop feed’ them ‘information about life on Mars and other celestial bodies

‘We are taking the initiative and we have proven on this site that life exists a thousand times over,’ he writes.

‘Somewhere along the line, Americans got lost and began depending on the government for all their important information…but some information is a threat to national security…such as UFO technology and alien intelligence, so they can’t announce it.