Nathan Larson for Congress campaign manifesto - Nathan Larson for Con…
I, Nathan Larson, hereby announce my candidacy as a quasi-neoreactionary libertarian in Virginia's 10th congressional district election, 2018 . As Representative, my main agenda will be (1) stopping the war on drugs, (2) protecting gun ownership rights, and (3) putting an end to U.S. involvement in foreign wars arising from our country's alliance with Israel. I will also restore (4) benevolent white supremacy, (5) private borders, (6) patriarchy, (7) freedom of speech, (8) freedom from age restrictions, (9) suicide rights, (10) jury trial rights, (11) discrimination rights, and (12) free trade.

Major campaign themes [ edit ]

Stopping the War on Drugs [ edit ]

It is commonly argued that if drugs are legalized, then people will succumb to their addiction to these substances and the streets will be filled with addicts smoking crack pipes and shooting up heroin. Actually, though, what is typically far more addictive than drugs themselves is drug money. Many drug dealers who don't consume their product are nonetheless dependent on the drug money that funds the lifestyle they have grown accustomed to. With the money they get from selling drugs, they can feed any number of non-drug-related addictions, such as to sex, gambling, 23-inch rims , etc.

Ultimately, though, what we need is complete legalization of all drugs. Otherwise, drug manufacturers and dealers will continue to go back to the drug trade once they're released from prison, since it's a business they know, and since their felony records preclude them from getting a decent job outside the underground economy. We need to keep people from going to prison at all for drug offenses, by creating a legal market that will dry up the flow of illegal drug money and drive the street corner drug dealers out of business. We should also expunge the records of those who already have criminal convictions for drug offenses, so they can have a clean start.

When the government is no longer sending so many black men to prison for drugs, rates of other categories of black crime will probably go down, as fathers become available to provide guidance and support to their kids on a daily basis rather than whenever their kids can come see them in the prison visiting room. It's in the interests of all races that we work to strengthen black families, whether by ending the drug war or by fighting against the feminists whose policies are in large part responsible for the trend , since the 1960s, for black women to marry later in life, to be less likely to marry at all, and to have higher rates of marital instability.

An example of how feminism adversely affects black-led families may be seen in the O. J. Simpson "murder" case . Simpson was merely trying to use a reasonable amount of force to correct his wife's misbehavior, but the police intervened to stop him, in response to her 911 calls. Prohibited in this manner from keeping discipline and order in his family, Simpson had to resort to the use of a blade to end his marriage in a way that wouldn't leave him vulnerable to losing half his property and custody of his kids in divorce proceedings. In this way, Simpson protected his kids from having to be exposed to their mother's immoral behavior, and taught them by example how men have a right to respond to wives who are flagrantly disrespecting, or otherwise displeasing, them; or who have generally become more of a liability than an asset to have around.

The black community, knowing he did nothing wrong, got behind him, and the jury set him free. But he should never have even been subjected to being locked up for a year and put on trial, because his wife deserved what she got as retribution for her infidelity; in one of the 911 tapes, Simpson can be heard saying, "You did not give a shit about the kids when you were sucking his dick in the living room" and his wife seems to admit to the 911 operator that she was in fact guilty of adultery. Given how much the authority of husbands has been undermined by feminists, it's understandable that black men would not even bother getting married anymore. Chris Brown , for example, was able to avoid the inconvenience of having to kill Rihanna or Karrueche Tran because he could break up with them without their being able to subject him to a humiliating divorce process if they remained alive. He did at times find it necessary to make threats or use physical force against them, but that actually increased his popularity among female fans, who were impressed by his willingness to do what was necessary to keep his women in line. But, from the perspective of wanting to keep any particular race from dying out, the decline of marriage as a social institution that many people are willing to participate in has a downside, which is that it's correlated with a decline of fertility.

The other politicians in this election, by the way, seem to be totally overlooking the fact that legalizing cannabis can reduce opioid addiction rates. When safer highs become available, people will tend to prefer those over the more dangerous ones. Once the government stops banning every new recreational drug that chemists come up with, then there will be market incentives to come up with new and safer drugs.

Both police and prosecutors will often tell disgruntled members of the public, "I don't make the laws, I just enforce them" and claim that when they kick open people's doors in the middle of the night to search for drugs, or ask judges to throw the book at defendants, they are simply doing their jobs. Yet every time a drug legalization proposal comes before a legislative panel, the leaders of the police associations and the prosecutors are there to testify against it. They can't have it both ways. They need to either be a truly neutral body of enforcers, or admit to being a special interest group seeking to line their own pockets and gain more power at the expense of the taxpayers and the families of victimless offenders who have to lose their loved ones to prison for no good reason.

The Washington Post reports that under asset forfeiture laws , the police take more cash and other property from people than burglars do. Part of draining the swamp is standing up to the cops and prosecutors who will fight against almost every effort to restore liberty to the people.

Protecting gun ownership rights [ edit ]

All guns, including Ma Deuce , should be legalized for manufacture, distribution, and possession by private citizens and businesses, and subject to no more regulations than are applied to other potentially dangerous tools, such as buzzsaws or bottles of muriatic acid. In other words, the fact that you can walk into a gun show and walk out with a gun 10 minutes later without having to go through a background check should be considered a feature, not a bug. The black thugs who want to shoot up urban neighborhoods with high-powered assault rifles are usually not going to show up to a gun show anyway, because those events are typically crawling with cops who might recognize them from wanted posters. Dan Helmer didn't have any warrants outstanding, so he didn't mind demonstrating how easy it was to obtain a firearm from one of those venues.

There have also been calls to raise the minimum age for buying firearms to 21. For as long as guns have existed, though, young people have had access to them, and we did not see as many mass shootings as we have today. This suggests that gun availability is not the direct cause of gun violence

In reality, it's ((( feminists ))) and ((( psychiatrists ))) who are causing the school shootings. Many boys end up fatherless because feminists encouraged female sexual promiscuity and undermined husbands' authority over their wives. Feminists encourage young women to go to college and get a career rather than getting married and starting a family as soon as they become sexually mature . The failed relationships they have while putting off marriage harm their ability to pair bond , making it more likely that when they finally do get married, that relationship will fail as well.

Guns don't kill people — feminists do. The way to prevent school shootings is to reinstitute patriarchal rule in American families, and stop putting kids on dangerous psychiatric drugs. Another way in which traditional sex roles could keep children safer, by the way, is that if more women become housewives who homeschool their kids, then those kids will not be around to get shot up when there's a school shooting.

Unintended Consequences (in which the protagonist carries out an assassination campaign against government officials) years earlier, he might have shot Another way in which guns save lives is that they give terrorists a way to kill people without using bombs. Timothy McVeigh , for example, said that if he had read the novel(in which the protagonist carries out an assassination campaign against government officials) years earlier, he might have shot Janet Reno in the head instead of carrying out the Oklahoma City bombing . In this way, the lives of 19 children could have been spared.

18 U.S.C. § 922(g) We should get rid of laws likethat ban felons from having firearms. The stop-and-frisk policies are aimed at catching black convicted felons who carry guns, so they can be sent back to prison for up to 10 years for the victimless offense of being a felon in possession of a firearm. Of course, part of the reason why there are so many black convicted felons carrying firearms is that they are often involved in the drug trade. They can't just open a store and accept credit card payments the way a legal business would, but rather have to use weapons to defend their turf and their cash.

Warren v. District of Columbia. Just because someone has been involved in crime doesn't mean that they should lose their right to defend themselves and their families. Another reason black convicted felons would want to carry firearms is that there is a lot of black-on-black crime in certain neighborhoods, which they want to protect themselves from. A lot of these neighborhoods have inept police departments that don't do a good job of responding to 911 calls, as we saw in cases like. Just because someone has been involved in crime doesn't mean that they should lose their right to defend themselves and their families.

I'm for abolishing federal probation and supervised release and all other post-incarceration restrictions on liberty, since I agree with what Joshua Jebb wrote concerning ticket-of-leave holders, that to "impose conditions and restrictions that would effectually stamp them as individuals belonging to a criminal class, in this country would be manifestly a most inexpedient exercise of power, and one that would be calculated to defeat the entire object of an improved system of convict discipline. . . . . To impose police supervision over a poor wretch struggling to find employment is the way to add to his difficulties and throw him back into crime instead of keeping him out of it." Convicts who are too dangerous to ever be allowed gun rights after being released from prison should probably simply be euthanized

de facto divorce rather than because the order is actually justified. A lot of restraining orders are for "harassment" rather than for any kind of physical abuse, anyway; if women actually were as 18 U.S.C. § 922(g) also bans men from possessing guns if they are subject to an intimate partner restraining order. That provision needs to be abolished, since it treats men who have not even been convicted of a crime as though they were criminals. More generally, I think we should get rid of every provision in federal law (such as 18 U.S.C. § 2265 , requiring each state to enforce domestic violence restraining orders issued by other states) calling for restrictions to be placed on men subject to restraining orders, since these orders are typically used by women as a shortcut to getting adivorce rather than because the order is actually justified. A lot of restraining orders are for "harassment" rather than for any kind of physical abuse, anyway; if women actually were as "strong" and "independent" as feminists claim, they would be able to just ignore men who try to bother them, rather than relying on the state to keep those men away.

Voisine v. United States, to There also is a provision in 18 U.S.C. § 922(g) banning men who have been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence from owning guns. Physical discipline of wives shouldn't even be a crime anyway, but the idea of treating such misdemeanors as felonies was enough to make Justice Clarence Thomas break his silence for the first time in 10 years, in the case of, to ask , "Can you give me another area where a misdemeanor suspends a constitutional right? You're saying that recklessness is sufficient to trigger a violation— misdemeanor violation of domestic conduct that results in a lifetime ban on possession of a gun, which, at least as of now, is still a constitutional right. . . . Can you think of another constitutional right that can be suspended based upon a misdemeanor violation of a state law?"

We have to keep in mind that the nature of relations between the sexes are that men and women can never have a truly equal partnership. One will have to be dominant and the other submissive, or else the marriage will split apart, or the situation will devolve into chaos. John Locke 's view was , "But the husband and wife, though they have but one common concern, yet having different understandings, will unavoidably sometimes have different wills too; it therefore being necessary that the last determination, i. e. the rule, should be placed somewhere; it naturally falls to the man's share, as the abler and the stronger."

christy0misty notes , "I always find it funny when I see a marriage where the wife will brag that they're friends. They're really good friends. She'll say, 'We don't have the typical marriage. We're best buddies. He's not this overbearing chauvinist pig, I'm not a feminist brat. We get along great.' Usually I look over and the guy's sitting there looking whipped. The woman's saying, 'We have an equal relationship.' What she means is, 'I'm in charge.' She doesn't realize it, but to her, her being in charge makes it equal."

It just happens that female dominance is less obvious sometimes than the brute force that men might use to keep control, because women can get their way by essentially using the kids as hostages, threatening to deprive them of the benefit of being raised by their biological parents together, unless the husband submits to her will. Of course, what she's threatening to do wasn't what was agreed upon at the outset of the marriage, but the state will throw such agreements out the window for the sake of giving her autonomy, and for what it deems the best interests of the child

All feminism will do is change the order in the socio-sexual hierarchy to place women above betas Alphas will remain at the top and gammas (aka cucks) and omegas (aka incels) will remain at the bottom. It is similar to how another egalitarian system, communism, did not produce equality either; it only elevated the politburo, the commissars, etc. above the tsars and capitalists who had been in charge. One class of leaders replaced another, but human relations remained hierarchical.

Under communism, though, the peasants at the bottom were not able to vote with their ballots for good political leaders and get the same effect as when they had voted with their money for good business leaders. Therefore, the economy could not produce enough food to sustain the population, much as under feminism, families cannot produce enough children to sustain the population. The quality of the goods produced under communism was also less than what it was under capitalism, much as the quality of the children produced under feminism tends to diminish over time, rather than increasing, as it would under patriarchy.

The reason is that under feminism, as under communism, the high-quality men at the bottom tend to lack upward mobility by which they might rise to a position of more power (whether to have more wives, as would be the case under patriarchy; or to be in charge of producing goods, as would be the case under capitalism). And by high-quality men, I don't mean Alex from Target , who became a sensation because of his looks. I mean men who are able to financially support a large family.

Feminism also deprives attractive women of a lot of their upward mobility, by hindering women from the lower economic classes from rising above their stations by marrying a wealthy man. A 17-year-old girl like Debbie Wesson Gibson, for example, will not able to marry a high-status older man like Roy Moore , even if her mother considers her "the luckiest girl in the world."

Polygyny and male dominance produce good outcomes because, as Walter Block put it , "women are God's or nature's insurance policy and men are His crap shoot. And in the crap shoot, some men get very, very good genes, and other men get very bad genes and end up in a bad way." Under patriarchy, women, who tend to be mediocre compared to men in areas that are outside the female specialties of childcare, homemaking, and so on, accept leadership from those men whom they can look up to; and the other men are weeded out of the population. Because the natural order is that women are paired with men who are better leaders than themselves, it works better if women take on a submissive role in those relationships rather than vying for equal power. As Jim noted , "Equality requires fences between equals"; but in the marital relationship, there are no fences, so therefore there can be no equality. There must, rather, be a chain of command to administer the shared household.

Feminism and communism don't produce prosperity and happiness; on the contrary, they swell the ranks of the classes of sexual and material have-nots, respectively. Nor do they produce greater freedom. Much as it is in the nature of the average worker to need to serve some boss or another, it is in the nature of the average woman to need to serve some man or another. If there is no man at the top of whatever organization a career woman works for, there will be a masculinized woman at the top, who still is taking her leadership cues from some man or another. That never changes.

Even Hillary Clinton 's rise to the Democratic presidential nomination was preceded by her husband's, who paved the way for her. And female politicians like Maggie Thatcher and Angela Merkel had men around to advise them and tell them what to do. They're not like Adolf Hitler , who came up with his own theories and implemented them. They're not creative geniuses of that same caliber.

Putting an end to U.S. involvement in foreign wars arising out of our country's alliance with Israel [ edit ]

Our country's alliance with Israel is more of a liability than an asset. Arabs don't like that the United States takes Israel's side against the Palestinians who occupied the land before the state of Israel was created, and they seek revenge against us for that. Osama bin Laden's 1996 Declaration of Jihad argues that "the people of Islam had suffered from aggression, iniquity and injustice imposed on them by the Jewish-Christian alliance and their collaborators to the extent that the Muslims' blood became the cheapest and their wealth and assets looted by the hands of the enemies. Their blood was spilled in Palestine and Iraq."

Of course, another reason the September 11 attacks happened was that the airline crews were prohibited from carrying firearms by which they might have been able to keep terrorists armed only with box cutters from taking over the planes. The situation was a major terrorist incident waiting to happen. But Zionism was what gave bin Laden the motive and the justification for jihad, which in turn led to the War in Afghanistan (2001–present) and the Iraq conflict (2003–present)

Most of the wars the United States has gotten into in the Middle East have been related in some way to a desire to strengthen Israel's strategic position. The Iran nuclear deal framework would also not have much impact on American interests if Israel were not within striking distance of Iranian nuclear arms.

Palestine is just not a good location for a Jewish state. Israel requires constant military support from the United States, and even then often gets attacked by rockets and suicide bombers, which Israel reacts to with disproportionate military responses, provoking further attacks.

If there needs to be a Jewish state, then it should be in a more easily defensible location. Perhaps we could just cede the Zionists the entirety of New Jersey for the establishment of a Jewish state on the North American continent. New Jersey is a shithole by American standards, but still represents an upgrade in living conditions compared to Palestine, so letting the Jews take that state off our hands would be a win-win. The same laws that currently govern Israel, such as the Law of Return , could remain in effect, but Israel would occupy different territory. Most of Palestine could then be handed over to the Palestinians. Culturally significant locations, such as Jerusalem, could be placed under the ownership of a multinational corporation that would fund their preservation with tourism revenues.

This would be a good deal for all sides. Palestinians would be freed from being cooped up in places like Gaza. Israelis would get some better territory, within convenient driving distance of a major economic and Jewish cultural hub, that isn't mostly desert and arid land. The U.S. would save trillions of dollars currently devoted to waging various wars on Israel's behalf, and probably would no longer get attacked by Arab terrorists in retribution for those wars.

Moving the state of Israel to North America could also be justified under the strategic doctrine of "keeping your enemies closer." We can more easily keep an eye on what they're up to if they're nearby.

But a question that always arises with regard to Israel is, if we're going to put the Jewish state under the protective umbrella of the United States, then why do we bother having a sovereign Jewish state at all? They're not truly independent if they rely on the U.S. for their defense anyway. Why shouldn't Congress just pass a law allowing Jews to immigrate from anywhere in the world to the U.S.? A policy like that probably would've been helpful to European Jews during the 1930s, after a German government came to power that was not particularly friendly to European Jewry's interests.

Probably the reason was that a lot of Americans simply did not want to have that many Jews around. This could be because most whites prefer to have a relatively homogeneous, white-dominated culture in America, in which whites can have a sense of belonging, rather than letting those with alien cultures create a diverse mix. Or it could be because they view Jews as tending to have some negative personality characteristics, such as being deceitful, manipulative, traitorous, flaky, and neurotic.

Some of the same reasons why Hitler wanted to get rid of Jews from Germany could have made Americans reluctant to want to let Jewish refugees into the United States during the years leading up to World War II. In Europe, Jews had been involved in many of the Marxist movements that enslaved and killed eastern Europeans. Those slaughtered included many with Germanic ancestry, such as the House of Romanov , who ruled those countries prior to the communist takeovers.

At the beginning of the War, or even during the War, if twelve or fifteen thousand of these Jews who were corrupting the nation had been forced to submit to poison-gas, just as hundreds of thousands of our best German workers from every social stratum and from every trade and calling had to face it in the field, then the millions of sacrifices made at the front would not have been in vain. On the contrary: If twelve thousand of these malefactors had been eliminated in proper time probably the lives of a million decent men, who would be of value to Germany in the future, might have been saved. But it was in accordance with bourgeois ‘statesmanship’ to hand over, without the twitch of an eyelid, millions of human beings to be slaughtered on the battlefields, while they looked upon ten or twelve thousand public traitors, profiteers, usurers and swindlers, as the dearest and most sacred national treasure and proclaimed their persons to be inviolable.

I consider your crime worse than murder... I believe your conduct in putting into the hands of the Russians the A-Bomb years before our best scientists predicted Russia would perfect the bomb has already caused, in my opinion, the Communist aggression in Korea, with the resultant casualties exceeding 50,000 and who knows but that millions more of innocent people may pay the price of your treason. Indeed, by your betrayal you undoubtedly have altered the course of history to the disadvantage of our country. No one can say that we do not live in a constant state of tension. We have evidence of your treachery all around us every day for the civilian defense activities throughout the nation are aimed at preparing us for an atom bomb attack.

Today, Jewish Zionists and leftists continue to have a major influence on American politics. Lipset and Raab note that Jews contribute between one-quarter and one-third of all political contributions in the United States, including one-half of Democratic Party contributions and one-fourth of Republican contributions. The war in Iraq was conceived by 25 neoconservative intellectuals, most of them Jewish.

One might argue, "Jews have a right to exercise a preference for Jewish candidates. It is their money and their votes to do with as they wish." But it's interesting that when Fredy Burgos , who represented Virginia's 11th congressional district 's Republicans in the party's state central committee, posted to Facebook, "Having a preference for Christians over non-Christians as political leaders is not bigoted. It is a preference and duty we are allowed," cuckservative politicians such as Barbara Comstock and former Delegate Scott Lingamfelter condemned his remarks and called on him to step down. So apparently it is okay for Jews to discriminate against Gentiles, but not the other way around.

[1] and it's clear that Jews are hardly a marginalized group in American society. We see the same kind of principle in action when, say, EMILY's List discriminates against men, or when the Black Conservatives Fund discriminates against non-blacks. One might argue, these organizations are just trying to help underrepresented groups get the representation they deserve. But Jews already are overrepresented in all three branches of government. While Jews are only 2 percent of the U.S. population, they hold several important posts in the Cabinet of Donald Trump and make up one-third of the U.S. Supreme Court, 8 percent of the U.S. Senate and 5 percent of the U.S. House. Add to that the fact that Jews comprise half of the top one hundred Wall Street executives, about 40 percent of admissions to Ivy League colleges, and 25 percent of the social science faculty at elite universities,and it's clear that Jews are hardly a marginalized group in American society.

Of course, upon reading these statistics, one might argue, "If Jews are so well-educated and successful, doesn't that make them superior? Why shouldn't we be ruled by them, then?" Jewish intelligence, though, is mostly verbal . Like the east Asians, they are not known for making great breakthroughs in applied sciences the way that whites do; they merely make a few incremental improvements in what whites have already come up with. If you look around at the technology you use on a daily basis, virtually all of it was invented by whites, not Jews. And the empires of the world that made the greatest advances in weapons, armed forces, communication, transportation, agriculture, industry, standards of health, and every facet of science and technology were generally led by whites. We, not they, are the indispensable race, the race best-qualified to lead this country. We, not they, are the founders and custodians of civilization.

One of the few well-known Jewish inventions is Facebook (assuming Mark Zuckerberg really deserves the credit for it). Facebook is probably the most destructive invention of the 21st century, though, having caused more cultural damage than any other. It's been documented as bad for emotional health, and I would say that it tends to bring out some of the worst behavior in people. It destroys relationships and has even gotten people in trouble with Child Protective Services or with their employers when malicious false friends sent screenshots to them. Facebook isn't even particularly well-implemented; the software has a lot of flaws.

Human Action: Sorry, Jews. You lost. You weren't able to achieve what we could achieve. All you can do now is give us your young Jewesses to impregnate so that maybe some of those offspring can become a new hybrid race that will be more capable than either the white or Jewish genetic lines existing in isolation from the other. Or at least it may raise the quality of your genetic stock above what it is now, if the outbreeding depression from mongrelization doesn't take too much of a toll. The Jews and other non-whites who wish they could do what whites do are analogous to the animals about whom Ludwig von Mises writes in

We are fully aware of the unbridgeable gulf separating our reason from the reactive processes of their brains and nerves. But at the same time we divine that forces are desperately struggling in them toward the light of comprehension. They are like prisoners anxious to break out from the doom of eternal darkness and inescapable automatism. We feel with them because we ourselves are in a similar position: pressing in vain against the limitation of our intellectual apparatus, striving unavailingly after unattainable perfect cognition.

(Some might point out the irony in the fact that I'm quoting a Jew to make a point about Jews, but as Mises also notes, "The Nazi engineers and physicians did not disdain to utilize the theories, discoveries, and inventions of people of 'inferior' races and nations." Wherever truth is found, we should make use of it. At any rate, both Hitler and Mises were German-speaking Austrians who shared a lot of the same ideas, for example, about the nature and role of the creative genius in society.)

What the Fredy Burgos debacle shows is how much our politicians live in fear of the Jews' power to destroy their careers. The last high-profile politician to get on the Zionists' bad side was Jim Traficant , who championed the unpopular cause of John Demjanjuk , a Ukrainian-born autoworker from Seven Hills, Ohio, who had been wrongly convicted in Israel and sentenced to hang for having been the brutal concentration camp guard Ivan the Terrible . Traficant subsequently was expelled from Congress and sent to prison. (Even while serving time in federal prison, though, he was able to get 16 percent of the vote in the 2010 congressional election.) After getting released and going on Fox News to warn Americans that "Israel has a powerful stranglehold on the American government," he was killed in a suspiciously convenient tractor accident.

Bearing Drift Noose article "Trumpcucks" notes , "The shocking comment is not new territory for Burgos, whose attacks against Muslims, interracial marriage, refugees, Catholics, and Methodists have attracted nationwide attention and garnered condemnation from all corners of the party." This just proves my point about what a powerful hold Jews have had on American politics. Burgos was allowed to get away with badmouthing any other group he wanted, as long as he didn't say anything against the Jews. This is similar to how Donald Trump feels free to make offensive or insensitive remarks concerning almost any group he wants, but he is very careful not to directly criticize the Jews. On the contrary, he goes out of his way to show up to every Holocaust remembrance event, to tweet greetings to the Jews on every Jewish holiday, and to express his unwavering support for Israel. The closest he gets to saying anything critical of his Jewish detractors is when he makes oblique references to "the fake news ," " the failing New York Times ," etc. Thearticle "Trumpcucks" describes Trump's purpose thusly:

Donald Trump functions as a jewish measuring stick for emerging racial consciousness – the objective is for him to act as a relief valve and to keep all related discourse within a semitically-correct, patriotard frame, preventing it from reaching a point of explicit racial consciousness and organization. By getting the GOP nomination, he makes the system look more open than it really is, keeping an emerging, explicitly racial segment of the population on the GOP plantation, effectively assimilating them into that wide base where they can have no power and nullifying them as any oppositional entity.

Often, Jews will cite the Holocaust as an example of the dangers of white supremacist movements. But Jewish supremacists have also brought about the deaths of Gentiles for millennia, as they sought to ethnically cleanse the lands they wanted to occupy and neutralize any adversaries who stood in the way of their schemes. The Jews, like the Russians and Chinese, are a group vying against white Americans for supremacy, the main difference being that the Russians and Chinese compete with Americans from the outside, while Jews compete with whites from the inside.

Negro News video Some would argue that if Jews are smart enough to find a way to manipulate or coerce whites into doing their bidding, then they deserve to rule. By that "might is right" way of thinking, though, if whites are able to throw off the Jewish yoke and regain mastery of this country, then whites deserve to rule. Some religious Jews claim that Israeli military victories are God-given miracles. So then, if Israel has to depend on the U.S. military aid rather than on God for its protection, or if antisemites are able to kill Jews, what does that mean? In thevideo Black Hebrews make a Khazar Jew kid cry , a black Hebrew gives his view: "You was robbin' the Germans! You was takin' all the Germans' money! The Germans was sufferin'! You was oppressin' the Germans! You was oppressin' them! And God let them burn you the hell up."

Fredy Burgos writes , "To say that I am anti-Semitic is ignorant and wrong. The opposite is true. But perhaps it would help if critics understood that we evangelicals have a special affection for our Jewish neighbor: Because the Bible tells us that God has a special affection for them too and instructs Christians to have that same affection." Of course, this didn't placate those Jews who continued calling him antisemitic and pushing for his expulsion; they are after power, not the affection of Christian supremacists, and they know he is enough of a loose cannon to be dangerous to them. By "loose cannon" I mean, "a man who might occasionally stumble upon the truth and make the mistake of saying it out loud." I.e., a boy who doesn't know any better than to say that the emperor wears no clothes — or worse, from the perspective of the Jews, knows but doesn't care.

At the end of the day, though, it is in the best interests of all races that whites defeat the Jews in the fight for supremacy in America. The white race is essential to civilization's survival, while Jews are less essential (to put it mildly); and whites have a history of being more benevolent leaders when they have been put in charge of other races. It is noteworthy that even most Jews would rather live in America or Europe than in Israel, because there are so many benefits from living under a white-run government. Of course, they can't resist trying to take over that government; but if they were to succeed in attaining complete supremacy, then they would destroy what made this country worth living in, and would emigrate. In Europe, we see signs this is already happening, as the Muslim immigrants that some Jews advocated letting in are behaving in antisemitic ways, making Jews feel unwelcome there.

Burgos, in calling on Christians to vote for fellow Christians over Jews, was simply following in the tradition of Adolf Hitler, who also viewed antisemitism as a religious duty:

Should the Jew, with the aid of his Marxist creed, triumph over the people of this world, his Crown will be the funeral wreath of mankind, and this planet will once again follow its orbit through ether, without any human life on its surface, as it did millions of years ago. And so I believe to-day that my conduct is in accordance with the will of the Almighty Creator. In standing guard against the Jew I am defending the handiwork of the Lord.

Thus, in removing Burgos from their state central committee, Republicans were behaving in a way that was discriminatory against Burgos based on his expressed religious beliefs. They are being as intolerant as he was, so therefore, to be consistent, they too should resign their posts or be removed from their positions. Also, the people who claimed Burgos was violating the No Religious Test Clause have it all wrong; the Constitution prohibits the government, not the voters, from imposing such a test.

In March 2017, Barbara Comstock was one of the politicians who came together at the Jewish Community Center of Northern Virginia in Fairfax "to speak out against rising anti-semitism" and show support for the local Jewish community in the wake of an alleged bomb threat targeting the Gesher Jewish Day School in Fairfax and amid a string of nearly 100 alleged threats to Jewish schools and community centers across the country. If I were in Comstock's place, I would be very skeptical about these sorts of unsubstantiable claims of Jewish victimhood. Given the long history of Jews' fabricating hate crimes, I would be more likely to, rather than condemning antisemites, ask, " Hey rabbi...watcha been doin'?!

Letter, Friedman uses this typical Jewish tactic of In her video, Friedman uses this typical Jewish tactic of playing the victim , by saying that her daughter was afraid to have a photo taken of her letter to President Donald Trump because "what if he finds out I wrote it and brings his guns to our house?" If her daughter really asked that, it just goes to show how much non-whites are being brainwashed by the leftist media into thinking Trump, a former Democrat -turned- Alt-Liter , is out to get them. At any rate, I, a full-blooded white, am the only one in this election who knows what it is like to have the President's men bring guns to his house because of a letter

One might argue, "The Democratic establishment got behind Wexton rather than Friedman or Helmer, which shows that the Jews are not all-powerful in America." Conchis explains the dynamics of such situations thusly:

Per Machiavelli, there are always two types of historical forces at work: intentional factors and random factors. Intentional factors could themselves be centralized/"coordinated" efforts (i.e., conspiracies), uncentralized/"uncoordinated" efforts (like the "invisible hand"), or by "great men" who are themselves masters of nations and historical forces (like Napoleon or Hitler or Pericles). Random factors could be the emergence of unexpected events or interventions that distract from the original objective (like foreign invasion or natural disaster putting domestic policy efforts on hold). Fatalists tend to over-emphasize random factors as the determination of all. Conspiracy theorists tend to over-emphasize explanations around deliberate coordination. And libertarians tend to emphasize decentralized cooperation mental models . And because it is simple, classical historians tend to emphasize the "great men" who took the reigns of history. was conceived on was decided by the stumbling of Napoleon's cavalry charge in an unexpected ditch. And perhaps Paris does get fed because of the invisible hand of the market. All these things can be true (or none of them). A more flexible framework would consider them all, and also acknowledge that different events may be shaped by different categories of influences. Perhaps the Federal Reserve reallyconceived on Jekyll Island by a cabal of financiers . Perhaps the Battle of Waterloo decided by the stumbling of Napoleon's cavalry charge in an unexpected ditch. And perhaps Parisget fed because of the invisible hand of the market. All these things can be true (or none of them). People come up on the JQ like it is the great unifying theory of history, and many writers take advantage of this. But a mature perspective must see the JQ and then place it in a more complete context in the spirit of Machiavelli. They are hysterical sanctimonious parasites who separate themselves and look down on the goyim, yes. Powerful jews have shaped the course of nations, yes. But so have other things.

Other themes [ edit ]

Benevolent white supremacy [ edit ]

It has been alleged by many press outlets that I threatened to kill Barack Obama , the implication being that because of my racism, I opposed the elevation of Obama to the presidency. Like every other human being, I am indeed racist, but I did not specifically threaten Obama, nor was my threat motivated by racism. My forensic evaluation notes, "Mr. Larson allegedly sent an email to the Secret Service on December 11, 2008 in which he claimed he would kill the President of the United States in the near future. The e-mail sated his primary motivation was that the President 'is the leader of the largest and most dangerous criminal organization in the world namely the United States government.' The e-mail contained a polemic against the legitimacy of the government and advocated Libertarian principles. Several books advocating these principals were recommended in the e-mail." The government is interested in prosecuting hate crimes, so if there had been any indication of a racist motive or of my having a history of racism, they would have mentioned it in the evaluation or in my presentence investigation report

I don't even consider Barack Obama the first black President. He is, rather, the first mulatto President, or the first oreo President. He was born to, and raised by, a white woman, Ann Dunham ; his black father was absent during most of his upbringing. White America felt comfortable voting for him because he looked black enough that he would enable them to check the box of having elected a black President (and thereby assuage their white guilt by proving that they aren't racist); yet he was white enough that he could be trusted not to do serious damage to the country. Whites looked at Obama's law career and listened to his comments on race, including his response to the Jeremiah Wright controversy , concluded, "He's one of us," and cast their votes for that historic ticket. But whites still have enough racial awareness that they would never elect a full-blooded black man to the highest office in the land.

What did happen, though, was that while I was behind bars, I got a glimpse of a racially political society where, unlike in the outside world, the interracial struggle for dominance is more overt. At Englewood Federal Detention Center , the prison population was about one-third Latino, one-third black, and one-third white, with a few Native Americans and Asians sprinkled in. For the most part, there was harmony among the races. As in the outside world, commerce brought the races together for their mutual benefit. For example, my cellmate and I set up a business in which we sold legal services to the blacks, filing petitions with the courts on their behalf to get their crack cocaine trafficking sentences reduced. The blacks in turn had their own businesses, in which they would iron jumpsuits to help prisoners look presentable for visits or, if they were artistic, they would create and sell Mother's Day or Valentine's Day cards for prisoners to send home to the women in their lives who were taking care of their kids, putting commissary money on their books, and helping smuggle drugs into the prison.

Where problems arose were when non-whites got into a situation where they could lord it over whites. There were three TV rooms in our unit, and when I first got there, each of the three major races (Latinos, whites, and blacks) occupied one of them. That way, each TV could be devoted to programming in the language spoken by the race in question (viz., Spanish, English, or ebonics, respectively). Then one day, I noticed, the Latinos were still occupying their TV room, but now the blacks were using both of the two remaining TV rooms. I asked one of the whites what had happened and he said the blacks had just arbitrarily gone in there and changed the channel from what the whites were watching and taken over the TV room, so that they could watch two different black channels at a time rather than only one. I asked why they were being allowed to get away with that, and he said, "We don't want to get in a race war over a TV."

Another white prisoner explained the mentalities of the races: "That's the difference between us and them. When we run the prison, we make sure that the blacks have a TV to watch. It might be the most raggedy and beat-up TV in the unit, but we won't leave them without a TV. But when they run the prison, they take all the TVs and leave us with nothing."

Essentially what had happened was that the white prisoners had lost their will to rule, and degenerated from convicts to cuckvicts. And once the blacks saw that we wouldn't fight back, acts of petty black tyranny became a daily annoyance. We would be standing in line for chow, and the black serving the chicken would pick up a piece, notice that the prisoner standing in front of him was white, and then put that piece down and give him a smaller piece, so that he could give the larger piece to one of his fellow blacks. On Thanksgiving, I asked one of the whites, "What happened to all the turkey breast meat?" It turned out, one of the blacks in the kitchen had stolen all of it and loaded it into garbage bags to be smuggled out of the dining hall by his mules, so that it could be sold on the compound. So we had to do without, unless we wanted to pay to buy back what had been on the official menu but then snatched.

Governing a modern first world country and global economic and cultural hub like the United States requires upholding certain values, such as liberty and the rule of law , and being fair to all inhabitants, including those of other races. (This is not like the days of the Roman Empire or the Confederate State of America , when it made economic sense to have a large class of slaves.) That is what attracts immigrants to this country; they get tired of the corrupt police, the bought-off courts, and the oppressive rulers of their own people, and come here to be ruled more benevolently by whites. It's not entirely our system of government or our culture that make America different from other countries. Many Latin American countries have modeled their constitutions after the U.S. Constitution, but devolved into corrupt dictatorships. The Philippines were ruled by America and adopted not only a similar constitution but also the English language and many aspects of American culture; but the Philippines have not been able to become a first world country like Japan or South Korea or the European Union or the United States.

The reason is that the Filipinos are racially different from their east Asian neighbors and from European and American whites. They are not as highly evolved, and none of Rodrigo Duterte 's bluster can change that. His adopting the same provocative style as Donald Trump will not transform the Philippines into the United States. The Filipinos, like the Israelis, cannot escape their dependency on foreign military support to secure their country's "independence" in a world full of powerful enemies who would like to take what they have.

The Filipinas know that, since their country has done everything it could to copy western ways and still hasn't risen to first world status, their only remaining hope is to improve their stock with some white genetics. Therefore, they are eager to open their legs to the white tourists to their country, in hopes of having lighter-skinned babies with some white intellectual and personality traits. These can perhaps finally be the leaders who will bring their families and their country to greatness.

What makes whites (or at least, the more highly-evolved whites) different from other races is our cultural creativeness , our willingness to invest in the long term rather than living for today, and our conscientious desire to do the right thing even if it requires heroic self-sacrifice for the good of society. The only problem is that this can be exploited if others are able to deceive us into falsely believing ourselves to be iniquitous. They can get us to behave in racially suicidal ways if they can trick us into thinking that doing so would serve the interests of fairness and benefit society. Jews have proven particularly adept at this kind of deception, although what tends to happen is that whites eventually realize what's going on and get rid of them. This is why whenever it seems that the goyim know , the Jews shut it down

For example, whites will mistakenly believe that blacks will benefit from being given an equal voice in running the government. That's not true; what will actually benefit blacks is if whites use their position of power to maintain and enhance the infrastructure that keeps society running and, more generally, build an advanced civilization that blacks can join us in reaping the benefits of. Blacks, if given power, will not know what to do with it. If they were capable of running a first world country, then Africa would not be in the state it's in, and Africans would not be climbing aboard inflatable boats to risk their lives trying to migrate across the Mediterranean Sea to Europe. American blacks are aware of these racial realities, which is why they defer to the white and Jewish leaders of the Democratic Party even though, like everyone else, they go through the motions of repeating the politically correct orthodoxy that everyone is equal. Although blacks will sometimes test whites by seeing how they react to being chided over 19th-century Negro slavery or questioned about racism, this is mostly for their own amusement rather than because they seriously feel aggrieved.

Libertarianism represented a higher phase of development of the white man's thinking about politics than what had come before. Neoreaction is a further refinement of those ideas to correct certain errors that had crept in over the years due to the influence of egalitarianism. Libertarian economic theory explained the benefits of interracial cooperation by showing how comparative advantage can be leveraged to grow the economy. Neoreaction brings back some elements of classical libertarianism by recognizing the value of hierarchy in enabling smooth relations between the sexes, the races, and other disparate groups; and of preserving the freedom of homogeneous groups to erect walls within which they could retreat to enjoy the companionship of a homogeneous group when they're not out in the larger society interacting with a more heterogeneous group. Although to some extent, the family today mostly remains the fundamental unit of society, within what limited sanctity of the home the state allows to exist, modern society has lost sight of the importance of the extended family, aka the tribe.

Joseph Smith, white supremacist hero [ edit ]

Joseph Smith was the leader of perhaps the greatest religion the world has ever seen, Mormonism . This religion spread rapidly, both through proselytization and childbearing, as the church encouraged women to marry at a young age and have lots of kids. The men were allowed to have multiple wives , thus enabling the best familial genes and culture to be propagated more rapidly. The church was white supremacist, banning blacks from the priesthood and other leadership roles until 1978, when the church yielded to pressure to change the policy.

In 1844, Joseph Smith announced his campaign for the presidency of the United States . His platform proposed to, among other things, gradually end slavery through compensated emancipation , to reduce the size of Congress, to allow Texas, California and Oregon to join the union, to reform prisons, and to authorize the federal government to protect the liberties of Mormons and other minorities. Smith sent out Mormon missionary electioneers to share the gospel and Smith's political message. The Mormons had reached a point at which they could affect the outcome of elections by voting en masse for the candidates chosen by the church leadership, and Smith had also raised a large army, the Nauvoo Legion . He was getting powerful enough that people were beginning to fear he could take control of the country.

When I grow up, I want to be a mother

And have a family.

One little, two little, three little babies of my own!

Of all the jobs, for me, I'll choose no other.

I'll have a family.

Four little, five little, six little babies in my home!



And I will love them all day long,

And give them cookies, and milk, and yellow balloons.

And cuddle them when things go wrong,

And read them stories and sing them pretty tunes!



When I grow up, if I can be a mother,

How happy I will be.

One little, two little, three little babies I can love!

And you will say, "Each sister and each brother

All look a lot like me."

Four little, five little, six little blessings from above!

The LDS Humanitarian Services , which provides emergency response supplies, wheelchairs, clean water, neonatal resuscitation, and blindness prevention services to third world countries, is an example of how white-led movements benefit non-whites.

Adolf Hitler, white supremacist hero [ edit ]

Mein Kampf, the story of his struggle against lies, stupidity, and cowardice during his childhood, his sojourn as an architecture student in Austria, his service as a volunteer soldier in World War I, and the early years of National Socialist struggle leading up to the Adolf Hitler dedicated his life to the German Volk . One of his major early accomplishments was writing, the story of his struggle against lies, stupidity, and cowardice during his childhood, his sojourn as an architecture student in Austria, his service as a volunteer soldier in World War I, and the early years of National Socialist struggle leading up to the Beer Hall Putsch . It is an autobiography, political treatise, and guide to activism, all rolled into one book.

The Germans, too, knew what it was like to have their lebensraum subjected to some convoluted gerrymandering

Hitler went to war against Poland because he was unwilling to let Germany get cucked out of its territory in Danzig and the Polish corridor . He wanted to end the persecution of the German people who had been scattered abroad, and bring them under the protection of the Third Reich. Hitler knew that the German people needed lebensraum if they were to reach their full potential. It was the German volk that had culturally developed Danzig and the Corridor, lifting them up from the depths of barbarism; and Poland's only claim to that land was that Poland had been able to take it by force. Therefore, if Germany could take it back and keep it by force, then Germany's claim would have higher legitimacy than Poland's.

Although the French and English claimed they were declaring war on Germany out of a desire to preserve Poland's territorial integrity, they did not declare war on the Soviets, who had also invaded Poland, and who massacred the Polish intelligentsia at Katyn . After the Battle of Dunkirk , as a show of good faith, and over the objections of his own generals, Hitler allowed the trapped Allied forces to escape untouched. Hitler hoped that this gracious act would make the British more willing to make peace, but it was not to be. His 19 July 1940 last appeal to reason , in which he warned that war would destroy the British Empire , was rebuffed.

When the Soviets betrayed Germany by liquidating northeast Europe, including Finland and the Baltics , and preparing for an attack on Germany, Hitler was forced to go to war against them as well.

Mein Kampf because they Hitler pointed out the hypocrisy in how the British complained about German expansion into central and eastern Europe, yet still ruled over Palestine , Arabia, Egypt , and India . Many Indian business students still readbecause they regard Hitler as a management guru. A bookstore owner in New Delhi explains , "We like Hitler because he was a Hindu. He was a vegetarian and used the Swastika as a symbol for good luck. He was one of us."

Some might argue, "Hitler destroyed Germany by starting a war he couldn't win." But Hitler's view was that quiet acquiescence to enslavement would have been worse for Germany, in the long run, than defeat on the battlefield. To accept what was being done to Germany, without a fight, would have led only to further humiliations. In Mein Kampf, Hitler notes that this had already been proven by the events that transpired after World War I:

After we had laid down our arms, in November 1918, a policy was adopted which in all human probability was bound to lead gradually to our complete subjugation. Analogous examples from history show that those nations which lay down their arms without being absolutely forced to do so subsequently prefer to submit to the greatest humiliations and exactions rather than try to change their fate by resorting to arms again. That is intelligible on purely human grounds. A shrewd conqueror will always enforce his exactions on the conquered only by stages, as far as that is possible. Then he may expect that a people who have lost all strength of character - which is always the case with every nation that voluntarily submits to the threats of an opponent - will not find in any of these acts of oppression, if one be enforced apart from the other, sufficient grounds for taking up arms again. The more numerous the extortions thus passively accepted so much the less will resistance appear justified in the eyes of other people, if the vanquished nation should end by revolting against the last act of oppression in a long series. And that is specially so if the nation has already patiently and silently accepted impositions which were much more exacting. The fall of Carthage is a terrible example of the slow agony of a people which ended in destruction and which was the fault of the people themselves. In his Three Articles of Faith Clausewitz expressed this idea admirably and gave it a definite form when he said: "The stigma of shame incurred by a cowardly submission can never be effaced. The drop of poison which thus enters the blood of a nation will be transmitted to posterity. It will undermine and paralyse the strength of later generations." But, on the contrary, he added: "Even the loss of its liberty after a sanguinary and honourable struggle assures the resurgence of the nation and is the vital nucleus from which one day a new tree can draw firm roots."

After World War II, Germany was able to rebuild and become once again the most prosperous and mighty nation in Europe, ranked #5 globally by gross domestic product and #10 in global firepower . Even though they lost the Second World War, they made their point that Germany would not accept subjugation by those who wanted to bleed their country dry.

Some might argue that Hitler was not a libertarian. This is true, but Hitler probably would have adopted libertarianism if he had thought it would serve the nation's purposes. As he said in response to objections to the abolition of interest-servitude, "Any idea may be a source of danger if it be looked upon as an end in itself, when really it is only the means to an end. For me and for all genuine National-Socialists there is only one doctrine. People and Fatherland."

His reason for focusing so much on race was that "ideals do not exist of themselves somewhere in the air but are the product of man’s creative imagination and disappear when he disappears. Nature knows nothing of them. Moreover, they are characteristic of only a small number of nations, or rather of races, and their value depends on the measure in which they spring from the racial feeling of the latter. Humane and æsthetic ideals will disappear from the inhabited earth when those races disappear which are the creators and standard-bearers of them."

Hitler did have some libertarian sentiments, but his view was that the first step was to acquire power with which to protect values such as liberty: "A strong national Reich which recognizes and protects to the largest possible measure the rights of its citizens both within and outside its frontiers can allow freedom to reign at home without trembling for the safety of the State." Also, "The more completely our ideas triumph, the more liberty can we concede in particular affairs to our citizens at home." More generally, "Human rights are above the rights of the State. But if a people be defeated in the struggle for its human rights this means that its weight has proved too light in the scale of Destiny to have the luck of being able to endure in this terrestrial world. The world is not there to be possessed by the faint-hearted races." He notes:

The old Reich gave freedom to its people at home and showed itself strong towards the outside world, whereas the Republic shows itself weak towards the stranger and oppresses its own citizens at home. In both cases one attitude determines the other. A vigorous national State does not need to make many laws for the interior, because of the affection and attachment of its citizens. The international servile State can live only by coercing its citizens to render it the services it demands.

He observes, "State enterprise nearly always lags behind private enterprise. Of these gentry once can truly say that their maxim is: What we don't know won’t bother us." And he writes that "experience has shown that the productive powers of the individual are more enhanced by being accorded a generous measure of freedom than by coercion from above. Moreover, by according this freedom we give free play to the natural process of selection which brings forward the ablest and most capable and most industrious." He understood how competitive pressures could promote the best businessmen to positions of leadership in industry:

Only those should rule who have the natural temperament and gifts of leadership. Such men of brains are selected mainly, as I have already said, through the hard struggle for existence itself. In this struggle there are many who break down and collapse and thereby show that they are not called by Destiny to fill the highest positions; and only very few are left who can be classed among the elect. In the realm of thought and of artistic creation, and even in the economic field, this same process of selection takes place, although - especially in the economic field - its operation is heavily handicapped.

Now, perhaps Hitler should have simply pressed the button on the rostrum to abolish the state and set the market free to protect the German people, since private defense agencies could have emerged through spontaneous order . But it's not like anarcho-capitalist theory was a thing back then that he would have been aware of. George Lincoln Rockwell , uncomfortable with the idea of "socialism" since it was associated with communism and Marxism, originally called the American Nazi Party the World Union of Free Enterprise National Socialists. He explains , "We believe in private property and free enterprise. It is impossible we believe, to have a society in which there is any real work going on unless people can get the reward of their effort."

Private borders [ edit ]

The Mexico–United States barrier [ edit ]

Part of me wants to say that a Mexico–United States barrier isn't a good idea, because it commits us to a somewhat nationalized immigration policy rather than a more decentralized policy. Plus there's the fact that physical border controls aren't always all that effective; the desert already serves as a border control, but people still risk their lives to come here through the desert. On the other hand, the wall might not actually be all that expensive, compared to a lot of other stuff the federal government invests in, and there might be some benefit in keeping some of the worst elements on the other side of the border, assuming the federal government would actually come up with a reasonable list of immigration criteria as opposed to excluding communists, Nazis, polygamists, etc. (I don't like communists either, but Hitler scoffed at such exclusions, saying, "It is required of him that his political attitude is not such as to give cause for uneasiness; in other words he must be a harmless simpleton in politics.") So anyway, let's suppose we're going to have a border wall.

Trump brings up the fact that if the Israelis can build a 440-mile long barrier , we can surely build a 1,954-mile long Mexico–United States barrier , if we want to; it's not an insurmountable engineering challenge for a nation that has the technology and know-how to build skyscrapers. This is true, but there's a reason why the government is not put in charge of building skyscrapers, but rather leaves that task to the private sector. Anything the government tries to build will tend to be ugly, take forever to build, and run over budget. Our transportation system is proof of that.

If we're going to build a wall, then probably the most efficient way to do it is to contract the work out to Donald Trump himself to build. Congress (or some private organization, if it's going to be funded through donations) can look over the building contract, make sure that the price and specifications are acceptable, and sign off on it. If Trump is the builder, and he ends up ripping off the wall's funders by building a substandard wall, then he can be sued for breach of contract, and/or the voters can punish him in the United States presidential election, 2020 . Choosing Trump to build it, then, while seeming to be a possible conflict of interest, could actually introduce a check and balance to the arrangement, since he would not be able to blame any deficiencies in the wall on some other company that's not owned by him.

The builder needs to be a company that has concern for its brand and reputation being on the line, and given that Trump loves bragging about his accomplishments and would want a wall that's going to bring glory to him as the builder whenever it's in the news, that could be a reason to pick him to build it. As Ayn Rand wrote, "A man's ego is the fountainhead of human progress." Sometimes it seems like if Trump can't find a way to cut through all the red tape involved in trying to get anything accomplished in Washington, and build the wall himself and take credit for it, the way he did with his hotels and casinos and so on, he's going to be content with saying the wall was just a metaphor

Legal immigrants [ edit ]

Many 10th congressional district residents have told me, "I don't want Syrian immigrants living next door to me, 25 people to a house" or "I don't want Mexican immigrants who don't have health insurance clogging up the emergency rooms." The solution to that is to simply ban Syrian immigrants, or Mexican immigrants, or whatever class of immigrants one wants to ban, from communities that don't want them. Some other community can take them, and perhaps charge higher property taxes to make up for the fact that the residents are consuming more local services per household. Another possibility, already implemented to some extent in family-based immigration law, is that immigrants' sponsors can be required to sign an affidavit of support holding them liable for the cost of any state services that immigrants use.

There already is some political support for sanctuary cities that illegal immigrants can flee to, so they can avoid getting deported. It seems fair, then, to allow for whites to establish white sanctuary cities where they can be free of unwanted immigrants or other groups they prefer to not have as neighbors. We should repeal all equal housing opportunity equal employment opportunity , and other civil rights legislation that prohibits discrimination by private property owners. If someone wants to set up, say, a white-only apartment complex, that should be his prerogative. In this sense, we can have some "private borders" and stop, say, Mexican immigrants from entering places where they're unwelcome without denying Americans who want to do business with immigrants the right to do so.

Even though people living 25 to a house can be a nuisance to the locals, it enables those workers to keep their costs low and thereby charge a low rate for their labor; so communities in need of cheap labor might see fit to make accommodations for them to be around. This isn't really a problem, as long as the costs of having those immigrants around are absorbed by the community that harbors them rather than becoming an externality.

These same dynamics come into play during ballot access petitioning. A few people will say, "I'm fine with the choices I have" and not want to help an unknown like me get on the ballot. But the majority will sign just because they want a chance to hear what someone outside the mainstream will have to say. They are looking for someone, anyone, who might be able to help lead this country out of the mess that it's in. One woman told me, "I would vote for King Kong over Barbara Comstock." A white-haired lady told me, "I have a bad back, but I will do cartwheels the day that Barbara Comstock is voted out."

Comstock, by the way, caught flak for putting forth a workable proposal that immigrants be tracked like FedEx packages. If we're going to have a visa system, then it makes sense to have it set up to track when immigrants enter or leave the country through border checkpoints, so that if they overstay their visas, a red flag will go up and immigration enforcement officers can begin looking for them, to apprehend and deport them. What leftists didn't like about her proposal was that she was thinking about the most logical way to accomplish the goals of American immigration policy, which led her to make an analogy that dehumanized immigrants by comparing them to cargo. Sometimes clear thinking does require dehumanizing people to a certain extent, though, by thinking of them in terms of their shared functions and characteristics. A government bureaucracy in particular tends to reduce people to units to be processed in a standardized way according to a system of rules; it's one of the reasons why it's better to minimize the scope of government activities and allow the free market to provide solutions tailored to the needs of each individual.

The reality, in any event, is that the immigrants are not necessarily thinking primarily about how they can better make a contribution to the world by coming here to work in our economy, but often just want a better life for themselves and their families. Therefore, it's fair if we also look at the value they would contribute to the country rather than how their coming here would be of benefit to them. We have to look out for ourselves so we can continue to be in a position to have anything to offer others; if we let the country be overrun and taken over by those who would destroy its value, then there will be no reason for anyone to want to come here anymore, and we also will no longer have a decent place in which to live.

Some might ask, "Why do we need non-whites in this country at all?" We don't really need them, but the alternative to having them around would be to have a white proletarian class fulfill the same roles in the economy that non-whites fulfill. The mentality of some white ethnicities is similar to that of certain non-white races. For example, Slavic women in many ways are as scheming as Jewesses. They have often used their beauty and intellect to attract white men and then destroyed them. They need to be kept on leashes just like any other women, to keep them out of mischief.

Neocameralism (or as libertarians might call it, anarcho-capitalism) is one system we might try. Trump would probably suggest that we just make him our benevolent monarch, but given that he's not a libertarian, I would prefer some other option. It's great to apply the führerprinzip and have one leader who is accountable for everything the government does, but we need to have the right system in place for selecting that leader and ensuring the proper incentives are in place for him to make decisions that will serve the best interests of the people.

By the way, I support La ColectiVa's efforts to hold Del. Alfonso H. Lopez accountable by seeking answers from him about the nature of his consulting work for ICA-Farmville. Mass incarceration of Latinos is a problem at the federal level, too, with illegal reentry to the country being punishable, pursuant to 8 U.S.C. § 1326 , by 10 years in prison for those with prior felony convictions and 20 years for those with prior aggravated felony convictions. One might argue that some of these are bad hombres who should not be here, but the fact remains that illegal reentry, in and of itself, is a victimless crime, or at any rate a crime that directly causes only a minimal amount of damage. Also, there are so many victimless felony offenses (such as drug trafficking) on the books that a lot of these immigrants with criminal records are not actually people who committed aggression against anyone.

Some might ask, "If you think whites are superior, why do you care what happens to blacks or Latinos?" It's because, even if some are subhuman, that's still no reason to arbitrarily act in a cruel way toward them. It's similar to how, if you have a pet dog, you should not abuse your power by leaving that dog chained up in the back yard in all kinds of bad weather with no shelter. That kind of behavior tends to tarnish one's reputation for being a good steward.

Some alt-righters are more inclined to say, "We should kill off all non-whites, or otherwise get rid of them, since we don't need them." It's probably true that we could survive without them, but there can be a benefit sometimes to keeping around animals to whom we're superior rather than driving them extinct. If non-whites ever become too obsolete and useless to be worth keeping around, then they will simply become unable to earn a living. The invisible hand of the market will destroy them. We don't need to actually go out of our way to make this happen sooner than it would happen naturally.

One might argue, "If non-whites can't defend themselves from being killed by whites, that is proof of their inferiority." But those whites who find non-whites useful would probably try to defend them from those whites who want to kill them. Taking property is different from taking a life; the former has an economic benefit for the aggressor, while the latter doesn't. People who have no property can still be useful as slaves (including as pets, which are a type of slave). Typically, only those who prove unfit even to serve as slaves end up being annihilated entirely.

There are degrees of slavery, by the way. Even American whites have always been enslaved to a certain degree, because their freedom has been restricted in ways the government deemed would make them better servants. For example, they were not given total freedom to dispose of their incomes as they saw fit; some was taken away through taxation.

The problem of feminism [ edit ]

Feminism is a global problem that, if left unchecked, will eventually destroy all races. It begins with the white race, culling the best and the brightest by encouraging the most intelligent women to attend university and start a career rather than reproducing before their biological clocks run out. Since women have a natural tendency to seek out a mate who is of higher status than themselves, high-status women often remain single because the men around them are lower-status than them.

But the feminist cancer is not contained only within the first world; it spreads to every country the feminists can gain access to. Under the guise of stopping " human trafficking " State Department feminists like Alison Friedman fight to abolish other nations' traditional patriarchal practices such as forced marriage. Yet even Wikipedia notes that reasons for performing forced marriages include "controlling unwanted behavior and sexuality", "preventing 'unsuitable' relationships", "protecting and abiding by perceived cultural or religious norms", "dealing with the consequences of pregnancy out of wedlock" and "obtaining a guarantee against poverty". Far from being exploitative, forced marriage (or as we perhaps should call it, arranged marriage ) furthers many worthy goals that are for the benefit of all.

USA Today Even a Muslim society's birth rate will collapse when feminism is introduced. In Afghanistan, the Taliban did not allow girls to go to school, and endorsed child marriage (or as we perhaps should call it, early marriage). After the Taliban fell and NATO countries began funding schooling and birth control for girls, the fertility rate dropped from 8 in the 1990s to 5.1 at the end of 2010, and is projected to drop below replacement by around 2050. reports , "In developing nations where fertility rates begin to slide, the decline usually continues, according to global birth rate histories, a sign that Afghanistan's birth rate may be on a permanent descent."

Similarly, in the U.S., the fertility rate of Latinas is also in decline. Daniel Nehring notes that "second-generation women 15 to 44 years old had fewer children ever born than both first-generation Hispanic women and third generation Hispanic women who were American born and had two native parents as well. One explanation for the lower fertility levels found specifically in second-generation Hispanic women is the mediating effect of educational attainment and career opportunities." In other words, sending girls to school destroys populations.

Patriarchy [ edit ]

Congress should repeal the Violence Against Women Act and all other legislation that interferes with patriarchal rule in the family. We need to switch to a system that classifies women as property, initially of their fathers and later of their husbands.

Patriarchy is the only system known to man that can produce and nurture enough children to keep the fertility rate above the replacement rate and thereby perpetuate the species. It is, therefore, the only system of relations between men and women that is sustainable in the long run.

The Institute for Family Studies notes , "Quick policy fixes, like more parental leave or financial incentives, may have some effect but are likely to be quite expensive relative to their modest impact on birth rates." We can't subsidize our way out of the problem; even if, as some feminists suggest , we fund "a better social safety net so women can both work and have more children" (i.e. tax sexless, childless men to pay for the support of the children fathered by the men whom women would rather reproduce with), it won't be enough. France tried that and it didn't suffice ; even if career women have enough money to raise large families, they don't have enough time.

Patriarchy is also a eumemic and eugenic system that promotes the improvement of cultural and genetic quality over time. In a patriarchal society, the most beautiful and intelligent girls are married off at a young age and used to produce and raise more children who have those same high-quality characteristics. They are not sent to a university to be educated or sent into the workforce to devote their years of peak beauty and fertility to tasks that men (who have a longer window of fertility, and who devote fewer bodily resources to reproduction) could be doing. In a patriarchal society, fathers pick their daughters' husbands , choosing based on their ability to provide rather than based on superficial qualities; this also is eugenic.

[2] Barbara Comstock, unless she's a cafeteria Catholic , must believe, to some extent, in traditional sex roles, since she belongs to a sexist religion, Roman Catholicism, that only allows men into the priesthood. Catholics also have a number of other beliefs that tend to grant husbands privileges, such as the idea that spouses have a " marital debt " obligating them to provide the other with sex, and the idea that sex is supposed to be procreative. Since usually it's husbands who are wanting more sex and more children than their wives, the idea of a "marital debt" tends to favor men's getting more of what they want.

The most successful religions of the world usually endorse a patriarchist order in which men rule over women, because this is what produces large enough families to continue passing on the religious tradition to successive generations. If the job of replenishing, say, the Jewish race were left to feminist Jewesses like Alison Friedman who only have one (possibly mixed-race) child, the Jewish race would die out. It is the religious conservative Jews, who still observe traditions of male dominance in the family, who are producing enough Jewish babies with their wives to keep their kind from going extinct. (Occasionally, there will be a secular Jew, like Bryan Caplan , who advocates having a large family; but he and his wife don't actually have all that many kids, and even if they did, it still wouldn't make up for the Alison Friedmans.) The world Muslim population is growing rapidly partly because, unlike Christianity, it has not allowed its patriarchal principles to get watered down so much by political correctness.

"Patriarchy" means "rule by fathers." Roman Catholicism is full of patriarchal imagery, with the faithful praying to " Our Father " and addressing their priest as "Father" as well. When they pray the Hail Mary , the woman they are describing as blessed amongst women is one who was chosen to bear and raise God's son, as opposed to, say, like Deborah , being chosen to liberate Israel by hammering a tent-pin through an enemy military commander's temple. (Of course, Mary was not invited by the angel Gabriel to give affirmative consent to take on this maternal role; rather, she was considered blessed because God exercised his authority to honor her with it. Roman Catholics are not exactly what one would call staunch proponents of the idea of women making their own reproductive choices.)

The Catholic church bans abortion and birth control as a way to help ensure the continuance of the species and of the church. When women get pregnant outside of marriage, they can either try to trap the father into marrying them (or otherwise entering into a long-term relationship with them), or give the kid up for abortion (typically to a conservative Christian couple who will raise the kid in that tradition), or try to raise the kid as a single mom (and possibly be at risk of having the kid get taken away by CPS, which again leads to adoption typically by a Christian conservative couple). The idea of simply marrying girls off at a young age to avoid fornication , and so that biological parents can raise their kids together, doesn't seem to occur to the Catholics, or they've rejected the idea because early marriage would be too controversial, or inconsistent with the idea that young women lack the maturity to enter into a marriage (a principle that in many cases serves as a handy loophole allowing a Catholic divorce, aka annulment , if a marriage doesn't work out).

While I support Roman Catholicism's goal of subordinating women as sex slaves and baby factories for their husbands, it seems that Comstock does not take patriarchal ideas to their logical conclusions to address many of the social ills about which she has expressed concern. For example, she often talks about the need to put a stop to workplace sexual harassment, including on Capitol Hill . The problem is that young, attractive women are in the workplace, where they encounter high-status men who have a natural desire to want to mate with them. It would be better if those girls got married no later than their early teens, so that they could spend their young womanhood in the marital home under the protection of their husbands. Men will often have no qualms about behaving in a sexually aggressive way toward women who are single (also known as unowned or abandoned property , since their fathers have left them to be taken by the first comer), but they will think twice about risking the consequences of trespassing on another man's property.

This would also address some of Jennifer Wexton's concerns, about how so many women are getting raped. If girls were not being put in high-risk situations, such as university frat parties where they get drunk to the point of passing out in the company of a bunch of libidinous young men, then they would probably not get raped so much. I don't blame the girls for this; I blame their fathers, and/or society (since society has limited fathers' ability to control their daughters), for encouraging, condoning, or permitting this type of behavior, or creating the circumstances where it's more likely to happen. They were supposed to look out for those girls' safety, and they didn't. Instead, they sent them into harm's way by paying for a higher education that could have been given to a promising young man with potential to serve as patriarch of a traditional family. As Senator Wexton knows, despite the best efforts of prosecutors, most rapes of this kind will not lead to successful rape prosecutions. This is a problem that needs to be dealt with through means other than the court system.

(Of course, some might argue that women who get raped in those types of circumstances were asking for it anyway, which was why they dressed that way and acted so provocatively, since getting gang-raped by a number of high-status men is a common female fantasy . That's probably true, but my point about how people are setting them up to get defiled stands. It doesn't really matter whether she supposedly "consented" or was "raped" anyway; those are just arbitrary social constructs that serve little purpose in such a context and are at any rate potentially subject to being revised and reinterpreted after the fact if changing circumstances make it seem convenient to do so. An example of this would be how Brock Turner 's "victim" claimed she was sexually assaulted after her boyfriend found out two Swedish bicyclists had caught her getting fingered by another man behind a dumpster.)

Women of childbearing age should be kept out of the workplace for a variety of other reasons too, besides sexual harassment. If they're going to put a career ahead of having kids, then they're probably not doing their part to continue the human race by producing high-quality offspring. But if they are going to have kids, then they're potentially inconveniencing the whole office by going on maternity leave. The office will have to either be shorthanded for awhile, or bring in a temp and train them to do the job, before ultimately letting the temp go upon the female employee's return and losing their investment in training him. If a man had been in that same permanent position, he could have stayed in his role while his wife had a kid, and continued to provide value to the company and progress in his career. There is a natural order in which men are the ones who devote themselves to their jobs so that women can stay home and devote themselves fully to childbearing and child rearing.

Career women miss opportunities to bond with their children by being there to hold them and breastfeed them and play with them and read to them and so on. Children generally are better taken care of by their own parents than by babysitters; certainly kids tend to feel more comfortable in their own homes with a parent or other family member who loves them, than in the home of a stranger who is taking care of them on a mercenary basis. Time kids are able to spend with the their parents rather than a babysitter can be used to offer them guidance and support to help prepare them for adulthood, as opposed to the babysitter's just doing the minimum of occasionally glancing away from a soap opera to make sure they don't wander out of the yard and into traffic; sadly, with both parents typically exhausted after work, most kids don't get a lot of parenting time.

Barbara Comstock wants to get more women into science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. But we are not doing girls any favors by telling them that they can be as competent at these fields as any man, or that their time would be better spent in these careers than at home having and raising kids. When they are not able to achieve as much as their male peers, they will feel like losers. They will also have a lethal effect on technological innovation in every organization they infiltrate, as they force an end to meritocratic practices and drive out the nerds who built everything from scratch.

Meanwhile, the women who started families and devoted themselves to those children will feel like they have accomplished something meaningful, and made a difference in the world. Those mothers don't need to get papers published in the academic press or make scientific discoveries or write software on a par with men, to feel successful. They can watch the progress of their sons and know that they have made their mark on the future of civilization. Those women's intelligence won't go to waste; the genes for it will be passed on to their children, with whom they can have intellectually stimulating conversations. The purpose of female intelligence is mostly to enable women to be suitable companions for men and the children they make together; and to serve as a cue to men that all else equal, those intelligent women have a better chance than other women of being able to produce intelligent offspring.

Most career women end up feeling tired and overburdened by their responsibilities. They sigh heavily , as though they are being compelled to carry the weight of the world on their weak backs. They're so different from the carefree young girls they used to be, or the happy mothers whose husbands bring home the bacon while they relax at home and enjoy spending time with their kids. The housewife gets to sip coffee in her pajamas and make her infant smile by speaking baby talk and playing peek-a-boo with her, while the career woman rushes in the early morning to put on her work clothes and go fight traffic. The career woman tells herself that having her own money gives her freedom, because now she can buy 300 pairs of shoes (most of which she'll wear maybe once) without having to deal with a husband complaining that she's making frivolous purchases that bury him in an avalanche of footwear when he opens the closet.

When James Damore published his essay, Google's Ideological Echo Chamber , career women hated him because they couldn't face the truth that they had invested in a path that wouldn't lead them to the kind of happiness and fulfillment they could have enjoyed as tradwives . They were trying to cope by deceiving themselves, and he dropped a truth bomb on them, so they had to get rid of him. But others will take up the fight, and the truth bombs will keep coming until we put an end to the feminist social experiment, which has gone the same way as communism and other egalitarian social experiments.

If women were truly as competent as men, they would not need constant handouts and other forms of affirmative action from men in order to try to achieve equality in fields like STEM. Already, men pay the majority of taxes , yet women want more freebies. They want WIC , and child support payments from men, and all kinds of other forms of wealth redistribution, to bail them out when they make irresponsible choices (such as bypassing all the good providers to go get impregnated by a sexy badboy ; or dumping a good husband, rather than raising the kid with him), that would otherwise lead them down the path to giving birth in the rain in dark alleys . Feminists want women to have rights, but they don't want women to have accountability for their choices.

Some might argue, "Women bear the burden of having and taking care of children, so they deserve to have men support them financially." Yes, but one could argue with equal validity, "The men who support women financially should be rewarded by those women for doing so." A lot of men are getting little or no benefit in exchange for what the state makes them pay to enable women to be mothers. The men who make child support payments, but don't get to have sex with their ex-wives anymore or spend any time with their kids, have not received a benefit that is proportionate to what they have to pay. The incels who have never slept with a woman at all, or even held a woman's hand , yet are forced to pay taxes for schools, welfare, and other support for other men's children, are arguably not receiving a benefit at all, because their genetic lines are coming to an end. (This is why they often refer to working for a living as " wagecucking ".)

In fact, those incels' paying for women to have sex with other men and bear children by those other men subsidizes, and thereby enables and encourages, those women's choosing those other men over them. It negates the advantage those incels would have otherwise been able to offer in the sexual marketplace, which was that they could provide for a family. So incels are actually incurring another cost, rather than receiving a benefit, in exchange for their contribution. If only a few women were getting away with this, it might serve their feminine imperative ; but since it's happening on a civilization-wide scale, it threatens the survival of the whole race because eventually, women will run out of cucks to exploit.

Feminism has made men less happy, but it has made women downright miserable, by depriving them of the relatively cushy life that used to be their birthright. From 1999, suicide rates among white women and white men increased by 60% and 28%, respectively. We need to get back to the wholesome American traditions of motherhood and apple pie if we want to restore harmony to relations between the sexes. Production of children and homebaked goods has been way down ever since women were told they should aspire for success according to the standards by which men are measured, rather than doing what would play more to their strengths. That needs to change. Let us remember what another white supremacist hero, Adolf Hitler, said in his speech on women

If I think to myself that a woman shall make an appearance at an adjudication, then I have to say: When that would be a woman who is close to me, and if I wanted to imagine my mother would be still alive and has to sit in front of a murder in a court and decide the verdict never, never! We don't want that! I also don't want an uniformed female police to walk around and run after scamps or criminals. These are all things we actually don't want. Then they come naturally and say promptly: "Excuse me, but you don't let them into the parliaments as well." Certainly, but only because I am also satisfied that the parliament doesn't raise the value of the woman, but it would only degrade her. I removed the men from the parliamentary service as well. In former times, in former times I was often told: "Don't you think that if you get the woman in the Reichstag that the woman would refine the manners of the Reichstag then and thereby?" I even have no interest to refine the Reichstag or to refine its manners at all, because whether honored, knighted or ennobled, is ranting or not, that is entirely the same. Above all, I am also convinced that, for example, the parliament at the time was nothing more than a sack of rotten apples. Now... you will say to me: "That's why you should put some sound ones into it, now!" No, I prefer to leave the sound ones out, lest they become rotten, too. It's better to let something die, which is destined to die. When I look around the world today, the picture from the papers that comes to mind is a woman's regiment in the Soviet Union for sharpshooting! Or a women's battalion of grenadiers in Spain! Or... All I can say to the representatives of this type of female equality: I would not be a man, if I wanted to tolerate such a thing. I experienced the war. I know how hard it is. I know how many men's nerves have been shattered by this war. I have often seen them return by the dozens, doddering, completely ruined and broken! The idea that a girl or a woman has to take it upon herself, I could have no respect for the German men then! Either they take responsibility for this or they shall resign! As long as we have a healthy male gender — and we National Socialists will ensure it — no female grenadiers and sharpshooters will be trained in Germany. That's no equality, but in reality inferior rights for women, because it's harder for women than for men. For her it is much more terrible than for men. I could say just as well that I am arming children in the future and sending them to war. We won't do it. But apart from that, before our very eyes there is a vast expanse of job opportunities and work area for the woman, because for us the woman has been the most faithful work and life companion of the man at all times. They often said, "You want to remove women from all professions!" On the whole, I will give her only the chance of being able to marry and to assist her to found an own family and to have children, because she would then — and this is my conviction now — benefit our people the most, of course. For that's clear, and you need to understand it from me, if I have a female lawyer in front of me these days and it doesn't matter how much she has achieved, and next to her is a mother of five, six, seven children and they are in great health and well-educated by her, then I want to say: From the eternal point of view of the eternal value of our people the woman — who is able to have children and has children and raised them and thereby gave our people the further ability to live in the future — has achieved more. She has done more. She assists us to avoid the death of our people.

Some libertarians would say that patriarchy is unlibertarian because women are self-owners . I would not categorize them as such. The category they fall into is closer to that of children , who emotionally bond with their fathers and need to be taken care of by them. A woman will always look to her husband or some other male authority figure as her leader; without such leadership, she is at a loss as to what to do.

One might argue, women should have freedom to choose their own mates (rather than have the choice made for them by their fathers) and then leave them, if they feel unhappy in the relationship. One of the first legal reforms that feminists typically try to make in a patriarchist country is to permit women to file for divorce. The problem with this is that it allows women to perpetrate frau