400 Scientific Papers Published In 2017 Support A Skeptical Position On Climate Alarm
A Growing Volume Of Evidence

Undercuts ‘Consensus’ Science

During the first 10 months of 2017, 400 scientific papers have been published that cast doubt on the position that anthropogenic CO2 emissions function as the climate’s fundamental control knob…or that otherwise question the efficacy of climate models or the related “consensus” positions commonly endorsed by policymakers and mainstream media.

These 400 new papers support the position that there are significant limitations and uncertainties inherent in our understanding of climate and climate changes. Climate science is not settled.

Modern temperatures, sea levels, and extreme weather events are neither unusual nor unprecedented. Many regions of the Earth are cooler now than they have been for most of the last 10,000 years.

Natural factors such as the Sun (106 papers), multi-decadal oceanic-atmospheric oscillations such as the NAO, AMO/PDO, ENSO (37 papers), decadal-scale cloud cover variations, and internal variability in general have exerted a significant influence on weather and climate changes during both the past and present. Detecting a clear anthropogenic forcing signal amidst the noise of unforced natural variability may therefore be difficult.

And current emissions-mitigation policies, especially related to the advocacy for renewables, are often costly, ineffective, and perhaps even harmful to the environment. On the other hand, elevated CO2 and a warmer climate provide unheralded benefits to the biosphere (i.e., a greener planet and enhanced crop yields).

Below are the two links to the list of 400 papers as well as the guideline for the lists’ categorization.

(Parts 1 and 2 are on the same page).

Solar Influence On Climate (106)

ENSO, NAO, AMO, PDO Climate Influence (37)

Modern Climate In Phase With Natural Variability (13)

Cloud/Aerosol Climate Influence (8)

Volcanic/Tectonic Climate Influence (4)

The Theoretical Greenhouse Effect As Climate Driver (11)

Climate Model Unreliability/Biases/Errors and the Pause (24)

Failing Renewable Energy, Climate Policies (12)

Wind Power Harming The Environment, Biosphere (7)

Elevated CO2 Greens Planet, Produces Higher Crop Yields (5)

Warming Beneficial, Does Not Harm Humans, Wildlife (4)

Warming, Acidification Not Harming Oceanic Biosphere (15)

Decreases In Extreme, Unstable Weather With Warming (3)

Urban Heat Island: Raising Surface Temperatures Artificially (5)

No Increasing Trends In Intense Hurricanes (3)

No Increasing Trends In Drought/Flood Frequency, Severity (3)

Natural CO2, Methane Sources Out-Emit Human Source (4)

Miscellaneous (7)

Lack Of Anthropogenic/CO2 Signal In Sea Level Rise (27)

No Net Warming During 20th (21st) Century (11)

A Warmer Past: Non-Hockey Stick Reconstructions (49)

Abrupt, Degrees-Per-Decade Natural Global Warming (7)

A Model-Defying Cryosphere, Polar Ice (30)

Recent Cooling In The North Atlantic (6)