Mueller met with ex-Ukraine president while Manafort was lobbying for him
Published time: 7 Apr, 2018 16:05 Edited time: 3 Aug, 2018 11:27

Special Counsel Robert Mueller is prosecuting former Trump campaign manager Paul Manafort on charges tied to lobbying for the former government of Ukraine. Mueller however, has his own history of working with Kiev.

Mueller is leading the investigation into collusion between the Trump campaign and the Kremlin, which has been alleged by Democrats and others. US President Donald Trump has called the investigation “the single greatest Witch Hunt in American history.”

In October last year, Mueller charged Manafort with conspiracy against the United States, conspiracy to launder money, failure to file reports of foreign bank and financial accounts, being an unregistered agent of a foreign principal, and false statements.

Read more Ex-Trump campaign manager Manafort indicted in US on 12 counts over Ukraine lobbying

None of the charges were related to Manafort’s work with the Trump campaign, however, but to his lobbying business for Ukraine’s former president, Viktor Yanukovych.

Since Yanukovych was seen as pro-Moscow, Russiagaters often point to this case as an example of “the collusion.”

For all Mueller’s zealotry in digging into the Trump team’s alleged foreign dalliances, the special counsel has kept quiet his own history of dealing with Yanukovych while he was a client of Manafort.

As director of the FBI, Mueller travelled to Ukraine to meet with Yanukovych in June 2013. The two men spoke about counter-terrorism operations and strengthening the US-Ukraine relationship. It did not seem to bother Mueller that the Obama administration was critical of Yanukovych, accusing him of being pro-Russian.

“Your visit is very interesting for Ukraine and relations between our law enforcement bodies have established good traditions of cooperation and communication in the course of 20 years.” the Ukrainian Embassy’s Facebook page quoted Yanukovych as saying.

app-facebook Embassy of Ukraine in the USA / Посольство України в США якынча 6 ел элек . . While in Ukraine, U.S. FBI Director Robert Mueller met with Ukraine's President Viktor Yanukovych “Ukraine counts on further cooperation with USA within the OSCE in order to enhance security in the countries of this organization,” the President noted. “We are grateful to American side for support of our efforts aimed at settlement of frozen conflicts, ensuring control over conventional arms in Europe and combating trafficking. We count on further support and cooperation with ... USA within the OSCE in order to enhance stability and security in the area which is under jurisdiction of the given organization,” the President said at the meeting with FBI Director Robert Mueller. The Head of State reminded that since the beginning of 2013, Ukraine had been presiding in the OSCE. “We determined priorities of our presidency in close cooperation with member-states of the OSCE. I am pleased to note that we have a constructive cooperation with Washington in this sphere,” the President emphasized. “Ukrainian-American cooperation efficiently develops in many spheres of mutual interest. Your visit is very interesting for Ukraine and relations between our law enforcement bodies have established good traditions of cooperation and communication in the course of 20 years. I am confident that there is a potential for further broadening of cooperation,” Viktor Yanukovych said. He stressed that Ukraine paid particular attention to the issue of combating terrorism. We have adopted a number of documents aimed at increasing the efficiency of such work. “The level of cooperation between central executive governmental bodies involved in anti-terrorist actions is pretty high. The Security Service elaborated respective documents, they were reviewed and approved by respective Presidential Decree,” the Head of State noted. The President emphasized that Ukraine is very close to signing the Association Agreement with the EU in November. “There are some preparations left but I hope that we will fulfill everything and sign the Agreement,” he said. In his turn, FBI Director Robert Mueller expressed gratitude to the President of Ukraine for the assistance provided after the explosions in Boston. “I would like to focus on the most important issue for us – the issue of combating terrorism. I would like to say thank you for the assistance provided to us after the Boston Marathon,” he noted. FBI Director also informed that in the course of his meetings in Ukraine, he planned to discuss a number of issues of mutual interest. Press office of President Viktor Yanukovych

Image of Press office of President Viktor Yanukovych Күбрәк карау 29 24 145

“I am confident that there is a potential for further broadening of cooperation.” The page was first dug up by the Daily Beast.

The FBI director also said “that in the course of his meetings in Ukraine, he planned to discuss a number of issues of mutual interest.” What these issues were was not specified.

One of the central topics of the Mueller-Yanukovych talks was the controversial Ukraine-EU association agreement. While it would have opened Ukraine’s borders to goods from the European Union, the treaty would have also invalidated the existing free-trade pacts with Russia, Ukraine’s largest trading partner at the time.

“There are some preparations left but I hope that we will fulfill everything and sign the Agreement,” Yanukovych said at the time of the meeting with Mueller.

One of the lobbyists working with Yanukovych to promote the association agreement was

Paul Manafort. Through two consulting firms, the Podesta Group (founded by Hillary Clinton’s ally) and Mercury LLC, Manafort lobbied the US Congress, attempting to convince them that Ukraine was heading in a pro-Western direction. Ukraine did not, and Yanukovych was deposed in a US-backed coup following protests against corruption, and for joining the EU.

A month before visiting Ukraine, Mueller journeyed to Moscow. There he again discussed counter-terrorism with Russian officials, the Daily Beast reported. Of course, this meeting was carried out at a time when maintaining normal relations with Moscow was not the stain on an American politician’s character it is today.

Indeed, following that meeting, Presidents Obama and Putin announced that the two countries would be cooperating more closely in the fight against terrorism. All of that seems like a distant memory now, as Mueller continues to investigate anyone who might have once had Russian dressing on their salad.

Manafort pleaded not guilty to Mueller’s charges, and remains on 24-hour GPS-monitored house arrest.