Drinking young people’s blood could be the secret to long-lasting health, scientists claim
DRINKING young people's blood could help you live longer and prevent age-related diseases, a study has found.

Blood factors taken from younger animals has been found to improve the later-life health of older creatures.

Getty - Contributor 2 More research is needed to measure the long-term effects of taking younger blood

The study, published in Nature, was conducted by researchers from University College London (UCL), who said it could reduce the chances of developing age-related disorders.

Geneticist Dame Linda Partridge said these included cancer and heart disease.

She told She told The Times : "I would say ageing is the emperor of all diseases."

"A lot of people regard ageing as 'natural' and that therefore you shouldn't interfere with nature. But we've always considered it an ethical imperative to cure illness where we find it."

Getty - Contributor 2 Two and a half litres of teenage blood plasma costs £6,200

The research is part of a wave of studies and trials backed by PayPal co-founder Peter Thiel at a San Francisco start-up called Ambrosia.

Separate trials by Ambrosia involved 70 participants, all 35 or older.

After being given plasma - the main component of blood - from volunteers aged 16 to 25, researchers noted improvements in biomarkers for various diseases.

Ambrosia currently offers teenage blood plasma to customers at a cost of £6,200 for two and a half litres.

The UCL trials showed older mice did not develop age-related diseases after being given young blood.

MOST READ IN NEWS B-TESTS HALF-CUT Hard-up police forced to 'slash drink-driving checks and drug arrests' BELT UP BOJO Theresa May gives Boris Johnson short shrift over his 'suicide belt' jibe TEEN GIRL PILL FEARS Girls aged 10-15 are 'poisoning themselves with booze and painkillers' 'VOYEUR CREEP' Landlord 'gave tenants instructions on when to shower and filmed them naked' DOWN BY THE SCHOOLYARD Family snaps of Sergei and Yulia Skripal emerge months after attack Booze 'con' Alcohol czar quits claiming health officials are in bed with drinks industry

The mice also maintained sharp cognitive function.

The opposite was true for younger mice injected with old blood.

The study did not: "Research in animals is needed to establish the long-term consequences and possible side effects."

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.