BREAKING: Democrats File TREASON Charges Against Trump, FBI, Giuliani…
In the wake of the CIA investigation that concluded Russia helped President-elect Donald Trump win the election, there has been an uproar from both Republicans and Democrats over the revelation. In addition, Trump’s dismissive response and his criticism of the CIA has caused disgust on both sides of the isle.

Now comes word that Democrats will file treason complaints against President-elect Trump, close Trump surrogate Rudy Giuliani, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, and FBI Director James Comey, who has been accused of knowing of Russia’s meddling in the election, but nonetheless chose to keep it quiet. He also curiously re-opened the investigation into Clinton’s emails right before the election. Many believe it influenced the outcome and gave Trump the presidency.

announced the plan on Twitter: democraticcoalition.org announced the plan on Twitter:

Here is their mission statement:

“The Democratic Coalition Against Trump (DCAT) is an arm of Keep America Great PAC. The coalition formed in the Spring of 2016, with the main goal of making sure that Donald Trump never became President. DCAT now exists to hold the Trump White House accountable, and is directly countering Donald Trump, along with Republican elected officials and candidates who support him, through aggressive digital and traditional advertising, grassroots action, in-depth opposition research, and a nationwide rapid-response team.”

The revelation of Russian meddling has resulted in both Republican and Democratic senators to call for an investigation. Here is part of the statement as The revelation of Russian meddling has resulted in both Republican and Democratic senators to call for an investigation. Here is part of the statement as reported by CNN:

“‘Congress’s national security committees have worked diligently to address the complex challenge of cybersecurity, but recent events show that more must be done,'” said Sens. Chuck Schumer, the incoming Senate Democratic leader, Sen. John McCain, the Armed Services Committee chairman, fellow Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham, and Sen. Jack Reed, the top Armed Services Committee Democrat, in a Sunday morning statement.” “While protecting classified material, we have an obligation to inform the public about recent cyberattacks that have cut to the heart of our free society. Democrats and Republicans must work together, and across the jurisdictional lines of the Congress, to examine these recent incidents thoroughly and devise comprehensive solutions to deter and defend against further cyber-attacks.”

And in a statement about FBI Director James Comey, Senator Harry Reid said:

“The FBI had this material for a long time but Comey, who is of course a Republican, refused to divulge specific information about Russia and the presidential election. Everyone should know “The FBI had this material for a long time but Comey, who is of course a Republican, refused to divulge specific information about Russia and the presidential election. Everyone should know WikiLeaks was involved from the very beginning. They leaked the information as if it was run by one of the great political operatives in America when in fact it was run by the political operatives in Russia. Russia has a pretty good way of cheating. Look at what they did with athletes.”

When pressed on Comey’s specific role, When pressed on Comey’s specific role, Reid said:

“I am so disappointed in Comey. He has let the country down for partisan purposes and that’s why I call him the new J Edgar Hoover, because I believe that, Reid added, calling for the director’s resignation.”

Trump, of course, dismissed the allegations and even went so far as to defend Russia, as he has done in the past.