WikiLeaks: Hillary Clinton Is Privately Against Gays & Gay Marriage
Hillary Clinton isn’t so fond of the gay community..

WikiLeaks released thousands of emails which show Hillary Clinton’s true views about Americans. In an email titled “Re: one chain on DOMA (Defense Of Marriage Act)” from 2015 we see that Hillary Clinton’s stance on Gay Marriage hasn’t changed since 2004.

In 2004, Hillary Clinton spoke against gay people and gay marriage. Clinton declared that “Marriage is a sacred bond between a man and a woman.”

In the leaked email Clinton staffers are stuck working around Clinton’s disapproval of gays. They try to tip-toe around the issue without offending the Clintons.

“I think everyone agrees we shouldn’t restate her argument. Question is whether she’s going to agree to explicitly disavow it. And I doubt it.” “I’m not saying double down or ever say it again. I’m just saying that she’s not going to want to say she was wrong about that, given she and her husband believe it and have repeated it many times. Better to reiterate evolution, opposition to DOMA when court considered it, and forward looking stance. “

Clinton seems confident she has gay voters in her pocket — but that may change.

Many gay voters are realizing the damage she could bring to LGBT communities. An influx of refugees from anti-gay countries is a major conflict with deadly implications for gays. Many refugees share a common value that they should kill gays by throwing them off buildings or executed if outed.

These values arrive with refugees — and they don’t dissipate after time spent in the west. Over half of UK’s muslim population thinks homosexuality should be illegal.

This reality works to Donald Trump’s advantage. Trump is the only candidate to speak firmly against radical islamic terrorists. Trump is growing a gay audience at a very important time. The Orlando Terrorist Attack was the worst mass shooting in modern America. As soon as the tragedy occurred, citizens looked towards our leaders to see how they would react.

Barack Obama said the following:

“During his [Obama’s] speech, he gave condolences to the families for the death of their loved ones, but was quick to place the blame for this at the feet of those who support the Second Amendment.”

The issue is that Democrats aren’t discussing the reason this attack took place. Islamic terrorism is on the rise, their anti-gay ideology is killing our citizens and the so-called “gay supporting” Democrats have turned a blind eye.