ABC: Experts say flu shot potentially caused the flu epidemic (Shocker, in mainstream no less)
(>> note from editor: this alleged health professionals profile takes you to her site where she says she’s a Vampire. Interesting combo. She is also misquoting us as others point out. She says the flu shot is 30% effective. Lol nope) she says That is where you lost credibility (no sorry we did not). You have freedom of speech but so do the people who work in the health care system (Please learn basic law 101. You have no rights on our site but we will leave your post to show your odd contradictions) and know that your statement, "This year's flu shot is 0% effective", is simply not true (we never said that we said for people over 65! It is. Watch the doctor’s video above). I do not feel that the elderly woman was insulting the other woman. I feel that she kind of just gave her a dose of reality. What she didn't mention, that I found surprising, is that number one, MOST Americans don't WANT to eat that stuff and two: That stuff does not "cure" or "prevent" cancer (more lies from one dangerous alleged health care worker). There is no known medical cure or prevention of Cancer. (If you work in health care you need to quit now with this stupidity) It also seemed to be critical of people who eat a different more filling and/or satisfying diet, ie: "fat people". Cancer effects people from ALL walks of life. There is absolutely ZERO evidence that cancer effects heavy set individuals more than skinny set individuals. The thought itself is laughable. (No one said that. More lies) This article is about the FLU SHOT. Considering the article, I'd say that the OP was completely off topic and way off base. With age comes wisdom. Most Americans do NOT have the time to prepare such things on a daily basis. Getting kids OR adults to eat ONLY vegetables cooked in fatty oils isn't healthy number one and number two, good luck trying to get them to eat it. There was one meat mentioned. So basically, the "good advice" was to serve your family the exact same dinner every single night that half the family will most likely refuse to eat. I wouldn't eat it. Did you know there is around 750-800mg of Potassium in one large baked potato? You have to eat the skin though! I always do!! So, based on your logic, you should definitely eat 🍠 potato skins every single night!! Now this is horrible advice but I'm using it as an example. My mother has low potassium but is allergic to bananas. (Bananas actually don't have as much Potassium in them as you might think. Only about 235mg for one large banana.) There is a whole plethora of foods out there that are LOADED with potassium! Avocados, potatoes, sweet potatoes and several others. I'm not going to list everything to make a simple point. The POINT is that was her advice GOOD advice? SURE - IF you're on a diet trying to lose weight and want to eat the same meal every single night. That is ALL it's good for. There is NO miracle food to "prevent" flu or cancer. I don't want to insult the poor lady, but the truth is that it's not the best advice in the world... As for the elderly woman who responded, you could have been just a tad more respectful or gracious. I'm 35 years old so I don't really want to go there because MY mother taught me how to respect my elders. She also taught me self-respect and the biggest lesson... Common SENSE! So how about we just stick to the TOPIC here: THE FLU SHOT!!!!!!!!! 😂😂 I can tell you that I have the strongest immune system of anyone I know. I have had the flu shot for the past 5/6 years. I've never had the flu a DAY IN MY LIFE. I don't EVER get sick. I received the flu shot this year, as usual, a couple months ago and I've been sick as a dog for a WEEK! I am grateful for this article. If it holds water, I'm going to sue the pharmacy that gave it to me, the doc who gave it to my toddler and the company who manufactured it. I haven't been sick in YEARS. Thank you for your article. I will be doing my research today!!!