Charleston Shooter Is Actor US Marine Crisis Actor As Jade Helm Stipulates (Video)
Nothing surprises me anymore ! Just in time to incite more rites this time whites against the government . And then joining in over the flag controversies , the blacks . Then Marshall law !!! They are pulling the stops to get Marshall law going . But first divide the people so they dont have to fight all 320 million of them . The flag did not stand for slavery ! It stood for 13 colonies that wanted to be separate from the northern states . WHY ? Because Ephraim and Judea even though not in Israel still wanted supreme right of self leadership . God blessed Ephraim with the name Israel and the greatest blessings , but gave the kingship to Judea . Since the time of Jacob they have fought and even through the bible Israel ( Ephraim ) and Judea have wared against each other . Today Ephraim is America and Judea is in a lot of the southern states ( Bible belt ) . Many of Judea has gone back to the land Israel . They are not Israel but Ephraim and Manasseh ( Joseph sons ) were given to them by Jacob the name Israel . America and Britain are now Israel . And Judea is our brother . That’s why up until this administration we have stood by them . We are the lost tribes of Israel . Read 48 and 49 of Genisis . It tells what kind of place we would be moved to . But towards the last days we must rejoin Judea and fight together to over come Esau ( Vatican , NWO ) and Ishmael ( Muslims ) that will join to war against the lost tribes (Israel) and Judea . They know who we are . We are uniformed to who we are . White type A blood type people are Hebrew , Israel . This is why they hate us . Another reason is God did not except them ( Esau , Jacobs brother and Ishmael , Abrahams other son by the Egyptian , Haggar ) for kingship and heirs to his promises . This does not mean they can not enter Heaven . God choose Israel ( speaking of all the brother tribes ) to be examples to the rest of the world . But they have been poor examples . Ephraim the leader of 10 of the brother tribes got remove from his territory because of idolatry . Search the internet ( Gods and Ephraims name on mountains of Israel , to which they will return soon ) . And again today he will be remove from America because he worships everything other than God . But this time those left will be returning home to the land , Israel . America is about to be destroyed . All this that is going on now is Esau’s doings to destroy Israel so they can hav a self made kingship which God rejects . Esau’s ( vatican , NWO ) next move is to divide America and Europe and move into destroy them . They have rounded up Russia , China and Iran to help . In the process Esau ( Vatican , NWO ) will claim rights in old Jerusalem in order to build a temple on Gods land as defiance to Gods rejecting their kingship of Esau and choosing Jacob . Then this will divide them and the Muslims because They already have their own temple on Gods land . They will become angery when Esau ( Vatican , NWO ) tells them that their temple is not the supreme temple . And that they must honor the new NWO temple . War will break out between them . Esau ( Vatican , NWO leader) will be destroyed . The Vatican will cease to exist . But for now this flag and acting is all from the NWO . Human nature wants fighting among each other . But trust me this is the last thing needed in this problem . That is unless you want Marshall law , FEMA camps , guillotines , population thinning and receiving their chip that has power to control you . That is if you get to live ! Almost like loading a 2 chamber gun and spinning it and then holding it to your head . Will you win or loose . Join them and in the end you will loose . Promise you !