Starbucks Crumbles As Investigator Finds 30% Of Coffee Tests Positive
Advertisement

Starbucks gets bad news from BBC investigation that found 30 percent of iced drinks feature fecal bacteria.

Many people around the world enjoy iced coffee and other cool drinks from baristas employed by Starbucks, Caffe Nero, and Costa Coffee. However, they may want to think twice before ordering again. The BBC’s “Watchdog” program performs consumer affairs checks on popular businesses. Their latest discovery found fecal bacteria in samples from the three popular coffee chains.

Yes, that’s right, bacteria that is present in feces is now included with customer’s ice at Starbucks, Caffe Nero, and Costa Coffee.

Samples taken from various stores found changeable levels of contamination. Head of policy at the Chartered Institute of Environmental Health Tony Lewis said that the amounts were “concerning.” He added that the bacteria “should not be present at any level – never mind the significant numbers found.”

Advertisement

The investigation tested the cleanliness of tables, trays, and ice at 30 different branches. Not surprisingly, the discovery comes right on the heels of Starbucks’ announcement to employ refugees from third-world countries.

Last week, Starbucks renewed the pledge it made on January 29, 2017 to hire 10,000 refugees, after President Trump announced his temporary travel ban. The former liberal CEO Howard Schultz wrote an open letter to employees that stated, “We are living in an unprecedented time, one in which we are witness to the conscience of our country, and the promise of the American Dream, being called into question.”

Starbucks announced in January that it would hire 10,000 refugees in response to President Trump’s travel ban. The move has backfired.

When the Supreme Court upheld part of the ban last week, the company immediately announced its commitment to hire another 2,500 refugees for their locations in England and other European countries.

Advertisement

The original pledge cost the company significantly in the States. Not only did social media make much of the un-American stance, the backlash plummeted brand sentiment and sales. Trump supporters boycotted the coffee giant, and according to YouGov BrandIndex, consumer participation levels fell by over 60 percent.

The problem with hiring and accepting refugees is the cultural hygienic difficulties it creates. In Germany and France, the situation is so dire that a company has invented a “multicultural toilet.” Despite pictogram instructions, third world invaders don’t understand how to use Western facilities.

“Many migrants will have never seen toilet paper before,” writes one Deutsche Welle journalist. He added, “refugees nationwide have squatted on toilet rims or the floor of the bathroom… others have relieved themselves in the shower stalls, leaving behind human excrement on the floors.”

Costa Coffee was the worst offender with over 70 percent contamination. Advertisement

Islam instructs followers concerning rules and practices “to be followed when answering the call of nature.” One stipulates that people use their fingers to clean themselves, and “if there are still traces,” of excrement people are told to wash them with water. Genital cleaning “with stones and similar materials” is also considered an “acceptable substitute for cleaning them with water.”

The bathroom facilities of Westerners confuse Muslim refugees who use their hands as toilet paper.

Naturally, those type of cleansing techniques are not compatible with Western cultures that use toilet paper, soap, and water. After reading the rules of hygiene, it’s little wonder that “fecal coliforms” were found in places where refugees frequently touch.

The investigation discovered that Starbucks and Caffe Nero tested positive for the bacteria in three out of 10 samples taken. Costa Coffee had the worst contamination. Seven out of 10 samples tested positive for fecal bacteria in drinks.

Fecal bacteria was found in the ice of three major coffee chains, including Caffe Nero, Starbucks, and Costa Coffee.

Advertisement

The BBC has reported that all three chains claim to have “taken action.” Costa said that it updated its ice-handling guidelines and was “introducing new ice equipment storage.” Starbucks and Caffe Nero said they were going to perform their own investigations.

Rather than looking into the violations more closely or buying new ice containers, the coffee providers might consider the toilet practices of the people they hire. Better yet, have “refugees” actually assimilate to the culture where they flee instead of keeping 1,000 year old practices of using their hands to wipe themselves.

Whether the investigation will influence sales in the United States is anyone’s guess. Starbucks is already reeling under the backlash of patriot purchasers, another blow could seriously jeopardize their strangle hold on over-priced coffee drinks in America.