BREAKING: Democrat House Votes In Favor Of Illegal Immigrant Voting, Report Says
The Democrat-controlled House of Representatives voted on Friday to defend local governments that choose to allow illegal aliens to vote in their elections.

"The vote marks a stunning reversal from just six months ago, when the chamber — then under GOP control — voted to decry illegal immigrant voting," The Washington Times reported. "The 228-197 vote came as part of a broader debate on Democrats’ major legislative priority this year, HR 1, the 'For the People Act,' which includes historic expansions of voter registration and access, as well as a major rewrite of campaign finance laws."

"It sounds like I’m making it up," Rep. Dan Crenshaw (R-TX) said. "What kind of government would cancel the vote of its own citizens, and replace it with noncitizens?"

"Today I offered a motion to recommit #HR1 reaffirming that only US citizens should have the right to vote," Crenshaw added on Twitter. "Dems rejected it. Next time you go to the ballot box, keep that in mind. The future of their party is in cities like San Fran, where illegals can vote. Let that sink in."





Dems rejected it.



Next time you go to the ballot box, keep that in mind. The future of their party is in cities like San Fran, where illegals can vote. Let that sink in. Today I offered a motion to recommit #HR1 reaffirming that only US citizens should have the right to vote.Dems rejected it.Next time you go to the ballot box, keep that in mind. The future of their party is in cities like San Fran, where illegals can vote. Let that sink in. March 8, 2019

The Times noted that Crenshaw pointed to last year's vote when 49 Democrats crossed the aisle and stood against illegal alien voting. Only six Democrats joined Republicans on Friday.

"Federal law already prohibits non-citizens from voting in elections for federal office," Fox News reported. "But the GOP motion referenced how San Francisco is allowing non-citizens, including illegal immigrants, to register to vote in school board elections."

Lauren Fine, a spokeswoman for House GOP Whip Steve Scalise, told Fox News that the Democrats who stood against illegal alien voting in the past and who flipped and supported it on Friday will have to explain their actions to voters.

"These 41 Democrats must now answer to voters why they were against illegal immigrants voting in elections six months ago, but are suddenly in favor of it now," Fine said.

"We've watched Democrats prioritize illegal immigrants over American citizens for a while now," Scalise tweeted. "But today they took it a step further by blocking our motion to prevent illegal immigrants from voting in elections—effectively devaluing the vote of legitimate voters."

We've watched Democrats prioritize illegal immigrants over American citizens for a while now. But today they took it a step further by blocking our motion to prevent illegal immigrants from voting in elections—effectively devaluing the vote of legitimate voters. pic.twitter.com/mEnXNCSsAA March 8, 2019

Democrats' efforts to encourage illegal alien voting is not new as far-left members of the party like failed Georgia Democratic gubernatorial candidate Stacy Abrams have openly called for illegal aliens to participate in elections.

"What is your view about some municipalities, like San Francisco, who have decided that it’s okay for some non-citizens to vote in local elections?" PBS host Margaret Hoover asked Abrams in January.

"I think there’s a difference between municipal and state and federal," Abrams responded. "Part of municipality — I’m not arguing for it or against it, but I will say, having been deputy city attorney, there’s a very — the granularity of what cities decide is so specific, as to, I think, allow for people to be participants in the process without it somehow undermining our larger democratic ethic that says that you should be a citizen to be a part of the conversation."

"So, in some cases, you would be supportive of non-citizens voting?" Hoover pressed.

"I wouldn’t oppose it," Abrams answered.

WATCH: