SICK: Artist Who Painted Obama's Official Portrait Known For Painting…
SICK: Artist Who Painted Obama’s Official Portrait Known For Painting Blacks Beheading Whites

The artist who painted former President Obama’s portrait for the Portrait Gallery, part of the Smithsonian Institution, has an interesting past. While reviewing previous works by artist Kehinde Wiley, it was discovered that he has a great fondness for painting black women beheading white women. Both beheading pieces are titled “Judith beheading Holofernes”, referencing a story in the Book of Judith , which involves a beautiful woman who seduces an invading general before he is able to destroy their land, gets him drunk, and then decapitates him.

Typical artists from the Rennaissance era have placed Judith in the role of a scriptural savior, “a type of the praying Virgin or the church or as a figure who tramples Satan and harrows Hell. ” Given the historical context and how Wiley recreated it in his works, is hard to interpret his use of this theme as anything other than a blatant statement of racism; black women are the powerful angels of the earth, conquering the white devils.

Can you imagine for a second if George W. Bush, or any other former president, decided on a painter who was famous for depicting white people killing black people to paint his official portrait? It’s hard to imagine, right? Yea, that’s because it’s disgusting and backward.

Users on Twitter expressed outrage at commissioning an artist with such obvious racist leanings to paint the portrait of an American president:

The Obama portrait "artist" Kehinde Wiley is shown here with one of his works, a black woman beheading a white woman. pic.twitter.com/EapnqQyRNv — DSA Cornelius Rye (@CorneliusRye2) February 12, 2018

https://twitter.com/VancityMaggie/status/963146263586783232

Also by Obama portrait painter Kehinde Wiley: This darling little number. I just LOVE how he blended the floral notes with the beheading of the white kid. pic.twitter.com/m0e6dnXWYt — Not THAT Ben Crystal; the other one. (@Bennettruth) February 12, 2018

@seanhannity @RealJamesWoods pic.twitter.com/8kyFQYApCm Obama portrait painter @kehindewiley , undoubtedly in the name of "artistic license", butchered history by depicting Caravaggio's classic "Judith Beheading Holofernes (1602)" as a vile image of a black woman decapitating a white woman. #TCOT — BobCav (@BobCav) February 12, 2018