Harvey Weinstein Gives Names of Hollywood & Washington DC Pedophiles to FBI

Disgraced movie mogul cuts deal by naming elite pedophilia network to law enforcement

Now, it seems, he is using all the information, on the depraved crimes that take place in the upper reaches of society, that he has gathered over the years to his advantage, as his "get out of jail free card".

Weinstein has been part of America's oligarchy for decades and has used his power, wealth, and political reach to bully and rape those in weaker positions than himself for far too long.

Want to Silence Your Liberal Friends in 17 Seconds Flat? Show Them This

According to sources within the FBI, Weinstein has offered up the names of some of the most powerful and influential people in the United States in connection with pedophilia, child pornography , and human trafficking

At this point, it's not clear what sort of deal will be made in return for the information, if a deal will be made at all.

It has now become crystal clear that Weinstein has just been the tip of the iceberg, and according to the New York Times, the floodgates have well and truly been opened in Hollywood

NY Times reports : In recent days, the singer Bjork , the “Riverdale” actress Lili Reinhart and the “Inside Edition” correspondent Lisa Guerrero lodged new accusations against other men who work in entertainment.

The singer and actress Courtney Love accused the powerful Creative Artists Agency of punishing her after she raised questions about Mr. Weinstein’s behavior in 2005, and a recently unearthed video clip of Ms. Love making the charge has gone viral.

The model Cameron Russell started a thread on her Instagram account on misconduct by men in fashion. It has led to more than 50 models anonymously sharing their stories of harassment.

At issue now is whether or not Hollywood can continue its old way of doing business, with self-styled “outlaw” executives and auteurs getting away with sexual misconduct as lawyers and publicists protect them.

“I think it’s upsetting and devastating, all of the stories that have come out,” said Nina Jacobson, a film producer who was formerly the president of the Walt Disney Company’s Buena Vista Motion Pictures Group.

“But I think the floodgates being opened is something that had to happen and that finally brings a subject to the surface that has sort of gone unchecked for countless years.”

Beginning with an article about the allegations against Mr. Weinstein that The New York Times published on Oct. 5, more than 30 accusers have stepped forward with charges of harassment, assault and even rape against the mogul.

The industry took a step toward that on Monday when the Producers Guild of America moved to terminate Mr. Weinstein’s membership and issued a statement that seemed to catch up with the wave of disapproval sweeping social media.

“Sexual harassment of any type is completely unacceptable,” it said in part.

“This is a systemic and pervasive problem requiring immediate industrywide action.”

On Saturday, the board of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences stripped Mr. Weinstein of his academy membership.