Hotel Worker Vanishes After Saying Stephen Paddock 'Didn't Have Many Bags'

Valet said suspected shooter was a 'normal guy' - social media accounts scrubbed

| @NeonNettle By: Jay Greenberg on 10th October 2017 @ 8.06pm

© Neon Nettle Hotel worker Chad Nishimura vanished after stating Paddock didn't have many bags

A valet worker from the Mandalay Bay hotel, who parked the suspected Las Vegas shooting gunman's car, has mysteriously vanished after giving an interview saying Stephen Paddock was a "normal guy" who "didn't have many bags". Chad Nishimura gave a statement to Moanike’ala Nabarro, a reporter for Hawaiian ABC affiliate, KITV4 News. The article has now been deleted from the KITV4 News website after it appeared to go against the "official" mainstream media narrative that "lone wolf" gunman Paddock had managed to get enough guns for a small army into his hotel room completely undetected. The most disturbing part though is that Hawaii native Nishimura has completely vanished since the report was published, with all of his social media accounts being scrubbed from the internet. Friends and colleagues say he has been "totally unreachable for days" since shortly after the horrific massacre that left 59 dead and hundreds more injured.

The article offered a refreshing perspective from someone who had met and spoken to Paddock shortly before the attack took place and gave an entirely different version of the man who "acted alone" that is being reported by the MSM. Nishimura told the ABC affiliate that Paddock "seemed normal" and that he "didn’t have any bags with him upon arrival." Perhaps you could explain away the removal of the article as being down to higher-ups at ABC taking issue with a report that conflicts with the narrative they are pushing on the public, but why would Chad Nishimura also disappear and delete all of his social media accounts? Could this report have put the whole "lone wolf" story in jeopardy or did he know something else that he may have also gone public with? People who realized the original article had been deleted have been Tweeting to the network that published the report, KITV4 News, to try and get answers but have had no response.

4chan users have archived the full story once it became apparent that the reports regarding this encounter were being erased from the internet. Twitter users also tried to reach out to Nabarro regarding the retraction of her story, however, there has been no response as of yet. Another curious anecdote of this whole story is that the bio for the KITV4 reporter says that she is a weather reporter, but why would a weather reporter report on such a sensitive story as this? Here is the full report as it was originally published: A Kamehameha graduate working as a valet at the Mandalay Bay Resort said he parked the shooter's car on Saturday. The gunman, 64-year-old Stephen Paddock, checked his car into the hotel on Saturday morning.

Valet Chad Nishimura, who is from Mililani, said he spoke briefly with Paddock. "Just in shock, really. It's scary to know that I was close to someone that was that dangerous. I would've never thought. He seemed like a normal guy. When he came in, nothing too weird about him. He didn't have any crazy bags with him that I can remember. We are a convention hotel so we have a bunch of people that have boxes and multiple carts worth of stuff. There's nothing weird that I can remember," Nishimura said. Nishimura and hundreds of employees at Mandalay Bay are cooperating with FBI agents as investigations continue. A number of people from Hawaii were at Sunday night's concert or nearby. Social media helped connect family and friends worried about their loved ones. Tara Spangler, originally from Pa'ia Maui, was working close to the concert venue, at the Hooter's Casino.

She posted on her Facebook page that she was safe but said shooting victims fleeing the concert, swarmed into the casino. "You can just see towels of blood everywhere and people walking past and they have like blood spots on their shirts and even on their face. I remember asking a girl, 'Hey are you OK?' Because she was just covered in blood and she said, 'Yeah, (she was shaking) and said this is not my blood,'" Spangler said. Spangler said they could hear bullets firing in the distance. Fearing for her own life, she hid inside a closet.

© KITV4 A screenshot of the report that was grabbed before it was deleted

When searching Chad Nishimura's social media accounts, it just leads to dead ends after his profiles have all been shut down. READ MORE: Second Shooter Arrested Day After Las Vegas Massacre: Mainstream Media Blackout His Facebook page now just has an error screen that says the page was removed. Even his Linkedin profile has been taken down. Here are some of the screenshots of the search results:

© Facebook Chad Nishimura's Facebook profile has been deleted after he disappeared

© Linkedin Even Chad Nishimura's Linkedin profile has been shut down after he vanished

Chad Nishimura's account seems to prove that Paddock didn't carry bags of heavy machine guns and other deadly weapons up to his room. One of the biggest gaps in the official story is how he couldn've taken all those weapons up to his room and remain completely undetected. This report of "normal guy" Paddock arriving at the hotel without much luggage totally scratches that theory. This is the reason it has been covered up, though as it does fit the mainstream media version of events, and it's the reason this report barely saw the light of day before it was scrubbed from existence. Now, the question remains: What happened to Nishimura and what else did he know that needed to be so desperately covered-up..?