The Frugal Lifestyle Of The King Of Thrift

Less is more, someone once said, and that certainly has proved true for Sam Walton. Starting out in Des Moines as an $85-a-month trainee for J.C. Penney, he forged the chain of Wal-Mart discount stores and, with a nickel here and a dime saved there, amassed a family fortune of $6.3 billion. He is

(as of this writing) richer than anyone named Rockefeller, Du Pont, Trump, Kennedy, Perot or, indeed, Anderson.

With his money, as Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Vance Trimble notes, Walton could ``loll around Palm Springs, whoop it up in New York, take the sun off Monte Carlo, drive a Lamborghini roadster, drape his wife in sables or build his own Taj Mahal on an Ozark mountaintop, as John D. Rockefeller`s grandson did.`` Thus far, Walton has exercised none of these options.

To the despair of the nation`s decorators, he lives in a modest house in a small town in Arkansas a few blocks from one of his warehouses. He keeps a dusty pickup truck in the driveway, a dusty Chevy sedan in the garage and a couple of muddy bird dogs in the yard. Each weekday, after breakfast at a local Days Inn, he drives the pickup, missing two hubcaps, to his office, a cubicle 8 by 12 feet. There, beside the secretarial pool, amid stacks of papers, he settles in at his desk, furniture that one visitor describes as having an ``early Holiday Inn`` look.

This could, of course, be a bizarre front for a James Bond-style villain who uses his fantastic wealth to fuel private fantasies in a retreat of incredible lavishness and decadence, hidden underneath a mountain. But Trimble, born in Arkansas, an hour`s drive from Wal-Mart headquarters, doesn`t think so. In this chatty account, he tells how Walton, a big man on campus and a Sunday school teacher at the University of Missouri, structured a career around high volume, low costs and minimum-wage labor, blowing away local merchants from Virginia to Arizona.

For students interested in careers in low-echelon retailing, the formula is hard work, attention to detail, thrift, retailing instinct and luck. It also helps to make sure that your leases have renewal clauses. Walton forgot that when he opened his first store, a Ben Franklin franchise in the remote farming town of Newport, Ark. It was a success and he lost it to the landlord. Stunned, he started over, adding such hot items as hula hoops that he made from nine-foot lengths of plastic pipe in 14 colors. In 1962, he cottoned onto discounting. The result, Wal-Mart, with 1,300 stores, had $20 billion in sales last year, making it the nation`s third largest retail operation (behind K mart and Sears) with, it claims, the highest earnings.