Robertson: Global Warming Won’t Affect America Because God is Protecting Trump
Pat Robertson

Televangelist Televangelist Pat Robertson has released some predictions for the New Year. And he claims that the United States will be protected from the ravages of climate change because of President Donald Trump.

“A few years ago, God came to me in a dream and said that if America elected Trump, he would protect us from the effects of global warming,” said Robertson on “The 700 Club.” “America had been sliding away from God, what with the ‘60s and Obama, but now we are back in God’s good graces, nothing bad is going to befall us.”

Like Robertson, the majority of Evangelicals are still solidly behind the bumbling Trump, who was recently accused of running national security based on his gut. Like Robertson, the majority of Evangelicals are still solidly behind the bumbling Trump, who was recently accused of running national security based on his gut. Eighty-one percent of Evangelicals backed Trump.

However, fundamentalist preachers don’t have a great track record when it comes to making predictions. According to However, fundamentalist preachers don’t have a great track record when it comes to making predictions. According to Right Wing Watch , self-proclaimed prophet Mark Taylor predicted that Republicans would win the midterm elections.

“There will be no ‘Blue Wave.’ A lot of people are talking about a ‘Red Wave,’ but it’s actually going to be a ‘Red Tsunami’ is what the Lord is showing me,” he continued,” said Taylor on the “USAWatchdog” show. “‘Because you’re seeing things right now; you’re seeing the resignations; you’re seeing the highest amount of resignations ever,’ Taylor said. ‘You’re seeing people resign; people like Paul Ryan are saying they’re not running again.’”

Another fundamentalist prophet, Kat Kerr, had an even crazier idea She claimed that Democrats, recently elected to the House of Representatives, were undercover Republicans.

“Similarly, self-proclaimed ‘prophetess’ Kat Kerr declared that her guarantee of a red tsunami had also been accurate, insisting that lots of the Democrats who had been elected to the House of Representatives were secretly Republican ‘scouts’ sent to infiltrate the party,” said Right Wing Watch.

Kerr also claimed she had “divine authority” to stop natural disasters such as Hurricane Florence and the California wildfires.

By Rondell Pettus