Foes lash Kerry for Vietnam War words

Atrocity allegations from 1971 raise ire

More than any single figure, Kerry's opponents say, he was responsible for creating the image of American troops as rabid criminals.

As Sen. John Kerry's campaign gains momentum, conservative critics are attacking his anti-war activism in the years after his return from Vietnam, saying Kerry slandered veterans with his 1971 Senate testimony that alleged atrocities by U.S. soldiers.

"We feel that those people who protested against the war on moral grounds, that's an honorable thing, but Kerry went over the line," said Jerry Kiley, a spokesman for an ad hoc group of activists who call themselves Vietnam Veterans Against John Kerry.

"He painted all Vietnam veterans as war criminals. We feel he's a traitor to the Vietnam veterans of this country who fought and died in a cause that they felt was just," Kiley said.

The sharp accusations offer one measure of how that distant conflict still divides the nation and shadows the presidential campaign. President Bush's spotty 1972 attendance in an Air National Guard unit also has come under fire.

At issue for the Massachusetts Democrat are 94 words he uttered during more than two hours of Senate testimony and questioning 33 years ago. Was Kerry accurate? Or does he bear a singular responsibility for smearing American soldiers, as his political opponents contend?

In rumpled combat fatigues, the battlefield-decorated, 27-year-old former Navy lieutenant shocked the nation with his denunciation of the war's political and moral failings.

Describing a conference held three months earlier by Vietnam Veterans Against the War, the protest group he helped lead, Kerry said:

"We had an investigation in which 150 honorably discharged and many very highly decorated veterans testified to war crimes committed in Southeast Asia, not isolated incidents but crimes committed on a day-by-day basis with the full awareness of officers at all levels of command.

"They told the stories [that] at times they had personally raped, cut off ears, cut off heads, taped wires from portable telephones to human genitals and turned up the power, cut off limbs, blown up bodies, randomly shot at civilians, razed villages in a fashion reminiscent of Genghis Khan."

Since then, Republicans have charged that Kerry's searing rhetoric demoralized U.S. troops and may have even contributed to their high casualty count. Is that a fair characterization? Were his charges correct?

"In the context of the time, he is trying to convince the Congress and the American public about the wrongness of the war, and in doing so, he occasionally turns to hyperbole to get his point across. But the general thrust of his statement about [U.S. military tactics] that included the razing of villages and killing of civilians is true," said Oakton Community College history professor Richard Stacewicz, author of a 1997 book about the veterans protest movement.