Anthony Bourdain Was About to Expose an Elite Pedophile Ring Before He Died

Journalist wanted to investigate Atlanta child trafficking network

| @NeonNettle By: Jay Greenberg on 9th June 2018 @ 12.48pm

© press Anthony Bourdain was found dead this week

As the world still reels in shock at the news that journalist Anthony Bourdain has been found dead, evidence is now emerging that the mainstream reporter was about to expose an elite pedophile ring just before he died.

According to CNN, 61-year-old Bourdain was in France working on an upcoming episode of his award-winning CNN TV show, "Parts Unknown."

His best friend Eric Ripert, the French chef, found Bourdain unresponsive in his hotel room Friday morning, having died of an apparent hanging.

Although Mr. Bourdain's death has been officially declared a suicide, many see his untimely passing a suspicious and unexpected.

Hillary Clinton knew about Weinstein "for years"

Bourdain was an open critic of Harvey Weinstein and made no secret of his desire for the disgraced former Hollywood mogul to face justice.

During his criticisms of Weinstein, he openly stated that Hillary Clinton had full knowledge of the sexual abuse, and had done so "for years.," saying:

"know what Hillary Clinton is NOT? She's not stupid. Or unsophisticated about the world. The Weinstein stories had been out there for years"

Bourdain’s girlfriend, actress Asia Argento, is one of the victims who accused Weinstein of raping her.

© press Anthony Bourdain said he was threatened by Hillary Clinton's 'operatives'

Threatened by Clinton

Just over a month ago, Mr. Bourdain revealed that he had been threatened by Clinton's representatives, saying:

"..and I am in no way an HRC fan. I’ve been on the receiving end of her operatives’ wrath. And it ain’t fun,"

It’s no secret that people who cross the Clintons' path end up dead… Usually from suicide.

Just this week, famous designer and Clinton Foundation member, Kate Spade reportedly killed herself.

Are Spade’s and Bourdain’s deaths both coincidences?

know what Hillary Clinton is NOT? She's not stupid. Or unsophisticated about the world. The Weinstein stories had been out there for years — Anthony Bourdain (@Bourdain) October 11, 2017 ..and I am in no way an HRC fan. I’ve been on the receiving end of her operatives’ wrath. And it ain’t fun, — Anthony Bourdain (@Bourdain) May 2, 2018

© press CNN refuses to report on the child trafficking bust that rescued 160 children

Elite pedophile rings

More recently, following news of a major child trafficking bust, sources are stating that Bourdain was planning on running "an exposé" and the sex slave network.

Despite reports that 160 children were rescued and will almost 150 arrested during the raids, Mr. Bourdain's network, CNN, has refused to cover the case.

Even more bizarrely, suspicious "fact-checking" website Snopes even went as far as to debunk reports that the raids even took place.

Channel 2’s Mike Petchenik. Operation Safe Summer was a collaborative effort between the FBI’s Atlanta field office and 38 law enforcement agencies in six metro counties, Assistant Special Agent in Charge Matt Alcoke told

“They are crimes of special concern to the FBI and to law enforcement generally,” Alcoke said.

“Because the victims are so vulnerable as children and because the offenders could be from just about any walk of life, from a gang member all the way up to someone who is highly successful and wealthy.”

The sting ended with nearly 160 children rescued, including one as young as 3 years old, and nearly 150 arrests, convictions or sentences, officials said.

Also this week, a group of retired veterans uncovered child trafficking camp in the Tucson, Arizona.

After accidentally stumbling upon the "pedophile bunker" whilst looking for homeless vets, they found children's toys, pornography, and even a human skull believed to belong to a child aged 7-8.

Since the find, which is being again ignored by the mainstream media, evidence has now emerged that show the land where the sex slaves camp was discovered, is owned by a company with deep ties to the Clinton Foundation.

Could this tie-in with whatever the investigative journalist Anthony Bourdain was just about to expose?

As the MSM blackout continues, Facebook tightens its censorship of independent journalism, and Snopes scrambles to convince the public that our "trusted leaders" would never harm children, then perhaps this case will end up being swept under the carpet, just like every other.