Berg - Moe Berg

Ballplayer Exchanged His Pinstripes And Bat For A Cloak And Dagger To Become The Jewish 007

The grillman at the Northwest Side diner had a standard response if one of us mocked his hero by swinging a soda straw to burlesque a batter's warmup swings.

McLEAN, Va. — The greasy spoon of my youth was decorated with a faded baseball card depicting Moe Berg, a third-string catcher who bounced around the major leagues in the 1920s and '30s.

"He's Jewish," the cook would insist, as if to say that group loyalty ought to outweigh a .243 lifetime batting average.

To reinforce that early example of multicultural education, he'd take a cut or two of his own, waving a spatula under the offender's nose. It was a lesson I didn't need; Moe had always been my hero. His picture simply had a mesmerizing force that puzzled me until a recent visit to the Central Intelligence Agency, whose fortress-like compound is in this Washington suburb.

"Sir, may I ask you to put these on?" said Linda McCarthy, a CIA archivist.

She handed me a pair of sheer muslin gloves, the kind curators don before straightening a masterpiece on a museum's walls. She drew out of its protective case a bat Berg had used in 1939, his last season as a player, handing it across her desk.

"Go ahead, sir," she said. "Have a swing, compliments of the U.S. government."

I got to take that swing with Moe Berg's bat because a recent book brought his name to mind, four decades after first encountering his picture in a teenage hangout in Chicago. In "Heisenberg's War" (Knopf), historian Thomas Powers reveals that Berg went into Nazi-occupied Europe during World War II as an American spy authorized to kill Werner Heisenberg, Germany's top physicist, if he found that Heisenberg was developing an atomic bomb.

My heart leaped with ethnic pride to think that after 15 years in the big leagues, Berg had gone on to become the Jewish James Bond.

Then came the reviews, some of which pooh-poohed the Berg-Heisenberg caper as the stuff of grade-B movies. Would the U.S. really put its atomic future in the hands of a washed-up baseball player? critics asked.

So did I, phoning the CIA, whose spokesman said to come by as soon as security clearance could be arranged. The agency had a staff member who knew the real Moe Berg story.

"Sir," McCarthy began, "Mr. Berg was the slowest man in the American League, and the fastest spy in the European theater."

She proceeded to rattle off Berg's statistics, in peace and war. Years ago, McCarthy found an old biography of Berg, who died in 1972, in the CIA's library. Since then he has never been far from her mind. Her own father, she explained, brought her up on baseball and stories of heroes and valiant deeds.

She has devoted herself to filling in the missing pieces of Berg's career by tracking down clues from his CIA file, which has recently been declassified. She haunts auctions of sports memorabilia, using her own money to buy artifacts from Berg's baseball days for a display of espionage history the CIA maintains for visiting VIPs.