A Shrewd Campaign To Control Firearms Assaults The Truth

FOR THE RECORD - Additional material published May 6, 1994: Corrections and clarifications. Stephen Chapman's column Thursday inaccurately described Rep. Charles Schumer's chairmanship. He is chairman of the Crime and Criminal Justice Subcommittee of the Judiciary Committee. The Tribune regrets the error.

I imagine the effect was not what they had intended. A lot of Americans who saw Bentsen with his AR-15 rifle and Schumer with his Tec-9 pistol probably exclaimed, "Say, that looks like fun!" Others may have concluded that the demonstration simply dramatized the folly of allowing dangerous weapons in the hands of anyone connected to the federal government.

Politicians don't feel obliged to smoke crack on camera to demonstrate the dangers of drug abuse or get behind the wheel of a car after several drinks to inveigh against drunk driving. But Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and House Judiciary Committee Chairman Charles Schumer (D-N.Y.) somehow couldn't find a way to rouse public concern about "assault weapons" without firing off a few rounds at a Washington police target range.

But it also served to underline the character of the campaign to ban "assault weapons," which from the outset has been composed of 10 parts vapor to one part substance. The advocates have done more to confuse than to inform, which is a shrewd tactic given the scarcity of facts on their side. Last year, their effort was enough to persuade the Senate to approve a measure forbidding the sale, manufacture or possession of 19 kinds of guns. The House, which is supposed to vote on the idea today, apparently has not been convinced.

The gun-control lobby and sympathetic journalists frequently give the misimpression that the issue is machine guns, which have been illegal for decades. The New York Times caption on the Schumer photo referred to the Tec-9 as an "automatic" weapon, when in fact it is semiautomatic-just like millions of other firearms that will remain legal.

Elsewhere, the Times says the proposed ban affects only those weapons that "spray" bullets. Wrong again. Semiautomatics differ from automatics in that they cannot fire in a continuous stream. Each bullet requires a separate squeeze of the trigger.

Much is made of the menacing appearance of the guns that would be prohibited. That's because appearance is about all that separates them from supposedly legitimate sporting arms. But looks, it should be unnecessary to note, don't kill.

The Tec-9, pictured in one lurid newspaper ad, certainly lacks a cuddly exterior, but it won't kill you any more quickly or permanently than an ordinary 9 mm handgun. About the only advantage enjoyed by the Tec-9 is a 32-shot clip, but the proposal already bans clips of more than 10 rounds. It's hard to see what this restriction achieves, though, since any minimally clever thug can carry more than one clip and reload in an instant.

This bill doesn't attempt to get rid of every "assault weapon" in America or, in fact, any of those that already exist-only new ones will be illegal. But even if it did, the effect on crime would be something close to undetectable. Last year, Chicago police confiscated more than 20,000 firearms. Of those, only 422 (about 2 percent) fell into the category of "assault weapons." Virtually all of the rest were garden-variety rifles and pistols-the kind the "assault weapon" bill explicitly protects.

The most dangerous weapon around is the humdrum .38 revolver, which in 1993 accounted for more than one out of every four gun murders in Chicago, surpassing any other firearm. But, as Northwestern law professor Daniel Polsby points out, no one has recommended a ban on .38 revolvers. That's because any fool can see that criminals would simply substitute another equally lethal firearm. Why then, asks Polsby, do people assume that a crook deprived of his AR-15 will suddenly be rendered harmless?