Oregon Department Of Education Bans Pledge Of Allegiance
In support of Principal Kauata Jackson, the Oregon Department of Education has banned the 500,000 plus students attending public schools in Oregon from reciting The Pledge of Allegiance throughout the remainder of the 2017 school year.

The decision to ban students and teachers throughout Oregon from reciting the Pledge of Allegiance was announced by Devon Withers, an Oregon Department of Education representative during a

Monday morning press-conference.









According to Withers, the decision to ban students from reciting The Pledge of Allegiance was made in support of Kauata Jackson, the principal of Mountain Dell Elementary school. Principal Jackson was the subject of heavy criticism after she sent a letter home notifying the parents of her students that she would be discontinuing the morning recital of The Pledge of Allegiance in her school throughout the 2017 school year.

Jackson told parents within her letter that her decision to discontinue the recital of The Pledge of Allegiance was a direct response to feedback and complaints from parents of her “culturally diverse community”.

Many parents were outraged by the letter and took to social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter to express their disappointment in Principal Jackson’s decision. The school’s anti -Pledge of Allegiance stance gained national media attention after the Facebook post of Kathleen Hunter was noticed by reporters across the country.

According to Oregon Department of Education spokesperson Devon Withers, members of the Oregon community and several other citizens throughout the United States “took things too far” in their criticism of Principal Jackson. During the Monday morning press-conference, Withers told reporters that many of the comments directed towards Principal Jackson far exceed the line of healthy constructive criticism and crossed into the realm of harassment. According to Withers, Principal Jackson even received several death threats.

Withers told reporters at the early morning press-conference, “We will not stand-by quietly and act as silent spectators while an affluent and respected member of our district is the subject of clear harassment for making a decision she felt best for her school and community. In a show of support for the respected members of our district, we are standing in solidarity with Principal Kauata Jackson and are requiring all public schools within the state of Oregon to immediately cease the recital of The Pledge of Allegiance within their respective classrooms as of tomorrow (August 30, 2016).”

According to Withers, the Oregon Department of Education will review their policy regarding the recital of The Pledge of Allegiance at the end of the 2017 school year, however he urges parents to utilize the proper channels to voice their feedback.

According to a 2014 Gallup poll, Oregon is ranked as one of the nation’s ‘most liberal’ and ‘least religious’ states in the nation, however many Oregon residents believe that the Department of Education has taken things ‘too far’, and are hopeful that the district will reverse what they believe to be a decision based upon a ‘knee-jerk’ reaction.