Before Wrigley Field rose, there was a seminary
Before there was a Wrigley, there was a seminary

The property bounded by Clark, Waveland, Sheffield and Addison was home to the Chicago Lutheran Theological Seminary

The land — sandy, dotted with a few trees and prone to flooding — was originally owned by developer Joseph Sheffield, who bought it around 1851, according to Ed Hartig, a Cubs historian who has written for the Cubs fan magazine Vine Line for 18 years.

The property bounded by Clark, Waveland, Sheffield and Addison was home to the Chicago Lutheran Theological Seminary.

Before Clark and Addison became synonymous with the Cubs, that patch of earth was God's country. Literally.

A 1914 postcard of the recently opened Weeghman Park. Eliza Hall of the Chicago Lutheran Theological Seminary can be seen abutting the left field fence. (Wikimedia Commons photo)

The property eventually wound up in the hands of Lutheran minister William Passavant — how exactly is not certain — and Hartig said that by the late 1860s Passavant was talking about building a seminary there.

By 1874, St. Mark's Lutheran Church had been constructed on the land. The small chapel served as the birthplace of the seminary until the school opened officially on Oct. 1, 1891, with six students.

The first seminary building was a home for the Rev. Revere Franklin Weidner, a professor at the school. In 1893, Eliza Hall opened with classrooms and a dormitory. And in 1899, two double houses were built for professors. But as the seminary grew, so did the neighborhood.

"I get the impression it was pretty bucolic when the seminary opened, yet grew up and became a little too busy, noisy and dirty in the ensuing years," said Stuart Shea, author of the just-released "Wrigley Field: The Long Life and Contentious Times of the Friendly Confines.".

In 1909, the seminary bought adjoining land to give itself a buffer from the encroaching neighborhood. That brought the property to 8 acres, according to "Passavant's Vision: A History of the Chicago Lutheran Theological Seminary, 1891-1951," by Marjory R. Weng. But it didn't solve the problem, and the seminary vacated the property in 1910, moving to Maywood and later merging with other seminaries to form the Lutheran School of Theology at Chicago, which is now on East 55th Street.

By the early 1900s, baseball was flourishing in Chicago. The major leagues were represented by the Cubs on the West Side and White Sox on the South, and amateur and semi-pro teams were everywhere. The seminary property was prime territory.

Hartig said there were talks as early as 1905 about putting a minor league team in Chicago. The man behind it was Charles Havenor, who owned a minor-league American Association team in Milwaukee.

"If you read the old Sporting Lifes," Hartig said, "You read, 'I'm real close, I have my eye on the property.'"

Havenor paid a reported $175,000 for the property. A Tribune article on June 20, 1909, detailed the sale and what it meant: "This property is considered the best vacant location in Chicago for a baseball park," wrote Harvey Woodruff, "and the purchase on its face appears to portend the entrance of an American Association club into this city."

But because the American Association was part of organized baseball, it couldn't move a team into Chicago without consent of the local major league owners. When the Cubs and Sox found out about Havenor's plans, they refused to grant permission.