Nadia Gains Freedom--and Its Uncertainty

"We knew that we could not guarantee that she would be taken care of better than her family could take care of her in Romania. History proved that I was right. I didn't have a regular job for six months. I took night jobs, cleaning restaurants and making pennies to carry me from one day to another.

"We were about to face a very different future," Karolyi said Friday by telephone from Stuttgart, West Germany, where he is coaching a team of U.S. women gymnasts in competition. "We had no assignments, no opportunities and no promises.

They said this week that they had considered asking Comaneci, who was 19 at the time, to join them, but decided against it--not because they feared that she would reject them, but because they feared that she would accept.

While Romanian gymnast Nadia Comaneci was on a tour of the United States in 1981, the two men who had the most impact on her career, her coach, Bela Karolyi, and her choreographer, Geza Pozsar, defected.

"She had to go back and finish her career as a gymnast and her education. We knew that a few years later she would be mature enough to make a decision on her own."

Only a few days past her 28th birthday, Comaneci made that decision this week. She crossed the Romanian border into Hungary Tuesday night and went to the U.S. Embassy in Vienna, where her request for political asylum was granted. Her freedom flight landed Friday in New York.

"I was always hoping that one of these days she was going to make this difficult step," Karolyi said.

Now that she has made it, the question becomes what she will do next.

Karolyi speculated that when the State Department finishes its processing of her, she will become the responsibility of the U.S. Gymnastics Federation (USGF) in Indianapolis.

"I think they're going to fly her down there for the interviews, press conferences, public appearances on 'Good Morning, America,' and all that stuff," Karolyi said.

Then she can consider whether to accept Karolyi's invitation to join him and his wife, Marta, in Houston, where they run one of the most prestigious gymnastics schools in the United States. Graduates include Mary Lou Retton and Phoebe Mills.

"My home and my gym are always open to her," he said.

USGF officials said that they also are hoping for a visit from Comaneci. But despite Karolyi's speculation, they said Friday that they had heard neither from her nor the State Department about her immediate plans.

"Like most of the rest of the world, we're just bystanders," said Patti Auer, a USGF spokesperson.

At the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal, Comaneci gained fame by becoming the first gymnast to receive a perfect 10 from judges at a major international competition. By the time she finished that week, she had seven of them. She also had won three gold medals. Four years later at the Summer Olympics in Moscow, she won two gold medals.

She is considered a national treasure in Romania, where she became the youngest person ever designated as a Hero of Socialist Labor. Until recently, when her travel privileges were withdrawn, she was treated as a princess. In a country that has the lowest standard of living in the Eastern Bloc, she had a well-furnished apartment and a car.

But since her retirement from competition in 1984, she has not been merely a professional celebrity. Besides earning certification as an international judge, she also has been coaching at the junior level in Romania.

"I think she's a very good teacher and could make a very good international coach," said Agnes Mura, the envoy at the 1984 Summer Olympics from the L.A. Olympic Organizing Committee to the Romanian delegation, which included Comaneci. "She makes phenomenal observations about her sport. There's a real talent there."