Doctors Healing With Words

Muslim Physicians Reach Out To Tell U.s. About Islam

``A physician feels that all the more,'' said the Hartford cardiologist. ``We are trained, even if there is only the slightest spark of life, that we should go after it intensively.''

Dr. Reza Mansoor's gaze floated upward as he spoke of Sept. 11. He was watching again -- in his mind's eye -- the video loop of the blazing, toppling towers. His voice softened. He called the events of that day ``the most shocking events I have ever witnessed.'' He spoke of the utter devastation, and then he paused.

After the initial revulsion on Sept. 11, Mansoor, a Muslim who grew up in Sri Lanka, got more bad news: Muslims did this. He wondered if non-Muslim Americans would understand that there is nothing Islamic about terrorism. He did not wait to find out. He began speaking in churches and community centers and writing newspaper opinion pieces, and nearly two months later, his speaking schedule is still full.

His colleague at Hartford Hospital, Dr. Inam Kureshi, a neurosurgeon born in Pakistan but raised in Canada and Texas, finds himself talking to colleagues and patients about the Islamic faith. ``This [terrorism] does not represent what Islam is all about,'' he said.

Mansoor and Kureshi are among dozens of Muslim physicians in Greater Hartford -- and thousands across the country -- who are the face of Islam to many non-Muslims. For many Americans, Muslims in the healing professions may be the only Muslims they know.

Dr. Shahid Athar of Indianapolis, president of the Islamic Medical Association of North America, said there are about 20,000 Muslim physicians in the United States. ``They are contributing to the health care of a lot of Americans,'' he said. In the first few days after the attacks, Athar said, he got a couple of harassing phone calls, one from a caller who said, ``Is this the headquarters of Osama bin Laden?''

But what followed, said Athar, was a torrent of support in the form of letters, phone calls and visits from patients, colleagues and neighbors. There were no canceled appointments and no harassment, according to Muslim doctors in the Hartford area interviewed for this story. Instead, patients and colleagues were sympathetic and curious.

Dr. Ali Hashmi, an East Hartford pulmonologist, said the response has been heartening. ``Hardly a day goes by when someone doesn't ask me how is my family back home,'' said the Pakistani native who has practiced in the area for 30 years.

One of Hashmi's patients, Florence Sinow of North Haven, wrote one of the letters. Sinow, 81, credits Hashmi with getting her asthma under control and keeping it that way for nearly 25 years. She thought of Hashmi when she read about the harassment of Pakistani storekeepers in North Haven after Sept. 11.

``As a Jewish woman, I know what that can be like,'' she said, so she wrote him a note of support.

``He's a fine doctor and a good man and a religious man, and I appreciate that in a physician,'' she said. ``Sometimes in situations like this you have to tell that to people.''

Muslim physicians are quick to point out that the role of healer is central to Islam, and that there is no role in true Islam for those who perpetrated the Sept. 11 attacks. ``The saving of a life is equivalent to saving all of humankind,'' said Mansoor, referring to a passage in the Koran. ``When you treat a patient, you view this as an act of worship to God.''