One by One, States Knit a Safety Net for Abandoned Newborns

Rescue: Fourteen states allow parents to relinquish their infants in a safe place without fear of punishment. Goal is to end the rash of 'dumpster babies,' save lives.

Prompted by a rash of reports of "dumpster babies" abandoned by their parents, state lawmakers across the country have rushed through legislation in recent months that would provide that alternative. The so-called "safe haven" or "Baby Moses" laws would shield parents from criminal prosecution as long as they bring newborns to a hospital or other approved site.

"They were scared young kids," said Kathleen Jennings, Ocampo's attorney. "They tried to find a place to leave the baby. They intended for this baby to be found alive. They just didn't feel they had a safe alternative."

Last month, the teenagers pleaded guilty to manslaughter in a Delaware court and agreed to accept five-year prison terms, pending the judge's decision.

A few hours after giving birth in March in a Fairfax, Va., motel room, Abigail Caliboso wrapped her baby in a cotton towel and left it on the floor of a portable toilet at a construction site in Delaware. The 19-year-old nursing student and the baby's father, Jose Ocampo, 18, both of Virginia, were too frightened to tell their families that they had had a child.

Started by a TV reporter in Mobile, Ala., the movement gained momentum in September 1999 after Texas, stung by 13 baby abandonments in 10 months in the Houston area, became the first state to enact a safe haven law. Since then, 14 states have passed similar laws, and safe haven legislation has been introduced in an additional 12 states.

Safe Haven Foes Have 'a Lot of Questions'

But although supporters of such bills are seen as well intentioned, the laws themselves have had a mixed reception. Some conservative groups, including Focus on the Family, have embraced the idea, but other conservatives fear it will promote a "casual, disposable" attitude toward children, said Teresa Wagner, policy analyst for sanctity-of-life issues at the Family Research Council.

So, too, some adoption groups oppose safe haven bills as a reckless alternative to adoption, saying that they essentially cut fathers out of the picture and that children dropped off anonymously have almost no chance of ever knowing their heritage or medical history.

Critics also have said that safe haven bills do nothing to help the babies' troubled mothers, and child-welfare groups have expressed concern that the laws don't address the larger issue of preventing child abandonment.

"There are a lot of questions," said Joyce Johnson, spokeswoman for the Child Welfare League, which hosted a conference on abandoned babies recently in Washington. "There are services that are available to these women. A lot of folks have worked hard to make sure there are health clinics and access to prenatal care. What's making this group of women do this? . . . Why aren't they accessing those services?"

Extensive Publicity Appears to Be Critical

But anecdotal evidence suggests that where safe haven laws are heavily publicized, they are working the way their proponents said they would: Women are coming forward and bringing in their newborns.

In Texas, for example, the law languished for almost a year until state Land Commissioner David Dewhurst spent more than $200,000 of his own money for public service announcements, informational kiosks at shopping malls and bus stop ads. In the last two months, two women have brought newborns to Texas hospitals.

And in New York, which enacted a safe haven law in July, two babies have been turned in, including one recently on Long Island, which an organization has blanketed with posters urging pregnant women to call its crisis hotline instead of abandoning their newborns.

Two weeks after New Jersey enacted its Safe Haven Infant Protection Act, a 4-day-old baby was turned in. In Alabama the tally is six, most of them in Mobile, which has had a highly publicized program since 1998.

"Legislation is one thing, but implementation is a completely different animal," said Jodi Brooks, the Mobile reporter who started A Secret Safe Place for Newborns. "Anyone can pass a law. But until you tell people about the program, it's nothing."