Former BART Officer Johannes Mehserle gets 2 years in Oscar Grant killing

A peaceful protest in Oakland over the sentence given in the shooting of black man by a white officer turns aggressive, with demonstrators smashing windshields and chanting slogans.

The sentencing followed a tearful apology from Mehserle, who, handcuffed to a waist chain over his orange jail scrubs, insisted that the shooting was unintentional.

As Perry spoke, the victim's mother rushed from the courtroom with other relatives and supporters. "Nothing, he got nothing!" she told reporters after she exited.

Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Robert J. Perry said evidence in the racially charged case showed that the shooting was an accident caused when Johannes Mehserle mistakenly reached for a firearm instead of an electric Taser weapon he meant to use.

Reporting from Los Angeles and Oakland — A former police officer convicted of involuntary manslaughter in the shooting of an unarmed man on an Oakland train station platform was sentenced Friday to two years in prison, sparking outrage from relatives and supporters of the victim who denounced the punishment as too lenient.

"I want to say how deeply sorry I am," said Mehserle, 28. "Nothing I could ever say or do could heal the wound I created."

Grainy video footage of the New Year's Day 2009 shooting was captured by several witnesses and shows Mehserle, who is white, firing one round into the back of Oscar J. Grant III, who was black. Grant, 22, was lying face-down on the Fruitvale Station platform when he was shot.

The shooting triggered rioting days later and again in July, when a Los Angeles jury rejected murder and voluntary manslaughter charges but found that the officer acted with gross negligence.

A four-hour peaceful demonstration at Oakland City Hall moved into the surrounding streets and took on a more aggressive tone Friday evening with marchers smashing windshields, making obscene gestures at surrounding police and noisily shouting slogans.

Police in riot gear allowed several hundred marchers to move through the streets for about an hour before encircling a smaller number near 6th Avenue and East 17th Street. Demonstrators left a trail of broken windshields as they moved down 17th Street, angering some residents.

Police moved in after one officer was injured when struck by a car and another's gun was grabbed by a protester. By late Friday, police had arrested more than 100 demonstrators.

The criminal case against Mehserle was moved to downtown Los Angeles amid concern about the extensive media coverage of the killing in the Bay Area.

The former Bay Area Rapid Transit police officer faced up to 14 years in prison. But the judge sharply reduced the maximum possible sentence by dismissing a finding by jurors that Mehserle intentionally used a gun. Among the reasons Perry cited was that he failed to provide jurors with clear instructions on the gun allegation and that the evidence was insufficient to show that the officer used his firearm deliberately.

The judge had the option of releasing Mehserle on probation but sentenced him to the minimum possible prison term.

Perry signaled that he might dismiss the gun allegation early on in the emotional hearing, prompting the victim's uncle to confront the judge when given a chance to talk about the impact of Grant's death.

"We want justice," Cephus Johnson told Perry in a shaking voice. "We should not lose this case because of you."

Grant's mother, Wanda Johnson, told the judge that Mehserle's explanation for the shooting was a "fabrication." She said anything less than the maximum punishment would show that police officers are above the law.