Bradley Wrote Author ‘Legitimately Suggested That Women Play a Role in Date Rape’
MADISON, Wis. — One Wisconsin Now has uncovered another column penned by Justice Rebecca Bradley in which she wrote author Camille Paglia, “legitimately suggested that women play a role in date rape.” These and other incendiary comments were found in a column that ran in the Marquette Journal student magazine. In her piece Bradley went on to refer to supporters of feminism as, “… angry, militant, man-hating lesbians who abhor the traditional family.”

When questioned about her writing suggesting that women were in part to blame for their own rape, Bradley refused to denounce her earlier writing, saying she would need to go back and re-read her column.

One Wisconsin Now has called on Bradley to resign for a series of writings in which she made hateful and venomous attacks on gay people and people living with HIV, according to articles she wrote obtained by One Wisconsin Now, in multiple instances, derisively referred to members of the LGBTQ community as “queers” and “degenerates”, claimed “homosexual sex kills,” mocked the AIDS epidemic and declared the nearly 45 million voters who supported President Clinton were, “either totally stupid or entirely evil.”

Additional Bradley columns included comparing abortion to the Holocaust and slavery and suggesting American Indians ought to feel “privileged” to be used as mascots for sporting teams.

The following are the statements of One Wisconsin Now Research Director Jenni Dye:

“What could Rebecca Bradley possibly need to think about? It is abhorrent to blame the victim of a sexual assault, whatever the circumstances. It is disqualifying when you are talking about a judge on the highest court in the state of Wisconsin.

“Justice Bradley has revealed with her own words that she cannot be trusted to uphold the most basic tenet of our legal system, that all are equal before the law.

“Blaming the victims of sexual violence is yet another reason Justice Bradley must resign immediately.”