Mehendi cones may carry harmful ingredients

Founder-member of Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat, Suryakant Pathak, told TOI: "Lawsonia (the botanical name for mehendi) consists of a principal colouring compound named Lawsone, which reacts with the skin and imparts a dark red colour to it. Due to paucity of time, people have been buying mehendi cones from the market rather then preparing them at home."

PUNE: The colourful mehendi cones may well be the flavour of the season, what with the festive occasion of Nag Panchami round the corner. However, consumer activists and dermatologists would have you choose a mehendi cone with caution given the presence of harmful chemicals like para-phenylenediamine (PPD) in the mixture, which could lead to strong skin reactions.

Several manufacturers, he said, were now using the concoction of PPD in mehendi cones. The chemical is a common ingredient in permanent hair dye products, as well as dyes for fabrics, fur and dark makeup. PPD is also used in printing and photocopying inks. Also, the natural oils are being replaced with white oil to give a dark colour. "Some people are very sensitive to this chemical and the prolonged use of it can prove fatal. The chemical may cause itching, body ache, restlessness, etc," Pathak said.

The presence of the chemical in mehendi cones was brought to Pathak's notice by a local manufacturer. "As a precautionary measure, consumers should buy only those cones which carry manufacturer's name and address," he said.

City doctors further affirmed the ill-effects of the ready-made mehendi cones. "Mehendi can cause an allergy if chemicals are mixed in it. Para-phenylenediamine is a chemical that is used by manufacturers to make the imprint of mehendi darker. The presence of additional chemicals in mehendi can damage the skin and can also cause redness, itching, blistering of the skin areas," said dermatologist Vinay Kulkarni.

Another city-based doctor, Sunil Tolat, said, "Natural mehendi is unlikely to cause skin reaction, but the mixture of black mehendi with the natural can cause allergic reactions."

"I get ready-made mehendi cones from a local manufacturer. The name of the manufacturer is displayed on the cones, but if it is in Urdu, it becomes difficult to read or understand the name of the manufacturer. At times, the name is not printed at all," said shopkeeper Rajesh Gaikwad.

Homemaker Nupur Rathore said henna cones are now bought on all festive occasions. "No one really has the time to prepare mehendi at home. Moreover, home-made henna pastes never seem to give you that colour. Even if one were to ask a professional beautician to do it, she would just use the ready-made henna cones in her stock," Rathore said.

Bunty Gawande, a grocery store owner, said, "We don't really check whether the name is there or not. We place our orders depending upon the requirement. They are known by their names and we call them and ask for the stocks. Even the customers never ask us about the manufacturer's name." Perhaps, it's time they did.