House panel reviewing Clintons' gifts sees system to fix
Also, many gifts to the Clintons had been undervalued, some were never reported, and some were described as lost or missing, Ose said during a hearing he convened yesterday.

The committee found that a gift of an Yves St. Laurent suit, for instance, had been valued at $249. Under federal ethics rules, gifts worth $250 and over must be reported.

While confessing that he's "no shopping maven," Rep. Steven C. LaTourette (R., Ohio) said he couldn't "go to Penney's and buy a suit for $248."

An 18-karat-gold saxophone pin valued at $4,200 and a large Oriental rug valued at $1,200 were among 30 examples of gifts to the Clintons labeled "lost" or "misplaced" in records that investigators examined, the subcommittee said.

Clinton White House lawyers advised at one point that the first couple should not accept a gift of 10 shares of stock in General Electric, which were returned to the sender. But the subcommittee reported that the Clintons kept 15 shares of Coca-Cola stock worth $1,027.

Ose called the $75,000 in gifts received by the Clintons in December 2000 "disturbing at best," but they were not illegal. Since Hillary Clinton - elected a month earlier - had not been sworn in as a senator, she was not yet subject to Senate rules that generally bar members from accepting gifts worth more than $50. (The Senate rules do contain numerous exceptions, such as allowing gifts to be accepted from individuals based on friendship.)

Jim Kennedy, a spokesman for Hillary Clinton, yesterday called the gift issue a "year-old story" that he said "has cost far more than the American people want to pay during this time of deficits and urgent national needs."

Ose's subcommittee on energy policy, natural resources and regulatory affairs disclosed new information about gifts that Hillary Clinton received by way of an Omaha, Neb., retailer of fine jewelry, china and flatware.

Ose said the first lady had been registered at Borsheim's, and he wondered whether she might have violated federal rules against soliciting gifts. He said that prospective gift-givers could view her "wish-list" at Borsheim's online only by using her personal e-mail address and password.

"Something transpired here," Ose said. "I'm having trouble putting my finger on it."

The Clintons came under heavy criticism last year for leaving the White House with more than $190,000 in furniture, silver, china and other gifts. They returned 21 items worth $44,000. They also repaid about $86,000 to people who gave them gifts in 2000.

Yesterday's hearing was designed to build support for Ose's bill to centralize, with one agency, the responsibility for overseeing presidential gifts and to change the rules governing how and when they are permissible.

Rep. Patsy T. Mink of Hawaii, the only Democrat who attended the hearing, questioned why the subcommittee had investigated the gift practices only of the Clinton White House and had not looked into past Republican administrations, such as those of former President George Bush.

"If we had access to President Bush's administration, it would certainly balance the view," she said.

Ose spokesman Yier Shi said the subcommittee had not investigated gift practices before the Clinton administration because it had already spent a year on the Clinton matter and found enough evidence to show that the system needed to be improved.

David Goldstein's e-mail address is dgoldstein@krwashington.com.