Artisanal and Small-scale Mining
About artisanalmining.org

Until end of 2012, this domain "artisanalmining.org" hosted the website of the "Communities and Small-scale Mining" (CASM) initiative.

After CASM had come to an unexpected end (with a Roundtable on the future of the initiative in 2010 and the announcement of a "better, stronger CASM"), its website disappeared and with it hundreds of valuable files. All documents, shared by members of the CASM Community at the international Annual General Meetings (from 2002 - 2009), presented at national events or prepared as part of CASM projects were suddenly lost. Many publications on Artisanal and Small-scale Mining (ASM) cited documents available at the "CASM Website" - all these links became broken overnight. Some of the documents survived in private archives; some slowly re-appeared in a scattered way on various other websites.

By end of 2016, the former CASM domain "artisanalmining.org" had expired and became available for transfer. With hundreds of broken links still poining to it, much harm could have been done to an ASM sector already plagued by marginalization. Fortunately, it was possible to acquire the domain with the intent of providing continuity to ASM knowledge sharing. The new artisanalmining.org website was launched on 27 Dec 2016.

artisanalmining.org is dedicated and committed to knowledge sharing in benefit of the millions of artisanal and small-scale miners worldwide.

A first step to fulfill this mission was to "bring home" all the lost files from the former CASM website and initiative in form of The CASM Files. Artisanalmining.org is also available to host file archives of other ASM projects or initiatives, to avoid being lost by closure of project websites.

Early 2017, a new section ASM Inventory was added, featuring thematic maps on ASM. A few global baseline studies provide the starting point for updating ASM population statistics with quantitative and qualitative (anecdotic) data.

Other services will emerge in the future. As such, artisanalmining.org is intended to be part and a network node of global ASM knowledge hub initiatives. Please feel free to contact me to explore opportunities for cooperation.