EPA Regulation Would Ban Racecar Builds
RIVERSIDE, CA - MARCH 14: Morning rush-hour traffic moves along the 60 freeway, after Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Administrator Stephen L. Johnson this week announced a modest lowering of legal limits on ozone pollution standards, on March 14, 2008 in Riverside, California. The change angered not only industry groups who lobbied against the change but also medical, scientific and environmental groups who say that tougher limits are needed. EPA science advisors and a children's health panel had unanimously recommended tougher standards to protect the public, especially children and the elderly, from serious respiratory problems caused by breathing ground-level ozone that aggravates asthma and can lead to premature death, as shown by mounting evidence. A second proposal for more stringent seasonal limits on ozone based on its harm to forests, crops and other plants was reportedly quashed at the 11th hour by President Bush. Governments in areas where the air is declared dirty as the pollution limit of about 84 parts per billion changes to about 75 ppb over an average eight-hour period will have two decades to reduce their emissions. (Photo by David McNew/Getty Images)

The EPA tried to pull a fast one on enthusiasts by sneaking in a proposed regulation that would ban you from building a racecar from a street car.

Thank God for government watchdogs that look out for the automotive enthusiast. According to the Specialty Equipment Market Association on their latest press release that hit the web earlier Monday, the Environmental Protection Agency snuck in a piece of legislation that would prohibit all street cars from turning into race cars. In addition, any accessory or modification that aids in this process would be banned. That means certain coilover kits, intake kits, exhaust systems and roll cages meant for “off-road use only” that would turn your vehicle into anything not meant for the streets would be included in this sweeping regulation.

The EPA regulation reads,

“Certified motor vehicles and motor vehicle engines and their emission control devices must remain in their certified configuration even if they are used solely for competition or if they become nonroad vehicles or engines”. 80 Fed. Reg. 40138, 40565 (July 13, 2015). “

You’ll be surprised to know that the original piece was called “Greenhouse Gas Missions Fuel Efficiency Standards for Medium and Heavy-Duty Engines and Vehicles- Phase 2.” A cursory search on EPA’s official website shows that this piece of regulation first originated in 2012 when the goals of the “National Program for greenhouse gas emissions and fuel economy standards” was extended to vehicles sold from 2017-2025. Although the aims of these regulations are meant to cut greenhouse emissions, reduce our dependence on foreign oil and save families money on fuel costs, it’s hard to see where this new regulation would so much as add a dent into that goal.

According to SEMA,

SEMA submitted comments in opposition to the regulation and met with the EPA to confirm the agency’s intentions. The EPA indicated that the regulation would prohibit conversion of vehicles into racecars and make the sale of certain emissions-related parts for use on converted vehicles illegal.

The aftermarket community is a multi-billion dollar market and this regulation, if not defined correctly, would seriously hurt the market for parts and services. Car modifications and the enthusiasts that take part in this hobby represent an infinitesimal amount of carbon emissions when compared to the larger car community.

We think that this is just a case of the EPA trying to justify itself in an age of increased government regulations. It seems like right now, they have some internal issues they need to address and can leave us enthusiasts to ourselves. #FlintMichigan.