TRUMP CASTLE PRESENTS A RARE SHOW BY ARETHA FRANKLIN ATLANTIC CITY
Last season, Atlantic City's Trump Castle heralded the debut of singer Latoya Jackson. Amidst a storm of media coverage, Michael's younger sister launched her career as a live performer. Despite the fanfare, most critics slagged her performance, concluding that Latoya's premiere was a case of much ado about nothing.

But this week, the Castle redeems itself by offering the Atlantic City debut of Aretha Franklin, the once and future Queen of Soul. The Friday, Saturday and Sunday dates, which sold out in less than an hour, represent a very rare chance to see the reclusive Franklin perform.

Some say the best place to catch a Franklin show is at Detroit's New Bethel Baptist Church, where she sings in the choir nearly every Sunday. Like the majority of soul singers, Franklin's music roots were nourished by the sounds of gospel. When she was 14, Franklin recorded an album of spirituals for Chess Records, a label that also released more than 50 albums of sermons by her father, Rev. C.L. Franklin.

At 18, the singer was signed to Columbia Records by John Hammond, who had produced and promoted Billie Holiday, Bessie Smith and Charlie Christian and would soon do the same for Bob Dylan and Bruce Springsteen. Surprisingly, Hammond and Franklin didn't click. Their relationship was thwarted by Columbia Records executives who wanted Hammond to recast Franklin as the black Barbra Streisand. She was encouraged to record slick show tunes and jazz standards instead of the gospel-inspired rhythm and blues material that best suited her powerful, two-octave voice.

But her eight years at Columbia weren't a total loss. She learned to modulate her voice, control her phrasing and refine the gospel techniques of note-bending.

When she moved to Atlantic Records in 1966, she put those lessons to use. With producer Jerry Wexler on board, Franklin helped write and arrange many of the classics that, in the years to come, would define the sound of Southern soul. "I Never Loved A Man (The Way I Love You)" was the first of a remarkable string of hits, that include "Respect," "Ain't No Way," "A Natural Woman," "Think," "Dr. Feelgood," "The House That Jack Built," and "Chain of Fools."

During the mid-to-late 1970s, Franklin recorded few hits and even fewer artistic triumphs. But by 1982, she was back in peak form with the Luther Vandross-produced "Jump To It," which was followed up the charts by the platinum-selling LP "Who's Zoomin' Who?" and the recent "Aretha." Her latest chart-topping single was "I Knew You Were Waiting For Me," a duet with George Michael.

Franklin, who has collected 15 Grammys and nearly twice as many gold albums, claims to be years from retirement. Her current label, Arista Records is promising a new disc of Franklin recording in early 1989. Long live the Queen.

ME AND JULIO DOWN BY THE BOARDWALK: Superstar-in-the-making Roberto Carlos makes his Atlantic City debut Friday and Saturday at Caesar's. The Spanish crooner has just finished recording an LP with pal Julio Iglesias. Also on the singer's agenda: a Spanish-language remake of the Beach Boys' "Kokomo" with group member Mike Love.

BETTER TAKE YOUR UMBRELLA: The Claridge has announced plans to present "Singin' In The Rain" as the replacement for the long-running "Applause." Based on the story and screenplay of Adolph Green and Betty Comden, the well-known musical reached the screen in 1952, starring Gene Kelly, Debbie Reynolds and Donald O'Connor. The stage version opened at the Palladium Theatre in London in 1983 and on Broadway at the Gershwin Theater in 1985. The Claridge Casino Hotel/Maynard Sloate production will star "Annie" alumna Andrea McArdle. It begins its run Jan. 10.

SO YOU DON'T FORGET: Comedian Jackie Mason headlines at the Sands Hotel, Casino & Country Club Friday and Saturday. . . . Middle East performer Samira Toufic makes her United States debut at Harrah's Marina Hotel Casino Friday and Saturday. . . . The TropWorld Casino and Entertainment Resort unveils the Hartford Ballet's "The Nutcracker" starting Wednesday and concluding next Sunday. . . . Dick Fox's "Golden Boys of Bandstand," starring Fabian, Frankie Avalon and Bobby Rydell, comes to Resorts International Casino Hotel, Friday through Sunday.

Amy Longsdorf is a free-lance entertainment writer for The Morning Call.