Water use in Georgia declines, even as population grows
Georgia’s population increased by more than 75 percent between 1980 and 2010. But in those same 30 years, water use declined significantly, according to recent estimates by the U.S. Geological Survey.

The amount of water withdrawn from Georgia rivers and aquifers dropped from a peak of about 6.7 billion gallons per day in 1980 to 4.7 billion gallons per day in 2010 — down 30 percent overall and 43 percent per person, according to research by USGS hydrologist Stephen Lawrence. Most of that reduction came between 2000 and 2010, when Georgia baked in two unusually intense droughts.

The declines have important implications for state water planning, calling into question, for example, whether the state really needs to spend hundreds of millions of dollars building water supply reservoirs.

“I think people have changed their habits in regards to water use” because of the droughts, said University of Georgia agricultural climatologist Pam Knox.

Water use figures from the Athens-Clarke County Public Utilities Department back up Lawrence’s estimates. In 2000, Athens used about 17.2 million gallons of water per day from the Middle Oconee and North Oconee rivers. In 2010, that usage declined to 13.1 million gallons, and in 2014 it fell further, to 12 million gallons per day, said Athens-Clarke County Water Conservation Coordinator Marilyn Hall.

There’s more than one reason for that nearly 30 percent decline.

A strong water conservation program by the utility’s biggest customer, the University of Georgia, helped. Also, the closing of a big chicken processing plant in 2008 knocked down demand by about a million gallons a day. And, just as elsewhere in the country, federal mandates requiring more water-efficient plumbing fixtures have helped cut

water use.

According to Lawrence’s calculations, water withdrawals by public utilities are down by about 14 percent over the 30-year period from 1980 to 2010.

Locally, a major reason for declining water use is the conservation rate structure that Athens-Clarke County adopted at the beginning of this decade, Hall said. Users pay more per gallon when they go above certain baseline amounts, which gives them a strong financial incentive to use less. The conservation rate structure reduces peak demands as well as overall consumption, Hall said.

Athens-Clarke County was one of the first governments in the state to establish conservation pricing, and a proposed state water regulation could mandate that public utilities adopt either conservation pricing or incorporate drought surcharges into their rate structures.

Planners estimate that Athens-Clarke County’s water treatment plant will be adequate to meet the community’s needs through 2030, but Hall said that with the water-use reductions, Athens might have enough treatment capacity to see the city through until 2050.

Even with continued conservation, though, population increases will mean that water use will, at some point, move upward, according to Hall. “I expect to see more reductions in the future," she said, "but as the population grows, that will level off and grow. At what point that happens, I don’t know.”

Although public utility conservation efforts are working, the biggest reason for the overall state reduction in water withdrawals is the change from coal to natural gas as fuel for electric utilities such as Georgia Power. Water is pulled out of rivers and aquifers to cool the machinery in power plants, and gas-fired plants use considerably less water than coal-fired facilities.

In 2010, thermoelectric withdrawals were about 2 billion gallons per day, nearly a third of the water pulled from Georgia aquifers and rivers, according to Lawrence’s estimates. According to figures provided by Georgia Power, its water withdrawals have declined from a high of 2.7 billion gallons per day to about 2.1 billion gallons in 2000 and 1.3 billion in 2014. More reductions are on the way this year and next year as the utility closes down some of its huge coal-fired plants, said Georgia Power spokesman Brian Green. The company has also reduced evaporation in its plant cooling operations, which means more water gets returned to rivers.

“With the retirement of more than 2,000 megawatts of coal- and oil-fired generation in 2015 and 2016, Georgia Power expects to reduce the total amount of water withdrawn from the state’s waterways for power generation by approximately 50 percent,” Green said. The company also has ongoing programs to reduce water use, such as leak detection and new procedures that improve water-use efficiency, Green said.

On another water usage front, estimates for irrigation use have the greatest uncertainty, Lawrence said, because most farmers don’t report how much water they pull out of the ground to put on crops. But Lawrence believes irrigation withdrawals have decreased slightly in recent years.

More farmers, especially big producers, are adopting more efficient irrigation methods, said Calvin Perry, superintendent of the University of Georgia’s Stripling Irrigation Research Park. Perry couldn’t say whether irrigation water use has actually declined, but researchers at Stripling are developing precision techniques, such as linking soil moisture sensors to variable-rate irrigation systems that can deliver just the right amount of water to a field.

Georgia’s declining water consumption carries significant implications for water supply planning, said Ben Emanuel, an associate director of American Rivers based in Georgia.

“I think the steepness of the decline has taken a lot of water suppliers by surprise,” he said, as he predicted that reductions in water use will continue. “That’s something water planers need to plan around as we look toward future management of water supplies,” he said.

One question the planners should ask is whether it’s wise to continue the state’s aggressive push to build more water supply reservoirs, which some scientists say actually reduces water supply because of evaporation.

“We really need to ask if that’s a smart investment of public dollars when trends show that new supply may not be needed," said Emanuel. "We’ve already got quite a lot of reservoir storage."

Water scientists like UGA hydrologist Todd Rasmussen question the value of reservoirs. Lake Lanier loses more water to evaporation than the city of Atlanta consumes, he said.

The state needs to find ways to get better data on water use, Rasmussen added. A recent study by the Union of Concerned Scientists found that many utilities under-reported water usage, and only a small part of agricultural use is accurately measured.

“It’s sort of tough to do any long-term planning when you don’t have accurate data,” Rasmussen said.

Follow education reporter Lee Shearer at www.facebook.com/LeeShearerABH or https://twitter.com/LeeShearer.