Board of Healthcare Funders of Southern Africa
×

PRIVACY POLICY

What information do we collect?

We collect information when you send a query via the website. You may visit the site anonymously.

What do we use your information for?

Any of the information we collect from you may be used in one of the following ways:

To personalize your experience (your information helps us to better respond to your individual needs).

To improve our website (we continually strive to improve our website offerings based on the information and feedback we receive from you).

To improve customer service (your information helps us to more effectively respond to your customer service requests and support needs).

To send periodic emails. The email address you provide may be used to send you occasional company news, updates, related product or service information.

Do we use cookies?

We do not use cookies.

Do we disclose any information to outside parties?

We do not sell, trade, or otherwise transfer to outside parties your personally identifiable information. This does not include trusted third parties who assist us in operating our website, conducting our business, or servicing you, so long as those parties agree to keep this information confidential. We may also release your information when we believe release is appropriate to comply with the law, enforce our site policies, or protect ours or others rights, property or safety. However, non-personally identifiable visitor information may be provided to other parties for marketing, advertising and other uses.

Online Privacy Policy

This online privacy policy only applies to information collected through our website and not to information collected offline.

Your Consent

By using our site, you consent to our privacy policy.

Terms & Conditions:

Disclaimer

The information contained in this website is for general information purposes only. The information is provided by BHF Southern Africa and while we endeavor to keep the information up to date and correct, we make no representations or warranties of any kind, express or implied, about the completeness, accuracy, reliability, suitability or availability with respect to the website or the information, products, services, correlated graphics contained on the website for any purpose. Any reliance you place on such information is therefore strictly at your own risk.

In no event will we be liable for any loss or damage including without limitation, indirect or consequential loss or damage, or any loss or damage whatsoever arising from loss of data or profits out of, or in connection with, the use of this website.

Through this website you are able to link to other websites which are not under the control of BHF Southern Africa. We have no control over the nature, content and availability of those sites. The inclusion of any links does not necessarily imply a recommendation or endorse the views expressed within them. Every effort is made to keep the website up and running smoothly. However, BHF Southern Africa takes no responsibility for, and will not be liable for, the website being temporarily unavailable due to technical issues beyond our control.