Fox News Shocks America & Admits Benghazi Investigation Was Complete Hoax (DETAILS
Current Presidential Candidate Hillary Clinton’s alleged wrongdoings have been all over the media. From her use of a private email server, to the Benghazi attacks, Clinton has made national news with headlines proclaiming she can’t be trusted, is a criminal, and needs to drop out of the race. Though there may be some truth behind the reports, even Fox News themselves have reported the Benghazi scandal is a hoax.

Fox Carolina describes the Benghazi attacks,

‘On the night of Sept. 11, a large group of men rushed into the diplomatic compound in Benghazi, firing guns and setting fires. Visiting Ambassador Stevens and computer specialist Sean Smith were killed despite taking cover in a safe room.

Hours later, before dawn, mortar fire hit the CIA roof nearby, killing security contractors Tyrone Woods and Glen Doherty.’

These attacks have caused such a stir because while Americans were being killed, not a single U.S. Tank headed towards Benghazi. The blame was put on Hillary Clinton and the Obama administration for allegedly ignoring warning signs of the attacks and not sending more security and armed forces to Benghazi. After the attacks Clinton was blamed for lying to the nation about what happened and making it seem like a much smaller situation, though the Obama administration had sent out a public message regarding the attacks.

Upon receiving the latest Benghazi reports, Fox host Shepard Smith announced,

‘The House committee investigating the deadly terror attack in Benghazi today released its report. After a two-year, $7 million investigation the eighth investigation to date, the authors of the report make no new accusations and provide no new evidence of wrongdoing against the former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.’

Two years and $7 Million later, there is still no evidence to back up accusations of Hillary Clinton’s wrong-doings in the Benghazi attacks. This investigation comes after a series of other investigations that also found no evidence that Hillary Clinton could have stopped or made the attacks less fatal.

Smith continues with a quote from the investigation report,

‘Despite President Obama and Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta’s clear orders to deploy military assets, nothing was sent to Benghazi and nothing was en route to Libya at the time the last two Americans were killed almost eight hours after the attack began,’

He concludes with,

‘ They say the military could not have done anything differently to save the lives of the four Americans killed in the attack.’