Isaiah 22:13 But look, there is joy and gladness, butchering of cattle and slaughtering of sheep, eating of meat and drinking of wine: "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die!"
Study Bible

12

13

14

Cross References

Luke 17:26

Just as it was in the days of Noah, so also will it be in the days of the Son of Man:



1 Corinthians 15:32

If I fought wild beasts in Ephesus for human motives, what did I gain? If the dead are not raised, "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."



Isaiah 5:11

Woe to those who rise early in the morning in pursuit of strong drink, who linger into the evening, to be inflamed by wine.



Isaiah 5:22

Woe to those who are heroes in drinking wine, and champions in mixing beer,



Isaiah 26:10

Though grace is shown to the wicked man, he does not learn righteousness. In the land of righteousness he acts unjustly and fails to see the majesty of the LORD.



Isaiah 28:7

These also stagger from wine and stumble from strong drink: Priests and prophets reel from strong drink and are befuddled by wine. They stumble because of strong drink, muddled in their visions and stumbling in their judgments.



Isaiah 28:8

For all their tables are covered with vomit; there is not a place without filth.



Isaiah 29:1

Woe to you, O Ariel, Ariel, the city where David camped! Year upon year let your festivals recur.



Isaiah 47:8

So now hear this, O lover of luxury, who sits securely, who says to herself, 'I am, and there is none besides me. I will never be a widow or know the loss of children.'



Isaiah 56:12

"Come, let me get the wine, let us imbibe the strong drink, and tomorrow will be like today, only far better!"



Isaiah 58:3

"Why have we fasted, and You have not seen? Why have we humbled ourselves, and You have not noticed?" "Behold, on the day of your fast, you do as you please, and you oppress all your workers.



Ezekiel 16:49

Now this was the iniquity of your sister Sodom: She and her daughters were arrogant, overfed, and complacent; they did not help the poor and needy.



Hosea 9:1

Do not rejoice, O Israel, with exultation like the nations, for you have played the harlot against your God; you have made love for hire on every threshing floor.



Just as it was in the days of Noah, so also will it be in the days of the Son of Man:If I fought wild beasts in Ephesus for human motives, what did I gain? If the dead are not raised, "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."Woe to those who rise early in the morning in pursuit of strong drink, who linger into the evening, to be inflamed by wine.Woe to those who are heroes in drinking wine, and champions in mixing beer,Though grace is shown to the wicked man, he does not learn righteousness. In the land of righteousness he acts unjustly and fails to see the majesty of the LORD.These also stagger from wine and stumble from strong drink: Priests and prophets reel from strong drink and are befuddled by wine. They stumble because of strong drink, muddled in their visions and stumbling in their judgments.For all their tables are covered with vomit; there is not a place without filth.Woe to you, O Ariel, Ariel, the city where David camped! Year upon year let your festivals recur.So now hear this, O lover of luxury, who sits securely, who says to herself, 'I am, and there is none besides me. I will never be a widow or know the loss of children.'"Come, let me get the wine, let us imbibe the strong drink, and tomorrow will be like today, only far better!""Why have we fasted, and You have not seen? Why have we humbled ourselves, and You have not noticed?" "Behold, on the day of your fast, you do as you please, and you oppress all your workers.Now this was the iniquity of your sister Sodom: She and her daughters were arrogant, overfed, and complacent; they did not help the poor and needy.Do not rejoice, O Israel, with exultation like the nations, for you have played the harlot against your God; you have made love for hire on every threshing floor.

Treasury of Scripture

On that day the Lord GOD of Hosts called for weeping and wailing, for shaven heads and the wearing of sackcloth.The LORD of Hosts has revealed in my hearing: “Until your dying day, this sin of yours will never be atoned for,” says the Lord GOD of Hosts.…

And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall die.

behold

Isaiah 5:12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the LORD, neither consider the operation of his hands.

Isaiah 21:4,5 My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted me: the night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me…

Isaiah 56:12 Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.

let

Isaiah 56:12 Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.

1 Corinthians 15:32 If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink; for to morrow we die.

James 5:5 Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.