2019-2020 South Africa Hunting Price List

Looking for an affordable South African hunting safari? Here is our South Africa hunting price list for the 2019 and 2020 hunting seasons.

At Big Game Hunting Adventures, our #1 goal is to provide our clients with high quality trophy hunting safaris at a reasonable price. Join us on one of our South Africa hunting packages or custom build your own hunt by using our South Africa hunting price list below. Regardless of the safari you book, you’ll receive first class lodging, excellent food, and outstanding hunting. While you’re responsible for paying for your airline ticket, taxidermy, and shipment of your trophies home, our South Africa hunting rates include all costs associated with the hunt. There are no hidden fees . Our African hunting safaris all include pick-up and drop off at O.R. Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg.

1×1: One Hunter Guided By One Professional Hunter

2×1: Two Hunters Guided By One Professional Hunter

Daily Rate

1×1: $400 per hunter, per day

2×1: $350 per hunter, per day

Non Hunter: $200 per person, per day

Included in the Daily Rate:

Exclusive use of the hunting area

Services of a licensed Professional Hunter

Pre-Approved firearm import service

Meet & Greet at airport

Transportation between Johannesburg International Airport and hunting areas

Accommodation, food, and beverages

Reasonable quantity of alcoholic beverages

Laundry service during the hunt

Skinning and field preparation of trophies

Delivery of trophies to a Gauteng based taxidermist/shipping company of your choice

CITES Permits and hunting permits (when applicable)

Not Included in the Daily Rate:

Gratuities for staff members

Trophy and taxidermy fees

Shipment of trophies out of South Africa

Airline tickets

Personal, travel, and trophy insurance

International calls from cell phones or landlines

Rifle rental

Videographer

$220 per day: Includes all editing and post production of video.

For more information on our hunts, check our our Africa FAQ page.

South Africa Hunting Trophy Fees



All prices are in US dollars.

South Africa Cape Buffalo Hunting Packages

South Africa Cape Buffalo Hunting Package

7 Days (6 Nights) Accommodation

1 Cape Buffalo Bull

$13,000 Per Hunter (1×1)

$12,750 Per Hunter (2×1)

$1,200 Per Non-Hunter

South Africa Cape Buffalo/Sable Hunting Package

8 Days (7 Nights) Accommodation

1 Cape Buffalo Bull & 1 Trophy Sable

$18,000 Per Hunter (1×1)

$1,400 Per Non-Hunter

Join us on one of our South Africa Cape Buffalo hunts if you want to go up against the legendary Black Death on our outstanding buffalo hunting area in northern Limpopo Province. Cape Buffalo are the most sought after member of the Big Five and this is a real deal Cape Buffalo hunt for wild buffalo on foot and in thick bushveld conditions.

We have a 100% success rate over the past four years and our lifetime success rate on Cape Buffalo hunting safaris is over 90%. We only hunt hard bossed bulls, not immature bulls who have not had an opportunity to breed.

Visit our South Africa Cape Buffalo Hunting page for more details.

Why Should I Book A South Africa Hunting Safari With You?

No hidden costs: our South Africa hunting packages include everything except for your air fare, taxidermy, and shipment of your trophies.

We are not a high turnover outfit. Instead, we focus on providing quality hunts with the best possible experience for each guest. For that reason, we only book one hunt at a time. Instead of sharing the area with people that you don’t know, you’ll have the whole place to yourself. This allows us to give you our full attention and ensure that you receive VIP treatment on your hunt.

We’ll pick you up at O.R. Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg. Unlike a hunt in Namibia, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, or the Eastern Cape of South Africa, no follow on airline flights or plane charters are necessary if you book a hunting safari with us.

If you want to bring your own rifle, we’ll get a temporary import permit for you and help you with all the paperwork involved at no extra charge. So, there is no need to go through the hassle of importing your rifle on your own or pay an additional $200-300 to another company for their help with this.

We book a limited number of hunts each year, abide by strict quotas, and carefully manage our hunting areas. This ensures that our hunters have high success rates and take the best quality trophies possible (over 90% of our trophies make the Safari Club International or Rowland Ward record book).

Our Professional Hunters (PHs) are friendly, knowledgeable, and have many years worth of experience guiding North American, European, and Asian hunters on plains game and dangerous game hunting safaris.

We take pride in providing authentic African hunting safaris with outstanding personal service before, during, and after your hunt. You will not have problems getting in touch us when and we’ll be available to you through the entire process to provide assistance with anything you need related to the hunt.

We strive to provide high quality, all-inclusive African hunting safaris with no hidden costs. Not every hunting outfitter prices their hunts in this manner.

This is a veteran owned and operated business and we plan all of our hunts with military precision and attention to detail.

For more information on our hunts, check our our Africa FAQ page.

Our South Africa hunting prices are valid for hunts booked in 2019 and 2020. Though every effort will be made to follow up and recover wounded animals, all animals wounded and not recovered will be charged the full trophy fee.

For hunters that do not wish to bring their own rifles, we have scoped rifles chambered in .243 Winchester, .308 Winchester, .30-06 Springfield, .338 Winchester Magnum, .375 H&H and .375 Ruger available for our clients to rent when hunting. For $20 a day, we provide use of the rifle and ammunition suitable for hunting plains game or Cape Buffalo as appropriate.

Don’t forget to check out our 2019 South African Packages. Check out the following page to learn more about the accommodations on our plains game hunts in South Africa.