Today’s Technologies Need an Off-the-Hook Option
When I was a kid, Friday night was always movie night in the Bilton house. My dad would stop on his way home from work to pick up Chinese takeout and a movie from the video rental store.

My sisters and I would scurry into the kitchen, grab our cartons of chow mien and chopsticks that we were too young to properly use, and then race into the living room to drop onto the well-worn leather couch, ready to be mesmerized by the best of the ’80s: “Teen Wolf,” “Ghostbusters,” “The Goonies.”

But there was also another part of the Friday night ritual — very likely the most important part. “Nick, go and take the phone off the hook,” my father would command.

I’d excitedly rush into the hallway, lift up the phone receiver, and toss it to the floor. Then, I’d race back into the living room before showtime. As the opening credits for the movie began, the phone left off the hook would echo in the hall: Beep. Beep. Beep. Beep … and then, silence.

No way to answer the phone, and no way to leave a message, meant that no one could get through. And rightly so: it was movie night, after all.

It was as if we had put up a giant stop sign on our lawn warning any visitors to keep away. As a family, we didn’t want any interruptions and technology allowed us to make sure we didn’t have any.

Today’s communications technologies do not have that option.

Sure, you can turn off your smartphone when you want some alone time, but when it’s turned back on, like the grand finale of a fireworks show, the phone will boing, chime, trill, marimba and vibrate erratically with text messages, voice mail, app notifications, e-mails and a cannonade of messages from all the social networks you’re connected to.

The difference with the old landline phone being off the hook was that people didn’t have an option to leave a message or disrupt you. If the call was important, the person would call back later. We were never left with the anxiety that we would be buried by an avalanche of communications as soon as the phone was reunited with the receiver.

With today’s tech, e-mail is the worst at disconnecting. Yes, you could set an “away message” and bounce e-mails back like ping-pong balls to their senders, but that only creates more work for the person who wrote the message.

Anyone who has ever walked away from e-mail for a few days knows that dreaded feeling of returning to a full inbox. E-mail should allow you to literally say, “I don’t want to receive e-mails for a day.” Then, people would be unable to send you messages.

We would all be better off for it. A recent study found that people who take e-mail vacations for five days have drastically reduced stress levels.

Technology created the problem. It’s time for technology to fix it. One thing’s for sure: Today’s communications, with its unlimited avenues and no traffic lights or stop signs, is broken.

We need technological solutions that allow us to take our smartphones and computers off the hook, and not have anything waiting for us if we do.