Luke 12:19 Then I will say to myself, "You have plenty of good things laid up for many years. Take it easy. Eat, drink, and be merry!"'
Lexicon

Then

καὶ

(kai)

Conjunction



And, even, also, namely.

I will say

ἐρῶ

(erō)

Verb - Future Indicative Active - 1st Person Singular



Probably a fuller form of rheo; an alternate for epo in certain tenses; to utter, i.e. Speak or say.

to

τῇ

(tē)

Article - Dative Feminine Singular



The, the definite article. Including the feminine he, and the neuter to in all their inflections; the definite article; the.

myself,

μου

(mou)

Personal / Possessive Pronoun - Genitive 1st Person Singular



I, the first-person pronoun. A primary pronoun of the first person I.

“You

Ψυχή

(Psychē)

Noun - Vocative Feminine Singular



From psucho; breath, i.e. spirit, abstractly or concretely.

have

ἔχεις

(echeis)

Verb - Present Indicative Active - 2nd Person Singular



To have, hold, possess. Including an alternate form scheo skheh'-o; a primary verb; to hold.

plenty of

πολλὰ

(polla)

Adjective - Accusative Neuter Plural



Much, many; often.

good things

ἀγαθὰ

(agatha)

Adjective - Accusative Neuter Plural



A primary word; 'good'.

laid up

κείμενα

(keimena)

Verb - Present Participle Middle or Passive - Accusative Neuter Plural



To lie, recline, be placed, be laid, set, specially appointed, destined. Middle voice of a primary verb; to lie outstretched.

for

εἰς

(eis)

Preposition



A primary preposition; to or into, of place, time, or purpose; also in adverbial phrases.

many

πολλά

(polla)

Adjective - Accusative Neuter Plural



Much, many; often.

years.

ἔτη

(etē)

Noun - Accusative Neuter Plural



A year. Apparently a primary word; a year.

Take it easy.

ἀναπαύου

(anapauou)

Verb - Present Imperative Middle - 2nd Person Singular



From ana and pauo; to repose (be exempt), remain); by implication, to refresh.

Eat,

φάγε

(phage)

Verb - Aorist Imperative Active - 2nd Person Singular



A primary verb; to eat.

drink,

πίε

(pie)

Verb - Aorist Imperative Active - 2nd Person Singular



To drink, imbibe. A prolonged form of pio, which poo occurs only as an alternate in certain tenses; to imbibe.

[and] be merry!”’

εὐφραίνου

(euphrainou)

Verb - Present Imperative Middle or Passive - 2nd Person Singular



From eu and phren; to put in a good frame of mind, i.e. Rejoice.

Eat, drink, and be merry.

Odes,

(19)--The words remind us of St. Paul's "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die" ( 1Corinthians 15:32 ), and may possibly have suggested them. There is, however, a suggestive difference in the context. Extremes meet, and the life of self-indulgence may spring either from an undue expectation of a lengthened life, or from unduly dwelling on the fact of its shortness, without taking into account the judgment that comes after it. The latter, as in the "carpe diem" of Horace (i. 11, 8), was the current language of popular Epicureanism; the former seems to have been more characteristic of a corrupt Judaism. (Comp. James 4:13 .) In acting on it the Jew with his far outlook, as he dreamt, into the future, was sinking to the level of the dissolute heathen, who was content to live in and for the present only.

Verse 19.

And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years.

soul

Many years.

so

Take

thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry

Jump to Previous

Jump to Next

Links



















"What folly!" writes St. Basil. "Had thy soul been a sty, what else couldst thou have promised to it? Art thou so ignorant of what really belongs to the soul, that thou offerest to it the foods of the body? And givest thou to thythe things which the draught receives?"How little did that poor fool, so wise in all matters of earthly business, suspect the awful doom wasclose to him! He forgot Solomon's words, "Boast not thyself of to-morrow" ( Proverbs 27:1 ).. "Extremes meet," suggests Dean Plumptre; "and the life of self-indulgence may spring either from an undue expectation of a lengthened life" (as was the case here), "or from unduly dwelling on its shortness, without taking into account the judgment that comes after it. The latter, as in the 'carpe diem' of Horace ('Odes,' 1:11. 8), was the current language of popular epicureanism" (see St. Paul's reproduction of this thought, 1 Corinthians 15:32 ); "the former seems to have been more characteristic of a corrupt Judaism."12:13-21 Christ's kingdom is spiritual, and not of this world. Christianity does not meddle with politics; it obliges all to do justly, but wordly dominion is not founded in grace. It does not encourage expectations of worldly advantages by religion. The rewards of Christ's disciples are of another nature. Covetousness is a sin we need constantly to be warned against; for happiness and comfort do not depend on the wealth of this world. The things of the world will not satisfy the desires of a soul. Here is a parable, which shows the folly of carnal worldling while they live, and their misery when they die. The character drawn is exactly that of a prudent, worldly man, who has no grateful regard to the providence of God, nor any right thought of the uncertainty of human affairs, the worth of his soul, or the importance of eternity. How many, even among professed Christians, point out similar characters as models for imitation, and proper persons to form connexions with! We mistake if we think that thoughts are hid, and thoughts are free. When he saw a great crop upon his ground, instead of thanking God for it, or rejoicing to be able to do more good, he afflicts himself. What shall I do now? The poorest beggar in the country could not have said a more anxious word. The more men have, the more perplexity they have with it. It was folly for him to think of making no other use of his plenty, than to indulge the flesh and gratify the sensual appetites, without any thought of doing good to others. Carnal worldlings are fools; and the day is coming when God will call them by their own name, and they will call themselves so. The death of such persons is miserable in itself, and terrible to them. Thy soul shall be required. He is loth to part with it; but God shall require it, shall require an account of it, require it as a guilty soul to be punished without delay. It is the folly of most men, to mind and pursue that which is for the body and for time only, more than that for the soul and eternity.Alphabetical: And be come drink ease easy eat for good goods have I I'll laid life many merry merry' my myself of plenty say soul Take things to up will years You your