Klein: ‘We have to strengthen our sexual harassment laws’
State Senate Independent Democratic Conference Leader Jeff Klein, who last week was accused by a former staff member of forcibly kissing her, reiterated on Tuesday that he believes he will be vindicated following a Joint Commission on Public Ethics investigation into the matter.

Klein confirmed that JCOPE indeed is looking into the matter, after he initially called for the commission to investigate him last week.

As for how he’ll approach this year’s state budget, with Gov. Andrew Cuomo proposing a package of anti-sexual harassment and assault provisions, Klein told reporters that Cuomo’s proposal is “an important start.”

“I think we have to strengthen our sexual harassment laws, and I intend to push to make that happen,” he said.

Cuomo’s budget includes a proposal to fund a special investigation unit within JCOPE to specifically tackle sexual misconduct claims.

“JCOPE has jurisdiction over these issues, that’s in the existing law,” Cuomo said in his executive budget address Tuesday afternoon. “The only criticism of JCOPE in the past — and JCOPE has done these cases before and they’ve been very effective … was the timing, that it took them a long time.”

Erica Vladimer, who is accusing Klein of forcibly kissing her outside an Albany bar in 2015, released a statement through her attorney Monday, saying she would gladly cooperate with a JCOPE investigation “because I am telling the truth.”

“I hope this is the next important step to introducing legislation to protect people against misconduct both in government and beyond,” she said, later adding that though she has hired an attorney, she does not intend to sue Klein, “although he richly deserves it.”

Klein hired an attorney who conducted an investigation of the allegation, which Vladimer was not contacted for, she said.

“Given his aggressive actions thus far, I too have hired counsel to protect my rights as I speak out — and to make sure, if and when there is an investigation, it will not be a white wash, like the one hastily conducted by Senator Klein and backed immediately by his colleagues in the IDC,” she said. “I, too, served the IDC, yet it shamefully adopted his narrative without investigation or reflection.”