How do we decide which words to include in our children’s dictionaries?

Compiling a small dictionary for children is never easy – so many words competing for space in a book with a finite number of pages. Animals and plants, clothing, fruits and vegetables, musical instruments, body parts, animal noises … the list is endless. They can’t all go in. We know that, but it’s still painful to have to exclude some familiar favourites. At the extremes, it’s fairly easy – apple is in and durian fruit is out, piano is in and didgeridoo is out, jumper is in and jeggings is out. It’s always the grey area in between that is difficult: kiwi fruit? French horn? stocking?

To compound the difficulties, the language keeps growing, with new words coming knocking on the door and demanding entry – internet, online, blog, etc. Closing the door on new words and crying, ‘No room!’ is not an option, so the axe has to fall on some of the old ones. Some words are clever and manage to evolve to maintain their slot. Wireless is one which, as a device for listening to BBC radio, was on the verge of being kicked out, until it cunningly managed to reinvent itself as an adjective, so it keeps its place between wire and wise.

One of the big frustrations with any small dictionary is that there is a core of around 1500 words that have to be included – the basic words that are so ubiquitous that we hardly notice them: get, give, and go, mum and dad, up and down, school and shoe. Once all these are in place, there is limited space for the more interesting or colourful words. Personally, I think one of the greatest achievements of the Oxford Junior Dictionary is the number of descriptive words which it has managed to retain, despite all the pressures on space – descriptive verbs such as glimmer and glitter, peep and peer, snarl, sneak, and snuggle; adjectives such as cunning and curious, energetic and enormous, incredible and indignant. Not only has it retained these words, but in many cases it has managed to find space for an example sentence to bring the word to life. If the role of a dictionary for children is partly to encourage a love and appreciation of language, then I believe words such as these should have the status of a protected species.

The Oxford Children’s Corpus

Fortunately, the work of lexicographers is much easier now since the invention of the corpus. Whereas in the past, decisions about what to include and exclude were based purely on opinion, we can now turn to the evidence to see which words are used the most frequently. The Oxford Children’s Corpus is a wonderful resource which allows us to look at the language which children are most likely to come across. It includes not only language that children are likely to read in fiction and non-fiction, but also a considerable amount of language written by children themselves. This allows us to make informed choices about which words merit inclusion.

Dictionary publishers occasionally come under pressure from different groups competing to get ‘their’ words included in dictionaries as a way of promoting particular beliefs or an agenda for social change. I find it an interesting idea that dictionaries could be powerful enough to change beliefs and behaviours. If this is the case, my next project might be a dictionary for teenagers which would exclude apathy, boredom, and clubbing, and instead focus on ambition, brainpower, and charm!

Dictionaries reflect the language as it is used, and language in turn reflects society. A children’s dictionary published in any particular decade will naturally give a snapshot of children’s lives and interests at that time. This is what makes it so fascinating to look back at earlier editions and compare with the present ones. Who knows what children’s lives will be like in ten years’ time, and which new or rediscovered words will be fighting to elbow aside some of those currently in the dictionary?