Texas Plumber’s Truck Traded In, Ends Up in Syria with Terrorists
Mark-1 Plumbing in Texas City is getting a lot of frantic calls lately. It’s got nothing to do with plugged drains or leaks—and everything to do with Syrian terrorists, social media, and a castoff Ford F-250 bearing the small business’s name.

As Houston news station KHOU reports, Mark-1’s Jeff Oberholtzer traded in an old F-250 in October of last year. The truck went to auction, still wearing Mark-1’s name and phone number on the door. Oberholtzer got his new vehicle and went on with his business.

Fast-forward to this week, when Oberholtzer’s truck appeared on Twitter in a decidedly different role:

And cue the confused, frantic, and outraged phone calls.

The fast-cash nature of auto auctions makes it difficult to figure out exactly how the castoff Mark-1 truck went from Texas City, Texas, to, apparently, the front lines of Islamic extremist rebel group Ansar al-Deen’s fight in the Syrian Civil War. But it has made for a world of headaches for Oberholtzer, who’s had to reassure people over and over that, no, the family-owned Texas business does not support terrorists. “We have a secretary here, she’s scared to death,” he tells KHOU. “We all have families. We don’t want no problems.”

There’s actually a straightforward explanation for how the truck ended up, allegedly, in Syria. The export market for used U.S. vehicles reaches across the globe. The cars and trucks we think of as old and busted hold immense value in other parts of the world, and auction transactions happen fast. The truck likely passed through numerous hands and ended up on a dealer’s lot in Syria before Mark-1 had fully broken in the vehicle that replaced this F-250. From there, judging by the image on Twitter, it became part of Ansar al-Deen’s fleet.

But the internet is full of hair-trigger conspiracy theorists ready to pounce, and so Oberholtzer and the rest of the folks at Mark-1 have had to deal with death threats from mouth-breathers convinced that this plumbing shop is tied in to the global terrorist network. The company tells CBS News they’ve employed an attorney to attempt to remove the truck’s image from Twitter.

Remember: Get your business’s identifying info off of your vehicles before sending them to auction. Especially if those vehicles are capable of lugging a homebrew anti-aircraft rifle.

This story originally appeared on roadandtrack.com via KHOU.