Highway 280 Chick-fil-A took "opportunity to help," gave food to drivers, others stranded in snow
BIRMINGHAM, Alabama -- When the heavy snow in Birmingham on Tuesday slowed traffic to a crawl on major roads, the owner of a fast-food location on Highway 280 found a way to help feed -- and bring a little comfort -- to some of the drivers as they struggled to get home.

Mark Meadows, owner/operator of the Chick-fil-A location at 4620 Highway 280, said today that he and his staff distributed chicken sandwiches to drivers stuck in traffic yesterday.

And they prepared chicken biscuits this morning for people who were stranded in the area last night.

The food giveaway, which will end today at about noon, began almost by accident, when Meadows went out to make a delivery Tuesday about 2 p.m.

"I took my delivery out and couldn't get there," he said. "It was bumper to bumper for several hours."

But rather than letting the good, hot food go to waste, Meadows gave it to some of the drivers whose vehicles were crawling slowly along the crowded road.

"It was an opportunity to help," he said. "Some people were in their cars for 5 or 6 hours."

After going back to the store, Meadows arranged for a second giveaway of the regular Chick-fil-A sandwiches just before dark, at about 4 or 5 p.m., to drivers still trying to make it home

"That was the biggest round," he said. "We probably gave away about 300 sandwiches."

Meadows said he stuck with the sandwiches because they were easier to prepare and distribute.

The effort was certainly worthwhile, according to Meadows. "Some of these people left their office at 11 that morning and didn't have anything to eat," he said. "They were hungry."

And he said he enjoyed having the chance to help. "It made me feel real good, especially with people being so appreciative," Meadows said. "It was the most fun I've had in a long time."

The food giveaway at the store continued this morning beginning at about 7 a.m., as Meadows and his staff distributed over 1,000 chicken biscuits.

Some of the recipients of the food this morning were people who had been given refuge for the night in the lobbies of area hotels, such as the Fairfield Inn near the Chick-fil-A, according to Meadows.

Meadows, who said today he has been at work since Tuesday at 9 a.m., spent the night at the store with some of his employees.

They also offered a place to sleep and stay warm to a few of the people who were stranded.

This occurred after the lobby at the Fairfield Inn filled up, according to Meadows.

Meadows, a lifelong Birmingham resident, said that he has seen harsh winter weather hit the city before, as in the blizzard of 1993.

But there was one difference with this storm, according to Meadows.

"The biggest difference is that it came at 10 or 11 o'clock in the morning, not the middle of the night," he said. "And everybody was out. It caught everybody by surprise."

Meadows also mentioned that the staff at the Home Depot store in the area was out on 280 giving away bottles of water yesterday.

For more news from Birmingham, go to www.al.com/local/birmingham.



Winter Storm Aerial Photographs: Jan. 29, 2014 64 Gallery: Winter Storm Aerial Photographs: Jan. 29, 2014