Bureau of Public Service Reforms
Mr. D. I Arabi, BA, PGDM, MBA, MCIPM (Licenced Human Resource Practitioner), MNIM.

Director, Corporate Services Department/Ag. Director-General

He attended the following Institutions:

· Ahmadu Bello University B.A.(Hons)

· Usman Dan Fodio University, Sokoto, PG Diploma in Mgmt

· Usman Dan Fodio University, Sokoto, M.Sc. Bus. Admin



He also attended the following training programs:

Modernizing the Public Service

Benchmarking and managing performance

Benchmarking and managing performance Policy Analysis and Policy Implementation

Policy Analysis and Policy Implementation Role of ICT in Policy Analysis

Role of ICT in Policy Analysis Leading a Project Team

Leading a Project Team Modern Trends on Human Resource Management

Modern Trends on Human Resource Management Writing Council Memo, Notes and Conclusion

Writing Council Memo, Notes and Conclusion E-Government in Africa

E-Government in Africa Special Human Resource Forum

Special Human Resource Forum Delivering Value through People in the Public Sector

Delivering Value through People in the Public Sector E-Government Capacity (Executive Course)

E-Government Capacity (Executive Course) Strategic Human Resource Management (Master Class)

Strategic Human Resource Management (Master Class) Impact Assessment & Evaluation

Impact Assessment & Evaluation Compliance Training for Public Officers

Compliance Training for Public Officers Improving Research Capacity for PRS

Improving Research Capacity for PRS Leading a Project Team

Leading a Project Team Modern Trend in Human Resource Management

Modern Trend in Human Resource Management Policy Analysis and Implementation

Policy Analysis and Implementation Council Memoranda, Notes & Conclusion

Council Memoranda, Notes & Conclusion Customer Service Delivery in the Public Service

Customer Service Delivery in the Public Service Preparatory Training Course for Compulsory Confirmation, Promotion Exam

Preparatory Training Course for Compulsory Confirmation, Promotion Exam Operationalizing the Strategic Plan of BPSR

Operationalizing the Strategic Plan of BPSR Leadership & Personal Effectiveness Program

Leadership & Personal Effectiveness Program Benchmarking & Managing Performance

Membership

Member, Nigeria Institute of Management (NIM)

Member, Nigeria Marketing Association

Member, Chartered Institute of Public Management of Nigeria (CIPMN)

Mr. Dizzy M. Ukiri, Director, Finance & Accounts (AMICAN 1995, FCA 2004, MNIM 2005)

Mr. Dizzy M. Ukiri is a native of Uvwie Local Government Area of Delta State. He holds HND in Accountancy from the Lagos State College of Science & Technology 1982 and Post Graduate Diploma in Public Administration from University of Abuja 2006. He started his working career as an Accountant in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1983. He served at various times in some Nigerian Embassies abroad before being posted to the Office of the Accountant General of the Federation Headquarter in 2003.

He is now the Director, Finance and Accounts at the Bureau of Public Service Reforms.

Ms. Amonia Morreen Standfast, Head/DD, Reform Coordination Department

Miss Amonia Morreen Standfast hails from Abonnema, in Akuku-Toru Local Government Area (AKULGA) of Rivers State. She holds a B.Ed (Hons) Arts - English degree (1983) from the University of Benin- City, and an M.Ed (Administration - 1986) from the University of Lagos, Akoka, Lagos.

Miss Standfast was employed as aPersonnel Officer II on 4th April, 1989 in the then Federal Ministry of Finance & Economic Development. She rose through the ranks and is currently a Deputy Director (Administration)/Head of Reform Cooridnation Department in the Bureau of Public Service Reforms. She worked in various Ministries including Special Duties Office (under the Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation), Federal Ministry of Youth Development, Science & Technology, Environment, and Water Resources, where she served as the Special Assistant to the Permanent Secretary from 2011 - 2017.

She was the Project Manager of the HIV/AIDS Critical Mass Committee in the Federal Ministry of Youth Development from 2009-2010 and also M&E Officer for the Science Technology Education Post Basic (STEP-B) project in the Federal Ministry of Science and Technology, from 2012-2014.

Ms. F. Otti, Head/DD, Strategy, Innovation & Research

Mr. Sylvester Inyang Anyang - Head/DD, Special Duties and Programmes

Mr. S. Inyang Anyang hails from Ikot Imo, Nsit Ubium LGA of Akwa Ibom State. He holds a B.SC (Political Science) 1985 from the University of Calabar, Calabar and MPA (1991) from the Obafemi Awolowo University, IIe-Ife.

Anyang started his working career as an Administrative Officer in 1987 and is now a Deputy Director. His working career has seen him working in the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation (i.e. Manpower Development Office), Ministry of Defence, National Planning Commission, and the Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR).

He bagged the Kaduna State NYSC award and the Presidential NYSC award (1986).

He was appointed as a member of the 1979 Constitution Review Committee (CRC) to represent the interest of the Youths in the review of the 1979 constitution.

He is married with children.

Mrs. Florence-D Eke, Head/DD, Strategic Communications Department

Mrs Florence Dibiaezue-Eke is a native of Ifitedunu, in Dunukofia Local Government Area of Anambra State. She holds a B.Ed (English), degree (1985) from the University of Ife, Ile-Ife , Oyo State, Nigeria and M.Ed (Guidance and Counselling 1988) from University of Ibadan, Oyo State.

Mrs. D -Eke started her working career as an Information Officer 1 in 1990 in the then Federal Ministry of Labour, Employment and Productivity. She rose through the ranks and is now a Deputy Director (Information) in Bureau of Public Service Reforms (BPSR). Her working career has been in various Ministries as Chief Press Secretary, namely: Federal Ministry of Solid Minerials, Office of Special Assistant to the Mr. President on Child Trafficking (under the Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation), Press and Public Relations Unit, Office of the Auditor General for the Federation etc.

Mrs. Eke is happily married with children.

Mr. Aliu I. Ibrahim, Head/DD, Internal Audit Unit (AMNIM, CNA/ANAN)

Mr. Aliu I. Ibrahim hails from Share Ifelodun Local Government Area of Kwara State. He holds a B.Sc (Banking & Finance) 1986 from the University of Lagos and MBA (Finance) 2015 from Nasarawa State University, Keffi. He started his working career as an Accountant II at National Population Commission (NPC) in 1991 and now a Deputy Director. Apart from the NPC, he has had a distinguished working career in the Federal Ministry of Trade and Investment, Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation and Bureau of Public Service Reforms.

He was given a commendation letter at the Osun State office of National Population Commission in 1996 for a proper coordination of human and material resources.