Do you buy Papa John's pizza?
Quote: Johnny L.A. Originally Posted by They look pretty good on the commercials, but I object to the CEO's attitude. John Schnatter ostensibly said, 'If our business is successful and achieves excessive profits, we're under no obligation to share that with our workers.'



Employees work for wages. They enter into a negotiated contract and earn what the two parties agreed to at an arms-length transaction. If your skills are not sufficiently marketable, then you need to do something about that. This is the bedrock of a free market.



Owners, on the other hand, invest for profits. If a company is profitable, that benefit goes to the owners.



So the answer to employees is simple: if you want a higher wage, go out and obtain it. If you want a cut of the profits, buy stock. If you're not willing to do either one, just STFU.



As far as the pizza goes: Papa John's is OK. Given a choice, there are five options in my area that I prefer (2 that deliver and 3 that do not), so I don't actually buy from Papa John's. As for their politics: they should do whatever allows them to acquire and retain the workforce necessary to maintain a profitable business. I guess you could say I agree with them, though I've learned from experience that you often get what you pay for when it comes to employees. I don't understand this attitude.Employees work for wages. They enter into a negotiated contract and earn what the two parties agreed to at an arms-length transaction. If your skills are not sufficiently marketable, then you need to do something about that. This is the bedrock of a free market.Owners, on the other hand, invest for profits. If a company is profitable, that benefit goes to the owners.So the answer to employees is simple: if you want a higher wage, go out and obtain it. If you want a cut of the profits, buy stock. If you're not willing to do either one, just STFU.As far as the pizza goes: Papa John's is OK. Given a choice, there are five options in my area that I prefer (2 that deliver and 3 that do not), so I don't actually buy from Papa John's. As for their politics: they should do whatever allows them to acquire and retain the workforce necessary to maintain a profitable business. I guess you could say I agree with them, though I've learned from experience that you often get what you pay for when it comes to employees. Reply With Quote