September 2007
Brian is keen to carry on astronomical research, and I look forward to seeing future publications by May et al. which will throw light on the structure and origin of the zodiacal cloud.

Despite his success as a rock musician, Brian has continued his interest in astronomy, and last year co-authored, with Sir Patrick Moore and Chris Lintott, a popular science book entitled BANG! The Complete History of the Universe. He had mentioned in public that it was always a matter of regret that he hadnt finished his PhD in astronomy, but recently he had the opportunity to do just that, and he has spent the last year or so reviewing the field and putting his original work into an up-to-date context. Fortunately for Brian, the particular line of research he followed has not progressed much since the 1970s studies of the zodiacal cloud (the interplanetary dust cloud which pervades the solar system) have concentrated more on its spatial rather than its kinematic structure. So he was in the position of having old data which could still inform current debate about the origin interplanetary dust. Of course I cant say much about the viva itself except the outcome which has been widely reported, that his thesis will be accepted subject to the usual minor corrections.

I was recently asked to be the external examiner for a PhD thesis entitled A survey of radial velocities in the zodiacal dust cloud. Nothing too extraordinary in that, except that in this case, the candidate had carried out his observational work in the early 1970s, and that at the time when he should have been writing-up, he was enjoying huge chart success with the band Queen. The candidate was of course their lead guitarist, Brian May.

One of Brian's examiners wrote a piece about Brian on Open University , which readers of Brianmay.com might find of interest:

- title of his thesis "A Survey of Radial Velocities in the Zodiacal Dust Cloud" and explain subject a little; - what insights are obtained into the dust from looking at it; - his interest was in the "motion" that is, movement, of the dust in addition to its static state; - why it took so long(!); - validity of the technique for studying this kind of dust; - timeframes of observations; - whether purpose for finishing the PhD now was to become a career scientist, remain 'Brian May the musician' or simply 'unfinished business'; - whether parallels between finishing an album and putting lid on such a paper - knowing 'when to finish'; - perfectionist streak as both a musician and a scientist; - had Imperial changed much after such a long career break; - whether any approaches by Rock Music Society; - what did he consider his greatest achievement - thesis volume "Bohemian Rhapsody"

GARETH MITCHELL: ". . . an Imperial College PhD student has just submitted his thesis. And one of his extramural activities alongside being a student here at Imperial is playing in a rock band. And you might think, well, that could apply to many students. But not all of them are Brian May from Queen . But it is true, Brian , you have just handed in your thesis? It's a weighty looking tome in front of us. Just give us the title of this PhD."...

Gareth Mitchell is a lecturer in the Science and Communication Group at Imperial College and also presents the BBC technology programme, Digital Planet.

As reported here, Brian handed in his thesis to Imperial College on 3 August. While there, he sat down with Gareth Mitchell, to answer questions for the Imperial College September Podcast. ( Listen : 33MB)

Before lunch today, Brian "delivered a final purple-bound hardback copy" of his thesis to the Imperial College Registry. The completed thesis now has the approval of Prof. Iwan Williams, Solar System research expert. Brian is now officially (the 'real')....

This Friday at the Heights Hotel, Portland, Dorset ( www.heightshotel.com ) there is a charity auction with a signed and used Brian May guitar as the main item. Apparently there is a reserve of £5000 already…!!! Adrian

Thank you, farewell and good luck to outgoing members - and a warm welcome to new cast joining the 'Rock You' family.

The new cast have their first performance on Monday 1 October.

This Saturday (29 September) is tha last performance of many mambers of the current WWRY UK cast. To mark the end of their tenure and by way of send off, Brian plans to be present and intends popping up for an onstage jam... so an extra or this treat.

This week, we will be trying less training and more sweets. Pete and Carl

Great performances from all the lads. Alex looks more like a goalkeeper with every game, George was much more like it in defence, and Kieron was man of the match for his well taken goal and tireless running.

The boys lost 4-1 on Saturday thanks to some sketchy refereeing decisions, one goal that didn't cross the line, and a blatant handball. Nevertheless, we were pleased with the effort and they are definitely 'getting it'. We will no doubt get some hammerings this season against more experienced sides, but as long as we learn every week, that's all we can ask!!!

Tickets at £7.50 include light refreshments and a cooked lunch, or £4 for just the refreshments. Book by contacting Darren Jehan on 01234 764498 or email programme@bedsastro.org.uk

Exhibitions will include displays of meteorites and space memorabilia, while vendors will also have latest generation equipment.

A full programme of speakers includes: Robin Catchpole, on The Universe Unveiled; Paul Money, on Mars, The Next Generation; Nik Syzmaneck, on Astro Imaging; Andy Green, on The Story Of Extra Terrestrial And Terrestrial Impacts; and Carl Warren, on Lisa Pathfinder And Gravity Wave Detection.

The anniversary celebrations take place on Sunday, October 7, at the school's theatre from 9am to 5.30pm.

The Bedford society's ranks of 65 members were swelled by a series of exhibitions at libraries earlier this year, and they meet on the last Wednesday of every month at Bedford School's Observatory and Planetarium.

"Then there was Brian May writing his book (with Moore ), and getting his doctorate in astronomical physics, and he (the Queen guitarist) is a well-known celebrity. Growing numbers of people are finding it intriguing."

"We can see a growth of interest, not only from specialist magazines but from newspapers and television," Mr Ashwell said. "There is so much more now than when we only had programmes like The Sky At Night on at obscure times of the morning. Patrick Moore isn't going to go on for ever and there are a lot of new people coming up.

Bedford Astronomical Society notches up its 20th anniversary with a day-long programme of events next month. And membership is booming, said publications editor Peter Ashwell.

Bedford Astronomical Society has a record membership as it marks its 20th anniversary. Record levels of interest are being shown in the night skies above Bedford, according to the town's astronomers.