The First Lady of Poland Smoothly Avoided Shaking Donald Trump’s Hand [Updated]
Donald Trump has only been in office for six months, but he already has a streak of awkward handshakes—or in this case, snubs—with world leaders. As the president and First Lady were greeting the Polish President Andrzej Duda and his wife, Agata Kornhauser-Duda, in Poland on Thursday, Kornhauser-Duda appeared to pass over the president and instead shook Melania Trump’s hand. has only been in office for six months, but he already has a streak of awkward handshakes—or in this case, snubs—with world leaders. As the president and First Lady were greeting the Polish Presidentand his wife,in Poland on Thursday, Kornhauser-Duda appeared to pass over the president and instead shookhand.

The video, which quickly went viral, shows the president turning toward Kornhauser-Duda for a handshake as she swiftly walks by him. Trump looks bewildered at this apparent rejection. (She did, later, shake the president’s hand after all.)

Shinzo Abe resulted in what looked like an [uncomfortable power struggle] as Trump held on to the Abe’s hands for nearly 19 seconds. The president has a reputation for this kind of handshake, which Mike Pence to New Jersey Governor Chris Christie. But this interaction is only the latest fumble in Trump’s social interactions. In February, Trump’s meeting with Japanese Prime Ministerresulted in what looked like an [uncomfortable power struggle] as Trump held on to the Abe’s hands for nearly 19 seconds. The president has a reputation for this kind of handshake, which CNN deemed the “grab and yank” in a compilation video featuring political leaders from Vice Presidentto New Jersey Governor



This article has been updated to reflect that President Trump and Kornhauser-Duda did eventually shake hands. And do we even need to get into the Melania hand graze seen ‘round the world ? O.K. fine, we have. .This article has been updated to reflect that President Trump and Kornhauser-Duda did eventually shake hands.

Do you have what it takes?

Test your knowledge of the Seven Kingdoms with Vanity Fair’s Game of Unknowns.

Make your predictions