VCU School of Business
Etti Baranoff

Associate ProfessorFinance Insurance and Real Estate301 W. Main StreetPO Box 844000Richmond, VA, 23284-4000B4167(804) 828-3187(804) 828-88841995 to present: Associate Professor of Finance and Insurance at the School of Business of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia. Teaching: undergraduate and graduate courses in finance, risk and insurance and employee benefits - all group coverages and pensions. Curriculum and course development in risk financing, risk management, and insurance, including educational videos. Affiliation: A visiting scholar at the Business School of the University of Texas at Austin; courses teaching: Risk and Insurance (my textbook with Flat World Knowledge.com); managing financial risk; employee benefitsHealth Insurance risks and managed care; capital structure; enterprise risk; All insurance coverage - personal and commercial lines; Insurers' financial stability; Alternative risk financing; macro regulation; systemic risk; digitation and insurance;Etti Baranoff is an Associate Professor of Insurance and Finance at Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond VA since 1995. She teaches insurance, pensions, employee benefits and finance topics to graduate and undergraduate classes. Prior to her academic career, she was a Texas insurance regulator for 12 years with specialty in rate regulation, solvency studies and modelling and legislative issues. Her career also includes experience with a life insurer, a Texas public risk pool and consulting.Baranoff has been in the insurance and risk management arena for over 30 years. She has spoken in many insurance and finance forums and is a 5-time winner of the Research Paper Award from the International Insurance Society, including her timely award paper "The Impact of Mortgage Backed Securities on Capital Requirements of Life Insurers in the Financial Crisis of 2007- 2008."Baranoff has been a member of the prestigious Risk Theory Seminar and have authored or co- authored more than 50 papers relating to risk management and insurance. Her work is published in prominent journals, including The Journal of Risk and Insurance, The Journal of Banking andFinance, The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance, the Journal of Insurance Regulation, Best's Review, and Contingencies of the American Academy of Actuaries, among others. She has served on the editorial board of The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance. Her research subjects include solvency detection models, capital and risk relationship, risk financing, enterprise risk management, asset allocation models and market discipline. She also authored and co-authored textbooks in risk management and insurance including the recent "Risk Management for the Enterprise and Individuals" published in 2009 by Flatworld Knowledge.Along with her faculty position, she was appointed the Research Director for Finance and Insurance by The Geneva Association in October 2010. In this position she is a key independent expert on all fundamental and theoretical work in the area of Insurance and Finance and responsible for original research work. She serves on the Financial Stability in Insurance Working Group and is the author of the report: "An Analysis of the AIG Case: Understanding Systemic Risk and its Relation to Insurance" at: http://www.genevaassociation.org/PDF/BookandMonographs/GA2011-Considerations_for_Identifying_SIFIs_in_Insurance.pdf. She is the editor of the Geneva Association Insurance and Finance Newsletter and of the Geneva Papers for specific issues. The 7th-15th editions of the IF Newsletter of are available at: http://www.genevaassociation.org Baranoff earned her Ph.D. in finance, insurance and statistics from the University of Texas at Austin in 1993. Her BA in economics and statistics and her teaching certificate are from the University of Tel Aviv, Israel. She is a native of Israel and resides in both Austin, Texas and Richmond, Virginia.