Conservative activist Phyllis Schlafly endorses Michele Bachmann
Social conservative Phyllis Schlafly has endorsed Michele Bachmann for president and is urging Iowans to caucus for her, Bachmann’s campaign told The Des Moines Register tonight.

In a written statement, Schlafly says: “Most important, Michele has the courage to be a leader among her peers. She is a real champion in speaking up for values we care about. Michele is a woman of faith and the mother of a beautiful family. She has a 100 percent pro-life record and is a strong supporter of traditional marriage.”

Schlafly became a national leader in the conservative movement in the 1960s. In 2000, she campaigned in Iowa for Republican Steve Forbes.

In the statement, Schlafly pumps up Iowa’s first-in-the-nation caucuses.

“If I were an Iowa voter, I would be making plans right now to cast my vote for Michele Bachmann for president on January 3. I hope you will take advantage of this golden opportunity to support a candidate we can all be proud of.”

Schlafly said conservatives don’t want the media to choose their candidate, “or tell us we must choose one of the two who currently lead in the polls.”

Bachmann has the support of 8 percent of likely GOP caucusgoers in Iowa, a new Des Moines Register poll shows. Newt Gingrich is at the top with 25 percent, followed by Ron Paul at 18 percent.

Schlafly highlighted the Minnesota congresswoman’s work against “ObamaCare,” deficit spending and “traditional values.”

Here’s the biography provided by the Bachmann campaign:

Schlafly, who was named one of the 100 most important women of the 20th century by the Ladies’ Home Journal, has been a national leader of the conservative movement since the publication of her best-selling 1964 book, A Choice Not An Echo. She has been a leader of the pro-family movement since 1972, when she started her national volunteer organization now called Eagle Forum. In a ten-year battle, Mrs. Schlafly led the pro-family movement to victory over the Equal Rights Amendment, which was the principal legislative goal of the radical feminists. Her syndicated column appears in 100 newspapers, her radio commentaries are heard daily on over 600 stations, and her radio talk show on education called “Eagle Forum Live” is heard weekly on 75 stations.

Recommended Photos