Civil Engineering
Welcome to the Department of Civil Engineering, one of the departments of the Faculty of Engineering at the University of Stellenbosch . Here you will find contact details, updated reports on research conducted by the Department, publications by staff, information on academic and support staff as well as information on courses, postgraduate studies and of course, the latest news. You can also find relevant postgraduate information in our 2019 PG Brochure .

The Civil Engineering Department at Stellenbosch University is a leading institute for the teaching of Civil Engineering in South Africa. Our undergraduate and postgraduate courses in Civil Engineering are internationally accredited and recognised, and our graduates work all around the world as respected engineers. This video introduces the field of Civil Engineering and our specialist divisions.

Undergraduate

The civil engineering profession offers excellent careers for both men and women. Many and varied positions in the public and private sectors are filled by civil engineers, from local authorities to government departments, and from consulting engineering firms to giant international construction companies.

As a bonus, you get to study at one of the most beautiful campuses in the world! These are the fields you will be exposed to as an undergraduate:

Geotechnical engineering is the branch of civil engineering concerned with the behaviour of earth materials. Transport Engineering is the application of science and technology to the safe, efficient and sustainable movement of people and goods. It encompasses research, policy development, planning, design, implementation, operation and management of all modes of travel.

Structural engineering is the branch of civil engineering that deals with large, modern buildings and similar structures.The focus of Civil engineering informatics is on fundamental methods, models and processes of civil engineering, as well as information technology. This provides the basis for the systematic mapping of problems to the computer in such a way that the potential of information technology can be fully exploited.

Water and environmental engineering has to do with water resources development and management, yield analysis, low and flood flow hydrology, river hydraulics, design of hydraulic structures such as dams, tunnels and pump stations, water services, water quality and water treatment, as well as coastal and port engineering.

Construction engineering and management is concerned with management in all areas of infrastructure development, including the client, consultant and the contractor. It deals with large projects and focuses on modular construction, construction risk management, design management and infrastructure management.