Charlotte714 Ticket Information

FREE Admission | Main Gates Open 2PM

Sunday Praise & Worship with Special Musical Guests including:

Spend Labor Day Sunday With the Church of Charlotte

Charlotte714 tickets are not required for entry. We encourage participants to reserve tickets to help us estimate the number of attendees. Preferred, easy access, parking will be available for buses and church vans near the front gate.

Directions | Available Concessions |

Schedule of Events

8AM-3PM Outer Gate Praise/Worship

Main Gates Open at 2PM

Enter into His Gates with Praise 2:45 – 3:30

Individual Call to Prayer & Repentance 3:30-5:00

Church Call to Prayer & Repentance 5:00-7:00

National Call to Prayer & Repentance 7:00 – 8:30

Celebration of Worship with Big Daddy Weave 9:00

Pray For Our City | Pray for Our Nation

According to Claude King, co-author of “Experiencing God“, sacred assemblies were times for God’s people to confess and repent of their sins. They were times to renew the covenant relationship with the Lord and return to Him in faithful love and obedience. They were times for worship and sacrifice, feasting and fasting. Spiritual leaders knew that the sacred assembly was a time for corporate repentance in the face of God’s righteous judgments (Joel 1-2). A number of national revivals in the Old Testament occurred in response to a sacred assembly. Many of these assemblies lasted an entire day, with revival fires lasting for years following.

Charlotte714 will follow this biblical pattern and also provide an excellent time of fellowship with other believers from around our region. Because we are gathering as families, we are trying to make this family-friendly, yet with the full understanding that this is a sacred assembly.

Verizon Wireless Amphitheatre has graciously allowed us to bring coolers, so please come prepared with food. There will also be concessions available, so bring cash.

We have multiple Kid Zones that can provide temporary relief to our little ones that need to burn some energy. The amphitheatre has a very large lawn, so bring a blanket or lawn chair, relax and lead your family in this sacred gathering. There are also seats under a large pavilion, so rain or shine we are moving forward in Jesus’ name!

Charlotte714 is not a political event or a protest or demonstration. It is a gathering of believers seeking spiritual renewal in the church through biblical repentance. We humbly bow in Jesus’ name requesting that He hear from heaven, forgive our sins, and heal our land.