Carrie Underwood Has a Message for Radical Atheists Who Hate Her Song: "If You Don't Like It..." [VIDEO]
Former American Idol and current country superstar Carrie Underwood’s “Something in the Water” is an overtly Christian song that affirms the reality of God, conversion, and baptism.

No wonder the atheists hate it.

Water baptism is the sacrament, practiced almost universally by Christians of all stripes, though which the individual believer is identified with Jesus Christ. As a theme in popular music, it’s not entirely unheard of, but Underwood’s treatment of it makes it clear what she believes.

Click here to find out about the stand Derek Jeter took for his faith during his last home game.

For those who find the song offensive — for whatever reason — Underwood has a very simple message.

Get our daily email alert by entering your Email:

“I’m not the first person to sing about God, Jesus, faith [or] any of that, and I won’t be the last. And it won’t be the last for me, either. If you don’t like it, change the channel,” the singer recently said, according to The Blaze.

Underwood said the song is about how God improves the lives of those who believe in Him.

“It’s really kind of a joyous, uplifting song about changing your life for the better and kind of having that ‘a-ha’ moment, to waking up and your life being different from that moment forward,” she said.

In the song, that “a-ha” moment comes “a couple of days” after the singer’s decision to be baptized:

Then it hit me like a lightning late one night

I was all out of hope and all out of fight Couldn’t fight back the tears so I fell on my knees

Saying, “God, if you’re there come and rescue me.”

Felt love pouring down from above

Got washed in the water, washed in the blood and now I’m changed

Listen to “Something in the Water” here:

Underwood, we’re certain, hopes that no one actually changes the channel — not just because her career depends on listeners, but also because she undoubtedly would want as wide an audience as possible to hear the message the song delivers.

So we encourage all conservatives not to turn the channel, but to turn the volume — up. Not only will you hear some great music, but you’ll have the opportunity to annoy any atheists who might be standing nearby.

That’s a two-fer.

Please share this article on Twitter and Facebook if you support Carrie Underwood’s inclusion of faith in her music.

Enter your Email:

Please install the YARPP plugin Get our DAILY, politically incorrect updates for free... find out what the media isn't telling you: