Debate Question for Sen. Cruz: 'Any Word From God?'
Republican presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, standing next to Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, speaks at the first Republican presidential debate on Thursday, Aug. 6, 2015, in Cleveland. (AP Photo/Andrew Harnik)

(CNSNews.com) - Near the end of the debate Thursday night, Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly asked conservative Republican Sen. Ted Cruz if he'd had "any word from God."



Of the hundreds of questions that could have been asked, Kelly chose "an interesting closing question" for the candidates, suggested by a Facebook user, who said, 'I want to know if any of them have received a word from God on what they should do and take care of first.'



"Senator Cruz, start from you. Any word from God?" Kelly asked.



"Well, I am blessed to receive a word from God every day in receiving the scriptures and reading the scriptures. And God speaks through the Bible," Cruz replied, to applause.

"I'm the son of a pastor and evangelist, and I've described many times how my father, when I was a child, was an alcoholic. He was not a Christian. And my father left my mother and left me when I was just three years old."And someone invited him to Clay Road Baptist Church. And he gave his heart to Jesus, and it turned him around. And he got on a plane and he flew back to my mother and me."I would also note that the scripture tells us, 'You shall know them by their fruit.' We see lots of campaign conservatives. But if we're going to win in 2016, we need a consistent conservative, someone who has been a fiscal conservative, a social conservative, a national security conservative."

He added that he has "been proud to fight and stand for religious liberty, to stand against Planned Parenthood, to defend life for my entire career."



Kelly asked Ohio Gov. John Kasich the same question.



Kasich talked about his parents, then told Kelly, "I do believe in miracles. You know, I've had a lot of elections. But my elections are really not about campaigns. I tell my people that these are about a movement. And a movement to do what? To restore common sense. A movement to do things like provide economic growth. And a movement not to let anybody be behind."



Kasich never talked about God, but he did mention "the Lord" in passing.



He also changed the subject: "You asked a question about the police and the difficulty in communities," Kasich told Kelly. "We've got to unite our country again, because we're stronger when we are united and we are weaker when we are divided.



"And we've got to listen to other people's voices, respect them, but keep in mind, and I believe in terms of the things that I've read in my lifetime, the Lord is not picking us. But because of how we respect human rights, because that we are a good force in the world, he wants America to be strong. He wants America to succeed. And He wants America to lead."



"Same question," Kelly said, turning to Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker:



"I'm certainly an imperfect man," Walker answered. "And it's only by the blood of Jesus Christ that I've been redeemed from my sins. So I know that God doesn't call me to do a specific thing. God hasn't given me a list, a Ten Commandments, if you will, of things to act on the first day.



"What God calls us to do is follow his will. And ultimately that's what I'm going to try to do. And I hope people see it in my state, even in the big challenges I took on when I had over 100,000 protesters in and around our capital, trying to do what I thought was the right thing.



"It wasn't just how I took on those political battles. It was ultimately how I acted. Not responding in kind. Not lashing out. But just being decent going forward and living my life in a way that would be a testimony to him and our faith."



Sen. Mark Rubio (R-Fla.) was next, but Kelly changed the question a bit, telling Rubio, "a woman just came here to the stage and asked, what about the veterans?" She then asked Rubio "about God and the veterans."



"Well, first, let me say I think God has blessed us. He has blessed the Republican Party with some very good candidates. The Democrats can't even find one," Rubio said to laughter and applause.



"And I believe God has blessed our country. This country has been extraordinarily blessed. And we have honored that blessing. And that's why God has continued to bless us.



"And he has blessed us with young men and women willing to risk their lives and sometimes die in uniform for the safety and security of our people." He went on to talk about the failures of the Veterans Administration.



Kelly then asked Dr. Ben Carson a question "about God and his role, but also...race relations."



Carson only answered the race relations part of the question.



Those were the only five candidates to be asked about God.