Sen. Ron Johnson calls Violence Against Women bill unconstitutional
All Politics Blog From Milwaukee, Madison and beyond, a daily dose of political news and glimpses behind the scenes SHARE

By of the

Washington, D.C. -- In a statement Wednesday, GOP Sen. Ron Johnson said he voted against re-authorizing the Violence Against Women Act because it contained “serious flaws,” including an “unconstitutional expansion of tribal authority.”

Johnson was one of 22 senators – all Republicans – who voted Tuesday against re-authorization of the law, which offers protections and aid to victims of domestic violence.

The 19-year-old law lapsed in 2011, and its latest reauthorization has been bogged down along partisan lines.

The version passed 78-22 by the Senate this week expanded the law’s original protections to gays and lesbians and to women in tribal reservations. (It was supported by every Senate Democrat, including Wisconsin's Tammy Baldwin.)

Some Republicans have objected to new provisions in the law, including one allowing tribal courts for the first time to prosecute men who aren't American Indians when they're accused of abusing an American Indian woman on a reservation.

Johnson argued Wednesday that provision was an unconstitutional expansion of tribal authority.

This is Johnson's full statement:

“In passing The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA), the Democrat-controlled Senate turned the renewal of a non-controversial piece of legislation that had a history of strong bi-partisan support, into a divisive and highly partisan bill.

“As a result, the Senate has approved a piece of legislation that sounds nice, but which is fatally flawed. By including an unconstitutional expansion of tribal authority and introducing a bill before the Congressional Budget Office could review it to estimate its cost, Senate Democrats made it impossible for me to support a bill covering an issue I would like to address. Most analysts believe it would add more than $2 billion to the deficit.

“I voted for an alternative that did not have these serious flaws. That alternative would help deter and prosecute violence against women – without the inclusion of unconstitutional provisions."

The executive director of the Wisconsin Democratic Party, Maggie Brickerman, assailed Johnson’s vote Tuesday, calling the vote “blind extremism.”

“This is a law with broad bipartisan support, including all the Republican women in the Senate, and support from advocates, cops, judges and average men and women," she said. "But Ron Johnson, like Wisconsin's Republicans, can always be counted on to march to the beat of Tea Party drums no matter how it conflicts with the interests of most of the rest of Wisconsin.”