A Day At Connecticut Farmer’s Markets
Today we just happened to be out in Mystic on a Sunday, which is not normal for us, and we saw a tiny sign at the end of a road telling us that the local Farmer’s Market was happening on Sunday, from noon to 3. What do you know? It was 12:47 and we had plenty of time to stop and take a look. Whenever you see those signs you’re like darn it, I missed it again, I will go next week, and then next week never comes.

It was just around the corner from the Mystic Aquarium and basically across the street from the Denison Pequotsepos Nature Center, hence, probably the name Denison Farmer’s Market. Visit them on Facebook.

Going to the Farmer’s Market makes me feel like part of a community. It makes me feel like America is getting back to it’s roots, the way things used to be when people mattered and fresh grown, local products, were sold at the local market. Everyone shopped there, knew their neighbor, and supported local businesses.

American culture is changing again and I think for the better and people like us are forcing the change. As we all start going “back to basics” and doing what made us great – in my opinion community and putting each other first – then things changes. It takes one person at a time doing one small thing and then it becomes part of our everyday lives.

This photo says it all. One generation passing the farming tradition down to the next. This old guy told us they run the second oldest farm in New England. He was funny and said, when it gets cold and the ground freezes we are going to go up to Massachusetts and visit the oldest farm in New England. Their farm, Davis Farm, is located in Pawcatuck, Connecticut.

Watch my walk through of the Mystic Denison Farmer’s Market and my interview with the Farmer from Davis Farm.

[iframe: width=”450″ height=”253″ src=”http://www.youtube.com/embed/hfbywS250v0?rel=0″ frameborder=”0″ allowfullscreen]



When we pulled up and parked in the grassy field and got out of our car we could see rows of tents all set up and music playing in the background – bluegrass folk music even.

The state of Connecticut has done a great job with the CT Grown project. They have lots of information on their website, schedule of events, signage, logos, and they promote it well. Everyone living in Connecticut and coming into Connecticut will know a product by the Connecticut Grown signs.

Many of the farmers we met do this full-time.

This farmer raised cattle in Connecticut and sells all varieties of beef at the Farmer’s Market. Here he is explaining about it.

Craig Edwards plays American Roots Music. It is kind of folk, bluesy music with bluegrass thrown in. You should book him for your next event. Call him at 860-536-4628 or email [email protected]

17 SHARES Facebook Twitter