The declaration of Muslim faith
SHAHADA

(The Declaration of Faith)



This Arabic phrase, shahada, also called kalima, is a simple statement; sincerely believing in the meanings of it and the faith behind it can change one's life for ever. It consists of two parts: first half is tawheed the unity and oneness of Allah. This fundamental concept of Islam is expressed by Allah himself in His book Qur'an: "He, Allah is one. Allah is He on Whom all depend. He begets not, nor is He begotten, And none is like Him."

[The Holy Qur'an, Surah 112:1-4] The second part of kalima is risalah: the acceptance of Prophethood. Muslims accept that all Prophets were chosen by Allah to deliver His literal word, the basic message of His oneness to all nations, in their own languages, at different times. Adam was the first Prophet and Muhammad the final of all messengers to mankind. This belief is central to Islam.



There are certain conditions of the shahadah, without which it is considered to be meaningless: Ilm: Knowledge of the meaning of the Shahadah, its negation and affirmation.

Knowledge of the meaning of the Shahadah, its negation and affirmation. Yaqeen: Certainty – perfect knowledge of it that counteracts suspicion and doubt.

Certainty – perfect knowledge of it that counteracts suspicion and doubt. Ikhlaas: Sincerity which negates shirk.

Sincerity which negates shirk. Sidq: Truthfulness that permits neither falsehood nor hypocrisy.

Truthfulness that permits neither falsehood nor hypocrisy. Mahabbah: Love of the Shahadah and its meaning, and being happy with it and its requirements.

Love of the Shahadah and its meaning, and being happy with it and its requirements. Inqiad: Submission to its rightful requirements, which are the duties that must be performed with sincerity to Allah (alone) seeking only Allah's pleasure.

Submission to its rightful requirements, which are the duties that must be performed with sincerity to Allah (alone) seeking only Allah's pleasure. Qubool: Acceptance that contradicts rejection.







The True Islam is based on the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah. Sunnah is an Arabic word which means the words and actions or examples of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him).



Six Articles of Belief

Tawheed: Monotheism (Oneness of Allah)

Prophethood and Messengership

Holy Books

Angels

The Final Judgement Day

Predestination



Five Pillars of Islam

Shahadah: Declaration of Faith

Salah: Prayer

Zakah: Charity, paying of alms and giving to the poor

Sawm: Fasting, obligatory during the Month of Ramadan

Hajj: Pilgrimage to Makkah



The Last Messenger - Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him)

Prophet Muhammad was the last and final Messenger of Allah. No prophet shall come after Muhammad (peace be upon him)

Allah chose Muhammad to reveal His Last Message to mankind - The Holy Qur'an - and gave Muhammad complete guidance for people of all the worlds. Muhammad (peace be upon him) received the Noble Qur'an from Allah through the Angel Jibril.



Rightly Guided Caliphs

Abu Bakr Siddeeque

Umar ibn al-Khattab

Uthman ibn Affan

Ali ibn Abi Talib



Islamic Laws (Shari'ah)

The Laws based purely on the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah of the Prophet, as embodied in the Hadith, as a source of the Shari'ah.





Allah says in the Holy Quran: The Messenger (Muhammad) believes in what has been revealed to him by his Lord, and so do the believers. They believe in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers. They say: "We make no distinction between Allah's Messengers." And they say: "We hear and obey. Grant us Your forgiveness, Lord; to You shall all return."

[The Holy Qur'an, Surah 2:285]







Oneness of God (Monotheism)



Who is Allah?



Submission to the Will of God



Five Pillars of Islam



There is no God

except ALLAH;

Muhammad is

the Messenger

of ALLAH.









The Sovereignty



"Blessed be He in Whose hand is the Sovereignty and He has power over all things. Who has created death and life, the He may test you which of you is best in conduct, and He is the All-Mighty, the Oft-Forgiving. Who has created the seven heavens one above another, you can see no fault in the creation of the Most Beneficent. Then look again can you see any rifts? Then look again and yet again, your sight will return to you weakend and made dim. And indeed We have adorned the nearest heaven with lamps, and We have made them missiles for the devils, and for them We have prepared the torment of the blazing fire. And for those who disbelieve in their Lord is the torment of Hell, and worst indeed is their destination."

[The Quran, Surah 67:1-6]