Feingold launches attack ad against Johnson
All Politics Blog From Milwaukee, Madison and beyond, a daily dose of political news and glimpses behind the scenes SHARE

By of the

Democratic former U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold is up with a new attack ad Tuesday, taking aim at Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson's record on jobs.

The ad uses video from Johnson's first statewide spot that began airing a week ago in which he touted his manufacturing roots in Oshkosh.

The Feingold ad says that "before Senator Johnson left for Washington, he paid himself $10 million, a sweetheart corporate payout." The charge refers to Johnson receiving deferred compensation at the plastics firm he once headed, Pacur.

The ad continues: "Then in Congress he voted five times for tax breaks to help companies ship Wisconsin jobs overseas."

The Johnson campaign called out Feingold for launching the ad just days after Sunday's mass shooting in Orlando.

“While the rest of the country mourns the largest terrorist attack on American soil since 9/11, Senator Feingold is shamelessly launching a misleading attack ad and trying to distract from his own failed national security record after 18 years in Washington," said Brian Reisinger, a Johnson spokesman. "This is a time for our country to come together – not a time for the kind of callous political ambition that is everything people hate about politics.”

Pat Garrett, a spokesman for the Republican Party of Wisconsin, criticized the timing of the ad and said: "Feingold's judgement needs to be questioned if he doesn't pull this ad immediately."

The Feingold ad was shipped to stations last week. On Sunday, Feingold participated in a fundraising event in River Falls.

Also, the Johnson campaign sent an email to supporters on Tuesday, asking for donations. The Wisconsin GOP and the National Republican Senatorial Committee have also continued to send out campaign-related tweets.

In a statement, Michael Tyler, a Feingold spokesman, said: "Senator Johnson refuses to stop airing his partisan attack against Russ and his allies continue to lob up false and misleading attacks."

The Johnson ad that currently airs makes no mention of Feingold. In the ad, Johnson says: "Career politicians manufacture hogwash — I manufacture plastic."

Tyler added: "For the last three months, Senator Johnson has been hiding behind millions of dollars in attack ads from his allies, the oil billionaire Koch Brothers. He even had his committee conceal evidence because it contradicted claims in his allies’ false attack ads. It’s just like a typical, self-serving DC politician like Senator Johnson to hide behind rich billionaires and corporations just to try and win re-election."