Debt Ceiling Is Next Battleground
WASHINGTON—Despite the eleventh-hour budget agreement that averted a government shutdown, congressional Democrats and Republicans are still deeply divided over how to tackle the next big challenge: a vote to raise the federal debt ceiling.

U.S. President Barack Obama paid a brief, unscheduled visit to the Lincoln Memorial Saturday, telling surprised tourists they were able to be there because Congress was willing to agree to a budget deal Friday night. Video courtesy of NewsCore.

Republicans signaled they would support an increase in the debt ceiling—required by law to avoid a government default—only if deep and long-term spending cuts are introduced. Democrats, in contrast, are trying to shift the fight to certain industry subsidies and proposed Republican tax cuts.

Enlarge Image Close Getty Images President Barack Obama shakes the hands of tourists visiting the Lincoln Memorial during a surprise visit Saturday, a day after budget negotiations with Congress prevented a government shutdown.

House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.) said the U.S. was facing "a fiscal train wreck" and added, "There is no way we Republicans are going to support increasing the debt limit without guaranteed steps being put in place to ensure the spending doesn't get out of control again." He was speaking on "Fox News Sunday."

Leading Democrats argued that the consequences of failing to raise the debt ceiling, which could force the government into default and upend the fragile economic recovery, make the stakes much higher than during the tense negotiations to keep funding the federal government.

"Instead of risking a government shutdown, we're risking a second recession," said Senate Majority Whip Dick Durbin (D., Ill.), a member of the "Gang of Six" bipartisan group trying to hammer out a budget solution. He was speaking on CNN's "State of the Union." Mr. Durbin said Democrats "need to fight for" a raft of social provisions, including medical and social-security benefits, and educational grants.

Presidential adviser David Plouffe, in multiple television appearances, defended the last-minute deal reached to avoid the shutdown and said that President Barack Obama would be looking at "every corner of the federal government" as he details his budget plans this week

On ABC's "This Week," Mr. Plouffe conceded that "some of the cuts were Draconian," acknowledging a degree of backlash among Democrats to the size of the spending cuts agreed to Friday night.

But he also tried to paint a hopeful picture of a divided government that could work through differences. Friday's agreement was reached after a flurry of meetings and phone calls between Mr. Obama, House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.).

"It should give us some confidence," Mr. Plouffe said. "We're not going to move forward as a country unless we do it together."

Mr. Plouffe rejected suggestions that the next round of budget fights would be over just spending cuts. "Revenues have to be a part of it," he said. He cited the example of wealthy tax payers receiving what he said would be a $200,000 tax break under the Republican budget plan, and contrasted that with what he said would be an additional $6,000 in medical expenses for elderly people.

"If you weren't giving enormous tax cuts to millionaires, you wouldn't have to do that," he said, referring to higher health-care costs.

Speaking on CNN's "State of the Union," Rep. Jeb Hensarling (R., Texas), a member of the House Republican leadership team, repeatedly called on Mr. Obama to "cut up the credit cards" and put America back on a "fiscally smart path."

"The classic definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result," Mr. Hensarling, referring to recent record-breaking deficits.

Asked by CNN's Candy Crowley if Republicans were willing to "play chicken" with the debt ceiling, Mr. Hensarling said, "I don't know what you mean."

He acknowledged that a government default would be "catastrophic," but said the argument was based on a "false premise," because the U.S. can cut spending and reduce the deficit.

Mr. Hensarling also threw a bucket of cold water on the record $38 billion in spending cuts included in the stopgap plan to avert the shutdown.

"Relative to the size of the problem," he said, "this wasn't even a rounding error."

Write to Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com and Jeff Bater at jeff.bater@dowjones.com