White House says more former Iraqi helpers are getting visas
The Obama administration says it has made tweaks in how it is vetting Iraqis applying to a U.S. government resettlement program, leading to more former military interpreters and U.S. embassy workers being resettled in the USA in the first half of fiscal year 2012 than all of last year.

At least 715 special immigrant visas have been issued since October, surpassing the 706 visas that were issued for all of FY 2011, according to State Department data provided to USA TODAY. The special immigrant visa [SIV] is available to Iraqis that had worked for the U.S. government during the war, and had come under serious threat because they assisted America.

More than 7,700 Iraqis who had assisted the U.S. war effort have been resettled under the SIV program since it was established in 2007, but processing of those visas as well as Iraqi refugees seeking resettlement in the USA plummeted last year as the Obama administration toughened its screening process under heightened concern that Al Qaeda was trying to exploit the programs.

White House and agency officials won't talk about the additional security measures they've put in place or what changes they've recently made to speed up the vetting in recent months.

"What I can tell you today is that I think we have now a way forward that will show demonstrable progress in bringing people to the United States, while making sure that our security is upheld," said Anthony Blinken, the national security adviser to Vice President Joe Biden, after delivering an address on Friday on Iraq at the liberal think tank Center for American Progress.

Top administration officials—including White House counterterrorism adviser John Brennan and Deputy National Security Adviser Denis McDonough—have dedicated themselves to fixing the dramatic slowdown in resettlement, Blinken said.

"We owe these people," Blinken said. "If we don't deal with this problem, it will have a chilling effect on the willingness of people around the world to work with us, to cooperate with our missions."

While resettlement of Iraqis eligible for the SIV program has picked up over the last six months, the State Department is still far behind the pace it set in 2009 and 2010, when 2,843 and 2,042 SIVs were issued in the respective years.

Resettlement of the broader Iraqi refugee community—which includes many former helpers to the U.S. military and diplomats--has grinded to a near halt. Only 1,861 refugees have been resettled over the last five months compared to 9,388 in FY 2011 and 18,000 in FY 2010, according to the State Department.

President George W. Bush pledged to settle as many as 25,000 Iraqis under the SIV program, and President Obama, as a candidate for the White House, vowed not to abandon the Iraqis who assisted the USA as he campaigned to end the war in Iraq.

The slowdown in processing SIVs started not long before two Iraqi refugees who resettled in the United States in 2009 were arrested in May in Bowling Green, Ky., and accused of plotting to send weapons and cash to al-Qaida in Iraq. The administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue, says intelligence indicates the threat was much broader than the two refugees. Neither of the men in the Kentucky plot had worked for the U.S. mission in Iraq.

Authorities learned of the Kentucky plot through intelligence gleaned in late 2010, the official said.

"That threat stream led us to re-examine our vetting process for this population and really all of the refugee population," the official said.