In 2010 Florida Senate Race, Charlie Crist Uses GOP as New Foil
Associated Press Gov. Crist has shored up some conservative positions, such as his support for gun rights, while shifting to the left on core issues like abortion, education and gay rights.

KEY BISCAYNE, Fla.—Florida's Republican-led legislature will gather Tuesday on the order of Gov. Charlie Crist—and then is expected to quickly refuse his call for a state-constitution ban on offshore oil drilling in Florida waters.

While no real legislative action seems likely to come of the special session, the showdown has become a signal event in Mr. Crist's campaign for the U.S. Senate and in his transformation from a rising Republican star to a political free agent.

Crist, Then and Now Allowing drilling off Florida's coast

THEN: "It's the last thing in the world I'd like to do, but I also understand what people are paying at the pump…Something has to be done in a responsible, pragmatic way." —St. Petersburg Times, June 16, 2008

NOW: "To ignore [the dangers of drilling] and not give the people of Florida the opportunity to ban this in perpetuity going forward forever—you'd have to be crazy." —Speaking to reporters in Key Biscayne, July 14, 2010 Democratic health-care overhaul

THEN: "Once in the U.S. Senate, I will fight to repeal this government takeover of health care." —Crist statement, March 23, 2010

NOW: "It should be modified,'' a stance short of repeal. —Wall Street Journal interview, July 14, 2010

Teacher tenure and merit pay

THEN: "If we base how we compensate our teachers on how their students perform, it seems like a very natural thing." —St. Petersburg Times, March 14, 2010

NOW: "This bill has deeply and negatively affected the morale of our teachers, parents and students." —Crist veto message, April 15, 2010

Nearly three months after losing his Republican allies and campaign staff by leaving his party, Mr. Crist has rebuilt his political machinery and gained a footing among many general-election voters as he runs as an independent. One reason: He has used the Republican-led state legislature as a conservative foil to increase his appeal among centrist and Democratic voters.

Mr. Crist has shored up some conservative positions, such as his support for gun rights, while shifting to the left on core issues like abortion, education and gay rights. And he has successfully courted top Democrats—including some with close ties to President Barack Obama and the White House—to work on his campaign, even though two Democrats are making serious bids for the Senate seat.

"So many of the elected politicians in Washington seem to be shackled by the fear of a primary," Mr. Crist said in an interview last week in this seaside city, where he attended a briefing on the effects of the Gulf oil spill. As an independent, Mr. Crist said, he is free to speak his mind without worrying about the most ideological voters.

"It's liberating," Mr. Crist said. "It's a lot of fun, and I'm convinced it's what the people want."

Mr. Crist believes he has stumbled on a political sweet spot, amid polls showing voters are angry at incumbents and disenchanted with both political parties.

Many here had considered his political career to be all but over, as conservatives and the tea party movement rejected Mr. Crist's Senate candidacy for that of the more conservative Marco Rubio, a former state House speaker. Mr. Crist left the GOP in late April. Now, by most measures, he is the front-runner, leading among Democratic voters and taking a third of Republicans.

Mr. Crist this year vetoed an education bill and an abortion bill sent to him by the legislature, which won him praise from many teachers and liberal women's groups. Now, in calling a special legislative session to discuss a state-constitution ban on oil drilling in state waters, he is gambling that voters will see him as protecting Florida's tourism industry in the aftermath of the Gulf oil spill. (Florida law already bans such drilling, but some lawmakers have sought in the past to repeal the ban.)

Mr. Crist's opponents note that he was open to considering offshore drilling as recently as 2009. Some worry that putting a drilling amendment on the November ballot, as Mr. Crist called for in convening this week's session, would drive Crist voters to the polls. "To find the governor now changing his mind again—against it to for it, to against it again—is just comical," said state Sen. Mike Haridopolos, the incoming state Senate president. "The running joke is that his policy manual is filled with bumper stickers, and for serious people it's just untenable."

Mr. Crist has made other policy shifts. Despite pledging as a Republican to help repeal President Obama's health-care overhaul, Mr. Crist now says he does not support such a move. He has long called himself "pro-life," doing so even in the interview last week. He is now quick to add that while he personally opposes abortion, he would not seek to overturn Roe v. Wade and supports abortion rights.

He came out last year in opposition to the Supreme Court nomination of Justice Sonia Sotomayor, but now says that he "probably" took that position because he felt pressure from the GOP primary. Asked if he felt differently now, he said: "Perhaps."

"I want to do what is in my heart," Mr. Crist said last week. "But other influences have some effect, to a degree."

The White House and top Democrats in Florida and Washington are publicly backing U.S. Rep. Kendrick Meek in the Senate race. Yet the governor in recent weeks has populated his campaign with Democrats, bringing on a Democratic pollster and political consultant.

In addition, Alfredo Balsera, a member of Mr. Obama's national finance committee in 2008 and a top adviser to the president on Latino outreach, is now advising Mr. Crist. Mr. Balsera, of Miami, is planning a fund-raiser next month that he said would consist largely of Obama supporters. He said he informed the White House ahead of time.

Mr. Crist has retained a political consulting firm that counts Anita Dunn as a partner. Ms. Dunn was the White House communications director until November. She said she was not working on the Crist campaign herself but had stopped advising the Democratic Party, to avoid a conflict of interest.

A White House official said that the president "expected" the state's party leaders to back Mr. Meek and that Vice President Joe Biden planned to campaign for him soon.

Mr. Crist said he had spoken twice in recent weeks with Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid. The governor said he had not offered any assurances that he would caucus with the Democrats as an independent, but the discussions with Mr. Reid signal that he may be moving in that direction.

Aides to Mr. Meek say voters will abandon Mr. Crist once Democrats begin their advertising campaign this fall. Meek spokesman Adam Sharon called Mr. Crist "a lifelong conservative." Republicans are likely to highlight statements from Mr. Crist's prior campaigns, such as his statement in a 2006 automated call that he was "pro-life."

"If he really didn't believe in these things, then why did he spend 20 years campaigning on them?" Mr. Rubio said in an interview. "With all due respect, and I mean this with no animosity, I think he'll do and say anything to win this election, and I think we already have too many people like that in Washington."

Mr. Crist said he was always more of a centrist Republican, angering his party, for example, when he pushed to make it easier to restore a felon's right to vote. "I've always had that predilection" to buck the GOP, he said. Then, snapping his fingers, he added: "It's just quicker now."

Write to Peter Wallsten at peter.wallsten@wsj.com