Feminist Aborts Baby For Being A Boy, Shocked People Don’t Approve
Sex-selecting abortions are nothing new. They happen all the time in China, for example. While they undoubtedly happen in the United States, people don’t brag about them. At least they didn’t.

It’s hard to believe this is real, but according to the website “Injustice Stories,” a woman named Lana, a self-described feminist, boasted of aborting her baby because it was a boy. Then, after making that declaration, claims to be shocked that some people might have a problem with that.

Lana, who only uses her first name, appears to be a child of privilege. She boasts of involvement in “fighting for women’s rights” being all-consuming, “even to the point of eschewing a career.” Yet that lack of a career hasn’t stopped her from travelling to “many different places” to continue that “fight.

She tells the story of a flight to an Occupy Wall Street event in San Francisco where she screamed “Assault” because the man sitting next to her said “B******* like you need to learn their place.”

Putting the unlikeliness of that exchange aside, Lana then demanded to be moved to another seat. That’s when she was told the only empty seats were “both back in economy.” At which point she demanded the man be moved.

When the flight attendants came running, one of whom was male, they refused to force the man to move because he hadn’t done anything. Lana, regretfully, relented and, in tears, moved herself.

The encounter left her “having felt as though I had been verbally and emotionally raped.”

That flight, according to Lana, left her forever changed. “By the time we landed, my outlook had changed, I could no longer depend on men to be an ally of the cause,” she wrote.

Lana was pregnant at the time, and thought she “had a good idea” who the father, or as she puts it, “the donator” happened to be. She was convinced she was having a girl because, well, she wanted a girl. Or at least a baby with a vagina, the “gender” part would be up to the child. “I had already started buying gender neutral clothing since I did not want outside influences affecting what gender she would ultimately become,” she writes.

After researching all-girl daycares and schools with the plan to make sure that “No man will be around to hurt her progress, no boys there to demean her or call her names,” Lana got horrible news from her doctor – her baby had a penis.

She spent the next two days in fit of crying rage. How could this happen to her? She says, “My home became my prison and my fetus became my warden.”

Within a few days she had aborted the baby. “My body’s betrayal was no more, I was free, and for the first time since the airplane incident, I felt strong,” Lana claims. “I had done something positive, something that would actually make a difference, something good.”

Lana informs readers that she is now the mother of “a beautiful 1 year old female who will hopefully grow up to be just as strong and driven as her mother.”

She ends her post with:

I stand by my decision to abort my baby because it was a male. I don’t hate men, I hate the patriarchy, what men, and even some women, turn into, I wasn’t going to let that happen with my offspring. The chances were greater that it would with a male, it was unacceptable. If the curse returns, I would do the exact same thing all over again.

The backlash was immediate, and harsh. Lana, much to her shock, was on the receiving end of negative comments and even death threats.

At the request of the editors of the website, Lana returned to answer critics. She was as unrepentant the second time as she was the first.

She starts:

I cannot believe some of the emails that have been forwarded to me, do people really exist who want to see me dead because of what I chose to do with my own body? Those are the minds of mentally disturbed individuals.

She then offers advice to those who have a problem with her proud proclamation:

I suspect that many of you reading this will be the kind of people who are sending emails from their mom’s basement, leaving comments on here and on social media websites as you degrade mentally more and more while sitting on your crusty computer chairs. Do everyone a favor: GROW UP!

This charming woman then claims not to hold animosity toward anyone. “I find it hard to hate anybody, their faults are not their own, but usually rather the product of an environment or social circle they have been exposed to,” she writes.

In the end, Lana remains Lana, the spoiled, selfish brat she appears to have always been. “I beg most of you, for your own good, take a look at yourself and decide right now if you want to spend the rest of your life angry on the internet, or if you want to fight for a woman’s right to do what she wants with her body.”