Hundreds Scammed At Luxury Fyre Music Festival In Bahamas – CBS Dallas
A luxury music festival proved to be less than it promised, as festival goers were left in what they described as, “refugee-like conditions” in the Bahamas.

The Fyre Festival was scheduled to take place on a private island in the Bahamas. Its website advertises it as a “cultural moment created from a blend of music, art, and food.” Prices for attending the festival, staying in a private villa, and enjoying food and music from renowned artists and chefs cost people from $1,500 to $200,000.

A slick and beautiful promotional video sold the ultimate festival experience to those willing to shell out thousands.

“We were expecting a luxurious Coachella type experience,” says Benghozi. “We expected a great time in the water, with all inclusive and VIP access to the food and music. Basically, we expected what we paid for.”

Benghozi says issues started popping up soon after many started arriving yesterday morning. The villas turned out to be only tents, and there was no sign of famous musical acts and top chefs.

“The food they served was like a soup kitchen, and there wasn’t enough of it,” she says.

Benghozi, along with over 100 other people, decided they’d had enough. They got a bus to Exuma International Airport and were promised a plane out this morning.

“Everyone was ready to go, but they checked our passports a million times, said things weren’t matching up,” says Benghozi. “They asked us to step out of the plane.”

According to video on social media, officials at the Exuma International Airport put chains on the doors to keep people corralled.

“People are scared, some are crying, and honestly we’re just confused,” says Farah Benghozi of Dallas. “People tried to go outside for some fresh air, and security literally pulled out a chain and bolted us in.”

The Fyre festival goers are still waiting in the airport for answers, and for a plane back to the US.

People boarded a flight then were told to get off 7 hours later in the Bahamas after #fyrefestival #hoax. No food or drinks. pic.twitter.com/evWvaa1DvQ — Janan Buisier (@JananBuisier) April 28, 2017

“This was a scam for sure,” Benghozi says. “It could have been something, but they didn’t put effort into it.”

On social media, the promoters of the festival said, “Due to unforeseen and extenuating circumstances, Fyre Festival has been fully postponed. After assessing the situation this morning and looking at best options for our guests, we cannot move forward as we hoped. At this time, we are working tirelessly to get flights scheduled and get all travelers home safely.”

Due to unforeseen and extenuating circumstances, Fyre Festival has been fully postponed (con't) — Fyre Festival (@fyrefestival) April 28, 2017

The Bahamas Ministry of Tourism today released the following statement on Twitter:

https://twitter.com/VisitTheBahamas/status/857949787513139200