definition in the Cambridge English Dictionary
On the other hand, positive electioneering did appear to have an effect. From Cambridge English Corpus

It is reasonable to expect, therefore, that patronage might also be used to improve the quality of cadre electioneering effort. From Cambridge English Corpus

This traditional distrust of electioneering threatened to leave electors in a void, dispersing their votes and conferring haphazard majorities upon unwilling office-holders. From Cambridge English Corpus

Voting is the quintessential electoral act, but it is not the only one; elements of campaigning and electioneering have also been the subject of formal analysis. From Cambridge English Corpus

Goldenberg bought large amounts of food and cars for voters and candidates during the electioneering period. From Cambridge English Corpus

I earnestly and hopefully hope that this will not become a matter of party and electioneering strife in this country. Hansard archive From the

That would be the final irony—and a fitting epitaph for this gimmicky, limited and crude electioneering piece of legislation. Hansard archive From the

I refer, finally, to the electioneering defence speeches which we have heard from the benches opposite. Hansard archive From the

Every device known to modern electioneering will be availed of in order to bring the matter home to the people. Hansard archive From the

Therefore, for the purpose of giving information, it is wholly unnecessary, and can have no other abject but that of electioneering. Hansard archive From the

After 13 years in opposition—and we can understand the climate of opinion—they were electioneering after the election was over. Hansard archive From the

In reality, just as electioneering can take the form of telephone canvassing, so directory inquiries and mail order type businesses can be located anywhere. Hansard archive From the

For two whole years our island has been distracted by party strife and electioneering. Hansard archive From the

It is for them that we spend thousands of pounds on posters and electioneering literature. Hansard archive From the