‘SNL’ Pokes At Donald Trump’s CNN Tweets – And Gives Shout-Out To Real-Life High School Supporter
Update Donald Trump has tweeted his dislike for SNL‘s sketch about his tweets. Read about it here. Also, Jennifer Aniston dropped by Weekend Update while Vanessa Bayer was doing her Aniston impression.Tonight’s episode was, at the very least, an exercise in meta, with a touch of cross-promotion: Bayer, Aniston and SNL‘s Kate McKinnon appear in the upcoming feature film Office Christmas Party. See Aniston’s Weekend Update bit at bottom of this post.

Previous Saturday Night Live took aim at Donald Trump’s recent re-tweets from young and less-than-fully-informed Americans supporting his opposition to CNN. “Kellyanne,” said Alec Baldwin as Trump in tonight’s cold open, “I just retweeted the best tweet. I mean, wow, what a great smart tweet.”

Looking into the camera, Baldwin drove the point home, telling viewers: “I really did retweet him, seriously.” Added Kate McKinnon’s Kellyanne Conway: “He really did do this.”

“It was from a young man named Seth, he’s 16 and he’s in high school and I really did retweet him.”

“God, Seth seems so cool – his twitter bio states he wants to make America great again,” Baldwin Trump’s praised. “It also states he loves the Anaheim Ducks.”

In the sketch, young Seth was played by Pete Davidson, whose cell phone goes off in class when Trump retweets his message. Earlier this week, Trump, angered when CNN reporter Jeff Zeleny called out the President-elect’s claims of millions of illegal votes, retweeted the 16-year-old Californian’s message that CNN was “pathetic.”

The real Seth offered a quick response to his second brush with fame this week, tweeting a tweet that might prove irresistible to Hillary Clinton’s victor:

It seems like the Alec Baldwin impersonation gets worse every week – failing SNL is sad! @realDonaldTrump — Seth Morton (@FiIibuster) December 4, 2016

And here’s the real Trump retweeting the real Seth earlier this week:

"@FiIibuster: @jeffzeleny Pathetic – you have no sufficient evidence that Donald Trump did not suffer from voter fraud, shame! Bad reporter. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 29, 2016

Tonight’s sketch included jokes about a couple other Trump retweets, followed up by Trump telling Conway and other staffers that he is going to “build that swamp!,” and complaining about that “ugly” photo of him used by the press (turned out to be a plate of mashed potatoes).

And real Trump’s meeting this week with Mitt Romney didn’t go unmentioned. “Can I have a picture of us together where he looks like a little bitch?,” Baldwin’s Trump asked McKinnon’s Conway, just before “Steve Bannon” entered the room decked out in Grim Reaper garb.

Tonight’s episode is hosted by Emma Stone, with musical guest Shawn Mendes.

And here’s the Aniston bit: