Congressman Don Young
Washington, D.C. – Alaska Congressman Don Young is moving forward with an effort to overturn two Obama-era rules impacting the management of fish and game upon Alaska refuge lands and future development and exploration in the Arctic Outer Continental Shelf.

The actions represent a collective effort in Congress to overturn costly and often politically charged rules – issued in the final months of the Obama Administration – through the use of the Congressional Review Act (CRA). The Act is a powerful Congressional tool to disapprove of new federal regulations through an expedited legislative process, requiring a simple majority in both Chambers and the signature of the President.



Congressman Young introduced the following resolutions of disapproval:

H.J. Res 70, a joint resolution of disapproval under the CRA, would overturn a Department of Interior (DOI) final rule governing oil and gas exploration in the Arctic OCS, which would add upwards of $2 billion in additional regulatory costs on industry.

“For years, the Obama Administration tried to convince the American people that it supported an “all-of-the-above” energy policy. Yet, at every turn they proposed crippling new rules and regulations that locked away our nation’s vital resources,” Congressman Young said of his Arctic resolution of disapproval. “This rule, combined with unilateral actions to permanently withdraw the Arctic OCS for exploration, represents a significant blow to Alaska’s already sensitive economy, future development in the region and the security of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline. Not only does this rule lock in the status-quo for exploration, it eliminates the opportunity to carefully and methodically introduce new technologies. Bottom line, I am fighting to overturn a number of the shortsighted actions taken by the Obama administration, including this costly, overly prescriptive new rule – which could add upwards of $2 billion in development costs – and make it nearly impossible for exploration to move forward in the future.”

H.J. Res 69, a joint resolution of disapproval under the CRA, would overturn an August 5, 2016 final rule by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service that significantly restricts hunting and wildlife management practices upon federal lands in Alaska, in violation of the Alaska Statehood Compact and Alaska National Interest Land Conservation Act (ANILCA).

“There’s no question, the Fish and Wildlife Service rule – which lays claim to more than 20 percent of our state – violates ANILCA and the Alaska Statehood Compact,” said Congressman Don Young. “Not only does this action undermine Alaska’s ability to manage fish and wildlife upon refuge lands, it fundamentally destroys a cooperative relationship between Alaska and the federal government. I continue to fight to protect Alaska’s sovereignty and management authority and will use every tool at my discretion to strike this rule.”

If passed, Young’s joint resolutions of disapproval would ensure that the final rules issues by the Department of Interior and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service would have no force or effect, and that no substantially similar rule can be issued in the future without a subsequent authorization from Congress.

Young’s CRA efforts were recently featured in an article published by E&E News.

For background information on the Arctic Rule and FWS Wildlife Management Rule, click here.

In addition, Congressman Young has cosponsored four additional resolutions of disapproval:

H.J. Res. 36 (introduced by Rep. Rob Bishop, UT-01), a resolution disapproving of the BLM’s “Venting and Flaring” rule. Click here for additional information on the rule.

H.J. Res. 38 (introduced by Rep. Bill Johnson, OH-06), a resolution disapproving of the Office of Surface Mining’s (OSM) Stream Protection Rule (SPR). Click here for additional information on the rule.

H.J. Res. 40 (introduced by Rep. Sam Johnson, TX-03), a resolution of disapproval overturning a rule submitted by the Social Security Administration relating to the implementation of the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Improvement Amendments Act of 2007. Click here for more information on the rule.