Wausau Paper being sold to SCA
SHARE

By

Wausau Paper Corp. will be sold to Sweden-based SCA in a $500 million transaction announced Tuesday.

The cash deal, approved by both companies' board of directors, would pay Wausau shareholders $10.25 per share, or $513 million. That represents a more than 40% premium to Wausau's closing stock price on Monday and an 11% premium to the average price of the shares over the past year, SCA said.

Wausau Paper, based in Mosinee, has about 900 employees and makes towel and tissue products, as well as soap dispensers for the nonresidential market. Its mills are in Ohio and Kentucky, with the company having already shuttered or sold its Wisconsin mills and timberland.

After a protracted proxy fight involving the New York hedge fund Starboard Value LP, Wausau in recent years scaled back its focus to the away-from-home tissue market. The retrenchment from the specialty and writing papers businesses led it to shut its Wisconsin mill in Brokaw and another in Brainerd, Minn., while retaining its corporate headquarters in Mosinee.

The company last year replaced its CEO, Henry "Hank" Newell, with Michael Burandt, a paper industry veteran who was among Starboard's nominees to Wausau board of directors.

SCA, which has Wisconsin paper operations in Neenah and Menasha, said the deal will "further contribute to SCA's efforts to create environmentally friendly products and extend its sustainability commitment."

The deal, which requires regulatory and shareholder approvals, is expected to be completed in the first quarter of 2016.

Wausau's brands include Artisan, EcoSoft, DublSoft and DublNature as well as OptiCore and Bay West.

Stockholm-based SCA, which stands for Svenska Cellulosa Aktiebolaget and has its U.S. headquarters in Philadelphia, anticipates spending $50 million on restructuring costs tied to the combination of the two companies.

Within three years of the deal being finalized, SCA said, restructuring would generate annual savings of $40 million, primarily in the areas of sourcing, production, logistics, reduced imports, increased volumes of premium products and reduced sales and administrative costs.

In the first half of 2015, Wausau Paper reported sales of $175 million and earnings of $2.5 million, or 5 cents per share. The company's 2014 sales were $352 million. SCA's worldwide sales last year were $12.8 billion, more than half of which came from the tissue segment.