Neag School of Education
Title:

Assistant Professor

Counseling Program (School Counseling)

Department of Educational Psychology

Academic Degrees:

Ph.D. Counselor Education (Urban School Counseling), University of Maryland

M.Ed. School Counseling, College of William and Mary

B.S. Social Science Education, Florida State University

A.A. Secondary Education, Hillsborough Community College

Areas of Expertise:

College and Career Readiness of African American Males

STEM Career Exploration for Underrepresented Students

Career Development for Students of Color

School Counseling

Parental Involvement

Biography:

Dr. Erik M. Hines is an assistant professor in the Department of Educational Psychology at the University of Connecticut. Dr. Hines teaches in the counseling program and prepares graduate students to be professional school counselors. Dr. Hines’s research agenda centers around: (a) African American male academic achievement and college readiness; (b) parental involvement and its impact on academic achievement for students of color; and (c) improving and increasing postsecondary opportunities for first generation, low-income, and students of color (particularly for African American males). Additionally, his research interests include career exploration in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) for students of color in K-12. His research has appeared in peer-reviewed journals, such as the Journal of Counseling and Development, Professional School Counseling, and The High School Journal.

Selected Publications:

Hines, E. M., Borders, L. D., Gonzalez, L. G., Villalba, J. A., & Henderson, A.

(2014). Parental involvement in college planning: Cultural considerations

when working with African American families. Journal for Multicultural Education, 8(4), 249-260.

Mayes, R. M. & Hines, E. M. & Harris, P.C. (2014). Twice exceptional African

American students and school counselors [Special Issue]. Interdisciplinary Journal of Teaching and Learning, 4(3), 125-139.

Mayes, R. D. & Hines, E. M. (2014). Gifted African American girls and college and

career readiness: A call to school counselors [Special Issue]. Interdisciplinary Journal of Teaching and Learning, 4(1), 31-42.

Harris, P. C., Hines, E. M., Kelly, D. D., & Williams, D. (2014). Promoting the

academic engagement and success of Black male student-athletes. High School Journal, 97(3), 180-195.

Villalba, J.A., Gonzalez, L.M., Hines, E.M., & Borders, L.D. (2014). The Latino

parents-learning about college (LaP-LAC) program: Educational empowerment of Latino families through psychoeducational group. Journal for Specialist in Group Work, 39(1), 47-70.

Harris, P.C., Hines, E.M., & Ham, D. (2013). Preparing elementary African

American males for post-secondary opportunities. Journal of Black Masculinity, 1, 11-25.

Gonzalez, L. M., Borders, L. D., Hines, E. M., Villalba, J. A., & Henderson, A.

(2013). Parental involvement with their children’s education: Considerations for counselors of Latino immigrant families. Professional School Counseling 16(3), 185-193.

Hines E.M., & Holcomb-McCoy, C.C. (2013). Parental characteristics, ecological

factors, and the academic achievement of African American males. Journal of Counseling and Development, 91(1) 68-77.

Holcomb-McCoy, C.C., Harris, P.C., Hines, E.M., & Johnston, G. (2008).

School counselors’ multicultural self-efficacy: A preliminary investigation. Professional School Counseling, 11(3), 166-178.

Day-Vines, N.L., Moore-Thomas, C., & Hines, E.M. (2005). Processing

culturally relevant bibliotherapeutic selections with African American adolescents [Special Issue]. The Counseling Interviewer, 38, 13-18.

Honors/Awards:

Invited as an emerging scholar to participate in the 2014 American Educational Research Association Division E Early Career Faculty and Researchers Mentoring Seminar. This event was held at the AERA Annual Meeting in Philadelphia, PA, April 2-3, 2014.

Invited to participate on a panel titled: “Changing the Course of Black Men and Boys in American Society”, Symposium for the Hale Hall Ribbon Cutting at The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, September 19-20, 2013.

Invited to participate on a panel titled: “Trayvon Martin Panel”. This event was sponsored by the Office of Multicultural Affairs and the Department of Residence Life at the University of North Carolina, Greensboro, NC, September 10, 2013.

National Data Institute Fellow, Association for Institutional Research, Arlington, VA, May, 2013.

Associations/Committees/Outreach:

American Educational Research Association

Association for Counselor Education and Supervision

American School Counseling Association

American Counseling Association

In the News:

Education Expert on Obama’s Free Tuition Proposal