UFO at the bottom of the Baltic Sea cuts off electrical equipment when divers get within 200m
The divers exploring a ‘UFO-shaped’ object at the bottom of the Baltic Sea say their equipment stops working when they approach within 200 meters of the object.

Professional diver Stefan Hogerborn, part of the Ocean X team which is exploring the anomaly, said some of the teams’ cameras and satellite phones would refuse to work when directly above the object, and would only work once they had sailed away. He is quoted as saying:

“Anything electric out there, and the satellite phone as well, stopped working when we were above the object. And then when we got away about 200 meters, it turned on again, and when we got back over the object it didn’t work.”

Hefty trajectory: The Swedish diving team noted a 985-foot flattened out ‘runway’ leading up to the object, implying that it skidded along the path before stopping but no true answers to this are clear.

Diver Peter Lindberg said: “We have experienced things that I really couldn’t explain and I have been the team’s biggest skeptic regarding these different kind of theories.”

He continues..

“I was kind of prepared just to find a stone or cliff or outcrop or pile of mud but it was nothing like that, so for me it has been a missing experience I must say.”

Member Dennis Åsberg said: “I am one hundred percent convinced and confident that we have found something that is very, very, very unique.”

“Is it a meteorite or an asteroid? Or a volcano? Or a base from say, a U-boat from the Cold War which has manufactured and placed there? Or if it is a UFO?

Well, honestly, it has to be something.”

The quotes were first reported at NDTV. DailyMail also reached out to the Ocean X team for clarification.

The team did get some pictures, such as these soot-covered rocks that encircled an egg-shaped hole which went into the object at its center, and have no idea what any of it means.

No clarification: The divers made their sonar discovery public but waited a year to make the dive because they had to gather enough funding.

Landing spot: The exact coordinates of the object have not been released, but it is confirmed to be somewhere at the bottom of the Botnia Gulf in the Baltic Sea between Finland and Sweden.

The object was first found in May of 2011, but because of a lack of funding and bad timing, they have were not able to pull a team together to see for themselves – just the strange, metallic outline and a similar disk-shaped object about 200 metres away.

During their visit, the team saw a 985-foot trail that they described as “a runway or a downhill path on the seabed with the object at the end of it”.

The sonar picture of the unidentified object resembles the famed Star Wars ship the Millennium Falcon.

As it was before the recent dive, the story behind the object is anyone’s guess, from a “plug to the inner world” to the Millennium Falcon ship from Star Wars.

While the Ocean Explorer team is understandably excited about their potentially earth-shattering find, others are slightly more sceptical and are questioning the accuracy of the sonar technology.

In the past, such technology has confused foreign objects with unusual, but natural rock formations.

Part of the trouble they face is that they have no way of telling what is inside the supposed cylinder, whether it is filled with gold and riches, some sort of energy source, or simply aged sedimentary particles.

The Baltic Sea is a treasure trove for shipwreck hunters. An estimated 100,000 objects are thought to line the cold seas’ floor.

The company has created a submarine that they hope will appeal to tourists and wannabe shipwreck hunters who will pay to take a trip down to the bottom of the Baltic Sea to see it for themselves.

The Ocean Explorer team’s sonar pictures show that the object is a massive cylinder with a 60 metre diameter and a 400 metre-long tail. A similar disk-shaped object was also found about 200 metres away.

Unidentified Object: Shipwreck divers are completely perplexed by the oddly-shaped object that they found at the bottom of the Baltic Sea.

Tourist trips: Diver Peter Lindberg is hoping to take tourists down in this submarine to see the object.

Are you on “Tsu” yet? Its a new social media platform that pays you for creating and sharing content! Thousands of people have already joined. Its just like Facebook, it takes seconds to join, and even easier to use! And best of all you can reach100% of your friends and audience, and NO Censorship. You can only join by Invite, and this isan invitation from us to you. Click here to join! and be sure to Follow us too.

Source: DailyMail

Popular Content

WHAT ARE YOUR THOUGHTS?