Consumer Affairs
RAPEX is the EU rapid alert system that facilitates the rapid exchange of information between Member States and the Commission on measures taken to prevent or restrict the marketing or use of products posing a serious risk to the health and safety of consumers with the exception of food, pharmaceutical and medical devices, which are covered by other mechanisms. Since 1 January 2010, as regards goods subject to EU harmonisation regulation, the system also facilitates the rapid exchange of information on products posing a serious risk to the health and safety of professional users and on those posing a serious risk to other public interests protected via the relevant EU legislation (e.g. environment and security). Both measures ordered by national authorities and measures taken voluntarily by producers and distributors are reported by RAPEX.

Every Friday, the Commission publishes a weekly overview of the products posing a serious risk as reported by the national authorities (the RAPEX notifications). This weekly overview gives you all information on the product, the possible danger and the measures that were taken by the reporting country. ( Disclaimer - Important notice concerning re-use of RAPEX notifications )

NEW



Enforcement is a top priority of the EU Consumer Policy Strategy 2007-2013. Both measures leading to RAPEX notifications and measures which come to the attention of the Commission and other Member States as reactions are indications of enforcement activity in the Member State concerned.



In order to give a better view on the overall level of enforcement, including the follow-up activities of the national market surveillance authorities, the Commission RAPEX team has decided to publish on the RAPEX website also the names of the countries that have found the notified product on their market and have taken appropriate measures (and have submitted a reaction to a RAPEX notification as a consequence).



Information about the reacting countries is available in the RAPEX weekly overviews in the column 'Products were found and measures were taken also in'. The Commission RAPEX team will publish reactions sent (from May 2009 onwards) to 2009 RAPEX notifications.



Have a look at last notifications (published on 10-05-2013)

Search the weekly RAPEX overviews published :

In the EUROPA Search, enter : ["rapex weekly overview" keyword ]



Limit search : 2010 2011 2012 2013 From 2005

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

Archives

Disclaimer

The official contact points of the Member and EFTA-EEA States provide the information published in these weekly overviews. Under the terms of Annex II.10 to the General Product Safety Directive (2001/95/EC) responsibility for the information provided lies with the notifying party. The Commission does not take any responsibility for the accuracy of the information provided.

Important notice concerning re-use of RAPEX notifications

Links to the RAPEX website may be created subject to respect of the conditions set out at the following web address:

http://europa.eu/abouteuropa/faq/index_en.htm

Downloading and reproduction for non-commercial or commercial redissemination of any textual and photographic material contained in the RAPEX notifications are subject to prior permission.

The information contained in the weekly overviews may not be adapted or modified by the user. Translations of the RAPEX notifications from the original English-language edition published on the RAPEX website are subject to the conclusion of a free of charge licence agreement.

For permissions or licences, requests shall be addressed to: copyright-info@publications.europa.eu