Transcriptome profile analysis reflects rat liver and kidney damage following chronic ultra-low dose Roundup exposure
We report here the first in vivo transcriptome investigation in a mammalian species following long-term (2 year) exposure to an agricultural GBH (Roundup) at an environmentally relevant dose. Our results confirm the increased incidence of liver and kidney pathologies described at an anatomorphological and blood/urine biochemical level in female rats administered with Roundup in drinking water at a regulatory admissible, ultra-low dose 50 ng/L glyphosate equivalent concentration [17]. The levels of glyphosate consumption were approximately 4 ng/kg bw/day, which are well below global ADI values. We observed a wide-scale, treatment-associated alteration in gene expression patterns at a high statistical significance in both the liver and kidneys (Figs. 2 and 3; Table 1). Gene ontology analysis of these transcriptome alterations is linked with a marked change in mitochondrial respiration, spliceosome activity, chromatin structure and hormone signalling pathways (Table 2). Collectively, the alterations in gene expression (Fig. 4) are associated with a deregulation of tissue homeostasis at the level of proliferation-apoptosis balance (Fig. 5) and thus correlates well with the increased signs of liver and kidney anatomical, histological and blood/urine biochemical pathologies described in these animals [17]. Also of note is that the Roundup-treatment associated alterations in gene expression patterns we observe do not correspond to transcriptome signatures of liver necrosis provoked by acute hepatotoxicants [23].

Following the recommended analytical approach for large sets of genes [19], we observed a large number (>4000) whose expression was altered in both the liver and kidneys within the Roundup treatment group (Fig. 3a). In the majority of cases the change in level of transcription was below 2-fold (Fig. 3a and b) but to a highly statistically significant degree (p <0.01). These observations imply that low but consistent changes in expression of a large number of genes can provide sufficient statistical resolution to be informative regarding any organ pathology that may be present.

However, given the large number of gene functions altered in both the liver and kidneys within the Roundup treatment group, this represents a combination of effects resulting from the pathology of these organs as well as a direct impact of the pesticide. Thus it is not possible from our investigation to definitively distinguish the primary effects of Roundup on the liver and kidney transcriptome from the secondary effects on gene expression arising from the pathology present in these organs. Nevertheless, the smaller cohort of genes found to be commonly disturbed in liver and kidney (Fig. 3; Additional file 5) may provide insight into those systems that may be the primary targets of this herbicide (Table 2). Our results highlight the need for future GBH toxicity studies where organ transcriptome is determined prior to appearance of the overt liver and kidney pathologies observed at late-stage termination as in this instance. Thus transcriptome disturbances that may ultimately lead to the later stage organ pathologies may be identified. In addition, the clinical relevance of our observations remains to be ascertained, particularly as there is limited data available on glyphosate levels within humans [4].

Findings from studies where mice were fed diets containing Roundup-tolerant genetically modified soybeans [18, 24] are consistent with our observations. Animals showed disruptions in hepatocyte nuclear architecture, decreased expression of certain respiratory enzymes, a disturbance of splicing activity and marked increased liver ageing. In addition, similar observations were made with rat hepatocytes treated with Roundup in vitro [25], suggesting that alterations in nucleolar and mitochondrial function may be a direct primary effect of this herbicide.

Previous studies, albeit at much higher doses, have shown that glyphosate can uncouple liver mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation [6] and induce non-specific membrane permeabilization and a depletion of succinate-dependent respiratory indexes in isolated rat mitochondria [26]. The mode of glyphosate inhibition of EPSPS in plants is by competitive inhibition of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) substrate binding at the enzyme active site [5]. Enzymes binding PEP are regulators of energy metabolism in particular through the TCA cycle. Glyphosate off-target effects may include the disruption of these enzymes. Indeed, glyphosate can interact at the substrate binding site and potentially inhibit mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase [27]. Furthermore, as small molecule chelators of zinc can perturb spliceosome assembly and activity of chromatin modifying enzymes [28], glyphosate may also have exerted direct effects on spliceosome function due to its metal chelating properties (Patent No: US 3160632; [29]).

The increased incidence of Roundup-associated liver and kidney pathologies [17] confirmed in this report may be arising from multiple sources as there is increasing evidence to suggest that GBH and glyphosate can bring about toxic effects via different mechanisms depending upon the level of exposure. However, toxic effects have been recorded in most instances at levels of glyphosate and/or GBH exposures [10, 15] far in excess of the ultra-low dose administered to the animals in this investigation. Thus it is difficult to definitively attribute one or more mechanisms of toxicity observed at these higher dose levels to the liver and kidney pathologies seen in our study. Nevertheless, our observation of a major accumulation of snoRNAs in both liver and kidneys of the Roundup-treated group (Fig. 3, Table 2) supports the possibility of damage arising from oxidative stress as these are known to play a critical role in amplifying the effects of reactive oxygen species and downstream oxidative stress-mediated tissue injury [30]. The study by Michel and colleagues demonstrated the induction of snoRNA expression as a functional link between the progress of lipotoxic cell death and the deleterious cellular response to oxidative stress [30]. Lipotoxicity manifests itself as enhanced oxidative stress and as elevated proinflammatory signalling, often associated with abnormal insulin action [31]. It is noteworthy that we found disturbances in the pathways associated with these biological processes in our study (Fig. 5).

In addition, the analysis of pathways revealed disturbances in the modulation of mTOR and phosphatidylinositol signalling systems, both linked to the regulation of lipid synthesis among other major cellular functions [32]. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase transduces signals from various factors into intracellular messages by generating phospholipids, the disruption of which is among the major toxicity endpoint processes observed in the liver and kidneys in this study (Fig. 5). Overall, these results suggest an involvement of lipotoxic stress associated with elevated oxidative stress and proinflammatory signalling, which is a hallmark of chronic liver and kidney disease [33].

Chronic lipotoxic conditions in our study are also corroborated by biochemical analysis showing increased levels of serum triglycerides [17]. In some circumstances, excess free fatty acids induce apoptotic cell death [33]. Our analysis also indicates changes in intracellular pathways possibly underlying a change in cell growth, such as the proinsulin C-peptide signalling pathway as well as the mTOR and the phosphatidylinositol signalling systems. Tissue homeostasis relies on a delicate balance between apoptosis and cellular proliferation. When oxidative stress provokes apoptosis, injured cells are generally replaced through increased proliferation. Interestingly, similar results have recently been reported where transcriptome analysis of brown trout exposed to glyphosate or Roundup at a concentration (10 μg/L) typically found in the environment, revealed an over-representation of pathways involved in oxidative stress, apoptosis, and the regulation of cell proliferation [34]. However, although there is evidence to suggest that glyphosate can inhibit multiple cellular functions such as mitochondrial respiration, and enzyme activities other than EPSPS within the shikimate pathway, the existence of such direct mechanisms of interference at the low environmental dose tested here currently remains unknown and thus needs further exploration.

The proliferation/apoptosis imbalance may also have been either caused or promoted by a chronic disruption of the endocrine system and the activation or repression of signalling pathways. Activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) by hormones such as estrogens [35] results in a global downregulation of genes encoding members of the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, defective mitochondria, and reduced respiration [36]. Hormones and their nuclear receptors have dynamic interactions with chromatin remodeling complexes and spliceosome function [37]. As we have observed a disturbance in estrogen/testosterone balance and pituitary dysfunction in the animals studied here [17], a link between the disturbed gene expression patterns and pathologies via an endocrine disruptive mechanism is plausible, especially as endocrine disruptive effects can occur at very low doses [38]. Furthermore, the top-scoring transcription factor networks that can account for the observed Roundup-associated alterations in gene expression presented here are centered on Creb1, Esr1, Yy1, c-Myc and Oct3/4 (Fig. 4), which cooperate to regulate gene expression following hormonal stimulation [39]. Hormonal imbalance is generally associated with kidney or liver failure [40]. Furthermore, glyphosate has been found to act as an estrogen agonist in human breast cancer cell assays stimulating growth at comparable concentrations to the native hormone [13, 41]. This estrogenic potential of glyphosate may have contributed to the trend in increased mammary tumor incidence in the Roundup-treated rats analysed in this investigation [17].

An important consideration is that Roundup is not a single compound, but a mixture of an active ingredient (glyphosate) combined with various adjuvants, which are required to stabilise and allow penetration of glyphosate into plants. In short term acute exposures, some adjuvants can be considered as responsible of Roundup toxicity [42]. However, as adjuvant composition is proprietary and not fully disclosed, it is not possible to attribute the toxicity of the whole agricultural herbicide formulation to a given component. Thus the results from our study are not directly comparable to others testing glyphosate alone. The results we present may be specific for the formulation studied, because the toxicity of different GBH adjuvants can vary by a factor 100 at least based on assays involving a 24 h exposure to human tissue culture cells [42]. Future studies involving the administration of glyphosate alone would shed light on this issue.

In summary, the alterations in transcriptome profile were detected well below the glyphosate ADI (0.3 mg/kg bw/day) set within the European Union, and is within the range admitted in drinking water (0.1 ppb) and foodstuffs (for example, 20 ppm in GM soybeans or 2 ppm in bovine kidneys). As a probable endocrine disruptor, GBH/glyphosate may alter the functioning of hormonal systems and gene expression profiles via different mechanisms depending on the dose. Future metabolomic and proteomic studies of these organs could provide further mechanistic insight into the observed Roundup-mediated pathological process.