U.S. Throws Lifeline to Detroit
WASHINGTON -- The Bush administration said it would lend $17.4 billion to General Motors Corp. and Chrysler LLC, buying them a few weeks of financial relief but leaving the biggest decisions about the industry's future to President-elect Barack Obama.

Under the White House plan, the companies are required to extract enough financial concessions from workers, suppliers, dealers and other stakeholders to demonstrate their long-term viability by the end of March.

Enlarge Image Close Associated Press President George W. Bush makes comments on the auto industry Friday morning.

The deal's ambitious targets for the companies include replacing two-thirds of their debt with stock; using more stock instead of cash to fund retiree health-care obligations; eliminating much-criticized union "jobs banks" that pay laid-off auto workers; and establishing wage structures and workplace rules that are more competitive with foreign rivals.

But all those targets are nonbinding, and the agreement appeared to be much more porous than legislation that the administration and Democratic congressional leaders failed to pass earlier this month.

The loan package also requires the administration to drain what remains in the first half of the Treasury Department's $700 billion bailout fund, originally intended to aid the financial industry. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said lawmakers should release the final $350 billion "to support financial-market stability," a request likely to set up another battle with Congress.

{if djIsFlashPossible} The version of Adobe Flash Player required to view this interactive has not been found. To enjoy our complete interactive experience, please download a free copy of the latest version of Adobe Flash Player here {else} {else} This content can not be displayed because your browser does not support the Adobe Flash player required to view it. {/if} {/if}

Investors cheered the auto rescue, with GM shares climbing almost 23%, or 83 cents, to $4.49 in 4 p.m. New York Stock Exchange trading. Ford Motor Co. -- which is in better financial health and isn't seeking immediate aid -- saw a more modest gain of about 4%, or 11 cents, to close at $2.95.

Chrysler isn't publicly traded, but private-equity firm Cerberus Capital Management LLC, which owns a majority of the auto maker, said in a statement it is pleased with the White House's move, and believes it will lead "to the restructuring of Chrysler automotive's debt and labor agreements."

But the bailout is just the first step in what could be a long and painful revamping of the three Detroit companies during a recession. The loans may not keep them out of bankruptcy court in the long run as U.S. car sales have plunged to 1982 levels, consumer spending has fallen and buyers continue to have trouble obtaining vehicle financing.

In a note to clients, J.P. Morgan auto analyst Himanshu Patel said the Treasury Department's plan has a "nebulous threshold for determining viability by March 31," and he believes this "gray language could just as easily be used by the next administration to justify forcing a car maker into bankruptcy" or liquidation. He said of the three Detroit auto makers, Chrysler appears the most likely candidate for a near-term bankruptcy.

Helping Hand Under the White House plan, U.S. auto makers would: Receive $13.4 billion in short-term loans from TARP, the financial-industry rescue fund

Receive $4 billion more in February, contingent on congressional approval

Need to prove they are viable by March 31 or be required to return the funds

Provide the government with warrants for nonvoting stock

The deal adds the two storied Detroit giants to the long list of prominent American corporate names to receive federal bailouts in recent weeks -- and comes nearly 30 years after Chrysler once before was propped up by Washington.

The auto agreement provides the government with nonvoting stock warrants in GM and Chrysler, adding those ownership stakes to the government's rapidly expanding portfolio that includes much of the American banking industry, American International Group Inc., Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

The deal's generous terms in the short run reflect the precarious state of the U.S. and global economies and a U.S. government caught between two administrations -- as well as outgoing President George W. Bush's worries about the risk of deepening the downturn in the final days of his administration.

Bush Announces Auto Industry Rescue Package 2:21 Speaking from the White House, President Bush says the administration will grant struggling U.S. auto makers loans in order to avoid an industry collapse. He says amid an economic recession, allowing a collapse would be irresponsible. Video courtesy of Fox News.

Speaking from the White House at 9 a.m., Mr. Bush said the administration decided against forcing a bankruptcy to compel cost-cutting, fearing consumers might desert one or more of the car companies and touch off a broader collapse. Executives of the car makers have made similar arguments.

"Under ordinary economic circumstances, I would say this is the price that failed companies must pay, and I would not favor intervening to prevent the auto makers from going out of business," the president said. "But these are not ordinary circumstances. In the midst of a financial crisis and a recession, allowing the U.S. auto industry to collapse is not a responsible course of action."

In essence, Mr. Bush's plan lets the auto companies survive through March. He leaves it to the Obama administration to decide many tough questions after that. Obama officials must wrestle with how much in wage and benefit concessions to demand from the United Auto Workers union, which strongly backed Mr. Obama's campaign and helped him carry Michigan over Republican rival John McCain; how to wring savings from the companies' politically powerful dealerships; and what concessions can be squeezed from debt holders, suppliers and other groups.

Week on Wall Street: Fed Hits New Low 2:18 Simon Constable and David Gaffen discuss the new zero interest rate environment, plus the latest rescue of Detroit's automakers, with the government providing $13 billion loan.

Mr. Obama and his aides on Friday were generally supportive of the White House approach, especially the decision to avoid a bankruptcy filing. At a press conference, Mr. Obama warned Detroit executives that "the American people's patience is running out" and said the companies must use this opportunity to chart a course for their companies "that is sustainable." He also declined to say the White House is asking too much of the UAW. While workers shouldn't bear the entire burden of the restructuring, he said, "there are going to be some painful steps that have to be taken."

UAW leaders and their congressional allies were already signaling Friday that they would seek to ease the terms of the deal next year as they expect more friends on Capitol Hill and in the White House. Top Democratic leaders complained about the administration's aim of reducing worker wages and benefits. Rep. Barney Frank (D., Mass.), chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, termed the provisions "an unfair assault on working men and women."

Friday's deal, which resulted from negotiations between the administration and the two companies that lasted most of Thursday night, would extend a total $13.4 billion in loans to the two companies in December and January, with another $4 billion likely available in February. GM would get a total of $13.4 billion, and Chrysler, $4 billion.

The Bush administration agreed to tap the remaining financial-industry aid after it failed to win congressional approval to use a $25 billion program that was designed to help the domestic auto makers retool to make more environmentally friendly vehicles.

{if djIsFlashPossible} The version of Adobe Flash Player required to view this interactive has not been found. To enjoy our complete interactive experience, please download a free copy of the latest version of Adobe Flash Player here {else} {else} This content can not be displayed because your browser does not support the Adobe Flash player required to view it. {/if} {/if} David Patton and Mathew Passy discuss the move by President Bush to provide a bridge loan to GM and Chrysler

At both GM and Chrysler, the announcement of the loans and the government's conditions set off a race to rework agreements and contracts with the UAW, banks, creditors, suppliers and dealers.

"We know we have a lot of work ahead of us," GM Chief Executive Rick Wagoner said at a press conference. The crisis, he added, has focused GM on "once and for all" addressing problems that built up over decades.

But the pact gives the companies leeway, even if they don't obtain all the concessions they are seeking. The deal generally tracks key provisions of the bailout legislation that nearly passed Congress. But it provides significant flexibility to the companies in how they prove "viability."

And according to a White House fact sheet, the cost-cutting targets "would be nonbinding in the sense that negotiations can deviate from the quantitative targets ... providing that the [company] reports the reasons for these deviations and makes the business case to achieve long-term viability in spite of the deviations."

The agreement also lacks another key provision that the legislation contained: a ban on further federal aid if the companies failed to show they were taking sufficient steps to become viable. The new deal threatens only to call back existing loans if the companies fail to demonstrate viability by March 31.

Along with loans from the government, Chrysler is now in line to get additional help from its finance unit. Cerberus, which owns 80.1% of Chrysler, had come under pressure to put more money into the auto maker. After the White House announced the loans, Cerberus said it would put the first $2 billion in profits or dividends it makes on Chrysler Financial, which it also controls, into the auto operations. It didn't say when that would happen.

Enlarge Image Close Getty Images The government loan deal takes aim at auto-industry labor practices. Chrysler workers leave a plant Friday.

Friday's agreement didn't directly address the question of how the government might extend assistance to Chrysler Financial as well as GM's struggling financing arm, GMAC LLC. But they are expected to get money from the Treasury rescue fund as well, people familiar with the situation said.

Restoring the financing arms to health is key to sustaining sales for the companies. The financing operations also will be important elements in any mergers the companies attempt as part of their restructurings.

Now that GM's short-term liquidity issues are addressed, Mr. Wagoner said a key priority for the auto maker is ensuring the health of GMAC, co-owned by GM and Cerberus.

GMAC, a vital cog in GM's retail network, is teetering on the brink of collapse as it works to restructure its debt and obtain bank-holding status from the government in order to tap the financial-industry bailout funds.

Reflecting the ongoing struggles of the industry, Chrysler separately announced Friday the departure of two more top executives. Chief Marketing Officer Deborah Meyer is leaving the company immediately to pursue "other opportunities," and Philip F. Murtaugh, who headed its Asia operations, will leave at the end of the month.

Their exits come after unexpected departures by two other senior managers -- purchasing chief John Campi, who left last week, and Simon Boag, head of Chrysler's Mopar parts and accessories business, who left earlier this week.

—Sharon Terlep, Alex P. Kellogg and Elizabeth Williamson contributed to this article.

Write to John D. McKinnon at john.mckinnon@wsj.com and John D. Stoll at john.stoll@wsj.com

Printed in The Wall Street Journal, page A1