Mastoiditis: Practice Essentials, Etiology, Epidemiology
A purist's definition of mastoiditis includes all inflammatory processes of the mastoid air cells of the temporal bone. As the mastoid is contiguous to and an extension of the middle ear cleft, virtually every child or adult with acute otitis media (AOM) or chronic middle ear inflammatory disease has mastoiditis. In most cases, the symptomatology of the middle ear predominates (eg, fever, pain, conductive hearing loss), and the disease within the mastoid is not considered a separate entity (see the image below). [1] (See Etiology and Presentation.)

Mastoiditis with subperiosteal abscess. Note the loss of the skin crease and the pointed abscess. View Media Gallery

Acute mastoiditis is associated with AOM. In some patients, the infection spreads beyond the mucosa of the middle ear cleft, and they develop osteitis within the mastoid air-cell system or periosteitis of the mastoid process, either directly by bone erosion through the cortex or indirectly via the emissary vein of the mastoid. These patients have acute surgical mastoiditis (ASM), an intratemporal complication of otitis media. (See Etiology.)

Chronic mastoiditis is most commonly associated with chronic suppurative otitis media and particularly with cholesteatoma formation. Cholesteatomas are benign aggregates of squamous epithelium that can grow and alter normal structure and function of surrounding soft tissue and bone. This destructive process is accelerated in the presence of active infection by the secretion of osteolytic enzymes by the epithelial tissue. (See Etiology.)

Progression of mastoiditis

Mastoiditis progresses in the following 5 stages and may be arrested at any point (see Presentation and Workup):

Hyperemia of the mucosal lining of the mastoid air cells

Transudation and exudation of fluid and/or pus within the cells

Necrosis of bone by loss of vascularity of the septa

Cell wall loss with coalescence into abscess cavities

Extension of the inflammatory process to contiguous areas

Patient education

Warn patients and their families of possible cosmetic deformity following mastoid surgery.

Workup and management

Despite the use of antibiotics, acute mastoiditis still remains a threat for patients with acute otitis media (AOM), especially for children younger than age 5 years. Great care is required on the part of clinicians to make an early diagnosis in order to promote adequate treatment and to prevent complications. [15]

Material for culture and sensitivity should be obtained from the ear (via tympanocentesis or myringotomy), blood, any abscess, and mastoid tissue (if it becomes available). Obtain and evaluate spinal fluid if any suggestion exists of intracranial extension of the process.

Workup also includes the following:

Complete blood count (CBC)

Audiometry

Tympanocentesis/myringotomy

Computed tomography (CT) scanning - CT scanning of the temporal bone is the standard for evaluation of mastoiditis, with published sensitivities ranging from 87-100%

Surgical therapy confined to the ear includes myringotomy/tympanocentesis, tympanostomy tube placement, and mastoidectomy.

Antibiotics are the principal medications used in acute surgical mastoiditis (ASM). Culture results and the sensitivity of the organism ultimately govern selection of medications.