Terms of Service & Privacy Policy
Terms of Service

Supplier (“we”, “ours”,”Blobla”,”Blobla.com”) of the services that is supplied by this website (the service) will not take any responsible for any content that members upload (content). The content only shows the personal uploader's point of view.

All the content is for entertainment purpose. The quiz and game results maybe correct or incorrect to you. You should not be serious about the results for any reason.

You have to agree not to use the service to upload, comment or link up with any content relating to politic, religious, pornography, region discrimination, insult, vengeance, separation, threatening, contain other personal information, copyright violation, crime, encourage crime or violate any other laws.

You have to be over 13 years old to use the service.

By playing any game or taking any quiz on our service, you also agree with our Terms and Privacy Policy.

Privacy Policy

What we do with your information

Your information you provide to us is used only to generate the results for the games you play or the quizzes you take. We do not store your information on our server, nor we provide it to 3rd parties.

How we use cookies

A cookie is a small file which asks permission to be placed on your computer's hard drive. Once you agree, the file is added and the cookie helps analyse web traffic or lets you know when you visit a particular site. Cookies allow web applications to respond to you as an individual. The web application can tailor its operations to your needs, likes and dislikes by gathering and remembering information about your preferences.

We use traffic log cookies to identify which pages are being used. This helps us analyse data about webpage traffic and improve our website in order to tailor it to customer needs. We only use this information for statistical analysis purposes and then the data is removed from the system.

Overall, cookies help us provide you with a better website by enabling us to monitor which pages you find useful and which you do not. A cookie in no way gives us access to your computer or any information about you, other than the data you choose to share with us.

You can choose to accept or decline cookies. Most web browsers automatically accept cookies, but you can usually modify your browser setting to decline cookies if you prefer. This may prevent you from taking full advantage of the website.

Links to other websites

Our website may contain links to other websites of interest. However, once you have used these links to leave our site, you should note that we do not have any control over that other website. Therefore, we cannot be responsible for the protection and privacy of any information which you provide whilst visiting such sites and such sites are not governed by this privacy statement. You should exercise caution and look at the privacy statement applicable to the website in question.