GOP Faults Some Stimulus Projects
WASHINGTON -- Senate Republicans are trying to fire up more debate about the quality of the projects funded by the federal stimulus plan, calling out proposals to spend $16 million on scarcely used rural bridges in Wisconsin and $3.4 million for "eco-passage" wildlife crossings in Florida.

These and other uses of federal stimulus money will be targeted in a report to be released Tuesday by the office of Sen. Tom Coburn, the ranking Republican on the Senate's Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. The report is a fresh effort by the Oklahoma senator to question the Obama administration's spending priorities

Sen. Tom Coburn, the ranking Republican on the Permanent Select Committee on Investigations, will release a study of 100 stimulus projects, worth $5.5 billion, that he says are wasteful, damaging or just plain stupid. WSJ White House correspondent Jonathan Weisman explains.

White House officials say investigators were bound to find some faulty needles in a $787 billion haystack, but they say the Republicans' $5.5 billion list of 100 dubious projects is thin, given that 20,000 projects have been approved. Some questionable projects on the list, such as a $1.5 million guardrail around a dried up Oklahoma lake, have already been killed. Two Defense Department projects were rejected before they got off the drawing board, officials say.

Others, such as a bridge and interchange project in Kalamazoo, Mich., are worthy projects that Mr. Coburn opposes because of his broader view that the government spends too much, the administration says.

"Bridges to nowhere will not receive Recovery [Act] dollars," U.S. Department of Transportation spokeswoman Jill Zuckman said.

Still, White House officials say they are ready to listen to criticism of projects. They already changed the timing on a Kansas road paving project after Sen. Pat Roberts (R., Kan.) complained that Old Highway 96 was about to be repaved just before a Superfund cleanup project was going to tear it apart again.

Mr. Coburn's hit list is long and varied, but the subcommittee's Republican staff say one thread runs through it: the need for speed and getting money into the economy is trumping due diligence and careful prioritization.

Many of the projects singled out in Mr. Coburn's report concern the Transportation Department, which is administering roughly $48 billion, or 6% of stimulus funding.

In Wisconsin, 37 rural bridges carrying a little more than 500 vehicles a day -- some far fewer than that -- are on track to get stimulus dollars. Meanwhile, an aging bridge in Blooming Grove, Wis., which carries nearly 85,600 vehicles a day, is still waiting, according to the Republican report.

U.S. Transportation Department officials on Monday questioned the accuracy of the report, saying no bridge in Blooming Grove carries more than 40,000 vehicles per day. Republican investigators conceded they couldn't refute the Transportation Department's point, but they said they stand by their criticism that the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is investing in low-priority bridges that are "shovel ready" rather than fixing structurally deficient bridges that have a higher level of use.

One small bridge near Stevens Point, Wis., is getting $840,000 in stimulus money, although it carries 260 vehicles a day, many of them to Rusty's Backwater Saloon. Rusty Fischer, the restaurant's owner, said the bridge is "definitely in need of repair." Then again, he added, it is crossing a little creek that could have been easily and cheaply forded with a culvert.

It isn't that the state was favoring Rusty's bridge over a more well-trodden thoroughfare, said Peg Schmitt, a spokeswoman for the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. "When the eligibility criteria were made available, we took everything [local governments] submitted for local bridge projects that were submitted," she said. "Everything got funded."

Mr. Coburn's report criticizes Pennsylvania for proposing to spend $9.4 million to "renovate a 97-year-old train station that has sat vacant for more than 30 years." Pennsylvania officials defended the plan, saying the Elizabethtown stop is in use, even through the station building is closed. State and Amtrak official say Elizabethtown is an increasingly popular stop on Amtrak's Keystone Corridor, which links Harrisburg, Philadelphia and New York City.

The number of riders using the platform has nearly doubled in the past four years, said Steve Chizmar, a spokesman for the state's transportation department. Passengers currently can't buy a ticket at Elizabethtown and they have to wait on a platform covered by plastic sheeting, Mr. Chizmar said.

The Florida Department of Transportation plans to spend $3.4 million on road-crossings beneath U.S. Highway 27, in Lake Jackson to provide safe passage for alligators, otters, snakes and lizards. The "eco-passage" will consist of a series of fences directing animals to a 13-foot tunnel, although Republican staffers on the Senate subcommittee indicate a temporary fence appears to be cutting down the road kill already.

Write to Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com and Christopher Conkey at christopher.conkey@wsj.com

Printed in The Wall Street Journal, page A4