Democrats to Advance Stimulus Package
WASHINGTON -- A top House Democrat moved to broaden eligibility for a key business tax break, as party leaders prepared to advance President Barack Obama's $825 billion economic-recovery package through the full House next week.

That package is designed to spur job creation and stem the economy's decline with a massive boost of taxpayer support, including new spending on roads and bridges and tax breaks for workers and businesses. Included in the package is a preference that would allow money-losing companies to get refunds for taxes paid as far back as five years. Current law allows such losses to be carried back only for two years.

In a package of amendments to the recovery package unveiled Thursday, House Ways and Means Chairman Charles Rangel (D., N.Y.) proposed a series of changes that would give businesses greater flexibility to claim the credit, ensuring wider participation, congressional aides and corporate lobbyists said. Mr. Rangel's amendment package was expected to be approved by the committee late Thursday.

To pay for the changes, which threatened to drive up the ten-year cost of $16 billion carry-back proposal, the chairman proposed to limit the overall value of the tax benefit. Under his proposal, businesses claiming the tax break would be allowed to carry back 90% of current losses, not 100%, as originally proposed.

The carry-back proposal is available only for losses posted in 2008 and 2009.

The broader $275 billion tax-relief package is a major part of the president's economic-recovery plan, and is expected be approved by the House Ways and Means Committee late Thursday.

In a series of votes, the committee rejected several Republican amendments, including a proposal that would have cut the capital gains tax.

The battle between Republicans, demanding a more careful process, and Democrats, insisting on the importance of speed, continued in the House Energy and Commerce Committee, which was scrutinizing another major plank of the package Thursday ahead of floor action next week. But with decreased minorities here, as elsewhere in Congress, there was little the Republicans could do but complain.

Texas Rep. Joe Barton, the committee's senior Republican, called it "abominable" and "truly an insult to this committee" that the massive bill was the subject of no traditional hearings, only Thursday's one-day "markup" for offering amendments.

And most of those amendments were resoundingly voted down if they were offered by Republicans. One provision in the bill, for example, allocates $2.8 billion for broadband internet service. Rep. Roy Blunt (R., Mo.) proposed rewriting it to ensure that areas with no broadband service at all get priority over those that have some broadband but are "under-served."

After more than an hour of debate, including fist-pounding and words like "shameful," the amendment was voted down 33-23 in a straight party-line vote. The result underlined the likelihood that the overall $825 billion stimulus package, crafted mostly by Obama's team and introduced by House Democrats last week, was likely to sail through the house largely unchanged, leaving the true battle for the Senate.

On Wednesday, the House Appropriations Committee, voting 35-22, approved Wednesday a $355 billion spending piece of the recovery package, providing for near-term investments in "shovel-ready" infrastructure projects, among other things.

Write to Greg Hitt at greg.hitt@wsj.com and Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com