Bomb Attempt on U.S.-Bound Flight
By Neal E. Boudette in Detroit, Andy Pasztor in Los Angeles, and Peter Spiegel in Washington

Associated Press Northwest Flight 253 after arriving Friday in Detroit from Amsterdam. Delta Air Lines now owns Northwest.

A passenger on a Detroit-bound Northwest Airlines flight tried Friday to detonate an explosive device strapped to his leg and later told investigators he had affiliations with al Qaeda and was trying to blow up the plane, according to a senior U.S. official.

"We believe this was an attempted act of terrorism," said a White House official.

The suspect told investigators he was given the device by al Qaeda operatives in Yemen, along with detonation instructions, the official said. "This guy claims he is tied to al Qaeda, specifically in Yemen," the official said. "He claims he was on orders from al Qaeda in Yemen. Who knows if that's true?"

Rep. Peter King (R., N.Y.) identified the man as a 23-year-old Nigerian named Abdul Mudallad. Officials said they believed the man boarded a KLM flight in Lagos, Nigeria, and changed planes in Amsterdam, although that couldn't immediately be confirmed. The suspect's name didn't appear on any terrorist watch lists maintained by U.S. authorities, Mr. King said, but it turned up "hot" in other terrorism-related databases maintained by intelligence officials.

On Saturday morning, Britain's Metropolitan Police Service was searching a "number" of properties in central London that may be related to the attempted bombing, according to a spokeswoman. "We are liasing with U.S. authorities and are conducting enquiries in conjunction with them," she said, declining to give further details.

Media reports overnight identified the suspect by several different names, sometimes saying he was a student at University College London. On Saturday morning, a spokesman for the university said that one iteration of the name cited in news reports – Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab – matches the name of a former engineering student there. That student enrolled in September 2005 and departed in June 2008; it wasn't immediately clear whether he graduated, but the spokesman said he was pursuing a degree in mechanical engineering.

The spokesman said that, as of mid-day Saturday, University College London had not been contacted by police regarding any of its past or present students.

One U.S. intelligence official said the alleged explosive was a mix of powder and liquid. Mr. King said the concoction was strapped to Mr. Mudallad's leg.

The White House said President Barack Obama, vacationing in Hawaii, was notified of the incident after 9 a.m. local time and held two secure conference calls with his national-security team. He ordered increased security for air travel, the White House said. The Department of Homeland Security said airline passengers should expect to see additional screening measures on both domestic and international flights.

The incident aboard Northwest Flight 253, an Airbus 330-300 carrying about 278 passengers, came as the plane was approaching the airport just before noon. It landed safely after the pilots declared an emergency. Though a Northwest flight, the plane had Delta markings. After a merger, Delta Air Lines Inc. now owns Northwest.

FLASHBACK Getty Images 'Shoe bomber' Richard Reid was convicted for trying to blow up a jetliner in 2001 with plastic explosives concealed in his shoes. He is serving a life sentence in a Colorado prison. From the Archives: U.S. Indicts Shoe Bomber on Nine Charges

Stephanie van Herk, a passenger from the Netherlands who was in seat 18B, said the plane had lowered its landing gear when she heard a loud bang. At first she thought the plane might have blown a tire, she said, but then she saw flames leap from the lap of a man in the row behind her in the window seat 19A. "It was higher than the seat," said Ms. van Herk, 22 years old.

"Then everyone started screaming," she said. "It was panic." Flight attendants shouted "What are you doing? What are you doing?" They called for water, and the man began pulling down his burning pants, said Ms. van Herk. She and other passengers got water from the galley and the man was doused. Then a Dutch man jumped him.

Flight passenger Syed Jafry, a U.S. citizen who had flown from the United Arab Emirates, said he was seated three rows behind when he saw a glow and smelled smoke. He said, "A young man behind me jumped on him."

A woman who was seated in row 32 said she heard someone shout, "What the hell are you trying to do, kill all of us?"

"It was scary," said the woman, a nurse named Michelle from Dayton, Ohio, who did not want her last name published. Her voice was still shaking hours after the incident. "I just can't believe it."

Enlarge Image Close WILLIAM ARCHIE/Detroit Free Press Syed Jafry, right, said he was sitting three rows behind a man suspected of trying to detonate explosives on Flight 253.

A few passengers applauded the man who was identified as having helped subdue the alleged attacker, Michelle said.

The explosive was at first believed to have been a small firecracker.

One passenger was taken to the University of Michigan Medical Center and remained hospitalized Friday.

Shortly after the plane landed around 11:50 a.m. Detroit time, the Transportation Security Administration said that "out of an abundance of caution," the jet's passengers were put through a special security screening and luggage was re-examined. TSA and FBI officials interviewed passengers as the plane sat at a remote corner of the airport, surrounded by law-enforcement and emergency vehicles.

Regardless of what the investigation uncovers about the suspect's motives or the material that ignited, Friday's incident is likely to renew debate over whether new security systems are necessary to allow flight attendants to alert cockpit crews.

In addition to calling pilots on the intercom, airlines and security experts for years have debated the idea of providing cabin crews with additional ways to warn pilots about potential threats from passengers. Video cameras, wireless alerting devices or some type of discreet alarm switch have all been discussed as remedies.

Homeland Insecurity U.S. Faces Rising Threat From Its Own Citizens

12/15/09 12/15/09

The incident also is bound to renew debate over the effectiveness of the current system of international "no-fly" lists, aimed at identifying passengers with terrorist connections and keeping them off airliners around the globe.

So far, the Federal Aviation Administration and many airlines have been resisting such mandates, arguing they are expensive and unnecessary.

The additional security measures ordered by TSA, according to government and industry officials, could cause further delays to what already has been a difficult and storm-battered holiday travel season for millions of U.S. passengers

Delta Air Lines Inc. said it was cooperating with investigators.

British Prime Minister Gordon Brown is being kept in touch with developments, according to a spokesman.

Some foreign political and intelligence officials have long complained that the U.K. let itself become a base for terrorist cells and some recent attacks or attempted attacks on Western targets have had a British connection.

This included another failed attempt to blow up a U.S. bound jet midair, when Richard Reid, the so-called shoe-bomber, attempted to ignite explosives in his shoe on a flight from Paris to Miami just before Christmas 2001. In recent years the U.K. has made it harder for foreigners to enter the country, including by tightening up visa requirements for foreign students, a major revenue stream for British universities and colleges.

—Alistair MacDonald and Bruce Orwall in London, and Cam Simpson and Alex P. Kellogg contributed to this article.

Write to Neal E. Boudette at neal.boudette@wsj.com, Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com and Peter Spiegel at peter.spiegel@wsj.com

Printed in The Wall Street Journal, page A1