National study points to Wisconsin lowering its recidivism rate
SHARE

By of the

Wisconsin was among eight states recognized in a national report Thursday for lowering recidivism rates, which track how many people commit a new crime after serving time in prison.

Of the people released from Wisconsin prisons in 2007, 56.2% re-offended and returned in the following three years. The three-year return rate dropped to 51.1% for those who were released in 2010, according to the report released by the Council of State Governments Justice Center and the National Reentry Resource Center.

"It's fantastic that Wisconsin's being recognized for our work," said Tony Streveler, director of research and policy for the state Department of Corrections. "Having reduced recidivism, that means we have less victims."

The national report comes as the state DOC prepares to release a comprehensive report on recidivism in Wisconsin, far more detailed than its initial report in 2012, in coming days.

The lower recidivism rate shows that Wisconsin is moving in the right direction, but more could be done, said David Liners, state coordinator for WISDOM, a faith-based organization that focuses on social justice issues and has called for alternatives to incarceration in its 11 x 15 Campaign.

"Our feeling is that it's still way higher than it needs to be and it could be much lower," Liners said.

Wisconsin's prison population, which is among the highest in the country, has more than tripled since 1990 and has the highest rate of black male incarceration of any state, according to a 2013 workforce study by researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.

Wisconsin defines recidivism as a criminal offense that results in a new conviction and sentence to the state DOC, either probation or prison, during the specified follow-up period, which was three years in the new report.

The lowering rate of recidivism is a result of several factors, such as increased community-based resources, treatment alternatives and diversion, case planning and risk assessments, and work initiative programs, Streveler said.

The state found it had a 40% increase from 2000 to 2007 in the number of people admitted to prison because their community supervision was revoked for technical violations — not a new crime — and instead moved toward evidence-based programs like "swift and sure sanctions," he said.

For example, if a person on supervision missed an appointment with an agent and tested positive on a drug test but had a job, family relationship and no new criminal behavior, the person should still face sanctions, Streveler said.

"In the past we may have pursued revocation (to prison)," he said. "Now there are alternative sanctions like a jail bed. So in the previous example, we'd say 'We'll put you in county jail for the weekend and increase your terms of supervisions.' You've got the sanction taking place and no one losing their job and they won't be separated from family."

Sending people back to prison for technical violations still occurs in Wisconsin. In 2013, 1,501 individuals on probation were sent back to prison on technical revocations, while 588 on probation returned to prison because of a new criminal offense. However, that's fewer people than in 2007 when 2,172 people were imprisoned for technical violations.

The declines in recidivism rates for the states included in the national report — Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and South Carolina — ranged from 6% to 18%, with Wisconsin seeing a 9.1% decline.

"It's a baby step in the right direction, but we just need to really, seriously invest in helping people to succeed," Liners said. "There are so many barriers when you get out of prison."

He also advocated more diversion programs to keep people out of prisons.

"There are a lot of people who shouldn't be in prison in the first place, and we send them to jail when we should send them to a treatment program," Liners said. "We take people who've got problems and we compound them in a lot of cases."