Trump Tries to Reclaim His Pre-Debate Swagger
COUNCIL BLUFFS, IA - SEPTEMBER 28: Donald Trump pauses while speaking at a rally on September 28, 2016 in Council Bluffs, Iowa. Trump has been campaigning today in Iowa, Wisconsin and Chicago. (Photo by Spencer Platt/Getty Images)

Donald Trump is attempting to regain his focus.

Following Monday night's much-criticized presidential debate performance against Hillary Clinton, Trump has returned to the campaign trail intent on honing his message on what he perceives to be his rival's weaknesses. On Wednesday, at a rally in Council Bluffs, Iowa, he rarely strayed from what proved to be an anti-Clinton rant.

He drilled into Clinton on familiar topics—her deletion of government e-mails from a private server when she served as secretary of state, the telegraphed withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq—and offered fresh attacks on her health and trustworthiness. To date, it was one of his lengthiest and most focussed attacks of the general election against Clinton, who remains ahead of him in national polling and in several important battleground states.

More from Bloomberg.com: The Clinton Campaign Has a Millennial Math Problem

“You see all the days off that Hillary takes? Day off, day off, day off. All those day offs and then she can’t even make it to her car. Isn’t it tough?” Trump said in Iowa, a crucial swing state where early voting begins on Thursday. “All those day offs, right? Boom. Ever see her chart? She won’t be campaigning today. She won’t be campaigning today. She is day in, day out and I’m campaigning, I’m saying what’s going on?”

Clinton did campaign on Wednesday, holding a rally in Durham, New Hampshire, with former rival Bernie Sanders that focused on the need to make college tuition-free.

"I am asking you here today not only to vote for Secretary Clinton but to work hard to get your uncles and your aunts, to get your friends to vote," Sanders said at the event. "It is imperative that we elect Hillary Clinton as our next president."

More from Bloomberg.com: Congress Easily Overrides Obama Veto of Saudi 9/11 Lawsuit Bill

Trump’s strategists had originally instructed Trump and his surrogates to refrain from trying to capitalize on Clinton’s caught-on-video health scare on Sept. 11, when she became overheated and dehydrated and had to leave a memorial service early. Her aides later admitted she’d been diagnosed with pneumonia, and Clinton took three days off the campaign trail. But Republicans in August accused Clinton of going on “vacation” this summer, dedicating time to private fundraisers.

On Wednesday, Trump pushed back on the conclusion of many political observers that Clinton delivered the stronger performance in the first debate of the general election. “You hear how well she did in the debate. I don’t think she did so well in the debate at all,” he said.

More from Bloomberg.com: How Clinton Beat Trump in Their First Debate, By the Numbers

While Trump has repeatedly cited unscientific, online polls taken immediately following the debate that declared him the winner, an appeal sent to supporters on Wednesday struck a notably different tone.

"I need your immediate feedback from the first debate in order to win the second one," the candidate said in a mass e-mail. A link included in the message led to an online survey of rhetorical questions about his performance in the first debate.

"Should Trump have brought up Hillary’s failure in Benghazi as a disqualification for the presidency?" one question stated.

Roundly criticized as being unprepared for the first face-off with Clinton, Trump told supporters in his e-mail that "debate preparation is already underway, so you’ll need to get your input in immediately."

Reading from a teleprompter at his Iowa rally, Trump hit Clinton on many of the 30 questions he put to supporters in his survey.

He instructed voters to “follow the money” and look at the paid speeches Clinton gave to private companies. “Hillary Clinton has received $100 million in contributions from Wall Street and the hedge funds. She received $4.1 million in speaking fees from financial firms,” he said. “I’d like to see what she said. Where are the papers. Bernie was asking for the papers but Bernie gave up.”

Trump also lit into Clinton’s years as President Barack Obama’s secretary of state, saying she put the office “up for sale.”

“If she ever got the chance she would put the Oval Office up for sale, too.”

Read More