Entergy's Michoud Power plant back online

Entergy New Orleans' Michoud power plant, located in New Orleans on the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet waterway, is back in operation after completing repairs from flood and wind damage due to Hurricane Katrina.Michoud was shut down before Katrina made landfall in anticipation of storm surges and flooding in the New Orleans area.

The facility suffered more than $17 million in damage from up to 6 feet in flooding and wind damage from gusts in excess of 88 mph. Prior to the hurricane, the gas-fired plant's three units produced 918 megawatts. Two of units will restart by summer to support electrical needs. Michoud Unit 2 returned to service Wednesday and Unit 3, the largest of the three units, is scheduled for restart by the end of June. Both will operate as needed based on load demands. Unit 1, the smallest of the three Michoud units, will not be ready for restart this summer.Entergy New Orleans' Paterson power is typically operated only to meet peak summer load demands, which is not anticipated in summer 2006 due to the reduced customer base post- Katrina. Katrina made its second landfall around 6 a.m. Aug. 29 near Buras with sustained winds of 125 mph. It is the most destructive event in Entergy history, knocking out power to more than 1 million customers and decimating the coastal regions of Louisiana and Mississippi.Entergy New Orleans provides electricity to more than 190,000 customers and natural gas to more than 147,000 customers in Orleans Parish and is a subsidiary of Entergy Corp., an integrated energy company with annual revenues of more than $10 billion and more than 14,000 employees. Entergy, the second-largest U.S. nuclear generator, delivers electricity to about 2.7 million customers in Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas.Entergy New Orleans filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection Sept. 23, 2005. The company has bankruptcy court approval to receive up to $200 million debtor-in- possession loans from Entergy Corp. to continue operations. To date, $100 million has been lent to ENO using the debtor-in-possession facility.

Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires

Provided by ProQuest Information and Learning Company. All rights Reserved.