Demond Means resigns as leader of Milwaukee school turnaround district
Demond Means, superintendent of the Mequon-Thiensville School District, is resiging his post as commissioner of the state-mandated Opportunity Schools and Partnership Program in Milwaukee. He is shown in front of his alma mater, Riverside University High School in Milwaukee last year after being appointed to the position. Credit: Mike De Sisti

By of the

Demond Means, the Mequon-Thiensville superintendent tapped by Milwaukee County Executive Chris Abele to lead a state-mandated school turnaround district in Milwaukee, resigned that post Wednesday, saying the adversarial climate surrounding the program "is the last thing our children need."

Means' departure as Opportunity Schools and Partnership Program commissioner comes a week after Milwaukee Public Schools rejected an invitation to partner with him and Abele on a plan to turn around some of its poorest performing schools. Instead, it floated a counterproposal that would have allowed Abele and Means to open an independent early childhood program in one of its underused buildings.

With no compromise in sight — and a not-so-veiled threat of a lawsuit issued Tuesday by a conservative public interest law firm — Means appears to have abandoned the post rather than take control of select MPS schools and turn those over to outside operators as the state law requires.

"I made a promise when I volunteered for this position that I would not impose anything on Milwaukee Public Schools," Means said in a statement Wednesday.

"It is now clear to me that as implementation of the law moves forward, the environment is not conducive to collaborative partnerships — something essential for positive things to happen in Milwaukee."

Efforts to reach Means were not immediately successful.

Abele issued a statement saying he accepted Means' resignation "with regret."

"I chose Dr. Means for this role because he shares my commitment to strong public schools and to improving outcomes for Milwaukee's kids, families, and communities," Abele said. "I appreciate Demond's service over the past six months and know he will remain an advocate for helping kids succeed in our public schools."

MPS issued a statement saying it recognizes Means' "service to education and children in our area" and that it remains "focused on the needs of students of the city of Milwaukee."

Former School Board President Michael Bonds, the lone board member to publicly support the Abele-Means proposal, said he was disappointed.

"It's a sad day for education in Milwaukee," Bonds said. He called the Abele-Means proposal, under which Means would have run select MPS schools under a contract with the school district, "a golden opportunity."

"And we missed it," Bonds said.

State Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills), co-author of the OSPP statute, said Wednesday that she spoke with Means in the days following MPS' counterproposal, telling him it would not comply with the law and that he would now have to move forward to implement it as written.

And on Tuesday, the conservative public interest law firm the Wisconsin Institute for Law and Liberty issued a statement saying the MPS proposal would not satisfy the law and that failure to turn over schools to outside providers would expose Means to litigation.

It was not clear Wednesday whether that played a role in Means' decision to resign.

Darling's co-author, Rep. Dale Kooyenga (R-Brookfield), blamed Means' departure on MPS, calling it a failed opportunity to improve educational outcomes for thousands of Milwaukee students.

"The status quo establishment of Milwaukee Public Schools chewed him up and spit him out, and was not willing to partner with him to try some new ideas," Kooyenga said. "It's a shame."

The Milwaukee Teachers' Education Association called Means' resignation "a victory for parents, students, and community members who have been fighting to keep Milwaukee Public Schools in the hands of a democratically elected school board."

New leader by fall

Abele now has until the fall to select a new commissioner. State law requires the governor and Milwaukee mayor to provide a list of candidates, after which Abele would have 120 days to make the appointment.

A Milwaukee native and graduate of MPS' Riverside High School, Means was tapped to lead the Opportunity Schools program in November, months after it passed as part of the 2015-'17 state budget. Means had worked without pay, but was expected to be compensated once funding for the schools materialized — either from the state or donors.

The statute calls for the commissioner to take control of up to five schools a year and turn those over to outside operators.

Means and Abele had said from the beginning that they would not mount a takeover of MPS schools. Instead, they proposed what they described as a partnership in which Means would operate the schools under a contract with MPS.

Under their plan, teachers would have retained their jobs and MPS would have kept at least a portion of its current per-pupil funding. But the School Board would have lost at least some of its governing authority.

Abele and Means had spent weeks trying to muster support among religious and civic groups, but it was widely derided as a takeover by the Milwaukee teachers union, the NAACP and others.

MPS rejected the proposal last week as vague and in conflict with state law. It proposed an alternative that would have allowed Abele and Means to operate an independent charter school offering an early childhood program in the former 35th Street School, without any support from MPS.

That proposal — whether it complied with state law or not — would have been virtually impossible for Abele and Means to implement because the state provided no school start-up funds as part of the law, and Abele has yet to secure philanthropic dollars to support the OSPP efforts.