High Table Symposium » 15-16
Some of our High Table guests have also been invited to offer Fletcher-wide speeches under the auspices of the distinguished Charles Francis Adams Lecture Series. These have included H.E. Hisashi Owada, then President of the International Court of Justice; Nobel Laureate Dr. Mohamed Elbaradei; andH.E. Joseph Deiss, President of the 65th Session of the U.N. General Assembly.

One of the central features of the LL.M. program is the “High Table” luncheon series, which is held throughout during the academic year. High Table is a luncheon discussion attended by LL.M. faculty and required for LL.M. students, based on presentations by practitioners from the public and private sectors and visiting legal scholars. Some of our recent guests are listed below.

2015–2016 Speakers at The Fletcher LL.M. High Table Series

Dr. Kingsley Moghalu, Professor of Practice at the Fletcher School, former Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, and Director at the United Nations, spoke about his experience working at the intersection of international relations and international criminal law

Judge Patricia Wald, Board member at the Privacy and Civil Liberties Board, former Judge at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and former Chief Justice at the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, spoke about her work ensuring that privacy and civil liberty interests are balanced against national security concerns

Professor Cecile Aptel, Senior Legal Policy Adviser for the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and Professor of International Law at the Fletcher School, outlined the increasing challenges of promoting fundamental human rights on a global scale.

Professor William Park, Professor of Law at Boston University School of Law, spoke about challenges and opportunities in the field of investor-state arbitration

Other guests have included:

Lisa Tabassi, Head of Legal Services at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Steven Hill, Legal Adviser and Director of the Office of Legal Affairs at NATO