MoneySavingExpert.com Forums
“ One thing that does not appear to have been mentioned is the impact of the refugee crisis on the coming elections in Greece and Spain. I wonder if this will push both elections towards extremist parties and accelerate major changes what ever they are? Frugalsod Originally posted by ”

I have been wondering exactly the same thing to be honest. I do not have a vote here, unfortunately. I think that the more the crisis brings troubles to the Greeks , the more likely they are to vote for the Golden Dawn. Whoever is in, I think there is massive trouble ahead, not just for Greece but for Italy and others too.I have just been reading the news from Europe and it seems that there are huge issues going on. Most worrying was this quote I saw from the EU ... Germany's interior minister is backing the idea of cutting European Union funding to countries that refuse to share the burden of hosting refugees.Several EU countries, particularly in the former Eastern bloc, have rejected calls from Germany and the EU's executive Commission for mandatory quotas to spread refugees out among the 28-nation bloc.German Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere said Tuesday there needs to be discussion of how to exert pressure. He told ZDF television that the countries rejecting quotas often receive significant amounts of EU funding.He said that Commission chief Jean-Claude Juncker has suggested -- "and I find that right" -- that "we should talk about (them) getting less money from the structural funds."I have been thinking for a while that the migrants have been used as a political weapon against Greece, Italy and some other countries. This has sort of confirmed my fears.... we take back all the migrants or they do not give any of the money we have suffered five years of austerity for.On a more personal note, I shared an article online saying that putin thought the migrants were the biggest threat to Europe so far. I got two really nasty threatening messages from Muslim female fundamentalists threatening me via my Facebook. I have reported and blocked both of them.I am having serious doubts about going to London and Glasgow this year for Christmas and New year. I would be safer staying at home on this island, which may well get cut off this winter.