Quarryville man accused of using phone to look at 10-year-old girl in Sheetz restroom
LANCASTER, Pa. –A Quarryville man is accused of taking pictures of a 10 year-old girl using the bathroom. It happened last Thursday at the Sheetz located at 1180 Manheim Pike around 9:55pm. The victim told her mother, who was waiting outside the bathroom for her, that while she was in the bathroom, a man was in the adjoining stall, and the girl saw the man holding his phone over the top of the stall. Employees told police that this man had been in the bathroom for approximately an hour. Police found the suspect, James Thomas Shoemaker, 19, inside of a bathroom stall in the women’s bathroom. They say Shoemaker was in possession of a phone as described by the victim.

Police say Shoemaker intentionally went into the women’s bathroom, and while he was in there he used his phone to access pornographic images on his web browser. Shoemaker then used his phone’s camera to look over the stall to see into the adjoining stall that was occupied by the victim. The suspect also used his phone/camera to look under the stall door to see if anyone else was in the women’s bathroom. Shoemaker gave consent for officers to examine his phone, which is currently being forensically analyzed. As of this time, no pictures of the victim have been located on the phone. This investigation is ongoing.

Shoemaker, a resident of the 200 blk. of Blackburn Rd., Quarryville, PA was charged with (1) count of Invasion of Privacy, a 3rd degree misdemeanor, by Officer Mark Gehron before MDJ Sponaugle. He was released with a summons to appear in court.

Anyone with information on this incident or any similar incidents involving this suspect is urged to call Lancaster City Police at (717) 735-3300 or Lancaster City-County Crime Stoppers at 1-800-322-1913. You can also click the Submit a Tip button on our website, www.lancasterpolice.com, or Text a Tip to Crime Stoppers by texting LANCS plus your message to 847411. Tipsters may remain anonymous and do not have to give their names.