Mr. T talks about fighting cancer, playing Clubber Lang, and why he no longer wears his gold chains
Mr. T, when he first gets on the phone, sounds like a guy who’s just happy to be at the party.

“Good, wonderful, wonderful, I’m blessed, yes indeed!” he says, when asked how he is. Born Lawrence Tureaud in Chicago, the former pro wrestler, bodyguard, and actor is best known for his role as Clubber Lang in Rocky III and as a part of the ’80s show The A-Team.

Mr. T was speaking from New York City where, on Tuesday, the acrobat Nik Wallenda walked across a high wire while Mr. T yelled words of encouragement at him. The stunt was organized by the hotel chain Fairfield by Marriott, for whom Mr. T is a spokesman.

Here, 9 key takeaways from one phone call with Mr. T., including some thoughts about fighting ducks, his battle with cancer, and why he no longer wears his own gold chains.

1. He identified closely with the character of Clubber Lang

When asked what role has been his favorite, Mr. T didn’t hesitate for a second.

“Clubber Lang was it,” he said. “It was inspiring, because Clubber Lang is basically my life story. He wanted a shot, and people said he wouldn’t make it. I was in awe when they asked me to be in Rocky III, because a couple years before I had watched Rocky I and II. So to hear they want me in Rocky III? Wow. It was mind boggling.”

He did say, however, that he also really enjoyed his cameo in Not Another Teen Movie (warning: there’s NSFW language in this clip).

2. HE STILL PITIES LOTS OF FOOLS

Mr. T popularized the phrase, “I pity the fool!” in his role as Clubber Lang.

He said he still pities lots of fools, but he wasn’t willing to say which ones. He’s saving that for his forthcoming book called (you guessed it) I Pity The Fool. The second chapter is called “Ship of Fools.”

“I don’t want to give it away right now,” Mr. T said. “But I will be naming names then.”

3. He wouldn’t say whether he’d rather fight one horse-sized duck or 100 duck-sized horses

Given Mr. T’s wrestling past and his experience playing a boxer, it seemed like he’d be someone who could, once and for all, settle the debate over whether it would be harder to fight one horse-sized duck or 100 duck-sized horses.

But he refused.

“I don’t know how to answer this,” he said. “Because if I say the wrong thing, the people who like animals will get mad. There is a wrong answer. They’ll say, ‘Mr. T wants to kill a duck!’ So I gotta watch what I say and watch what I do. You’re trying to get me!”

4. He started wearing his gold chains for two distinct reasons

1. “I bought the gold because I could afford it. I tell inner city kids and their parents, ‘It’s stupid for you to go out and buy gold if your rent’s not paid, when the kids need shoes.’ So the first reason is that I can afford it.”

2. “The second is symbolic of my African heritage. When my ancestors were brought from Africa, they were shackled by their neck, their wrists, and their ankles by steel chains. And they were sold on the slave block for chump change. So I turned the steel chains to gold to symbolize that I’m still a slave, only my price tag is higher.”

5. But he hasn’t worn a chain he owns since Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans

After Hurricane Katrina hit in 2005, Mr. T said he could no longer justify wearing his jewelry, and vowed never to put on a chain he owned again.

“Because, as a Christian, I felt it would be a sin against god to wear my gold when the people lost everything,” he said. “I remember the bodies floating in the water, and I felt it would be disrespectful and insensitive to people who died, so I said I’d never wear my gold again. Only gold I have is the gold in my heart.”

He said that now, anytime he appears on camera with chains on, it belongs to the people who style him, and often isn’t real.

6. He saw his cancer as a test

Mr. T was diagnosed with cancer in 1995, and said that it was just one more obstacle he had to face.

“It was a test. And what is a test? A test is just a review of what you learned, and I was taught that the only students who don’t like a tests is the ones who didn’t study. You’ll have setbacks. The Bible said, you fall seven times, you get up eight. You keep on getting up.”

7. “Don’t get bitter, get better”

Mr. T is big into inspirational quotes. Over the course of the conversation, he dropped gems like this:

“Life give you lemons? Make lemonade.”

“Life gives you crap? Make fertilizer out of it.”

“Don’t get mad, get better.”

“D on’t get bitter, get better.”

“ Not how many times a man gets knocked down, it’s about how many times he gets up.”

“It’s okay to cry, but after you cry, get in the fight.”

8. His favorite part about being a bodyguard to famous people was when they said “thank you, Mr. T”

Mr. T served as a bodyguard to people like Muhammad Ali, Steve McQueen, Michael Jackson, and Diana Ross. He wouldn’t tell specific stories about his famous charges, but he did say that’s where he got his toughness.

“They thought enough of me that I could protect them, and that was serious business,” he said. “That’s where my tough attitude comes from — when I was a body guard, I gotta look mean, I don’t talk to nobody. The meanness and toughness is there.

“I enjoyed putting my life on the line,” he continued. “And when they’d say, ‘Thank you, Mr. T?’ Oh man, that was, oooh, that was the greatest, that they appreciated what I did. Then I was happy. And that’s it.”

9. HIS FAVORITE FOOTBALL TEAM IS “DA BEARS”

“My favorite football team is —” Mr. T paused, before saying, “daaa Bears!”

“I’m from Chicago, you know,” he continued. “So whether they win or lose, it’s daaaa Bears. Like the Cubs, whether they win or lose. The Bears used to be good, back in ’85.”

Before he hangs up, Mr. T adds, “I want you to stay amazing! I’ll do my best to never let you down.”