Target Stocks Sink by $2.5 Billion in 10 Days as over 1 Million Americans pledge to Boycott them
Target's stocks are imploding as over 1 million people have now signed the boycott pledge against the company for its bathroom and changing room policy to allow members of both sexes and those who are confused about their gender.

Tim Wildmon, president of the American Family Association, the organization that hosts the petition, said that there were nearly 75 people per minute who were adding their names to the petition.

"That's a million families who are going to spread the word about Target, so they may not get those customers back," Wildmon said.



Target's "management is just going to have step up here [and] say 'We're selling hammers and hats, we're not into social engineering,'" he added.



Just reached 1 million signatures! #BoycottTarget pic.twitter.com/V8SZc0hTtR take our poll - story continues below Do you support President Trump's plan to impose tariffs on Mexico? Do you support President Trump's plan to impose tariffs on Mexico?

Do you support President Trump's plan to impose tariffs on Mexico? * Yes, definitely Yeah, maybe Not sure Nah, it's a distraction No way, it's bad for America

Email *

Comments This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Completing this poll grants you access to Freedom Outpost updates free of charge. You may opt out at anytime. You also agree to this site's Privacy Policy and Terms of Use. — American Family Assc (@AmericanFamAssc) April 29, 2016

Breitbart reports:

The boycott was announced April 20 by the association, one day after Target revealed its decision to favor its few transgender customers and staff over the rest of the population. A study of the 2010 census data suggests that only about 1 in 2,400 adults change their names to match names used by the other sex.

Wildmon's association wants to affirm people's privacy in bathrooms and changing rooms, but also to block the progressives' multi-front push to stigmatize and outlaw any recognition of the average differences between women and men, and between boys and girls. The LGBT agenda "is being rammed down people's throats, and people are losing their jobs because of it, and it is becoming so that you can't think differently from these people or you're [called] a hater or a bigot," he said.

Since the decision was announced, numerous comments, articles, and videos protesting the store's one-sided decision have gone viral. Public opinion has moved and hardened in opposition to the previously bizarre notion of dual-sex bathrooms and changing rooms, and Target's brand as a family friendly store has taken a hit, as the online conversation shifted from its claim of "cheap chic" to worries of privacy, sexual predators, and the anger at the company's disregard for the reasoned judgement of its middle-class customers.

"This is how people can fight back — they're not going to shop at Target," said Wildmon.