Freedom Group Family of Companies
What is Freedom Group? We are the world's leading innovator, designer, manufacturer and marketer of firearms, ammunition and related products for the hunting, shooting sports, law enforcement and military markets. As one of the largest manufacturers in the world of firearms and ammunition, we have some of the most globally recognized brands including Remington®, Bushmaster® Firearms, DPMS/Panther Arms™, Marlin®, H&R®, The Parker Gun™, Mountain Khakis®, Advanced Armament Corp. ®, Dakota Arms®, Para™ USA and Barnes® Bullets.

For more information download the Freedom Group Brochure. Mission Statement Freedom Group develops, manufactures and markets innovative firearms, ammunition and related products of the highest quality for demanding applications in the commercial, law enforcement and defense markets around the world. Our value-added solutions result from a thorough understanding of our customers' needs and aspirations and our relentless pursuit of innovation, quality and continuous improvement in every aspect of our business. Vision Statement Freedom Group is the premier U.S. provider of firearms, ammunition and related products to a diverse set of global customers and markets. We are dedicated to design excellence, product innovation, speed to market, outstanding customer service and superior quality. We always treat our customers, employees, business partners, environment, community and nation with the highest levels of integrity. Value Statement All aspects of our business are conducted with the highest levels of integrity and are focused on creating sustainable value for all of our stakeholders. Customers

Our success is measured by providing our customers with the best solutions and superior quality, while employing the highest ethical standards. Employees

We provide a collaborative, safe and secure environment, free of harassment. We value diversity and attract and retain the best employees, while fostering open and candid communication without fear of reprisal. Community

We support and encourage community outreach and provide sustainable employment. Safety, health and environmental protection take priority over economic consideration. Suppliers

We partner with our suppliers and conduct ourselves professionally and ethically. Society

We produce environmentally sound products and only act within the law. We will not compromise our moral or ethical principles.