Milwaukee Common Council OKs streetcar plan
A proposed streetcar would stop at the Couture apartment tower proposed for downtown Milwaukee’s lakefront. Credit: Rinka Chung Architecture Inc.

SHARE Poll Did the Milwaukee Common Council make the right decision in approving plans for a streetcar? Yes No Undecided vote View Results Yes: 38% No: 58% Undecided: 4% Total Responses: 1075

By

A streetcar connecting the Milwaukee Intermodal Station with the city's lower east side was approved by the Common Council on Tuesday, bringing if not to a halt then at least to a pause, decades of sometimes acrimonious debate.

"It has taken us 24 years to decide," said Mayor Tom Barrett, who during an afternoon signing ceremony at the Pabst Theater called the streetcar legislation "historic."

"That debate is over."

Ald. Bob Bauman shared the mayor's relief.

"We've at last broken a 25-yearlong logjam of contention and argument and inaction," he said.

"Now the wind is at our backs."

On a 9-6 vote, the council approved a measure that established the project's $124 million capital budget, its estimated $3.2 million operating and maintenance budget and its 2.5-mile route, which includes a lakefront spur connecting the line to the proposed $122 million, 44-story Couture.

The council, by the same margin, also agreed to create a tax incremental financing district at the east end of Michigan St. that would generate $31 million and to amend a tax district on E. Erie St. that would generate an additional $18.3 million.

Some $9.7 million would come from the existing Cathedral Square tax district. The remaining capital costs would be covered by an existing $55 million federal grant and an applied-for $10 million federal grant.

A federal grant will also cover 80% of operating costs for the line during its first 18 months. City officials say they believe the grant will be extended an additional 18 months.

Groundbreaking is anticipated in late 2015, with full operation by mid-2018.

Voting in favor of the measures were Aldermen Ashanti Hamilton, Nik Kovac, Bob Bauman, Milele Coggs, Willie Wade, Jose Perez, Terry Witkowski, Russell Stamper and Common Council President Michael Murphy.

"We believe the streetcar not only complements a larger transit network," Murphy said, "but also serves as a city-building tool within a broader development plan — a plan that improves mass transit while attracting commercial and residential development in the heart of the city's tax base."

Voting against were Aldermen Joe Dudzik, Joe Davis, Jim Bohl, Bob Donovan, Robert Puente and Tony Zielinski.

The council delayed final approval of the project when it met in December and again in January. As a technical matter, the council on Tuesday voted, measure by measure, not to reconsider its January support.

There was little debate Tuesday. Only opponents spoke.

"I think this is a terrible move for the future of the city of Milwaukee," Zielinski said. "We do not have the financial resources to pay for the streetcar.

"I'm telling you right now, I'm predicting this is a Pyrrhic victory."

Donovan criticized the streetcar as a tarted-up relic of a has-been technology and doubted it would, as proponents have argued, attract young professionals to Milwaukee.

"I'm hard-pressed to believe that," he said.

"I firmly believe that these same young dynamic professionals are not going to want to travel on a fixed route that really doesn't appear to take them too many places — certainly takes them where the government decides they ought to go when the government decides they ought to go there."

"That comment," Kovac said in an interview, shows Donovan "flat out opposes public transportation. He thinks a car is the only way to enjoy freedom. I have a very different view. I think having multiple choices, including a car, is the way to truly enjoy freedom."

Petition drive continues

Final approval of the streetcar was stalled in January to give opponents a chance to gather enough signatures — they need 31,000 — to force the city to hold a binding referendum on any fixed-rail project costing more than $20 million.

Leaders coordinating the petition drive said last week that they will continue to gather signatures until March 5.

Asked what the petition drive would accomplish, Orville Seymer, one its leaders, said Tuesday: "This is going to go to court."

He said that even if the petition drive succeeds and then survives judicial scrutiny, it was not clear if it would halt expansions to the streetcar line.

Those expansions, Bauman said, are already being considered.

"I would expect those to be done in small chunks," he said.

One of those chunks, Bauman said, would likely extend the streetcar line north on N. 4th St. from the Intermodal Station to W. Juneau Ave., then west to The Brewery, the former site of the Pabst Brewery.

That would take the streetcar line through the preferred site of the proposed Milwaukee Bucks arena, which is north of the BMO Harris Bradley Center between N. 4th and 6th streets.

"We may very well see an extension of this streetcar offered as part of the arena proposal," he said.

Federal grant questions

Donovan said he found it "disingenuous of the mayor and some of the proponents of this streetcar to be continually talking about where its going to be expanding without ever mentioning how we are going to pay for it."

"It's all well and good to dream," he said, "But we can't allow our dreams to cloud our decision-making."

"Finance is certainly a very relevant question," Bauman said, "but there are methods for doing that."

Specifically, he cited federal grants. Milwaukee stands a better chance of receiving such funding now that the starter line is underway.

"So far, the feds have said, 'When you have demonstrated that you can actually build something in Milwaukee, give us a call,'" Bauman said.

"This demonstrates we are ready to move forward."

For Barrett, it was not a day to entertain naysayers. No step is without risk.

"I am betting on the future of this city," he said. "We are all betting on the future of Milwaukee."

What's next

■ Vehicle selection, sometime in 2015.

■ Final design, sometime in 2015.

■ Construction expected to begin in late 2015, with the streetcar in full operation by mid-2018.

■ Factors that will influence the timeline: engineering modifications, vehicle delivery timelines and utility relocation.