Feingold blurs lines on gun rights
By of the

You won't find too many Democrats these days attacking their conservative opponents for being soft on gun rights.

But that's exactly what Sen. Russ Feingold did last week in a radio ad, trading fire with GOP challenger Ron Johnson over who's a better friend of the Second Amendment.

"I have been one of the true leaders in fighting for a greater right to bear arms," Feingold said in an interview last week.

Republicans scoff at such claims, noting Feingold received an "F" and a "D" from the National Rifle Association during his first two re-election campaigns in 1998 and 2004.

Who's right?

And what's a left-of-center Democrat doing flexing his muscles on gun rights, an issue normally used to bludgeon Democrats?

A review of Feingold's record on gun issues shows several things:

He has a long rhetorical history of promoting the Second Amendment.

He has a long history of making appeals to gun owners in his campaigns.

He has taken a lot more "pro-gun" votes in the U.S. Senate than most other Democrats, though fewer than the average Republican.

His record on gun issues - opposing some restrictions, favoring others - has left neither side of the gun debate particularly happy.

"He hasn't really voted with us in the last five years on anything. Even before, it was a mixed bag," says Paul Helmke, president of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, a major gun control group.

"I think (our) grades speak for themselves," says Andrew Arulanandam, public affairs director for the NRA, the most powerful gun rights lobby in the country. "The fact he was F-rated in '98 and D-rated in '04, to most people, it's pretty self-explanatory."

The NRA declined last week to say anything more than that about Feingold's current or past record on guns, saying it would wait until it issues grades and endorsements of Senate candidates later this year.

An endorsement of Feingold in 2010 would seem highly unlikely. But after endorsing Feingold's opponent in 1998, the NRA stayed out of Feingold's 2004 race. It may or may not endorse anyone this time, but it will have an interesting record to consider.

On the one hand there is Johnson, the expected Republican nominee, who has pledged his support for gun rights but has no political track record, makes no pretense of being a hunter or gun owner, and talked vaguely this summer of "licensing" guns. It was a comment Feingold pounced on in last week's radio ad and Johnson then retracted, saying it was a poor choice of words by a first-time candidate.

Johnson said last week he will "never" support gun licensing or registration.

"I will strongly defend our Second Amendment rights," he says in a gun ad of his own.

Then there is Feingold, rated "F" in 1998, but who has taken an almost unbroken series of "pro-gun" votes in the Senate in recent years and joined legal efforts by gun groups to win a more expansive interpretation of the constitutional right to bear arms.

Two sides of the story

On the side of regulation, Feingold backed the 1993 Brady Bill, which required background checks for handgun buyers. He supported background checks for gun shows. He backed a measure championed by Wisconsin Democrat Herb Kohl to require that handguns be sold with trigger locks. And he opposed a 2005 bill to shield gun makers from lawsuits over the criminal or negligent use of their products.

The other side of the ledger?

Feingold voted against a 1993 bill to impose fees on gun dealers. After 9-11, he voted to let airline pilots be armed in the cockpit. After Hurricane Katrina, he voted to prevent federal agents from confiscating guns in a state of emergency.

Just last year, he voted to overturn a ban on firearms in the national parks; to allow guns in checked baggage on Amtrak; to repeal D.C.'s gun ban; and to allow a kind of national system of concealed-carry permits. Under that last provision, people with concealed carry permits from their home states would be allowed to carry in other states as well.

That bill did not affect Wisconsin, since it's one of two states that don't issue concealed carry permits.

But in an interview last week, Feingold said he thinks Wisconsin should end its prohibition on concealed carry - a fiercely debated issue in the state.

"I don't see any justification for continuing the restriction. They have it in Massachusetts. We can handle it in Wisconsin," said Feingold.

Perhaps Feingold's most notable "pro-gun" vote was his decision to oppose the 2004 extension of the "assault weapons" ban enacted under President Clinton 10 years earlier. Feingold was one of only six Senate Democrats to oppose renewing the ban. What's more, he was one of only three senators to vote against the ban in 2004 after voting for it 10 years earlier. Feingold says he changed his mind after gun owners convinced him that the law made arbitrary distinctions between legal and banned weapons.

"It's a mixed record," says Helmke of the Brady Campaign, which backs guns regulations. "A lot of folks are strong supporters and almost always with us, and some folks are just tough for us to get. (But) in his case it's sort of inconsistent. Again, maybe he's got his reasons and explanations. It's hard for us to figure."

Feingold says the reason he hasn't pleased either side in the gun debate is that while he backs gun rights, he supports "reasonable" regulations, and "I don't take instructions from the NRA."

Grading goes beyond guns

One thing should be noted about the votes cited above: They all involve gun-specific legislation. Feingold's poor marks among pro-gun groups have been influenced by issues that go well beyond guns.

When the NRA grades senators, it considers votes on judicial confirmations and on much broader legislation. For example, it fiercely opposed Feingold's controversial campaign finance law on free speech grounds, and that factored into its rating.

Ron Johnson's criticism of Feingold on guns last week centered on his votes on Supreme Court nominations, not gun legislation.

"It's surprising Senator Feingold would want to raise this issue," says Johnson in a radio spot responding to the Feingold ad on guns. "Feingold voted for every anti-gun justice on the court today."

In a scorecard of congressional votes published by the staunch gun rights group Gun Owners of America, Feingold is rated as voting pro-gun 17 times and anti-gun 36 times over 13 years. But at least half of those 36 "anti" votes were on issues that weren't specific to guns, such as health care and campaign laws and presidential appointments.

Taking the Gun Owners of America scorecard as one measure, Feingold fares worse than most Republicans, but better than most Democrats. He has taken more "pro-gun" votes (17) than any other current Democrat in the Senate except for one, Max Baucus of Montana. Feingold's 17 votes on the gun rights side compares to one for Democrats Charles Schumer of New York and Barbara Boxer of California, five for Carl Levin of Michigan and eight for fellow Wisconsinite Herb Kohl.

Aside from his voting record, Feingold points to his public advocacy on the Second Amendment (the subject of his 1975 thesis at the University of Wisconsin). As a state lawmaker, Feingold co-sponsored a proposed state constitutional amendment on the right to bear arms (and got a high grade at one point from the NRA). Wisconsin adopted such an amendment in 1998.

Coming from the left side of the Senate, Feingold's boosterism on the Second Amendment has sometimes surprised people in both camps on guns. He has argued for many years on the Senate Judiciary Committee, at Supreme Court confirmation hearings and in public forums that the Second Amendment confers an expansive individual right to bear arms - a position the high court only recently endorsed.

In the last few years, he signed on to legal challenges aimed at bolstering the legal scope of the right to bear arms.

Nor is campaigning on gun rights anything new for Feingold. He ran TV ads in his first Senate race in 1992 on the issue.

The ad on gun rights that Feingold launched last week - attacking the notion of gun licensing as an affront to individual rights - did not endear him to some gun control advocates back home.

"I found it unconscionable. He has a spokesperson in the ad kind of mocking a gun violence prevention strategy which is proven to be effective . . . at the same time 450 of Sen. Feingold's constituents die from gun violence every year," said Jeri Bonavia, executive director of the WAVE Educational Fund, a Wisconsin group that works to prevent gun violence.

In an interview, Feingold described the line he takes on gun rights: "If somebody's up to no good and has got a bad record, questions should be raised . . . (but) if you have a gun and are doing nothing wrong with it, you should be able to have it and you shouldn't have to let the government know you have it."