Gardasil Vaccine: One More Girl Dead
Health Impact News Editor Comments

The sudden death of a 12-year-old girl in Waukesha, Wisconsin, just hours after receiving the HPV Gardasil vaccine has shocked the girl’s family, and sent local media out asking questions as to how this could happen. Here is a report from WISN 12 News.

Dr. Geoffrey Swain of the local health department was interviewed to give the standard CDC reply, which is similar to almost every other vaccine, stating that severe reactions like this resulting in death are “very rare,” and about “1 out of a million”.

Assuming that there is some data to back up the claim of only “1 out of a million,” how many doses of the HPV vaccine are administered every year? According to the latest statistics (July 2014) published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services here (page 7), over 9 million per year. So the government admits that at least 9 girls per year are killed by the HPV vaccine. How many parents know this prior to taking a doctor’s advice to administer this vaccine that is supposedly a protection against cervical cancer caused by the human papillomavirus, a sexually transmitted disease?

Apparently, when the news broke that 12-year-old Meredith Prohaska died after receiving the HPV vaccine, at least one other parent contacted a local news station in the area to report she also had a serious adverse reaction to the HPV vaccine with her 17-year-old daughter, who needed urgent care at a local hospital. The local news affiliate asked the question: “So what are the odds another local girl had a similar reaction after getting the shot?”

Here is the report:

These local news media, possibly covering the HPV vaccine for the first time, were all quick to interview and provide links to the official CDC view of the vaccine. But here are some other facts regarding the vaccine that they failed to disclose, probably because they did not take the time to look outside of the standard government response to events like this, or their station managers did not allow them to give any other news outside of what the CDC claims.

1. There are many more reported side effects than just death from the HPV vaccine.

They include:

Premature menopause or infertility

See:

Narcolepsy and Autoimmune Disorders

See: Narcolepsy and Cataplexy after Gardasil?

Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), stroke, venous thromboembolism (VTE), appendicitis, seizures, syncope (fainting), and allergic reactions.

See: CDC HPV Vaccine Facts

2. Countries Outside the U.S. Are Halting HPV Vaccines: Lawsuits due to Damages are Mounting

See:

3. You Cannot Sue the Manufacturer of Vaccines in the U.S. – They have total legal immunity

Most of the U.S. public is unaware that a U.S. citizen, by law, cannot sue a pharmaceutical company for damages resulting from vaccines. Congress gave them total legal immunity in 1986, and that law was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2011. There is a special “vaccine court” called the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program that is funded through a tax on vaccines. If you are injured or killed by a vaccine, you must hire an attorney and fight tax-funded government attorneys to seek damages, as you cannot sue the drug manufacturers. It can take 10 years or longer to win your case and be compensated. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services usually publishes a report every couple months on settlements on their website. Here is the latest one.

4. The U.S. Government Earns Royalties from the sale of the Gardasil HPV Vaccine.

Dr. Eric Suba tried to use the Freedom of Information Act to find out how much money the National Institute of Health (NIH) earned from the sale of Gardasil, but they refused to report the amount of revenue the government earns from this vaccine (although not denying they do earn royalties). Did you know that the government earns royalties from the sale of the Gardasil vaccine? Does your doctor promoting the HPV vaccine know this?

5. Julie Gerberding was in charge of the CDC the years the FDA approved Gardasil as a vaccine and is now the president of Merck’s Vaccine division, a $5 billion dollar a year operation

Julie Gerberding was in charge of the CDC from 2002 to 2009, which includes the years the FDA approved Gardasil as a vaccine. Soon after she took over the CDC, she reportedly completely overhauled the agency’s organizational structure, and many of the CDC’s senior scientists and leaders either left or announced plans to leave. Some have claimed that almost all of the replacements Julie Gerberding appointed had ties to the vaccine industry.

Gerberding resigned from the CDC on January 20, 2009, and is now the president of Merck’s Vaccine division, a 5 billion dollar a year operation, and the supplier of the largest number of vaccines the CDC recommends (article here).

6. Black Women who are Vaccinated with Gardasil are Vaccinated Against the Wrong Strains

Scientists at the Duke University School of Medicine discovered that African American women carry HPV strains not found in the Gardasil vaccine. Study here. Moshella Roberts, a 20-year-old African American woman died needlessly from the HPV vaccine.

Do your own research!

While it is encouraging to see local news affiliates report deaths and injuries due to the Gardasil vaccine, they need to do more research to present all of the facts, rather than just parroting what the CDC says. Of course to raise the issue of the “Gardasil controversy” could jeopardize your journalistic career, and force you into apologizing for suggesting the vaccine is anything but totally safe. Just ask Katie Couric.

In the meantime, do your own research before making any decisions on the Gardasil vaccine!

Comment on this story at VaccineImpact.com

See Also:

More info on the Gardasil HPV Vaccine.

Say NO to Mandatory Vaccines T-Shirt

100% Pre-shrunk Cotton

Order here!

Make a Statement for Health Freedom!

Big Pharma and government health authorities are trying to pass laws mandating vaccines for all children, and even adults.

Show your opposition to forced vaccinations and support the cause of Vaccine Impact, part of the Health Impact News network.

Order here!

Dr. Andrew Moulden: Every Vaccine Produces Harm

Canadian physician Dr. Andrew Moulden provided clear scientific evidence to prove that every dose of vaccine given to a child or an adult produces harm. The truth that he uncovered was rejected by the conventional medical system and the pharmaceutical industry. Nevertheless, his warning and his message to America remains as a solid legacy of the man who stood up against big pharma and their program to vaccinate every person on the Earth.

Dr. Moulden died unexpectedly in November of 2013 at age 49.

Because of the strong opposition from big pharma concerning Dr. Moulden’s research, we became concerned that the name of this brilliant researcher and his life’s work had nearly been deleted from the internet. His reputation was being disparaged, and his message of warning and hope was being distorted and buried without a tombstone. This book summarizes his teaching and is a must-read for everyone who wants to learn the “other-side” of the vaccine debate that the mainstream media routinely censors.

Read Dr. Andrew Moulden: Every Vaccine Produces Harm on your mobile device or computer by ordering the eBook!

Retail: $13.99

Now: $9.99

Order Here.

Medical Doctors Opposed to Forced Vaccinations – Should Their Views be Silenced?

One of the biggest myths being propagated in the compliant mainstream media today is that doctors are either pro-vaccine or anti-vaccine, and that the anti-vaccine doctors are all “quacks.”

However, nothing could be further from the truth in the vaccine debate. Doctors are not unified at all on their positions regarding “the science” of vaccines, nor are they unified in the position of removing informed consent to a medical procedure like vaccines.

The two most extreme positions are those doctors who are 100% against vaccines and do not administer them at all, and those doctors that believe that ALL vaccines are safe and effective for ALL people, ALL the time, by force if necessary.

Very few doctors fall into either of these two extremist positions, and yet it is the extreme pro-vaccine position that is presented by the U.S. Government and mainstream media as being the dominant position of the medical field.

In between these two extreme views, however, is where the vast majority of doctors practicing today would probably categorize their position. Many doctors who consider themselves “pro-vaccine,” for example, do not believe that every single vaccine is appropriate for every single individual.

Many doctors recommend a “delayed” vaccine schedule for some patients, and not always the recommended one-size-fits-all CDC childhood schedule. Other doctors choose to recommend vaccines based on the actual science and merit of each vaccine, recommending some, while determining that others are not worth the risk for children, such as the suspect seasonal flu shot.

These doctors who do not hold extreme positions would be opposed to government-mandated vaccinations and the removal of all parental exemptions.

In this eBook, I am going to summarize the many doctors today who do not take the most extremist pro-vaccine position, which is probably not held by very many doctors at all, in spite of what the pharmaceutical industry, the federal government, and the mainstream media would like the public to believe.