Reports: US Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU) Lands at Langley!
U.S. National News

Details Category: U.S. National News Sunday, 19 November 2017 05:44

UPDATED 2:23 PM EST (SEE BOTTOM) -- Reports are beginning to surface that a Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU) landed at Langley on Saturday.

A Marine expeditionary unit (MEU, pronounced "Mew"), is the smallest Marine air-ground task force (MAGTF) in the United States Fleet Marine Force. Each MEU is an expeditionary quick reaction force, deployed and ready for immediate response to any crisis, whether it be natural disaster or combat missions.

A Marine expeditionary unit is normally composed of: a reinforced Marine infantry battalion (designated as a Battalion Landing Team) as the ground combat element, a composite medium tiltrotor squadron forms the aviation combat element, a combat logistics battalion provides the logistics combat element, and a company-size command element serves as the MEU headquarters group.

Troop strength is about 2,200 and usually commanded by a colonel, and is deployed from amphibious assault ships. Currently, a Marine expeditionary unit embarks Marines and equipment onto the amphibious warfare ships of an Expeditionary Strike Group (ESG) which also includes escort ships and submarines to protect them from air, surface, and submarine threats. For further protection and strong air support, such an ESG is often deployed along with one or more carrier battle groups.

WITNESSES

According to persons who reside near Langley, a large contingent of Marines arrived at CIA Headquarters in tilt-rotor aircraft and when the Marines deplaned, they were armed and moved quickly into CIA Headquarters! (I did not personally witness this and am relying solely on what witnesses are telling me)

Those witnesses also say that a significant number of tilt-rotor aircraft could be clearly seen circling the grounds of CIA Headquarters, parked on the grass around the building.

This is not normal.

Never before has anything like this ever been seen taking place at CIA Headquarters and speculation is now running rampant as to what is actually taking place.

Conspiracy Theorists are claiming the President of the United States is moving to take out rogue elements in the Intelligence Community, at the request of his new CIA Director. It is rumored that these rogue elements have been undermining the Administration since before it took office last January, and may be connected to some well publicized "incidents" which suddenly resumed taking place this year, (mass shootings / violent protests) after a brief respite once the Obama Administration left office.

Moreover, there is not one word of Marines landing at Langley, appearing in _any_ US mass-media outlet.

UPDATE 5:51 AM EST --

The number of SEALED INDICTMENTS presently on US District Court Dockets across the United States has reached an astonishing 1800 as of Friday, November 17. These Sealed Indictments began appearing on US District Court Dockets on October 31.

There have never been this many Sealed Indictments showing on federal court Dockets at the same time . . . ever.

The existence of so many sealed Indictments has lead others to suggest that large groups of federal officials - perhaps including elected officials - are facing mass arrest over a number of corruption-related activities such as "pay-to-play" the UraniumOne conspiracy, Pedophile Rings and other criminal activities, and these troops may be needed to keep order once the high officials start being taken under arrest!

This is especially interesting given revelations late last week, that an FBI Informant allegedly has VIDEO of Clinton Foundation people being given suitcases full of cash from Russians, prior to the approval of the UraniumOne deal which sold twenty percent of US Uranium manufacturing to Russia's state-owned ROSATOM corporation.

The existence of video showing cash payoffs has sent a slew of people from the former Administration into fits of anxiety that their schemes are now uncovered and many of them are going to prison for what they did. Desperate people can sometimes do desperate things and if those people are high-ranking federal officials, God only knows what they might have in the works to try to save themselves.

This is a developing story. Updates will be made as information becomes available.

UPDATE 9:17 PM EST --

Despite actually having a personal life, and despite today being Sunday, which is family time, I have done a LOT of digging on this story. I have reached out to contacts in both the Pentagon and in several Intel Agencies and here is what I can confirm:

This story has gone viral and sadly, a number of people who copied the story, added some of their own speculation or assumptions. Some of the copies offer absolutely wild variations on the basic report above.

Nowhere on this web site did I even make mention of any "coup" against the President. Those rumors came from others acting on their own.

Nowhere on this web site did I claim there were 2200 Marines sent to the CIA. I reported the typical size of an MEU as being typically 2200 and some readers assumed that all 2200 went to CIA.

Now, about the troops. I have been told that " a very significant number" of troops WERE sent to CIA and arrived via aircraft on Saturday, November 18. I was not told a precise number. I was not told WHY they were sent. I was not told what time they were sent.

My article above reports that a Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU) is comprised of about 2200 Marines. That's factually accurate.

But the Ground Combat Element of an MEU is 1100 troops.

The Aviation Element consists of 12 MV-22s (Osprey) and 4 Sikorsky CH-53 "Super Stallion" helicopters.

Each MV-22 carries 24 troops standard, and 32 if they cram them in.

Each CH-53 carries 37 troops standard, and if the extra seats are installed 55 troops.

So going with the absolute max per aircraft, the Osprey element can carry 384 troops, and the CH-53 element 220.

That means 604 troops in a single lift. So if they were using all 1100 troops of the ground combat element that would be two trips for each aircraft.

The CIA Headquarters building is located at 1000 Colonial Farm Road in McLean, Virginia, and can be reached via George Washington Memorial Parkway.

However, due to a need for secrecy, the complex may only be accessed by those with authorization (e.g., appropriate credentials) or by appointment; only authorized vehicles may access the private road leading to the complex from George Washington Memorial Parkway.

You cannot "clearly see" the grounds of the installation from anywhere because the front gate is down a long, two-lane road and there's trees and man-made hills all around the perimeter of it to protect from Sniper fire coming from nearby roads.



This means that the public couldn't just wander by and start snapping pictures by the side of the road. In fact, people aren't even allowed on the private roads nearby the installation.

Both the MV-22 Osprey and Sikorsky CH-53 Super Stallion are loud when they're flying; there would be no sneaking them in.

And it is this component that I followed-up on: Did nearby residents in McLean suddenly notice a large number of loud helicopters overhead, moving toward or from the area of the CIA. The repeated answer to that question has been "Yes."

Many (very many) residents of McLean, VA have confirmed they found themselves hearing large numbers of loud aircraft overhead on Saturday, and that the sounds lasted more then 30 minutes!

As far as a definitive statement from any of my former colleagues . . . . NONE of them would reveal any details about whatever is going on down there. But they did confirm to me today "something is going on."

I expect to have several additional contacts overnight and will again update this story if I am able to offer something more concise and verifiable.

My History with the FBI

Several persons have contacted me concerning this story and asked about my former history with the FBI. There are apparently smears being postulated about me given the fact that for 15 years I worked with the FBI doing covert intelligence. Some are alleging that I may somehow still be engaged in that activity and that this story is somehow "disinformation. Those claims are totally without merit. I think the following needs to be said:

My history is an open book now. From 1993 thru 2008 I worked with the FBI. In my final five years (2003-2008) with the Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF) doing National Security Intelligence. The FBI and I parted company in November 2008. They got rid of me for "severe control problems."

You see, the think tanks in the bureau got the idea they could lure gullible people into preparing to launch terror attacks, and guys like me could supply them with dummy explosives, dummy detonators and the like. Then, once the gullible person actually went to make his attack, the FBI could arrest him and claim they "averted a terrorist attack. "

To me, this was entrapment. It's one thing if a guy comes to me looking for explosives and such.

It is quite another for me to go offering such things to stupid people just to build a phony case and take credit for "averting" a terrorist attack that would have never happened had we in government not supplied the means! To me, this new program by the bureau stunk.

I refused to take part in these efforts. The FBI got rid of me.

About 7 months later, the Obama Regime arrested me for an EDITORIAL I wrote on my talk radio show web site.

In that Editorial I called three federal judges in Chicago "Traitors to the Constitution" over a gun control ruling they made. The Editorial quoted Thomas Jefferson who said "The tree of liberty must be replenished from time to time with the blood of Patriots and of Tyrants." I went on to say "These judges DESERVE to be killed. It would replenish the tree of liberty, a small price to pay to assure freedom for millions."

Twenty two days later, 14 FBI agents arrived at my house.

FBI: Hi Hal. Is this still your web site?

Me: Yes.

FBI: Did you write this?

Me: Yes.

FBI: Hal, the US Attorney in Chicago says this is a threat and you're under arrest.

THREE TRIALS

At my FIRST trial in December, 2009, Assistant Special Agent in Charge (of the New York City FBI Division) Amy Pickett, testified in Brooklyn Federal Court that I handled National Security, Terrorism and Foreign Counter Intelligence. At the time, Alex Jones reported about me on PrisonPlanet.tv. Here's the video. It's only the first 1m 30s you need to watch - it tells it all.

Others testified that the FBI budgeted $100,000 a year for me.

Result of Trial #1 --- HUNG JURY (9 voted NOT guilty)

The Obama Regime put me on trial a SECOND time in March, 2010. This time, they brought the three judges into court to testify against me. (First time in US history that 3 federal judges testified against someone).

Result of Trial #2 --- HUNG JURY (10 Voted NOT guilty)

By this time, I was Bankrupt from legal fees and from being under House Arrest, prohibited from being on radio or the Internet and unable to work.

Unable to pay my two lawyers, I was appointed a public defender.

The Obama Regime put me on Trial an astonishing THIRD time in August , 2010. (They usually only do that for Mafia Bosses accused of multiple murders.) The public defender rolled over and I got convicted.

Federal Prison

Off to federal prison I went for 33 months. And not just _any_ prison. TERRORIST PRISON at the Federal Correctional Institution in Terre Haute, Indiana. The "Communications Management Unit (CMU)" which is more intensely locked down and controlled than SUPERMAX!

While all other federal prisoners get 300 minutes a month phone time, we got two, 15 minute phone calls per WEEK. And we had to sign up a week in advance, telling the prison the number we would be calling, who we would be speaking to and what language, so they could actively monitor the calls.

Regular federal prisoners get a maximum of 32 hours a month visits. We got 8 hours a month.

They put me in there with El Sayyid NoSair who murdered Rabbi Meir Kahane and blew up the world trade center in 1993. He and I ate lunch together every day.

They put me in there with Muhammed Rashid, whom bombed Pan Am fight 803 and various Embassies.

They put me in there with that Somali Pirate, Musa, who hijacked the Maersk Alabama merchant vessel. You may have heard about in the Tom Hanks Movie "Captain Philips"

Go to the web site of National Public Radio. Use their search engine and conduct a search for "CMU" and you'll find my name on the list of prisoners. The most secret prison unit in the entire United States!

I was in the same unit as these killers. For writing an Editorial!

Here are links to the National Public Radio stories about the CMU: https://www.npr.org/2011/03...

and Prisoner List HERE: https://www.npr.org/2011/03...

(Alphabetized. Search down to "Turner, Harold Charles" )

When I got out, three more years probation - unable to be on the net or on the radio.

If you think that I would EVER assist the federal government again, you are out of your mind. They wrecked my life. Stole my freedom and ruined my name --- because I wrote an OPINION they didn't like. THAT was the Obama regime.

I returned to radio in October 2015. Had to stop for lack of funding.

Brought the show back earlier this year and the ONLY thing I have going for me is that I am still in close touch with the many people in the Intelligence Community with whom I worked for years; both in the US and overseas as a fully operational Extra-Territorial operative.

Thanks to those long-term relationships, I get info the general public never gets near.

My credibility has proven itself over and over again. It's the only reason people listen to me and visit my site.

I wouldn't DARE risk that credibility for some phony story.

Ever.

For anyone.

I do, however, fully support President Trump, for whom I happily voted.

Having worked in covert Intelligence, I ___KNOW__ what he is actually facing in the depths of the Deep State --- and these bastards play for keeps.

Elements within the CIA funded and supplied weapons to ISIS inside Syria; calling them "Freedom Fighters." These same CIA elements funded and supplied Al-Qaida.

ISIS and AL-Qaida used some of that funding and some of those weapon supplies to kill innocent people, steal land, steal oil, destroy historical artifacts and create turmoil. They committed unspeakable atrocities.

Material support of terrorism is a Felony under US federal law and now, there's a new Sheriff in town: Donald Trump.

Some people inside the CIA are guilty of committing felonies and they have every reason to use every means at their disposal to prevent their lives from being destroyed over what they did. Hide files. Destroy evidence. Create crises for diversions and so on. Desperate people sometimes do desperate things.

While I cannot even fathom doing anything to assist the federal government in any covert or overt manner, I would take a bullet to protect our President.

I voted for him. I admire him. I want him to remain President and carry out the agenda he campaigned upon. I want the Illegal aliens and their kids rounded-up and deported. I want a wall built along the entire southern border. I want manufacturing jobs brought back to this country. I want an end or renegotiation to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), same with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and an end to our membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO). I want radical Muslims kept out. I want our military OUT of . . . pretty much everywhere we've stuck our nose for the last two decades. I want the PEDOPHILE RINGS in Washington, DC and elsewhere arrested, prosecuted, jailed and, if possible, lawfully executed. I want an end to Affirmative Action, Minority Hiring Quotas and Contract set-asides. I want American English to be our official language. I want the Immigration Reform Act of 1964 Repealed and our immigration policy based on Merit. I want Hillary Clinton prosecuted for the E-mail deletions and mishandling of Classified Information. I want the people involved in the UraniumOne conspiracy investigated, prosecuted and jailed.

If the Deep State is actually being dealt with right now, then we the American People need to support what the President is doing. The only way the American people can know what's going on is if they are told.

That is why I went ahead with this report.

I stand-by the report.

My heart is now, and has always been, with my fellow Americans.

UPDATE 2:23 PM EST -- MONDAY, NOV. 20

I have now spoken to almost ALL of my former colleagues in the Intelligence Community and here's what took place:

Yes, a group of military aircraft approached and circled the CIA Headquarters in Virginia for upwards of 30 minutes on Saturday. They did NOT land and did NOT enter CIA HQ forcibly - or otherwise.

There is apparently an ongoing and gigantic problem between the Military and the CIA insofar as the Military is engaged in implementing President Trump's policies, while elements within the CIA are still INTENTIONALLY carrying out the failed policies of the Obama regime.

Specifically, these failed Obama-era policies include supplying weapons and logistical support to so-called "freedom fighters" inside Syria , many of whom are actually Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and ISIS terrorists.

The support being provided by elements in the CIA is being used against certain units of the US Military who are also inside Syria.

The Military has repeatedly and strenuously told the CIA the old Obama policies must stop. The CIA failed to stop.

So someone in the Pentagon/Military . . . . no one will say who . . . made a direct show of force to the CIA on Saturday. It was, for lack of a better description, the sending of a message from the military to the CIA: knock it off.

It was done over a weekend apparently because most of the bigshots in the Pentagon are at home, and by the time they heard something was going on, it was pretty much over . . . . the aircraft returned to wherever they came from.

This is utterly unprecedented. To have one agency of the US Government make a show of force to another entity of that same government is unheard of. It smacks of a sort of internal civil war heating up inside our own government!

Apparently, things are quickly "coming to a head" between competing policies and the military is tired of its people being injured or killed by the unintended consequences of the old policies and the CIA' stubborn refusal to stop backing the so-called "Freedom Fighters" in Syria.

No one will tell me who gave the order to "buzz" CIA HQ. No one will tell me who inside CIA is causing the trouble. But there is trouble . . . and given the activities over the weekend, one can only hope this thing goes away very quickly and quietly.

In the meantime, as far as the public is concerned: "Nothing took place. Everything is fine. Nothing to worry about."

HELP! Today is November 30 and I come to each of you as I do each month, to ask for a little financial support to keep this web site and my radio show alive and kicking for December. Once a month I ask readers like you, and listeners to my radio show, to kick -in a few bucks to help pay the bills for web hosting, cloud data costs, radio airtime, phone lines for callers, streaming software servers and all the other costs that go into an endeavor like this. Can I count on you for $5 or $10? Obviously many people in the world "take" and very few "give." So if you like this site, this style of brutally honest reporting, and/or my radio show, please make a donation TODAY as the Bills are due Tomorrow. Of course, if you can afford a bit larger donation, perhaps a one-time $50, $100 or more, that will be a MAJOR help. You can use the DONATE button at the top right of this page (and "check-out" with a Credit or Debit Card to avoid having to join PayPal) and I'll receive your help right away. Thanks very much for your anticipated assistance. It is people like YOU that keep the free speech on my radio show, and the cutting-edge news on this web site, alive for all the world to see, read, hear and enjoy.

FOLLOW ME ON TWITTER & FACEBOOK

FOLLOW ME ON FACEBOOK