*** PRESIDENT ORDERS MILITARY DEPLOYMENT TO SOUTHERN BORDER ***
U.S. National News

Details Category: U.S. National News Monday, 22 October 2018 11:36 Hits: 313630 Written by News Desk Staff

UPDATED 12:28 AM EDT , THURSDAY, OCTOBER 25 -- SEE BOTTOM -- Minutes ago, President Donald Trump signed DEPLOYMENT ORDERS for the 82nd Airborne Division of the United States Army, instructing them to deploy from Ft. Bragg, NC, to the U.S. southern border at Mexico.

In addition, the 1st Armored Division of the United States Army at Ft. Bliss, TX (Corrected Base info at 7:18 PM EDT) has been given 72 Hour ready-standby orders to begin shipping armored vehicles to the southern border via rail.

THE PRESIDENTIAL ORDER IS DATE SPECIFIC, NOT IMMEDIATE. IT ALSO SPECIFIES SEVERAL LOCATIONS. I HAVE WITHHELD THAT INFORMATION SO AS TO PROTECT OPERATIONAL SECURITY OF OUR TROOPS.

Covert Intelligence information confirms the present "migrant caravan" heading toward the US border from Honduras and Guatemala has grown to slightly more than TEN THOUSAND, but that an additional 40,000 Mexicans are staging in northern Mexico to join-up with that caravan.

The OPEN PLAN THEY ARE IMPLEMENTING is for more than fifty thousand of these so-called "migrants" to physically storm the U.S. border to gain entry into our country.

President Trump is not going to allow that.

Article 4, Section 4 of the US Constitution REQUIRES the federal government to protect each of the states from invasion. The "migrant caravan" is now classified as "an invasion force" against which the US government will take action.

These people not only tore down Border fencing to unlawfully enter Mexico from Guatemala and Honduras, they physically smashed-through Border gates. They are using force and it is now highly likely that US military force will be used against them if they try those same tactics at the US Border.

Prepare yourselves mentally for the reality that the army may have to gun down these people. Prepare yourselves mentally for the reality they may end up in piles of dead bodies all over your TV.

Many of us have known it was going to come to this sooner or later. Looks like it will be sooner.

This is a developing story, check back for updates. . .

UPDATE 12:28 AM EDT -- THURSDAY, OCTOBER 25 --

I have been made aware of a claim by SNOPES.com that my story above is being called "False." Snopes has a terrible track record of inaccuracy because it is a radical, left-wing, propaganda mill.

To demonstrate how unprofessional and grossly irresponsible SNOPES.com actually is, I point out that the individual who wrote the SNOPES.com article about my story, made NO EFFORT to contact me before declaring my story false! Despite prominent contact info on my site, including a CONTACT link at the very top of the page, the writer, Bethania Palma Markus, never bothered to reach out for comment. She simply declared my story false.

In journalism, one is supposed to contact all parties to a story before writing it; pr at least TRY to contact all parties. Ms. Palma made no such effort.

Worse, she referred to me falsely as a "White Supremacist" when the record clearly shows I was an FBI Intelligence Asset, tasked by the Joint Terrorism Task Force in INFILTRATE the White Supremacist movement to avert acts of violence. One way to infiltrate is to use the rhetoric of such people and it is that infiltration rhetoric that Ms. Palma is apparently using to call me bad names.

Finally, on her Twitter Page, the writer of the SNOPES.com article refers to herself as "Mother of Lizard People." (See Image below)

I'm not sure what is more laughable, the fact she calls herself "Mother of Lizard People" or that anyone takes her seriously!

Clearly, this woman seems to be a whack-job.

The simple fact is, I have the contacts inside the Intelligence Community from my 15 years years with the FBI, the final 5 of which were with the Joint Terrorism Task Force. Snopes.com does not.

The facts I report in the story above are 100% accurate. Snopes.com story does not disprove any of them.

The Presidential Order is DATE SPECIFIC and LOCATION SPECIFIC. I chose to withhold that information to protect operational security of our troops.

The fact that a spokesman for the Army told Snopes.com he does not know of any such order does not mean he was being truthful with her (operational security ) or he may not have been told yet.

My story above is accurate and I stand by it.

Snopes unprofessional story, with a complete absence of any effort to contact me before writing it, is yet another example that Snopes.com is unreliable and not to be believed; especially when they hire a woman who refers to herself as "Mother of Lizard People!"

MORE: On Thursday morning, Oct. 25, President Trump himself CONFIRMED he is bringing out the military to confront and stop the migrant caravan. So AGAIN, Snopes.com is proved wrong and I am proven right:

Brandon Judd of the National Border Patrol Council is right when he says on @foxandfriends that the Democrat inspired laws make it tough for us to stop people at the Border. MUST BE CHANDED, but I am bringing out the military for this National Emergency. They will be stopped! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 25, 2018

EVEN MORE: HERE IT IS . . . . the ORDER:

Several hundred troops are being sent to beef up security at the US’ southern border with Mexico, the Department of Defense said. It comes as a caravan of several thousand migrants makes it way north through Mexico.

Defense Secretary James Mattis is expected to sign an order sending at least 800 troops to the border in anticipation of the caravan’s arrival, a government source told AP. Full story HERE

So now all of you have all the proof you need. My story was correct; Snopes.com was wrong.