Dalrymple Signs Emergency Declaration to Enhance Public Safety Associated with Cannon Ball-area Protest
BISMARCK, N.D. – Gov. Jack Dalrymple today authorized a restricted emergency declaration, making available additional state resources which may be needed to manage public safety risks associated with the ongoing protest of the Dakota Access Pipeline near Cannon Ball.

The Governor’s executive order does not include activation of the North Dakota National Guard, but makes available other state resources for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and well-being of the general public and those involved in the protest. The executive order can help the state and local agencies manage costs associated with providing a heightened law enforcement presence and activates the State Emergency Operations Plan to coordinate the efficient flow of resources.

“The State of North Dakota remains committed to protecting citizens’ rights to lawfully assemble and protest, but the unfortunate fact remains that unlawful acts associated with the protest near Cannon Ball have led to serious public safety concerns and property damage,” Gov. Dalrymple said. “This emergency declaration simply allows us to bring greater resources to bear if needed to help local officials address any further public safety concerns.”

Following is a link to the Governor’s executive order: 081916 Executive Order

On Wednesday, the North Dakota Department of Transportation restricted southbound travel on ND Highway 1806, about six miles south of Mandan, to local traffic and emergency response vehicles only. The highway’s traffic was restricted following growing concerns about heavy pedestrian traffic and numerous vehicles parked along the highway. Alternative routes are available for through traffic. Additionally, the Transportation Department established a traffic control point at the intersection of ND Highway 6 and Morton County Road 138A to provide motorists with information regarding protest activities near Cannon Ball. The travel restrictions on ND Hwy 1806 and the traffic control point on Highway 6 remain in effect.