‘Home Improvement’ Reboot Coming? Tim Allen & Richard Karn ‘On Board’
Does everybody know what time it is?! That’s right — it may just be Tool Time again very soon. HollywoodLife.com spoke exclusively to both Tim Allen and Richard Karn who reflected on their time on the show — and admitted that they’ve been talking about getting back together as a cast!

With Full House becoming Fuller House and Boy Meets World heading to Girl Meets World, we couldn’t help but hope that one of our favorite shows from the ’90s would return. Yes, we’re talking about Home Improvement. Even though Tim Allen and Richard Karn burned down the stuido in the 1999 finale, we caught up with them — and they’re not really ready to hang up their hard hats!

‘Home Improvement’ Reboot Happening?

“This is strange, I am reading with the two boys Zachery Ty Bryan and Jonathan Taylor Thomas on Friday on a idea that they came up with,” Tim told HollywoodLife.com exclusively at the The 8th Annual George Lopez Celebrity Golf Classic Presented by Sabra Salsa on May 4. “And all of us were joking about, would they be playing themselves, they are playing brothers and the funny thing was actually I pushed the idea what if it was just the two Taylor boys later in life and I would never be there, Patricia would never be there but it would be them and what would happen. Its just an interesting idea!”

Of course, we have seen some of the cast reunite — Tim’s had his Home Improvement costars on his show, Last Man Standing this year. First his on-screen son, JTT, then his on-screen wife, Patricia Richardson. But what about Al? Not to worry, we talked to him, too!

Al Borland Is ‘On Board’

“There is always a chance, absolutely! Would I be on board? Yeah I think so!” Richard told us at the event, benefiting The George Lopez Foundation. “I would love to see what the story lines could be, it could be very funny! We have lost Earl [John Hindman], you know we lost Wilson. He was kind of the voice of reason and the moral of the story so we would have to figure out a replacement for that!”

So Tim’s in, Al’s in and the boys are in (minus Mark, but I’m sure we could get ahold of Taran Noah Smith)! So, what are we waiting for?

— Written by Emily Longeretta, Reporting by Russ Weakland

Follow @emilylongeretta