How to Care for a Sequoia Tree
Magnificent California redwoods (Sequoia spp.) have a legendary status, yet not every sequoia is a skyscraper. The weeping giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron giganteum "Pendulum") tops out at 25 feet, and -- like many sequoias -- is available commercially and thrives in Mediterranean climate of U.S. Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones 8 through 10. Whether you have the good fortune to share your yard with a coast redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) or a smaller member of the genus, the three most important care requirements are the same: water, water and water.

1 Water your sequoia early and often during its first growing seasons. This helps the soon-to-be tall tree to establish an appropriately deep, extensive root system. After the tree is well established, continue watering regularly. The amount of irrigation the tree needs depends on the species and your climate. The giant sequoia needs watering once a week, and more frequently in dry weather.

2 Remove all competition for your sequoia's water. Clear growth from around the base of the tree without impacting the trunk. Eliminate grass around the trunk, a yard or more in every direction depending upon the size of the tree. Keep weeds out of the sequoia's drip-line by active weeding and a 3-inch layer of mulch.

3 Feed your sequoia with a general-purpose fertilizer in early spring. This helps the tree produce lush new growth. Spread organic compost around the tree to further enrich the soil.

Things You Will Need Fertilizer

Mulch

Tip No known diseases or insects significantly trouble sequoias, so do not waste your time with pesticides or similar products unless you see a problem. Instead, pick up the garden hose. The main cause of backyard sequoia death is drought.

Warnings Never dig around sequoia trees. The roots are shallow and surprisingly fragile for such large specimens.

A transplant attempt is likely doomed to failure. The sequoia's need for water is so great that reducing the roots, something that necessarily occurs in a tree transplant, will likely kill the tree.

About the Author From Alaska to California, from France's Basque Country to Mexico's Pacific Coast, Teo Spengler has dug the soil, planted seeds and helped trees, flowers and veggies thrive. World traveler, professional writer and consummate gardener, Spengler earned a BA from U.C. Santa Cruz, a law degree from Berkeley's Boalt Hall, and an MA and MFA from San Francisco State. She currently divides her life between San Francisco and southwestern France.

Photo Credits Jupiterimages/Creatas/Getty Images