Lil' Wayne HAS NOT Announced That He Is Left With Only A Month To Live
UPDATE: SEE Not A Hoax: Lil' Wayne's Jet Makes Emergency Landing & Rapper Is Rush To Omaha Hospital

Starting off the April Fools' Day HOAX stories that are trending on the internet, we have a reccuring story stating "Lil Wayne Announces That He Is Left With Only A Month To Live." This particular write-up comes from a known hoax site and is an exact replica of a previous HOAX story from August 2015.

The NOT TRUE story starts:

Indeed this is sad news in "THE INDUSTRY" or preferably the Hip Hop music industry this period of time. New Orleans Rapper Lil Wayne made shocking statement this morning time in Atlanta after calling a press meeting, Wizzy who seemed to have lost a lot of weight announced to his fans and the press that he was diagnosed with skin cancer and his Doctors said he only has five weeks to live. His Doctor confirmed that in the beginning of this month Lil Wayne was examined with stage 4 cancer meaning there is nix they can do to rescue Wayne.

Totally believable, right? It's all in the grammar. Continuing:

With 80% percent of his skin blanketed in tattoos our electronic devices were always falling to notice the cancer in his skin all the time until it reached stage 4...The only thing we advice him is to enjoy the few days he got left. Wayne always visited me for regular check ups so we were close, The only thing he pissed me off with was thieving my cough syrup every time he came for a visit". Joked Dr Williams.

And concluding the HOAX story: Lil Wayne plans to consume the residual of his life with his YMCMB crew and requested that lean should be the chief booze at his funeral. "I would be thankful if a person can regularly pour a bottle of codeine and promethazine cough syrup every week on my tomb while two red bones twerk on either side of my grave...I'm dying a blissful man and I hope ya'll think about me in remembrance". Said Lil Wayne before departing leaving fans and reporters shocked.

Lil' Wayne is a regular on social media and has not reported anything on this particular topic, contradictory to the hoax stories:

Kendrick Lamar a real one #Respek -- Lil Wayne WEEZY F (@LilTunechi) March 16, 2016

Lead Stories' Trendolizer™ is constantly scouring the web for the hottest news, viral videos and images.

Follow us on Facebook and Twitter @LeadStoriesCom for your daily news.