What Types of Corn Plants Make Popcorn?
Movie theaters are not the only places to find great popcorn. You can grow popcorn (Zea mays everta) in your own garden even if you haven't tried it before. But the seeds you sow are not the same as the ones to grow sweet corn. Only certain types of corn plants bear ears with kernels that pop.

Types of Corn Varieties of corn are grouped into four categories: sweet corn, field corn, ornamental corn and popcorn. Field corn can be dent or flint types, which are hard-shelled and typically ground into meal or used for animal feed. Dent corn is named for the indentation at the top of its kernels and grows in warmer climates while flint types grow best in cooler regions. Sweet corn is a table vegetable and ornamental corn is used for decorations. Popcorn is unique among corn varieties because of its starchy endosperm that expands and pops when heated.

Popcorn As a favorite American snack, popcorn is not a new cultivated type. Its history goes back to 3600 B.C., making it one of the oldest types of corn. Two types of popcorn -- pearl and rice -- are named for their shapes. Pearl popcorn is more rounded and rice popcorn is longer. Both types are available in a rainbow of colors including red, blue, pink and yellow, with some ears sporting multi-colored kernels. Popcorn cultivars vary in height from 3 feet tall, such as “Tom Thumb,” to 8 feet, such as “Ruby Red.” “Strawberry” popcorn has red kernels, “Mini Blue” has blue kernels and “Cutie Pops” bears multi-colored kernels.

Culture Regardless of whether you grow sweet corn, field corn, ornamental types or popcorn, they all require the same care. But if you plant popcorn in the same garden as sweet corn, plants will cross-pollinate each other and it will compromise the taste of your sweet corn. Popcorn plants grow best in full sun after soil warms to 70 degrees Fahrenheit. If you sow seeds in cool soil they will germinate sporadically or not at all. Because corn is wind-pollinated, group plants in blocks instead of lined up in long rows. As corn stalks grow, adventitious roots grow from lower stems and peg down into the soil to form props that support heavy stalks. Deep watering to a depth of 1 to 1 1/2 inches once a week is better than frequent sprinklings.

Harvesting and Popping Popcorn is not harvested when kernels are soft and tender like sweet corn, but when husks are brown and kernels have completely dried and hardened. As popcorn kernels heat, the moisture within the starchy endosperm turns to steam and explodes, effectively turning the kernel inside out. After harvesting the ears, remove the husks before placing the ears in a mesh bag and storing in a warm and dry place. Occasionally, remove a few kernels and test to see if they pop well. When they do, the corn is sufficiently dry and you can shell the rest of the kernels and store them in an airtight container. You can place whole ears of miniature cultivars, such as “Tom Thumb,” into paper bags, tape them shut and pop in the microwave.

About the Author Victoria Lee Blackstone is a horticulturist and a professional writer who has authored research-based scientific/technical papers, horticultural articles, and magazine and newspaper articles. After studying botany and microbiology at Clemson University, Blackstone was hired as a University of Georgia Master Gardener Coordinator. She is also a former mortgage acquisition specialist for Freddie Mac in Atlanta, GA.

Photo Credits Jupiterimages/Photos.com/Getty Images