OMG! There's Going to be a "Harry Potter Go" Game!
Warner Bros

In a world where Pokémon and Blink 182 are popular, and a Clinton is running for President, it only makes sense that a revival of the ’90s would include some Harry Potter. And while Harry is never far from our hearts, the nostalgia just leveled up with this news: Niantic, creators of Pokémon Go, have announced their newest project: Harry Potter Go!

via giphy

Magic is coming to a smartphone near you, ladies and gents. With the overpowering success of Pokémon Go (we’re talking 15 million users worldwide), fans of the Potter franchise took to promoting the idea and went so far as to petition Warner Bros. Niantic took the bait as well, with senior developer Marcus Figueroa stating,

“the demand for this title was absolutely insane, so we figured we’d give it a shot.”

So, fellow Potterheads, what can we expect with the new app? Ashtyn Hannon, originator of the petition, had a few ideas of her own and argued that the app could be used to promote the new film, Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them. Here’s a look:

Horcruxes

via giphy

First up is horcruxes. You-Know-Who’s locket and diary won’t stand a chance when you search the game for the items to destroy them. Creatures would help us along the way, giving us tools like Floo Powder or Portkeys.

Dueling Club

via giphy

Find your real life Malfoy then square up against them in a battle of wits and wand, erm, phone waving?! Compete against friends (or foes!) and collect house points for rewards within the game. Just make sure you know it’s “leviOsa, not leviosAH.”

Potions

via giphy

As long as you’re not Seamus Finnigan, potions will be useful to you in the new game. Just how incense and potions help you find Pokémon in Pokémon Go, potions would help you find horcruxes.

No Harry Potter Go game would be complete without sorting players into houses and letting their wands choose them. Fans could stay true to their Pottermore sorting and rock out with a unicorn hair wand!

No matter your house or if you’re a squib when it comes to Harry Potter knowledge, this augmented reality game is one that people of all ages can look forward to.