HelloEnglish: India's no. 1 English Learning App
a situation in which people lie in wait to make a surprise attack.

police deliberately herded 400 demonstrators into a trap and then attacked and arrested them

a device or enclosure designed to catch and retain animals, typically by allowing entry but not exit or by catching hold of a part of the body.

All of us must have seen pictures of animals caught in traps , a horrible slow painful death.

Once he dreamed he was trying to trap foxes but kept catching Dalmatians.

example

The medical student came upon an accident in a city street where he found the man, a wealthy entrepreneur, impaled by the shaft that joined his 'trap' and horse.

For the first time, I've experienced a most unwelcome intrusion into the most sacred of personal spaces - the toilet 'trap' .

Prior to ozonation air was then passed through a water 'trap' at 15°C to maintain a relative humidity of 60%.

But this then was a lure, to 'trap' unions into giving up their defense of their pensions, their social security and other pensions.

Thus, consistently entering the same house immediately after release from a 'trap' was taken as evidence that an animal was resident in that house.

This doctor should mind her own business, shut her 'trap' and get a life.

All these animals were pets apart from the two work horses which pulled the 'trap' to town to take my father to work in the family business.

He once said: ‘A minister should either keep his 'trap' shut or resign.’

I shut my 'trap' for the next few minutes, and then muttered ‘Good One’.

one fuel filter and water 'trap' are sufficient on the fuel system

I am NOT an interfering busybody - leastways I can keep my 'trap' firmly shut on any conundrum I don't know about.

She had her hands over her mouth, and her eyes looked like an animal caught in a 'trap' , bleeding its life away.

by keeping quiet I was walking into a 'trap'

Vice-captain Matt Burke said the Australians had to concentrate on their own game and not fall into the 'trap' of watching the scoreboard.

He fell into the 'trap' of flogging the players at training and settling too early on his Test team.

In other words, he should mind his business and keep his 'trap' shut.

If you catch the animal in the 'trap' , transport it to some woods or take it to a wildlife agency.

But already this, unlike this afternoon's affairs, looks like a proper match, with passing and players who can 'trap' the ball and that.

Most very local papers escape the 'trap' of defining news strictly as events.

But the pipeline cannot take the amount of water from the silt 'trap' and hence it overflows into the lake.

If you cannot get near the animal or must set a 'trap' to catch it, it is probably feral.

From his window he could see the Pyramids, but all he wanted to see was a photograph of Tommy, the pony which pulled the 'trap' for the two of them on their last ride together.

They landed in her cleavage, and when she looked up at me to complain, she must have seen the look of a cold-blooded murderer in my eyes because she shut her 'trap' real quick.

Looking back now I realise that I fell into the 'trap' of over-training.

A coin 'trap' collects any loose change which falls out of the pockets of garments being washed.

Like a greyhound out of a 'trap' at Harold's Cross on a Friday night John Bee sprung into action.

police deliberately herded 400 demonstrators into a 'trap' and then attacked and arrested them

They 'trap' you and lure you in with catchy taglines and suspenseful previews.

To make a long story short, he who is able to keep his 'trap' shut, suck wind, and bury his head in the sand will always be valued by anyone who lives in a glass hut.

Once he dreamed he was trying to 'trap' foxes but kept catching Dalmatians.