UAE is the “happiest Muslim country in the world”
The United Arab Emirates is the happiest Muslim country in the world, according to a report by the United Nations.

The UAE was ranked 21st in the list of happiest countries in the world which were dominated by Northern European countries, with Norway coming top.

After the UAE the next nine happiest Muslim countries were Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Malaysia, Uzbekistan, Algeria, Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan.

The UAE is a federal absolute monarchy. It’s population is 9.2 million, of which 1.4 million are Emirati citizens and 7.8 million are expatriates.

The country is a federation of seven emirates, and was established on December 2, 1971. The constituent emirates are Abu Dhabi (which serves as the capital), Ajman, Dubai, Fujairah, Ras al-Khaimah, Sharjah and Umm al-Quwain.

The UAE’s oil reserves are the seventh-largest in the world while its natural gas reserves are the world’s seventeenth-largest. Sheikh Zayed, ruler of Abu Dhabi and the first President of the UAE, oversaw the development of the Emirates and steered oil revenues into healthcare, education and infrastructure. The UAE’s economy is the most diversified in the Gulf Cooperation Council, while its most populous city of Dubai is an important global city and an international aviation hub. Nevertheless, the country remains principally reliant on its export of petroleum and natural gas.

The countries were all ranked according to the following criteria: caring, freedom, generosity, honesty, health, income and good governance.

The ten least happy Muslim countries (in descending order) were Albania, Iraq, Mauritania, Mali, Sudan, Niger, Chad, Afghanistan, Yemen and Syria.

As you’re here… 5Pillars have one humble request from you… Thousands of Muslims around the world visit our website for news every day. Due to the unfortunate reality of covering Muslim-related news in a heightened Islamophobic environment, our advertising and fundraising revenues have decreased significantly. 5Pillars is editorially and financially independent, with no sectarian or political allegiance to any particular group or movement. Our journalism has been exclusively grassroots focussed and our sole purpose is to defend Islam and Muslims in the media. This makes us unique in comparison to other online Muslim media outlets who are neither independently regulated by a reputable body nor are they managed by qualified journalists. Our journalism takes time, money and effort to deliver. But we do it because we believe we have a duty to Allah (swt). You may not agree or like everything we publish. However, which other Muslim news site that is run by experienced journalists will take on the responsibility of being a shield for Islam and Muslims in the media? If you follow 5Pillars, and you understand its importance in today’s climate, then please support us for as little as £5 a month, it only takes a minute to make a donation. Jazakallah khayran. Our beloved Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) said:“The best deeds are those done regularly, even if they are small.” [Ibn Mājah] CLICK HERE TO SUPPORT 5PILLARS

Shares 0

Add your comments below