Soros responds to Roseanne: Her comments are an insult to Holocaust victims
Democratic donor George Soros on Tuesday responded to Roseanne Barr referring to him as a Nazi, saying the remarks were an insult to Holocaust victims.

"George Soros survived the Nazi occupation of Hungary as a 13-year-old child by going into hiding and assuming a false identity with the help of his father, who managed to save his own family and help many other Jews survive the Holocaust," Soros's spokesperson said in a statement to New York Daily News.

ADVERTISEMENT

"He did not collaborate with the Nazis. He did not help round people up. He did not confiscate anybody's property. Such false allegations are insulting to the victims of the Holocaust, to all Jewish people, and to anyone who honors the truth," the statement said.

"They are an affront to Mr. Soros and his family, who against the odds managed to survive one of the darkest moments in our history."

The statement comes after Barr said in a tweet that Soros is a “Nazi who turned in his fellow Jews 2 be murdered in German concentration camps & stole their wealth.”

The remark was part of a string of tweets that also falsely claimed Chelsea Clinton was married to Soros's nephew and that Soros's goal was to overthrow the U.S. government.

Chelsea Soros Clinton — Roseanne Barr (@therealroseanne) May 29, 2018

soros' goal; the overthrow of us constitutional republic by buying/backing candidates 4 local district attorney races who will ignore US law & favor 'feelings' instead-and call everyone who is alarmed by that 'racist'. — Roseanne Barr (@therealroseanne) May 29, 2018

Roseanne also issued a racially charged tweet in which she referred to former Obama adviser Valerie Jarret as a child produced by the Islamist organization the Muslim Brotherhood and the movie "Planet of the Apes."

Barr apologized for the remarks and announced she was leaving Twitter.

However, ABC announced on Tuesday it would be canceling its "Roseanne" sitcom reboot in light of Barr's comments.