Recent advances in contraceptive vaccine development: a mini-review

Next Section Abstract Contraceptive vaccines (CV) may provide viable and valuable alternatives to the presently available methods of contraception. The molecules that are being explored for CV development either target gamete production [luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH)/GnRH, FSH], gamete function [sperm antigens and oocyte zona pellucida (ZP)], and gamete outcome (HCG). CV targeting gamete production have shown varied degrees of efficacy; however, they either affect sex steroids causing impotency and/or show only a partial rather than a complete effect in inhibiting gametogenesis. However, vaccines based on LHRH/GnRH are being developed by several pharmaceutical companies as substitutes for castration of domestic pets, farm and wild animals, and for therapeutic anticancer purposes such as in prostatic hypertrophy and carcinoma. These vaccines may also find applications in clinical situations that require the inhibition of increased secretions of sex steroids, such as in uterine fibroids, polycystic ovary syndrome, endometriosis and precocious puberty. CV targeting molecules involved in gamete function such as sperm antigens and ZP proteins are exciting choices. Sperm constitute the most promising and exciting target for CV. Several sperm-specific antigens have been delineated in several laboratories and are being actively explored for CV development. Studies are focused on delineating appropriate sperm-specific epitopes, and increasing the immunogenicity (specifically in the local genital tract) and efficacy on the vaccines. Anti-sperm antibody (ASA)-mediated immunoinfertility provides a naturally occurring model to indicate how a vaccine might work in humans. Vaccines based on ZP proteins are quite efficacious in producing contraceptive effects, but may induce oophoritis, affecting sex steroids. They are being successfully tested to control feral populations of dogs, deer, horses and elephants, and populations of several species of zoo animals. The current research for human applicability is focused on delineating infertility-related epitopes (B‐cell epitopes) from oophoritis-inducing epitopes (T-cell epitopes). Vaccines targeting gamete outcome primarily focus on the HCG molecule. The HCG vaccine is the first vaccine to undergo Phase I and II clinical trials in humans. Both efficacy and lack of immunopathology have been reasonably well demonstrated for this vaccine. At the present time, studies are focused on increasing the immunogenicity and efficacy of the birth control vaccine, and examining its clinical applications in various HCG-producing cancers. The present article will focus on the current status of the anti-sperm, anti-ZP, anti-LHRH/GnRH and anti-HCG vaccines.

Key words

Previous Section Next Section Introduction Besides the availability of the present methods of birth control, the population explosion and unintended pregnancies continue to pose major public health issues worldwide. The world population has exceeded 6.43×109 (World POPClock projection, 2005) and increasing by 1×109 every 12 years. Ninety-five percent of this growth is in the developing nations. In the USA, half of all pregnancies are unintended, which result in >1×106 elective abortions annually (Henshaw, 1998; Grow and Ahmed, 2000). This calls for a better method of contraception that is acceptable, effective and available both in the developed and developing nations. An ideal contraceptive method should be highly effective and safe, inexpensive, have a prolonged duration of action, be rapidly reversible and easily accessible, require infrequent administration, and be capable of private use (Contraception Online, 2004). A contraceptive vaccine (CV) has been proposed as a valuable alternative that can fulfil most, if not all, of the properties of an ideal contraceptive. Since the developed and most of the developing nations have an infrastructure for mass immunization, the development of vaccines for contraception is an exciting proposition.

Previous Section Next Section Discussion Several targets are being investigated in various laboratories for the development of CV. These can be divided into three main categories: CV targeting gamete production, gamete function and gamete outcome (Naz, 2005a). CV targeting gamete production include anti-luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH)/GnRH vaccines; those targeting gamete function include anti-sperm and anti-oocyte zona pellucida (ZP) vaccines; and those targeting gamete outcome include anti-HCG vaccines. The aim of this article is to review the progress on various CV that has been made during the last 5 years, their current status, limitations (if any), and future perspectives. Specifically, this article will focus on anti-sperm, anti-ZP, anti-LHRH/GnRH, and anti-HCG vaccines.