Investor Relations
Form 10-K

UNITED STATES

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-K þ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2010 OR o TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 Commission file number: 001-16109 CORRECTIONS CORPORATION OF AMERICA (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) MARYLAND 62-1763875 (State or other jurisdiction of

incorporation or organization) (I.R.S. Employer

Identification No.) 10 BURTON HILLS BLVD., NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 37215

(Address and zip code of principal executive office) REGISTRANT’S TELEPHONE NUMBER, INCLUDING AREA CODE: (615) 263-3000 SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OF THE ACT: Title of each class Name of each exchange on which registered Common Stock, $.01 par value per share New York Stock Exchange SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(g) OF THE ACT: NONE Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15 (d) of the Act. Yes o No þ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of the registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K. o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. See definition of “accelerated filer and large accelerated filer” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one): Large accelerated filer þ Accelerated filer o Non-accelerated filer o Smaller reporting company o (Do not check if a smaller reporting company) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act.). Yes o No þ The aggregate market value of the shares of the registrant’s Common Stock held by non-affiliates was approximately $2,085,120,098 as of June 30, 2010, based on the closing price of such shares on the New York Stock Exchange on that day. The number of shares of the registrant’s Common Stock outstanding on February 17, 2011 was 109,169,428. DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE: Portions of the registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for the 2011 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, currently scheduled to be held on May 12, 2011, are incorporated by reference into Part III of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING

FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains statements that are forward-looking statements as defined within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements give our current expectations of forecasts of future events. All statements other than statements of current or historical fact contained in this Annual Report, including statements regarding our future financial position, business strategy, budgets, projected costs, and plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “projects,” “will,” and similar expressions, as they relate to us, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are based on our current plans and actual future activities, and our results of operations may be materially different from those set forth in the forward-looking statements. In particular these include, among other things, statements relating to: • general economic and market conditions, including the impact governmental budgets can have on our per diem rates and occupancy; • fluctuations in our operating results because of, among other things, changes in occupancy levels, competition, increases in costs of operations, fluctuations in interest rates, and risks of operations; • changes in the privatization of the corrections and detention industry and the public acceptance of our services; • our ability to obtain and maintain correctional facility management contracts, including as the result of sufficient governmental appropriations, inmate disturbances, and the timing of the opening of new facilities and the commencement of new management contracts as well as our ability to utilize current available beds and new capacity as development and expansion projects are completed; • increases in costs to develop or expand correctional facilities that exceed original estimates, or the inability to complete such projects on schedule as a result of various factors, many of which are beyond our control, such as weather, labor conditions, and material shortages, resulting in increased construction costs; • changes in government policy and in legislation and regulation of the corrections and detention industry that adversely affect our business including, but not limited to, judicial challenges regarding the transfer of California inmates to out-of-state private correctional facilities; and • the availability of debt and equity financing on terms that are favorable to us. Any or all of our forward-looking statements in this Annual Report may turn out to be inaccurate. We have based these forward-looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends that we believe may affect our financial condition, results of operations, business strategy and financial needs. They can be affected by inaccurate assumptions we might make or by known or unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions, including the risks, uncertainties and assumptions described in “Risk Factors.” 3

In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events and circumstances discussed in this Annual Report may not occur and actual results could differ materially from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements. When you consider these forward-looking statements, you should keep in mind the risk factors and other cautionary statements in this Annual Report, including in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Business.” Our forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements contained in this Annual Report. 4

PART I. ITEM 1. BUSINESS. Overview We are the nation’s largest owner and operator of privatized correctional and detention facilities and one of the largest prison operators in the United States behind only the federal government and three states. We currently operate 66 correctional and detention facilities, including 45 facilities that we own, with a total design capacity of approximately 90,000 beds in 19 states and the District of Columbia. We are also constructing an additional 1,124-bed correctional facility in Millen, Georgia under a contract awarded by the Georgia Department of Corrections. The facility, which we will own, is currently expected to be completed during the first quarter of 2012. We also own two additional correctional facilities that we lease to third-party operators. We specialize in owning, operating, and managing prisons and other correctional facilities and providing inmate residential and prisoner transportation services for governmental agencies. In addition to providing the fundamental residential services relating to inmates, our facilities offer a variety of rehabilitation and educational programs, including basic education, religious services, life skills and employment training and substance abuse treatment. These services are intended to help reduce recidivism and to prepare inmates for their successful reentry into society upon their release. We also provide health care (including medical, dental, and psychiatric services), food services, and work and recreational programs. Our website address is www.cca.com. We make our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to those reports under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), available on our website, free of charge, as soon as reasonably practicable after these reports are filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). Information contained on our website is not part of this Annual Report. Operations Management and Operation of Correctional and Detention Facilities Our customers consist of federal, state, and local correctional and detention authorities. For the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009, and 2008, federal correctional and detention authorities represented 43%, 40%, and 41%, respectively, of our total revenue. Federal correctional and detention authorities primarily consist of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, or the BOP, the United States Marshals Service, or the USMS, and the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE. Our management services contracts typically have terms of three to five years and contain multiple renewal options. Most of our facility contracts also contain clauses that allow the government agency to terminate the contract at any time without cause, and our contracts are generally subject to annual or bi-annual legislative appropriations of funds. We are compensated for operating and managing facilities at an inmate per diem rate based upon actual or minimum guaranteed occupancy levels. Occupancy rates for a particular facility are typically low when first opened or immediately following an expansion. However, beyond the start-up period, which typically ranges from 90 to 180 days, the occupancy rate tends to stabilize. For the years 2010, 2009, and 2008, the average compensated occupancy of our facilities, based on rated capacity, was 90.2%, 90.6%, and 95.5%, respectively, for all of the facilities we owned or managed, exclusive of facilities where operations have been discontinued. 5

As of December 31, 2010, we had approximately 11,700 unoccupied beds in inventory at facilities that had availability of 100 or more beds, and an additional 1,124 beds under development. Of those, 1,200 beds are under guaranteed contracts with existing customers, leaving us with 11,600 beds available. We have staff throughout the organization actively engaged in marketing this available capacity to existing and prospective customers. Historically, we have been successful in substantially filling our inventory of available beds and the beds that we have constructed. Filling these available beds would provide substantial growth in revenues, cash flow, and earnings per share. However, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to fill our available beds. Operating Procedures Pursuant to the terms of our management contracts, we are responsible for the overall operations of our facilities, including staff recruitment, general administration of the facilities, facility maintenance, security, and supervision of the offenders. We are required by our contracts to maintain certain levels of insurance coverage for general liability, workers’ compensation, vehicle liability, and property loss or damage. We are also required to indemnify the contracting agencies for claims and costs arising out of our operations and, in certain cases, to maintain performance bonds and other collateral requirements. Approximately 85% of the facilities we operated at December 31, 2010 were accredited by the American Correctional Association Commission on Accreditation. The American Correctional Association, or ACA, is an independent organization comprised of corrections professionals that establish accreditation standards for correctional and detention institutions. We provide a variety of rehabilitative and educational programs at our facilities. Inmates at most facilities we manage may receive basic education through academic programs designed to improve literacy levels and the opportunity to acquire GED certificates. We also offer vocational training to inmates who lack marketable job skills. Our craft vocational training programs are accredited by the National Center for Construction Education and Research. This organization provides training curriculum and establishes industry standards for over 4,000 construction and trade organizations in the United States and several foreign countries. In addition, we offer life skills transition-planning programs that provide inmates with job search skills, health education, financial responsibility training, parenting training, and other skills associated with becoming productive citizens. At many of our facilities, we also offer counseling, education and/or treatment to inmates with alcohol and drug abuse problems through our “Strategies for Change” and Residential Drug Addictions Treatment Program, or RDAP. Equally significant, we offer cognitive behavioral programs aimed at changing the anti-social attitudes and behaviors of offenders, and faith-based and religious programs that offer all offenders the opportunity to practice their spiritual beliefs. These programs incorporate the use of thousands of volunteers, along with our staff, that assist in providing guidance, direction, and post-incarceration services to offenders. We believe these programs help reduce recidivism. We operate our facilities in accordance with both company and facility-specific policies and procedures. The policies and procedures reflect the high standards generated by a number of sources, including the ACA, The Joint Commission, the National Commission on Correctional Healthcare, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, federal, state, and local government guidelines, established correctional procedures, and company-wide policies and procedures that may exceed these guidelines. Outside agency standards, such as those established by the ACA, provide us with the industry’s most widely accepted operational guidelines. Our facilities not only operate under these established standards (we have sought and received accreditation for 56 of the facilities we operated as of December 31, 2010) but are consistently challenged by management to exceed these standards. This challenge is presented, in large part, through an extensive, comprehensive Quality Assurance Program. We intend to apply for ACA accreditation for all of our eligible facilities that are not currently accredited where it is economically feasible to complete the 18-24 month accreditation process. 6

Our Quality Assurance Department independently operates under the auspices of, and reports directly to, the Company’s Office of General Counsel. The Quality Assurance Department consists of two major sections. The first is the Research and Analysis Section, which collects and analyzes performance metrics across multiple databases. Through rigorous reporting and analyses of comprehensive, comparative statistics across disciplines, divisions, business units and the Company as a whole, the Research and Analysis Section provides timely, independently generated performance and trend data to senior management. The second major section within the Quality Assurance Department is the Operational Audit Section. This section consists of two full time audit teams comprised of subject matter experts from all the major discipline areas within institutional operations. Routinely, these two audit teams conduct rigorous, on site annual evaluations of each facility we operate with no advance notice. Highly specialized, discipline specific audit tools, containing over 1,600 audited items across eleven major operational areas, are employed in this detailed, comprehensive process. The results of these on site evaluations are used to discern areas of strength and areas in need of management attention. The audit findings also comprise a major part of our continuous operational risk assessment and management process. The Company has devoted significant resources to the Quality Assurance Department, enabling us to monitor compliance with contractual requirements, outside agency and accrediting organization standards. Quality Assurance closely monitors all efforts by our facilities to deliver the exceptional quality of services and operations expected. Prisoner Transportation Services We currently provide transportation services to governmental agencies through our wholly-owned subsidiary, TransCor America, LLC, or TransCor. During the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009, and 2008, TransCor generated total consolidated revenue of $4.0 million, $4.0 million, and $6.9 million, respectively, comprising 0.2%, 0.2%, and 0.4% of our total consolidated revenue in each respective year. We believe TransCor provides a complementary service to our core business that enables us to respond quickly to our customers’ transportation needs. Facility Portfolio General Our facilities can generally be classified according to the level(s) of security at such facility. Minimum security facilities have open housing within an appropriately designed and patrolled institutional perimeter. Medium security facilities have either cells, rooms or dormitories, a secure perimeter, and some form of external patrol. Maximum security facilities have cells, a secure perimeter, and external patrol. Multi-security facilities have various areas encompassing minimum, medium or maximum security. Non-secure facilities are facilities having open housing that inhibit movement by their design. Secure facilities are facilities having cells, rooms, or dormitories, a secure perimeter, and some form of external patrol. Our facilities can also be classified according to their primary function. The primary functional categories are: • Correctional Facilities. Correctional facilities house and provide contractually agreed upon programs and services to sentenced adult prisoners, typically prisoners on whom a sentence in excess of one year has been imposed. • Detention Facilities. Detention facilities house and provide contractually agreed upon programs and services to (i) prisoners being detained by ICE, (ii) prisoners who are awaiting trial who have been charged with violations of federal criminal law (and are therefore in the custody of the USMS) or state criminal law, and (iii) prisoners who have been convicted of crimes and on whom a sentence of one year or less has been imposed. • Leased Facilities. Leased facilities are facilities that we own but do not manage, that are leased to third-party operators. 7

Facilities and Facility Management Contracts We own 47 correctional and detention facilities in 14 states and the District of Columbia, two of which we lease to third-party operators. We also own two corporate office buildings. Additionally, we currently manage 21 correctional and detention facilities owned by government agencies. The segment disclosures are included in Note 17 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. The following table sets forth all of the facilities that we currently (i) own and manage, (ii) own, but are leased to another operator, and (iii) manage but are owned by a government authority. The table includes certain information regarding each facility, including the term of the primary management contract related to such facility, or, in the case of facilities we own but lease to a third-party operator, the term of such lease. We have a number of management contracts and leases that expire in 2011 (or have expired) with no remaining renewal options. We continue to operate, and, unless otherwise noted, expect to continue to manage or lease these facilities, although we can provide no assurance that we will maintain our contracts to manage or lease these facilities or when new contracts will be renewed. Remaining Primary Design Security Facility Renewal Facility Name Customer Capacity (A) Level Type (B) Term Options (C) Owned and Managed Facilities: Central Arizona Detention Center

Florence, Arizona USMS 2,304 Multi Detention September 2013 (3) 5 year Eloy Detention Center

Eloy, Arizona ICE 1,500 Medium Detention Indefinite — Florence Correctional Center

Florence, Arizona USMS 1,824 Multi Detention September 2013 (3) 5 year La Palma Correctional Center

Eloy, Arizona State of California 3,060 Medium Correctional June 2013 Indefinite Red Rock Correctional Center

Eloy, Arizona State of California 1,596 Medium Correctional June 2013 Indefinite Saguaro Correctional Facility

Eloy, Arizona State of Hawaii 1,896 Medium Correctional June 2011 — California City Correctional Center

California City, California

Office of the Federal Detention Trustee 2,304 Medium Correctional September 2025 — San Diego Correctional Facility (D)

San Diego, California ICE 1,154 Minimum/ Medium Detention June 2011 (4) 3 year Bent County Correctional Facility

Las Animas, Colorado State of Colorado 1,420 Medium Correctional June 2011 — Crowley County Correctional Facility

Olney Springs, Colorado State of Colorado 1,794 Medium Correctional June 2011 — Huerfano County Correctional Center (E)

Walsenburg, Colorado — 752 Medium Correctional — — 8

Remaining Primary Design Security Facility Renewal Facility Name Customer Capacity (A) Level Type (B) Term Options (C) Kit Carson Correctional Center

Burlington, Colorado State of Colorado 1,488 Medium Correctional June 2011 — Coffee Correctional Facility (F)

Nicholls, Georgia State of Georgia 2,312 Medium Correctional June 2011 (23) 1 year McRae Correctional Facility

McRae, Georgia BOP 1,524 Medium Correctional November 2011 (1) 1 year Stewart Detention Center

Lumpkin, Georgia ICE 1,752 Medium Detention Indefinite — Wheeler Correctional Facility (F)

Alamo, Georgia State of Georgia 2,312 Medium Correctional June 2011 (23) 1 year Leavenworth Detention Center

Leavenworth, Kansas USMS 1,033 Maximum Detention December 2011 (3) 5 year Lee Adjustment Center

Beattyville, Kentucky State of Vermont 816 Minimum/ Medium Correctional June 2011 — Marion Adjustment Center

St. Mary, Kentucky Commonwealth of Kentucky 826 Minimum/ Medium Correctional June 2011 (1) 2 year Otter Creek Correctional Center (G)

Wheelwright, Kentucky Commonwealth of Kentucky 656 Minimum/ Medium Correctional June 2012 (1) 1 year

(1) 2 year Prairie Correctional Facility (H)

Appleton, Minnesota — 1,600 Medium Correctional — — Adams County Correctional Center

Adams County, Mississippi BOP 2,232 Medium Correctional July 2013 (3) 2 year Tallahatchie County Correctional Facility (I)

Tutwiler, Mississippi State of California 2,672 Medium Correctional June 2013 Indefinite Crossroads Correctional Center (J)

Shelby, Montana State of Montana 664 Multi Correctional August 2011 (4) 2 year Nevada Southern Detention Center

Pahrump, Nevada Office of the Federal Detention Trustee 1,072 Medium Detention September 2015 (3) 5 year Cibola County Corrections Center

Milan, New Mexico BOP 1,129 Medium Correctional September 2014 (3) 2 year New Mexico Women’s Correctional Facility

Grants, New Mexico State of New Mexico 596 Multi Correctional June 2013 — Torrance County Detention Facility

Estancia, New Mexico USMS 910 Multi Detention Indefinite — Northeast Ohio Correctional Center

Youngstown, Ohio BOP 2,016 Medium Correctional May 2011 (2) 2 year Queensgate Correctional Facility (K)

Cincinnati, Ohio — 850 Medium — — — Cimarron Correctional Facility (L)

Cushing, Oklahoma State of Oklahoma 1,692 Medium Correctional June 2011 (3) 1 year 9

Remaining Primary Design Security Facility Renewal Facility Name Customer Capacity (A) Level Type (B) Term Options (C) Davis Correctional Facility (L)

Holdenville, Oklahoma State of Oklahoma 1,670 Medium Correctional June 2011 (3) 1 year Diamondback Correctional Facility (E)

Watonga, Oklahoma — 2,160 Medium Correctional — — North Fork Correctional Facility

Sayre, Oklahoma State of California 2,400 Medium Correctional June 2013 Indefinite West Tennessee Detention Facility

Mason, Tennessee USMS 600 Multi Detention September 2011 (9) 2 year Shelby Training Center

Memphis, Tennessee — 200 Secure — — — Whiteville Correctional Facility (M)

Whiteville, Tennessee State of Tennessee 1,536 Medium Correctional June 2011 (1) 1 year Bridgeport Pre-Parole Transfer Facility

Bridgeport, Texas State of Texas 200 Medium Correctional August 2011 — Eden Detention Center

Eden, Texas BOP 1,422 Medium Correctional April 2011 (3) 2 year Houston Processing Center

Houston, Texas ICE 1,000 Medium Detention March 2011 (3) 1 year Laredo Processing Center

Laredo, Texas ICE 258 Minimum/ Medium Detention June 2011 — Webb County Detention Center

Laredo, Texas USMS 480 Medium Detention November 2012 (1) 5 year Mineral Wells Pre-Parole Transfer Facility

Mineral Wells, Texas State of Texas 2,103 Minimum Correctional August 2011 — T. Don Hutto Residential Center

Taylor, Texas ICE 512 Non-Secure Detention January 2015 Indefinite D.C. Correctional Treatment Facility (N)

Washington, D.C. District of Columbia 1,500 Medium Detention March 2017 — Managed Only Facilities: Bay Correctional Facility

Panama City, Florida State of Florida 985 Medium Correctional July 2013 (2) 2 year Citrus County Detention Facility

Lecanto, Florida Citrus County, Florida 760 Multi Detention September 2015 Indefinite Graceville Correctional Facility

Graceville, Florida State of Florida 1,884 Minimum/ Medium Correctional September 2013 (2) 2 year Lake City Correctional Facility

Lake City, Florida State of Florida 893 Secure Correctional June 2012 Indefinite Moore Haven Correctional Facility

Moore Haven, Florida State of Florida 985 Minimum/Medium Correctional July 2013 (2) 2 year North Georgia Detention Center

Hall County, Georgia ICE 502 Medium Detention March 2014 Indefinite 10

Remaining Primary Design Security Facility Renewal Facility Name Customer Capacity (A) Level Type (B) Term Options (C) Idaho Correctional Center

Boise, Idaho State of Idaho 2,016 Multi Correctional June 2014 (2) 2 year Marion County Jail

Indianapolis, Indiana Marion County, Indiana 1,030 Multi Detention December 2017 (1) 10 year Winn Correctional Center

Winnfield, Louisiana State of Louisiana 1,538 Medium/ Maximum Correctional June 2020 — Delta Correctional Facility

Greenwood, Mississippi State of Mississippi 1,172 Minimum/Medium Correctional July 2011 — Wilkinson County Correctional Facility

Woodville, Mississippi State of Mississippi 1,000 Medium Correctional June 2011 (4) 1 year Elizabeth Detention Center

Elizabeth, New Jersey ICE 300 Minimum Detention September 2011 (4) 3 year Silverdale Facilities

Chattanooga, Tennessee Hamilton County, Tennessee 1,046 Multi Detention December 2010 — South Central Correctional Center

Clifton, Tennessee State of Tennessee 1,676 Medium Correctional June 2012 Metro-Davidson County Detention Facility

Nashville, Tennessee Davidson County, Tennessee 1,092 Multi Detention July 2014 — Hardeman County Correctional Facility

Whiteville, Tennessee State of Tennessee 2,016 Medium Correctional May 2012 (2) 3 year Bartlett State Jail

Bartlett, Texas State of Texas 1,049 Minimum/ Medium Correctional August 2013 (2) 2 year Bradshaw State Jail

Henderson, Texas State of Texas 1,980 Minimum/ Medium Correctional August 2013 (2) 2 year Dawson State Jail

Dallas, Texas State of Texas 2,216 Minimum/ Medium Correctional August 2013 (2) 2 year Lindsey State Jail

Jacksboro, Texas State of Texas 1,031 Minimum/ Medium Correctional August 2013 (2) 2 year Willacy State Jail

Raymondville, Texas State of Texas 1,069 Minimum/ Medium Correctional August 2013 (2) 2 year Leased Facilities: Leo Chesney Correctional Center

Live Oak, California Cornell Corrections 240 Minimum Owned/Leased September 2015 — Community Education Partners (O)

Houston, Texas Community Education Partners — Non-secure Owned/Leased June 2014 — (A) Design capacity measures the number of beds and, accordingly, the number of inmates each facility is designed to accommodate. Facilities housing detainees on a short term basis may exceed the original intended design capacity for sentenced inmates due to the lower level of services required by detainees in custody for a brief period. From time to time, we may evaluate the design capacity of our facilities based on customers using the facilities, and the ability to reconfigure space with minimal capital outlays. As a result, the design capacity of certain facilities may vary from the design capacity previously presented. We believe design capacity is an appropriate measure for evaluating prison operations, because the revenue generated by each facility is based on a per diem or monthly rate per inmate housed at the facility paid by the corresponding contracting governmental entity. 11

(B) We manage numerous facilities that have more than a single function (e.g., housing both long-term sentenced adult prisoners and pre-trial detainees). The primary functional categories into which facility types are identified were determined by the relative size of inmate populations in a particular facility on December 31, 2010. If, for example, a 1,000-bed facility housed 900 adult inmates with sentences in excess of one year and 100 pre-trial detainees, the primary functional category to which it would be assigned would be that of correctional facilities and not detention facilities. It should be understood that the primary functional category to which multi-user facilities are assigned may change from time to time. (C) Remaining renewal options represents the number of renewal options, if applicable, and the term of each option renewal. (D) The facility is subject to a ground lease with the County of San Diego whereby the initial lease term is 18 years from the commencement of the contract, as defined. Upon expiration of the lease in December 2015, ownership of the facility automatically reverts to the County of San Diego. (E) During the first quarter of 2010, we were notified by the state of Arizona of their decision not to renew the management contracts at the Huerfano County Correctional Center upon its expiration on March 8, 2010 and the Diamondback Correctional Facility upon its expiration on May 1, 2010. (F) The facility is subject to a purchase option held by the Georgia Department of Corrections, or GDOC, which grants the GDOC the right to purchase the facility for the lesser of the facility’s depreciated book value, as defined, or fair market value at any time during the term of the contract between the GDOC and us. (G) The facility is subject to a deed of conveyance with the city of Wheelwright, Kentucky which includes provisions that allow assumption of ownership by the city of Wheelwright under the following occurrences: (1) we cease to operate the facility for more than two years, (2) our failure to maintain at least one employee for a period of sixty consecutive days, or (3) a conversion to a maximum security facility based upon classification by the Kentucky Corrections Cabinet. (H) During December 2009, we announced our decision to cease operations at our Prairie Correctional Facility on or about February 1, 2010 due to low inmate populations at the facility. During 2009, the Prairie facility housed offenders from the states of Minnesota and Washington. However, due to excess capacity in the states’ systems, both states removed the populations held at Prairie. (I) The facility is subject to a purchase option held by the Tallahatchie County Correctional Authority which grants Tallahatchie County Correctional Authority the right to purchase the facility at any time during the contract at a price generally equal to the cost of the premises less an allowance for amortization originally over a 20-year period. The amortization period was extended through 2050 in connection with an expansion completed during the fourth quarter of 2007. (J) The state of Montana has an option to purchase the facility generally at any time during the term of the contract with us at fair market value less the sum of a pre-determined portion of per diem payments made to us by the state of Montana. (K) During December 2008, we were notified by Hamilton County, Ohio of its intent to terminate the lease for the 850-bed Queensgate Correctional Facility. We believe the County elected to terminate the lease effective January 1, 2009, due to funding issues experienced by the County. (L) The facility is subject to a purchase option held by the Oklahoma Department of Corrections, or ODC, which grants the ODC the right to purchase the facility at its fair market value at any time during the term of the contract with ODC. (M) The state of Tennessee has the option to purchase the facility in the event of our bankruptcy, or upon an operational breach, as defined, at a price equal to the book value of the facility, as defined. (N) The District of Columbia has the right to purchase the facility at any time during the term of the contract at a price generally equal to the present value of the remaining lease payments for the premises. Upon expiration of the lease in 2017, ownership of the facility automatically reverts to the District of Columbia. (O) The alternative educational facility is currently configured to accommodate 900 at-risk juveniles and may be expanded to accommodate a total of 1,400 at-risk juveniles. Facilities Under Construction or Development In September 2010, we announced that we were awarded a contract by the Georgia Department of Corrections to manage up to 1,150 male inmates in the Jenkins Correctional Center, which will be constructed, owned and operated by us in Millen, Georgia. We commenced development of the new Jenkins Correctional Center during the third quarter of 2010, with an estimated total construction cost of approximately $57.0 million. Construction is expected to be completed during the first quarter of 2012. The contract has an initial one-year base term with 24 one-year renewal options. Additionally the contract provides for a population guarantee of 90% following a 120-day ramp-up period. In early 2008, we also announced our intention to construct a new 2,040-bed correctional facility in Trousdale County, Tennessee. However, during the first quarter of 2009, we temporarily suspended the construction of this facility until we have greater clarity around the timing of future bed absorption by our customers. We will continue to monitor our customers’ needs, and could promptly resume construction of the facility. 12

Business Development We are currently the nation’s largest provider of outsourced correctional management services. We believe we manage approximately 45% of all beds under contract with private operators of correctional and detention facilities in the United States. Under the direction of our business development department and our senior management and with the aid, where appropriate, of certain independent consultants, we market our services to government agencies responsible for federal, state, and local correctional facilities in the United States. Business from our federal customers, including primarily the BOP, USMS, and ICE, continues to be a significant component of our business accounting for 43%, 40%, and 41% of total revenue in 2010, 2009, and 2008, respectively. The BOP, USMS, and ICE, along with the State of California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (“CDCR”), were our only customers that accounted for 10% or more of our total revenue during these years. The BOP accounted for 15%, 13%, and 13% of total revenue for 2010, 2009, and 2008, respectively. The USMS accounted for 16%, 15%, and 14% of total revenue for 2010, 2009, and 2008, respectively. ICE accounted for 12%, 12%, and 13% of total revenue for 2010, 2009, and 2008, respectively. Certain federal contracts contain “take-or-pay” clauses that guarantee us a certain amount of management revenue, regardless of occupancy levels. Business from our state customers, which constituted 50%, 52%, and 51% of total revenue during 2010, 2009, and 2008, respectively, decreased 1.3% from $849.3 million during 2009 to $838.5 million during 2010, as certain states, such as the states of Arizona, Washington, and Minnesota, added additional bed capacity within their respective states and reduced the number of inmates housed in facilities we operate, while other states have reduced inmate populations in an effort to control their costs and alleviate their extraordinary budget challenges. Partially offsetting these reductions in state revenues, we continued to receive additional inmates from the state of California throughout 2009 and 2010 as they have turned to the private sector to help alleviate their overcrowded correctional system. The CDCR accounted for 13%, 11%, and 6% of total revenue for 2010, 2009, and 2008, respectively. We believe that we can further develop our business by, among other things: • Maintaining and expanding our existing customer relationships and continuing to fill existing beds within our facilities, while maintaining an adequate inventory of available beds through new facility construction and expansion opportunities that we believe provides us with flexibility and a competitive advantage when bidding for new management contracts; • Enhancing the terms of our existing contracts; and • Establishing relationships with new customers who have either previously not outsourced their correctional management needs or have utilized other private enterprises. We generally receive inquiries from or on behalf of government agencies that are considering outsourcing the management of certain facilities or that have already decided to contract with a private enterprise. When we receive such an inquiry, we determine whether there is an existing need for our services and whether the legal and political climate in which the inquiring party operates is conducive to serious consideration of outsourcing. Based on the findings, an initial cost analysis is conducted to further determine project feasibility. 13

Frequently, government agencies responsible for correctional and detention services procure goods and services through solicitations or competitive procurements. As part of our process of responding to such requests, members of our management team meet with the appropriate personnel from the agency making the request to best determine the agency’s needs. If the project fits within our strategy, we submit a written response. A typical solicitation or competitive procurement requires bidders to provide detailed information, including, but not limited to, the service to be provided by the bidder, its experience and qualifications, and the price at which the bidder is willing to provide the services (which services may include the renovation, improvement or expansion of an existing facility or the planning, design and construction of a new facility). The requesting agency selects a firm believed to be most qualified to provide the requested services and then negotiates the terms of the contract with that firm, which terms include the price at which its services are to be provided. Competitive Strengths We believe that we benefit from the following competitive strengths: The Largest and Most Recognized Private Prison Operator. Our recognition as the industry’s leading private prison operator provides us with significant credibility with our current and prospective clients. We believe we manage approximately 45% of all privately managed prison beds in the United States. We pioneered modern-day private prisons with a list of notable accomplishments, such as being the first company to design, build, and operate a private prison and the first company to manage a private maximum-security facility under a direct contract with the federal government. In addition to providing us with extensive experience and institutional knowledge, our size also helps us deliver value to our customers by providing purchasing power and allowing us to achieve certain economies of scale. Available Beds within Our Existing Facilities. As of December 31, 2010, we had approximately 11,700 unoccupied beds in facilities that had availability of 100 or more beds, and an additional 1,124 beds under construction. Of these, approximately 1,200 beds are under guaranteed contracts with existing customers, leaving us with 11,600 beds available. We have staff throughout the organization actively engaged in marketing this available capacity to existing and prospective customers. Historically, we have been successful in substantially filling our inventory of available beds and the beds that we have constructed. Filling these available beds would provide substantial growth in revenues, cash flow, and earnings per share. However, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to fill our available beds. Development and Expansion Opportunities. Although the demand for prison beds in the short term has been and could continue to be affected by the severe budget challenges many of our customers currently face, these challenges put further pressure on our customers’ ability to construct new prison beds of their own, which we believe could result in further reliance on the private sector for providing the capacity we believe our customers will need in the long term. We will continue to pursue build-to-suit opportunities like the aforementioned 1,124-bed Jenkins Correctional Center that we are constructing for the state of Georgia. In the long-term, we would like to see continued and meaningful utilization of our remaining capacity and better visibility from our customers before we add any additional capacity on a speculative basis. Diverse, High Quality Customer Base. We provide services under management contracts with federal, state, and local agencies that generally have credit ratings of single-A or better. In addition, a majority of our contracts have terms between one and five years which contribute to our relatively predictable and stable revenue base. Proven Senior Management Team. Our senior management team has applied their prior experience and diverse industry expertise to improve our operations, related financial results, and capital structure. Under our senior management team’s leadership, we have created new business opportunities with customers that have not previously utilized the private corrections sector, expanded relationships with existing customers, including all three federal correctional and detention agencies, and successfully completed numerous recapitalization and refinancing transactions, resulting in increases in revenues, operating income, facility operating margins, and profitability. 14

Financial Flexibility. As of December 31, 2010, we had cash on hand of $25.5 million and $228.2 million available (net of $13.9 million of unfunded borrowings and $1.1 million of letters of credit issued by Lehman Brothers Commercial Bank, which committed $15.0 million under our revolving credit facility, declared bankruptcy in 2008, and is no longer funding borrowing requests) under our $450.0 million revolving credit facility, and no debt maturities until December 2012. During the year ended December 31, 2010, we generated $255.5 million in cash through operating activities, and as of December 31, 2010, we had net working capital of $172.4 million. As a “well-known seasoned issuer”, as currently defined by the SEC, we have the ability to file a “shelf” registration statement that automatically becomes effective enabling us to issue debt and equity securities from time to time when we determine that market conditions and the opportunity to utilize the proceeds from the issuance of such securities are favorable. At December 31, 2010, the interest rates on all our outstanding indebtedness were fixed, with the exception of the interest rate applicable to $178.0 million outstanding under our revolving credit facility, with a total weighted average effective interest rate of 6.5%, while our total weighted average debt maturity was 3.9 years. Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services currently rates our unsecured debt and corporate credit as “BB”, while Moody’s Investors Service currently rates our unsecured debt as “Ba2”. On September 17, 2009, Moody’s improved its outlook on our debt rating to positive from stable. Business Strategy Our primary business strategy is to provide quality corrections services, offer a compelling value, and increase occupancy and revenue, while maintaining our position as the leading owner, operator, and manager of privatized correctional and detention facilities. We will also consider opportunities for growth, including potential acquisitions of businesses within our line of business and those that provide complementary services, provided we believe such opportunities will broaden our market and/or increase the services we can provide to our government partners. Own and Operate High Quality Correctional and Detention Facilities. We believe that our government partners choose an outsourced correctional service provider based primarily on availability of beds, price, and the quality services provided. Approximately 85% of the facilities we operated as of December 31, 2010 are accredited by the ACA, an independent organization of corrections industry professionals that establishes standards by which a correctional facility may gain accreditation. We believe that this percentage compares favorably to the percentage of government-operated adult prisons that are accredited by the ACA. We have experienced wardens managing our facilities, with an average of 25 years of corrections experience and an average tenure of 14 years with us. Offer Compelling Value. We believe that our government partners also seek a compelling value and service offering when selecting an outsourced correctional services provider. We believe that we offer a cost-effective alternative to our government partners by reducing their correctional services costs while allowing them to avoid long-term pension obligations for their employees and large capital investments in new prison beds. We attempt to improve operating performance and efficiency through the following key operating initiatives: (1) standardizing supply and service purchasing practices and usage; (2) implementing a standard approach to staffing and business practices in an effort to reduce our fixed expenses; (3) improving inmate management, resource consumption, and reporting procedures through the utilization of numerous technological initiatives; and (4) improving productivity and reducing employee turnover. Recognizing the challenges we faced as a result of the economic downturn, our efforts to contain costs were intensified during 2009 and 2010, as we implemented a company-wide initiative to improve operating efficiencies, and established a framework for accelerating the process and ensuring continuous delivery over the long-term. Further, certain states have requested, and additional state customers could request, reductions in per diem rates or request that we forego prospective rate increases in the future as methods of addressing the budget shortfalls they may be experiencing. Accordingly, we established a customer response team to create unique solutions for our government partners to help them manage their correctional costs while minimizing the financial impact to us. 15

We also intend to continue to implement a wide variety of specialized services that address the unique needs of various segments of the inmate population. Because the facilities we operate differ with respect to security levels, ages, genders, and cultures of inmates, we focus on the particular needs of an inmate population and tailor our services based on local conditions and our ability to provide services on a cost-effective basis. Increase Occupancy and Revenue. Our industry benefits from significant economies of scale, resulting in lower operating costs per inmate as occupancy rates increase. We believe we have been successful in increasing the number of residents in our care and continue to pursue a number of initiatives intended to further increase our occupancy and revenue. Our competitive cost structure offers prospective customers a compelling option for incarceration. The unique budgetary challenges states are facing may cause states to further rely on us to help reduce their costs, and also cause those states that have not previously utilized the private sector to turn to the private sector to help reduce their overall costs of incarceration. We are actively pursuing these opportunities. We are also focused on renewing and enhancing the terms of our existing contracts. However, we recognize that the budgetary constraints our state customers are experiencing will present challenges in obtaining per diem increases and additional inmate populations in the short-term. Nonetheless, we believe the long-term growth opportunities of our business remain very attractive as insufficient bed development by our customers should result in a return to the supply and demand imbalance that has been benefiting the private prison industry. Capital Strategy We believe the successes of our business and financing strategies have provided us with the financial flexibility to take advantage of various opportunities as they arise. During 2010, 2009, and 2008, we generated operating income of $323.1 million, $307.4 million, and $293.5 million, respectively. During June 2009, we completed the sale and issuance of $465.0 million aggregate principal amount of 7.75% unsecured senior notes pursuant to a prospectus supplement under an automatically effective shelf registration statement that we filed with the SEC on May 19, 2009. The 7.75% unsecured senior notes were issued at a price of 97.116%, resulting in a yield to maturity of 8.25%. We used the net proceeds from the sale of the 7.75% unsecured senior notes to purchase, redeem, or otherwise acquire our 7.5% unsecured senior notes, to pay fees and expenses, and for general corporate purposes. Replacing the 7.5% unsecured senior notes, which were scheduled to mature on May 1, 2011, with the 7.75% unsecured senior notes, which are scheduled to mature on June 1, 2017, extended our nearest debt maturity to December 2012. As of December 31, 2010, we had $55.1 million in estimated costs remaining to complete the aforementioned 1,124-bed Jenkins Correctional Center. Further, certain of our customers have expressed an interest in pursuing additional bed capacity from third parties despite their budgetary challenges. We believe our debt refinancing provides us with more financial flexibility to take advantage of opportunities that may require additional capital. 16

As of December 31, 2010, we had cash on hand of $25.5 million and $228.2 million available under a $450 million senior secured revolving credit facility, which, based on our current leverage ratio, currently bears interest at a base rate or LIBOR plus a margin of 0.75%. None of our outstanding debt requires scheduled principal payments, and we have no debt maturities until December 2012. We believe we have ample access to additional capital and may issue debt or equity securities from time to time when we determine that market conditions and the opportunity to utilize the proceeds from the issuance of such securities are favorable. Such opportunities could include, but are not limited to, refinancing existing indebtedness, extending our average debt maturities in a favorable interest rate environment or taking advantage of build-to-suit opportunities that generate favorable investment returns. In November 2008, our Board of Directors approved a program valid through December 31, 2009 to repurchase up to $150.0 million of our common stock through purchases from time to time in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions, in accordance with SEC requirements. During 2008 and 2009, we purchased 10.7 million shares of common stock under the repurchase program for $125.0 million at an average price of $11.72 per share. During February 2010, our Board of Directors approved another program to repurchase up to $250.0 million of our common stock through June 30, 2011. The program is essentially the same as the previous repurchase program, where purchases are made from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, in accordance with SEC requirements. Given current market conditions and available bed capacity within our portfolio, we believe that it is appropriate to use our capital resources to repurchase common stock at prices that would equal or exceed the rates of return we require when we invest in new beds. Through December 31, 2010, we completed the purchase of 7.1 million shares under the $250.0 million stock repurchase plan at a total cost of $145.7 million, or an average price of $20.41 per share. We believe we have the ability to fund the stock repurchase program as well as our capital expenditure requirements, including the construction projects under development, maintenance and information technology capital expenditures, working capital, and debt service requirements with cash on hand, cash from operating activities, and borrowings available under our revolving credit facility, while maintaining sufficient liquidity. The Corrections and Detention Industry We believe we are well-positioned to capitalize on government outsourcing of correctional management services because of our competitive strengths, business strategy, and financial flexibility. Notwithstanding the effects the current economy could have on our government partners’ demand for prison beds in the short term, we believe the long-term trends favor an increase in the outsourcing of correctional management services. The key reasons for this outsourcing trend include (unless otherwise noted, statistical references were obtained from the “Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin” issued by the U.S. Department of Justice in December 2010): Growing United States Prison Population. At year-end 2009, federal and state correctional authorities had jurisdiction over 1.6 million prisoners. The annual growth rate of the federal and state prison population increased 0.2% for the year ended December 31, 2009, which was less than the average annual growth rate of 1.8% from 2000 to 2009. During 2009, the total number of prisoners under federal jurisdiction increased 3.4%, while state prison populations declined 0.2%. Federal agencies are collectively our largest customer and accounted for 43% of our total revenues (when aggregating all of our federal contracts) for the year ended December 31, 2010. The imprisonment rate—the number of sentenced prisoners per 100,000 residents—decreased slightly from 504 prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents in 2008 to 502 prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents in 2009. Prison Overcrowding. The growth of the prison population in the United States over the past decade, combined with a lack of new prison capacity constructed by the public sector, has led to overcrowding in the state and federal prison systems. In 2009, at least 19 states and the federal prison system reported operating at or above their highest capacity measure. The federal prison system was operating at 36% above capacity at December 31, 2009. 17

Acceptance of Privatization. The prisoner population housed in privately managed facilities in the United States as of December 31, 2009 was approximately 129,000. At December 31, 2009, 16.4% of federal inmates and 6.8% of state inmates were held in private facilities. Since December 31, 2000, the number of federal inmates held in private facilities has increased approximately 120%, while the number of state inmates held in private facilities has increased approximately 33%. Nineteen states had at least 5% of their prison population held in private facilities at December 31, 2009. Six states housed at least 25% of their prison population in private facilities as of December 31, 2009 — New Mexico (43%), Montana (40%), Alaska (31%), Vermont (30%), Hawaii (28%), and Idaho (28%). Governmental Budgeting Constraints. We believe the outsourcing of prison management services to private operators allows governments to manage increasing inmate populations while simultaneously controlling correctional costs and improving correctional services. The use of facilities owned and managed by private operators allows governments to expand prison capacity without incurring large capital commitments or debt required to increase correctional capacity. Outsourcing correctional services to private operators also enables government agencies to avoid costly long-term pension obligations. We believe these advantages translate into significant cost savings for government agencies. Government Regulation Business Regulations The industry in which we operate is subject to extensive federal, state, and local regulations, including educational, health care, and safety regulations, which are administered by many governmental and regulatory authorities. Some of the regulations are unique to the corrections industry. Facility management contracts typically include reporting requirements, supervision, and on-site monitoring by representatives of the contracting governmental agencies. Corrections officers are customarily required to meet certain training standards and, in some instances, facility personnel are required to be licensed and subject to background investigation. Certain jurisdictions also require us to award subcontracts on a competitive basis or to subcontract with businesses owned by members of minority groups. Our facilities are also subject to operational and financial audits by the governmental agencies with which we have contracts. Failure to comply with these regulations can result in material penalties or non-renewal or termination of facility management contracts. In addition, private prison managers are increasingly subject to government legislation and regulation attempting to restrict the ability of private prison managers to house certain types of inmates. Legislation has been enacted in several states, and has previously been proposed in the United States Congress, containing such restrictions. Although we do not believe that existing legislation will have a material adverse effect on us, there can be no assurance that future legislation would not have such an effect. Environmental Matters Under various federal, state, and local environmental laws, ordinances and regulations, a current or previous owner or operator of real property may be liable for the costs of removal or remediation of hazardous or toxic substances on, under, or in such property. Such laws often impose liability whether or not the owner or operator knew of, or was responsible for, the presence of such hazardous or toxic substances. As an owner of correctional and detention facilities, we have been subject to these laws, ordinances, and regulations as the result of our operation and management of correctional and detention facilities. Phase I environmental assessments have been obtained on substantially all of the properties we currently own. We are not aware of any environmental matters that are expected to materially affect our financial condition or results of operations; however, if such matters are detected in the future, the costs of complying with environmental laws may adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. 18

Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 and Privacy and Security Requirements In 1996, Congress enacted the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, or HIPAA. HIPAA was designed to improve the portability and continuity of health insurance coverage, simplify the administration of health insurance, and protect the privacy and security of health-related information. Privacy regulations promulgated under HIPAA regulate the use and disclosure of individually identifiable health-related information, whether communicated electronically, on paper, or orally. The regulations also provide patients with significant rights related to understanding and controlling how their health information is used or disclosed. Security regulations promulgated under HIPAA require that health care providers implement administrative, physical, and technical practices to protect the security of individually identifiable health information that is maintained or transmitted electronically. These privacy and security regulations require the implementation of compliance training and awareness programs for our health care service providers associated with healthcare we provide to inmates and selected other employees primarily associated with our employee medical plans. Further, as required by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (the “ARRA”), the Department of Health and Human Services (“DHHS”) issued interim breach notification regulations requiring HIPAA covered entities and their business associates to provide notification to affected individuals without unreasonable delay but not to exceed 60 days of discovery of a breach of unsecured protected health information. Notification must also be made to DHHS and, in certain situations involving large breaches, to the media. Violations of the HIPAA regulations could result in significant civil and criminal penalties. Further, the ARRA provides for minimum penalties as well as increased maximum penalties and authorizes state attorneys general to bring civil actions for injunctions or damages in response to violations that threaten the privacy of state residents. In addition, there are numerous legislative and regulatory initiatives at the federal and state levels addressing the privacy and security of patient health information and other identifying information. For example, federal and various state laws and regulations strictly regulate the disclosure of patient identifiable information related to substance abuse treatment. Further, various state laws and regulations require providers and other entities to notify affected individuals in the event of a data breach involving certain types of individually identifiable health or financial information, and these requirements may be more restrictive than the regulations issued under HIPAA and the ARRA. These statutes vary and could impose additional penalties. Insurance We maintain general liability insurance for all the facilities we operate, as well as insurance in amounts we deem adequate to cover property and casualty risks, workers’ compensation, and directors and officers liability. In addition, each of our leases with third parties provides that the lessee will maintain insurance on each leased property under the lessee’s insurance policies providing for the following coverages: (i) fire, vandalism, and malicious mischief, extended coverage perils, and all physical loss perils; (ii) comprehensive general public liability (including personal injury and property damage); and (iii) workers’ compensation. Under each of these leases, we have the right to periodically review our lessees’ insurance coverage and provide input with respect thereto. 19

Each of our management contracts and the statutes of certain states require the maintenance of insurance. We maintain various insurance policies including employee health, workers’ compensation, automobile liability, and general liability insurance. Because we are significantly self-insured for employee health, workers’ compensation, and automobile liability insurance, the amount of our insurance expense is dependent on claims experience, and our ability to control our claims experience. Our insurance policies contain various deductibles and stop-loss amounts intended to limit our exposure for individually significant occurrences. However, the nature of our self-insurance policies provides little protection for deterioration in overall claims experience or an increase in medical costs. We are continually developing strategies to improve the management of our future loss claims but can provide no assurance that these strategies will be successful. However, unanticipated additional insurance expenses resulting from adverse claims experience or an increasing cost environment for general liability and other types of insurance could adversely impact our results of operations and cash flows. Employees As of December 31, 2010, we employed approximately 17,000 employees. Of such employees, approximately 370 were employed at our corporate offices and approximately 16,630 were employed at our facilities and in our inmate transportation business. We employ personnel in the following areas: clerical and administrative, facility administrators/wardens, security, medical, quality assurance, transportation and scheduling, maintenance, teachers, counselors, and other support services. Each of the correctional and detention facilities we currently operate is managed as a separate operational unit by the facility administrator or warden. All of these facilities follow a standardized code of policies and procedures. We have not experienced a strike or work stoppage at any of our facilities. Approximately 770 employees at three of our facilities are represented by labor unions. In the opinion of management, overall employee relations are good. Competition The correctional and detention facilities we operate and manage, as well as those facilities we own but are managed by other operators, are subject to competition for inmates from other private prison managers. We compete primarily on the basis of bed availability, cost, the quality and range of services offered, our experience in the operation and management of correctional and detention facilities, and our reputation. We compete with government agencies that are responsible for correctional facilities and a number of privatized correctional service companies, including, but not limited to, the GEO Group, Inc. and Management and Training Corporation. We also compete in some markets with small local companies that may have a better knowledge of the local conditions and may be better able to gain political and public acceptance. Other potential competitors may in the future enter into businesses competitive with us without a substantial capital investment or prior experience. We may also compete in the future for new development projects with companies that have more financial resources than we have. Competition by other companies may adversely affect the number of inmates at our facilities, which could have a material adverse effect on the operating revenue of our facilities. In addition, revenue derived from our facilities will be affected by a number of factors, including the demand for inmate beds, general economic conditions, and the age of the general population. 20

ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS. As the owner and operator of correctional and detention facilities, we are subject to certain risks and uncertainties associated with, among other things, the corrections and detention industry and pending or threatened litigation in which we are involved. In addition, we are also currently subject to risks associated with our indebtedness. The risks and uncertainties set forth below could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements contained herein and elsewhere. The risks described below are not the only risks we face. Additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or those we currently deem to be immaterial may also materially and adversely affect our business operations. Any of the following risks could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition, or results of operations. Risks Related to Our Business and Industry Our results of operations are dependent on revenues generated by our jails, prisons, and detention facilities, which are subject to the following risks associated with the corrections and detention industry. We are subject to fluctuations in occupancy levels. While a substantial portion of our cost structure is fixed, a substantial portion of our revenue is generated under facility management contracts that specify per diem payments based upon occupancy. Under a per diem rate structure, a decrease in our occupancy rates could cause a decrease in revenue and profitability. Average compensated occupancy for our facilities in operation for 2010, 2009, and 2008 was 90.2%, 90.6%, and 95.5%, respectively. Occupancy rates may, however, decrease below these levels in the future. We are dependent on government appropriations and our results of operations may be negatively affected by governmental budgetary challenges. Our cash flow is subject to the receipt of sufficient funding of and timely payment by contracting governmental entities. If the appropriate governmental agency does not receive sufficient appropriations to cover its contractual obligations, it may terminate our contract or delay or reduce payment to us. Any delays in payment, or the termination of a contract, could have an adverse effect on our cash flow and financial condition. During 2009 and 2010, the state of California delayed payments of cash to us and in 2009 issued interest bearing warrants, also known as IOU’s. Although the state of California ultimately redeemed the warrants issued in 2009 for cash, if California were to resume issuing warrants or if several additional major customers substantially delayed their cash payments to us, our liquidity could be materially affected. In addition, federal, state and local governments are constantly under pressure to control additional spending or reduce current levels of spending. These pressures have been compounded by the current economic downturn. Accordingly, we have been requested and may be requested in the future to reduce our existing per diem contract rates or forego prospective increases to those rates. Further, our customers could reduce inmate population levels in facilities we manage to contain their correctional costs. In addition, it may become more difficult to renew our existing contracts on favorable terms or otherwise. Competition for inmates may adversely affect the profitability of our business. We compete with government entities and other private operators on the basis of bed availability, cost, quality, and range of services offered, experience in managing facilities and reputation of management and personnel. While there are barriers to entering the market for the management of correctional and detention facilities, these barriers may not be sufficient to limit additional competition. In addition, our government customers may assume the management of a facility that they own and we currently manage for them upon the termination of the corresponding management contract or, if such customers have capacity at their facilities, may take inmates currently housed in our facilities and transfer them to government-run facilities. Since we are paid on a per diem basis with no minimum guaranteed occupancy under most of our contracts, the loss of such inmates and resulting decrease in occupancy would cause a decrease in our revenues and profitability. 21

Escapes, inmate disturbances, and public resistance to privatization of correctional and detention facilities could result in our inability to obtain new contracts or the loss of existing contracts. The operation of correctional and detention facilities by private entities has not achieved complete acceptance by either governments or the public. The movement toward privatization of correctional and detention facilities has also encountered resistance from certain groups, such as labor unions and others that believe that correctional and detention facilities should only be operated by governmental agencies. Moreover, negative publicity about an escape, riot or other disturbance or perceived poor conditions at a privately managed facility may result in adverse publicity to us and the private corrections industry in general. Any of these occurrences or continued trends may make it more difficult for us to renew or maintain existing contracts or to obtain new contracts, which could have a material adverse effect on our business. We are subject to termination or non-renewal of our government contracts. We typically enter into facility management contracts with governmental entities for terms of up to five years, with additional renewal periods at the option of the contracting governmental agency. Notwithstanding any contractual renewal option of a contracting governmental agency, 26 of our facility management contracts with the customers listed under “Business — Facility Portfolio — Facilities and Facility Management Contracts” have expired (1) or are currently scheduled to expire (25) on or before December 31, 2011. Although we generally expect these customers to exercise renewal options or negotiate new contracts with us, one or more of these contracts may not be renewed by the corresponding governmental agency. In addition, these and any other contracting agencies may determine not to exercise renewal options with respect to any of our contracts in the future. We own and manage two facilities in Texas pursuant to management contracts that expire in August 2011, which are currently subject to a competitive procurement process. We have competitively bid on the continued management of these two facilities but cannot provide assurance that we will be successful in maintaining contracts at these two facilities. Total revenues at these two facilities represented less than 2% of our total revenue for 2010. Other than these specific contracts which we believe are reasonably possible to terminate, we believe we will renew all contracts that have expired or are scheduled to expire within the next twelve months. We believe our renewal rate on existing contracts remains high as a result of a variety of reasons including, but not limited to, the constrained supply of available beds within the U.S. correctional system, our ownership of the majority of the beds we operate, and the quality of our operations. Governmental agencies typically may terminate a facility contract at any time without cause or use the possibility of termination to negotiate a lower per diem rate. In the event any of our management contracts are terminated or are not renewed on favorable terms or otherwise, we may not be able to obtain additional replacement contracts. The non-renewal or termination of any of our contracts with governmental agencies could materially adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity, including our ability to secure new facility management contracts from others. Our ability to secure new contracts to develop and manage correctional and detention facilities depends on many factors outside our control. Our growth is generally dependent upon our ability to obtain new contracts to develop and manage new correctional and detention facilities. This possible growth depends on a number of factors we cannot control, including crime rates and sentencing patterns in various jurisdictions and acceptance of privatization. The demand for our facilities and services could be adversely affected by the relaxation of enforcement efforts, leniency in conviction or parole standards and sentencing practices or through the decriminalization of certain activities that are currently proscribed by our criminal laws. For instance, any changes with respect to drugs and controlled substances or illegal immigration could affect the number of persons arrested, convicted, and sentenced, thereby potentially reducing demand for correctional facilities to house them. Legislation has been proposed in numerous jurisdictions that could lower minimum sentences for some non-violent crimes and make more inmates eligible for early release based on good behavior. Also, sentencing alternatives under consideration could put some offenders on probation with electronic monitoring who would otherwise be incarcerated. Similarly, reductions in crime rates or resources dedicated to prevent and enforce crime could lead to reductions in arrests, convictions and sentences requiring incarceration at correctional facilities. 22

Moreover, certain jurisdictions recently have required successful bidders to make a significant capital investment in connection with the financing of a particular project, a trend that will require us to have sufficient capital resources to compete effectively. We may compete for such projects with companies that have more financial resources than we have. Further, we may not be able to obtain the capital resources when needed. A prolonged downturn in the financial credit markets could make it more difficult to obtain capital resources at favorable rates of return or obtain capital resources at all. We may face community opposition to facility location, which may adversely affect our ability to obtain new contracts. Our success in obtaining new awards and contracts sometimes depends, in part, upon our ability to locate land that can be leased or acquired, on economically favorable terms, by us or other entities working with us in conjunction with our proposal to construct and/or manage a facility. Some locations may be in or near populous areas and, therefore, may generate legal action or other forms of opposition from residents in areas surrounding a proposed site. When we select the intended project site, we attempt to conduct business in communities where local leaders and residents generally support the establishment of a privatized correctional or detention facility. Future efforts to find suitable host communities may not be successful. We may incur substantial costs in evaluating the feasibility of the development of a correctional or detention facility. As a result, we may report significant charges if we decide to abandon efforts to develop a correctional or detention facility on a particular site. In many cases, the site selection is made by the contracting governmental entity. In such cases, site selection may be made for reasons related to political and/or economic development interests and may lead to the selection of sites that have less favorable environments. We may incur significant start-up and operating costs on new contracts before receiving related revenues, which may impact our cash flows and not be recouped. When we are awarded a contract to manage a facility, we may incur significant start-up and operating expenses, including the cost of constructing the facility, purchasing equipment and staffing the facility, before we receive any payments under the contract. These expenditures could result in a significant reduction in our cash reserves and may make it more difficult for us to meet other cash obligations. In addition, a contract may be terminated prior to its scheduled expiration and as a result we may not recover these expenditures or realize any return on our investment. Failure to comply with unique and increased governmental regulation could result in material penalties or non-renewal or termination of our contracts to manage correctional and detention facilities. The industry in which we operate is subject to extensive federal, state, and local regulations, including educational, health care, and safety regulations, which are administered by many regulatory authorities. Some of the regulations are unique to the corrections industry, some are unique to government contractors and the combination of regulations we face is unique. Facility management contracts typically include reporting requirements, supervision, and on-site monitoring by representatives of the contracting governmental agencies. Corrections officers are customarily required to meet certain training standards and, in some instances, facility personnel are required to be licensed and subject to background investigation. Certain jurisdictions also require us to award subcontracts on a competitive basis or to subcontract with certain types of businesses, such as small businesses and businesses owned by members of minority groups. Our facilities are also subject to operational and financial audits by the governmental agencies with whom we have contracts. New federal regulations also require federal government contractors like us to self-report evidence of certain forms of misconduct. We may not always successfully comply with these regulations, and failure to comply can result in material penalties, including financial penalties, non-renewal or termination of facility management contracts, and suspension or debarment from contracting with certain government entities. 23

In addition, private prison managers are increasingly subject to government legislation and regulation attempting to restrict the ability of private prison managers to house certain types of inmates, such as inmates from other jurisdictions or inmates at medium or higher security levels. Legislation has been enacted in several states, and has previously been proposed in the United States Congress, containing such restrictions. Such legislation may have an adverse effect on us. Our inmate transportation subsidiary, TransCor, is subject to regulations promulgated by the Departments of Transportation and Justice. TransCor must also comply with the Interstate Transportation of Dangerous Criminals Act of 2000, which covers operational aspects of transporting prisoners, including, but not limited to, background checks and drug testing of employees; employee training; employee hours; staff-to-inmate ratios; prisoner restraints; communication with local law enforcement; and standards to help ensure the safety of prisoners during transport. We are subject to changes in such regulations, which could result in an increase in the cost of our transportation operations. Moreover, the Federal Communications Commission, or the FCC, has published for comment a petition for rulemaking, filed on behalf of an inmate family, which would prevent private prison managers from collecting commissions from the operations of inmate telephone systems. We believe that there are sound reasons for the collection of such commissions by all operators of prisons, whether public or private. The FCC has traditionally deferred from rulemaking in this area; however, there is the risk that the FCC could act to prohibit private prison managers, like us, from collecting such revenues. Such an outcome could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. Government agencies may investigate and audit our contracts and, if any improprieties are found, we may be required to refund revenues we have received, to forego anticipated revenues, and we may be subject to penalties and sanctions, including prohibitions on our bidding in response to RFPs. Certain of the governmental agencies with which we contract have the authority to audit and investigate our contracts with them. As part of that process, government agencies may review our performance of the contract, our pricing practices, our cost structure and our compliance with applicable laws, regulations and standards. For contracts that actually or effectively provide for certain reimbursement of expenses, if an agency determines that we have improperly allocated costs to a specific contract, we may not be reimbursed for those costs, and we could be required to refund the amount of any such costs that have been reimbursed. If a government audit asserts improper or illegal activities by us, we may be subject to civil and criminal penalties and administrative sanctions, including termination of contracts, forfeitures of profits, suspension of payments, fines and suspension or disqualification from doing business with certain government entities. Any adverse determination could adversely impact our ability to bid in response to RFPs in one or more jurisdictions. We depend on a limited number of governmental customers for a significant portion of our revenues. We currently derive, and expect to continue to derive, a significant portion of our revenues from a limited number of governmental agencies. The loss of, or a significant decrease in, business from the BOP, ICE, USMS, or various state agencies could seriously harm our financial condition and results of operations. The three primary federal governmental agencies with correctional and detention responsibilities, the BOP, ICE, and USMS, accounted for 43% of our total revenues for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2010 ($717.8 million). The USMS accounted for 16% of our total revenues for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2010 ($271.6 million), BOP accounted for 15% of our total revenues for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2010 ($249.6 million), and ICE accounted for 12% of our total revenues for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2010 ($196.6 million). Although the revenue generated from each of these agencies is derived from numerous management contracts, the loss of one or more of such contracts could have a material adverse impact in our financial condition and results of operations. We expect to continue to depend upon the federal agencies and a relatively small group of other governmental customers for a significant percentage of our revenues. 24

The CDCR accounted for 13% of our total revenues for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2010 ($214.0 million). In November 2010, the CDCR extended the agreement with us to manage up to 9,588 inmates at four of the five facilities we currently manage for them, and notified us of its Intent to Award an additional contract to manage up to 3,256 offenders. As of December 31, 2010, we housed approximately 10,250 inmates from the state of California. Legislative enactments or legal proceedings, including a proceeding under federal jurisdiction that could potentially reduce the number of inmates in the California prison system, may impact the out-of-state transfer of inmates or could result in the return of inmates we currently house for the CDCR. The expiration on June 30, 2011 of the statutory authority established by the state legislature to transfer California inmates to out-of-state private correctional facilities precedes the expiration of our management contract on June 30, 2013. If expiration of the statutory authority is not extended, we believe the authority to utilize out-of-state beds will continue under the existing executive order of the Governor. In January 2011, newly elected California Governor Jerry Brown proposed a state budget which calls for a significant reallocation of responsibilities between the state government and local jurisdictions, including transferring some number of inmates from state custody to the custody of cities and counties. At this point in time it is too early to reasonably assess the likelihood the budget passes as proposed or the opportunities or challenges that could develop as a result of this proposal. However, if the budget is implemented as proposed, there could ultimately be a reduction in demand for our services because a large number of inmates may be transferred to city and county government facilities, and the state may then seek the return of inmates we currently house to space that is freed up in California state facilities. A significant reduction in demand from California would have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. A decrease in occupancy levels could cause a decrease in revenues and profitability. While a substantial portion of our cost structure is generally fixed, a significant portion of our revenues are generated under facility management contracts which provide for per diem payments based upon daily occupancy. We are dependent upon the governmental agencies with which we have contracts to provide inmates for our managed facilities. We cannot control occupancy levels at our managed facilities. Under a per diem rate structure, a decrease in our occupancy rates could cause a decrease in revenues and profitability. When combined with relatively fixed costs for operating each facility, regardless of the occupancy level, a decrease in occupancy levels could have a material adverse effect on our profitability. We are dependent upon our senior management and our ability to attract and retain sufficient qualified personnel. The success of our business depends in large part on the ability and experience of our senior management. The unexpected loss of any of these persons could materially adversely affect our business and operations. In addition, the services we provide are labor-intensive. When we are awarded a facility management contract or open a new facility, we must hire operating management, correctional officers, and other personnel. The success of our business requires that we attract, develop, and retain these personnel. Our inability to hire sufficient qualified personnel on a timely basis or the loss of significant numbers of personnel at existing facilities could adversely affect our business and operations. 25

Adverse developments in our relationship with our employees could adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations. As of December 31, 2010, we employed approximately 17,000 employees. Approximately 770 of our employees at three of our facilities, or less than 5% of our workforce, are represented by labor unions. We have not experienced a strike or work stoppage at any of our facilities and in the opinion of management overall employee relations are good. New and anticipated executive orders, administrative rules and changes in National Labor Relations could increase organizational activity at locations where employees are currently not represented by a labor organization. Increases in organizational activity or any future work stoppages could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, or results of operations. We are subject to necessary insurance costs. Workers’ compensation, employee health, and general liability insurance represent significant costs to us. Because we are significantly self-insured for workers’ compensation, employee health, and general liability risks, the amount of our insurance expense is dependent on claims experience, our ability to control our claims experience, and in the case of workers’ compensation and employee health, rising health care costs in general. Unanticipated additional insurance costs could adversely impact our results of operations and cash flows, and the failure to obtain or maintain any necessary insurance coverage could have a material adverse effect on us. We may be adversely affected by inflation. Many of our facility management contracts provide for fixed management fees or fees that increase by only small amounts during their terms. If, due to inflation or other causes, our operating expenses, such as wages and salaries of our employees, insurance, medical, and food costs, increase at rates faster than increases, if any, in our management fees, then our profitability would be adversely affected. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Inflation.” We are subject to legal proceedings associated with owning and managing correctional and detention facilities. Our ownership and management of correctional and detention facilities, and the provision of inmate transportation services by a subsidiary, expose us to potential third-party claims or litigation by prisoners or other persons relating to personal injury or other damages resulting from contact with a facility, its managers, personnel or other prisoners, including damages arising from a prisoner’s escape from, or a disturbance or riot at, a facility we own or manage, or from the misconduct of our employees. To the extent the events serving as a basis for any potential claims are alleged or determined to constitute illegal or criminal activity, we could also be subject to criminal liability. Such liability could result in significant monetary fines and could affect our ability to bid on future contracts and retain our existing contracts. In addition, as an owner of real property, we may be subject to a variety of proceedings relating to personal injuries of persons at such facilities. The claims against our facilities may be significant and may not be covered by insurance. Even in cases covered by insurance, our deductible (or self-insured retention) may be significant. 26

We are subject to risks associated with ownership of real estate. Our ownership of correctional and detention facilities subjects us to risks typically associated with investments in real estate. Investments in real estate and, in particular, correctional and detention facilities have limited or no alternative use and thus, are relatively illiquid, and therefore, our ability to divest ourselves of one or more of our facilities promptly in response to changed conditions is limited. Investments in correctional and detention facilities, in particular, subject us to risks involving potential exposure to environmental liability and uninsured loss. Our operating costs may be affected by the obligation to pay for the cost of complying with existing environmental laws, ordinances and regulations, as well as the cost of complying with future legislation. In addition, although we maintain insurance for many types of losses, there are certain types of losses, such as losses from earthquakes and acts of terrorism, which may be either uninsurable or for which it may not be economically feasible to obtain insurance coverage, in light of the substantial costs associated with such insurance. As a result, we could lose both our capital invested in, and anticipated profits from, one or more of the facilities we own. Further, it is possible to experience losses that may exceed the limits of insurance coverage. In addition, our focus on facility development and expansion poses additional risks, including cost overruns caused by various factors, many of which are beyond our control, such as weather, labor conditions, and material shortages, resulting in increased construction costs. Further, if we are unable to utilize this new bed capacity, our financial results could deteriorate. Certain of our facilities are subject to options to purchase and reversions. Ten of our facilities, including the facility under construction in Millen, Georgia, are or will be subject to an option to purchase by certain governmental agencies. Such options are exercisable by the corresponding contracting governmental entity generally at any time during the term of the respective facility management contract. Certain of these purchase options are based on the depreciated book value of the facility, which essentially results in the transfer of ownership of the facility to the governmental agency at the end of the life used for accounting purposes. See “Business — Facility Portfolio — Facilities and Facility Management Contracts.” If any of these options are exercised, there exists the risk that we will be unable to invest the proceeds from the sale of the facility in one or more properties that yield as much cash flow as the property acquired by the government entity. In addition, in the event any of these options are exercised, there exists the risk that the contracting governmental agency will terminate the management contract associated with such facility. For the year ended December 31, 2010, the facilities subject to these options generated $290.1 million in revenue (17.3% of total revenue) and incurred $198.3 million in operating expenses. Certain of the options to purchase are exercisable at prices below fair market value. See “Business — Facility Portfolio — Facilities and Facility Management Contracts.” In addition, the ownership of two of our facilities (that are also subject to options to purchase) will, upon the expiration of certain ground leases with remaining terms generally ranging from 5 to 7 years, revert to the respective governmental agency contracting with us. See “Business — Facility Portfolio — Facilities and Facility Management Contracts.” At the time of such reversion, there exists the risk that the contracting governmental agency will terminate the management contract associated with such facility. For the year ended December 31, 2010, the facilities subject to reversion generated $73.6 million in revenue (4.4% of total revenue) and incurred $54.4 million in operating expenses. Risks related to facility construction and development activities may increase our costs related to such activities. When we are engaged to perform construction and design services for a facility, we typically act as the primary contractor and subcontract with other companies who act as the general contractors. As primary contractor, we are subject to the various risks associated with construction (including, without limitation, shortages of labor and materials, work stoppages, labor disputes, and weather interference) which could cause construction delays. In addition, we are subject to the risk that the general contractor will be unable to complete construction at the budgeted costs or be unable to fund any excess construction costs, even though we require general contractors to post construction bonds and insurance. Under such contracts, we are ultimately liable for all late delivery penalties and cost overruns. 27

We may be adversely affected by the rising cost and increasing difficulty of obtaining adequate levels of surety credit on favorable terms. We are often required to post bid or performance bonds issued by a surety company as a condition to bidding on or being awarded a contract. Availability and pricing of these surety commitments are subject to general market and industry conditions, among other factors. Increases in surety costs could adversely affect our operating results if we are unable to effectively pass along such increases to our customers. We cannot assure you that we will have continued access to surety credit or that we will be able to secure bonds economically, without additional collateral, or at the levels required for any potential facility development or contract bids. If we are unable to obtain adequate levels of surety credit on favorable terms, we would have to rely upon letters of credit under our revolving credit facility, which could entail higher costs even if such borrowing capacity was available when desired at the time, and our ability to bid for or obtain new contracts could be impaired. Our issuance of preferred stock could adversely affect holders of our common stock and discourage