Tomi Lahren's Final Thoughts on the Florida School Shooting
TOMI LAHREN'S FINAL THOUGHTS COMMENTARIES ARE EXCLUSIVELY ON FOX NEWS INSIDER.

Tomi Lahren Pays Tribute to Fallen Officers: 'A Hero Remembered Never Dies'

Tomi Lahren: The American People 'Will Not Forget' Dems Sitting for SOTU

My first and final thoughts go out to all the Parkland, Florida, students, teachers, staff and parents going through hell right now. I can’t imagine their pain following the school massacre, and how difficult this must be.

Some will say offering thoughts and prayers isn’t enough … and that might be true.

After all, 17 people are dead. And there were warning signs everywhere about the shooter ... From classmates, administrators, and on YouTube, where he reportedly wrote a comment saying he aspired to become – quote – “a professional school shooter.”

That comment was investigated by the FBI, who said they couldn’t find the person who posted it.

The kid wasn’t even allowed to carry a backpack into school for fear he’d harm someone.

So why in the world was he not monitored more closely? That’s the real question here!

Yet some on the left are already politicizing this tragedy by attacking the Second Amendment.

You want a solution? Truth is, MAYBE there isn’t one. Evil will always be in this world. And evil people will always find evil ways to do evil things. The solution isn’t to start stripping away rights.

What we ought to do is make it easier for law enforcement to engage and evaluate individuals who exhibit warning signs, like making graphic threats online, or posting disturbing images.

Ya know, thoughts and prayers might seem laughable to some of you. But maybe, just maybe, more Jesus, more God, more prayer and more compassion is what we are missing.

Those are my Final Thoughts. Feel free to disagree. From LA, God Bless and Take Care.

Tomi Lahren: Grammys Turned Into Celebration of Elites' Trump Derangement Syndrome

Tomi Lahren Blasts 'Anti-Women's March': 'Mean Girls' Need to Take a Look in the Mirror