Hillary Clinton's campaign gets super PAC boost
Correct the Record, a group launched in 2013 to defend Hillary Clinton and other Democratic presidential candidates, is reinventing itself as a separate super PAC that can coordinate closely with Clinton’s presidential campaign.

The group is splitting off from its parent group, American Bridge, an organization focused on conducting opposition research on Republican candidates. American Bridge and Correct the Record both are connected to a close Clinton ally, David Brock.

Correct the Record’s sole mission will be defending Clinton and “aggressively responding to false attacks and misstatements of the secretary’s exemplary record,” said Brad Woodhouse, a veteran Democratic operative who will serve as Correct the Record’s president.

The move underscores the increasingly prominent role that super PACs, which can accept unlimited funds, will play in the 2016 presidential contest.

Clinton’s record as secretary of State is expected to be in the spotlight this month as she prepares to testify before a committee in the Republican-controlled House that is investigating the 2012 terrorist attacks on a diplomatic installation in Benghazi, Libya. The public hearing could occur the week of May 18, but committee leaders and Clinton’s team still are negotiating.

Super PACs can raise unlimited sums from individuals, corporations and unions. Super PACs are not supposed to coordinate their advertising spending with candidates. Correct the Record officials say they will not underwrite any “paid media” and, as a result, can work closely with Clinton’s campaign and the Democratic Party.

MORE: Clinton courts super PAC donors

Former Maryland lieutenant governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend will serve as chairwoman of Correct the Record’s board. Other board members include Brock, longtime Clinton ally and political strategist James Carville, Esprit Clothing co-founder Susie Tompkins Buell, Miami-area media strategist Freddy Balsera, and Sandy Robertson, a prominent San Francisco-based tech financier.