Fitton on Uranium One Indictment: DOJ Must 'Aggressively' Investigate Clintons & Russia
Tomi Lahren: Media Cowards Won't Talk About the Real Russia Story

Judge Jeanine: Obama and Clintons 'Sold Us Out' With Russia Uranium 'Racketeering Operation'

Tom Fitton, president of Judicial Watch, reacted Monday morning to the first indictment in connection with the Uranium One deal.

Mark Lambert, a Maryland transportation firm executive, faces 11 counts of money laundering and wire fraud for allegedly bribing Russian officials to win contracts to transport uranium.

The indictment comes after reports in late December that the Justice Department was taking a new look into the Obama-era deal that gave Russia partial control of the U.S. uranium supply.

Republicans have long claimed that the deal - which occurred while Hillary Clinton was secretary of state - is tied to allegations of pay-to-play at the Clinton Foundation.

"There's tens of millions of dollars that were laundered by Russians into the Clinton operation that needs to be thoroughly investigated in order for the American people to rest assured that our uranium industry hasn't been compromised," said Fitton on "Fox & Friends."

Hillary Clinton has repeatedly denied the allegations surrounding the uranium deal and the foundation, calling the allegations of impropriety "baloney."

"Let’s call this what it is: A sham," Clinton spokesman Nick Merrill said earlier this month. "This is a philanthropy that does life-changing work, which Republicans have tried to turn into a political football."

Fitton said the Obama administration knew of the "bribery-kickback schemes that are endemic in Russia" when the deal was allowed to go through.

He said the Justice Department must "aggressively" investigate all of these matters and their connections to Hillary Clinton.

Watch the full segment above.

'Personal Insult': Bill Clinton Slams Accusations Foundation Money Used for Chelsea's Wedding

Fitton on Renewed Clinton Foundation Investigation: Comey Conducted a 'Sham' Probe