Trump: 'We'll Just Let ObamaCare Fail, I'm Not Gonna Own It'
President Donald Trump expressed his disappointment over the failure by Republicans to repeal and replace ObamaCare.

Speaking at the White House after several GOP senators announced they would not support the bill, Trump said lawmakers will have to come together after ObamaCare fails.

NRA Goes After Wash. Post: Your Slogan Should Be 'Journalism Dies' Here

College Students Back Bernie, But Do They Actually Know What Socialism Is?

He said it won't be his fault when the Affordable Care Act fails and at that point, Democrats will want to work with the GOP.

"Let ObamaCare fail. It'll be a lot easier. I think we're probably in that position, where we'll just let ObamaCare fail. I'm not gonna own it. I can tell you the Republicans are not gonna own it," said Trump.

Trump said he was "very surprised" when GOP senators Jerry Moran (KS) and Mike Lee (UT) said they would not support the bill, but would not call them "disloyal."

"They had their own reasons," said Trump, adding that Democrats should have supported the "great plan."

He said this shows the need for Republicans to win more seats in 2018, accusing Democrats of only trying to obstruct his agenda.

The president made the remarks seated alongside VP Mike Pence, who earlier called on Congress to "step up" and pass a bill.

Trump said he's been hearing the "repeal and replace" slogan from Congress for seven years and is disappointed that the party isn't following through by sending him legislation to sign.

But he expressed hope that his administration will "win" on taxes and infrastructure, adding they're already "winning" against ISIS and on the border.

"We've had a lot of victories, but we haven't had a victory on health care," said Trump.

Watch his remarks above.

'Maddow's Dots May Never Connect': Left-Wing Author Blasts Trump-Russia Narrative

New Poll: A Majority Believe Dems Lack Message Other Than Opposing Trump

'They've Had It': GOP Rep. Says Many Constituents See Media as 'Agenda-Driven'