Gowdy on FBI Agents' Texts About 'Secret Society': A 'Stunning Level of Bias'
Tomi Talks Trump: POTUS Gets Surprisingly Mixed Reviews in West Hollywood

Napolitano Says Critics of FISA Memo Call It 'KGB-Like' Gov't Activity

Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) said new revelations about text messages exchanged by top FBI officials during the 2016 election reveal a "stunning" level of anti-Trump bias.

Peter Strzok -- a top counterintelligence official involved in both the Hillary Clinton email probe and FBI Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s Russia probe -- exchanged more than 50,000 messages with senior FBI lawyer Lisa Page, with whom he was having an extramarital affair.

According to Gowdy, the messages included a reference to a “secret society” within the Department of Justice and the FBI the day after Trump won election in November 2016.

"It's the day after the election and it's the same two people who were discussing a little bit later in the texts the damage they had done with the Clinton investigation and how they could 'fix it' and make it right," Gowdy said. "That is a level of bias that is stunning among law enforcement officers."

The contents of these text messages between top FBI officials are extremely troubling in terms of when certain key decisions were made by the DOJ and the FBI, by whom these decisions were made, and the evident bias exhibited by those in charge of the investigation. — Trey Gowdy (@TGowdySC) January 23, 2018

Rather than clearing up prior FBI and DOJ actions, these recently produced documents cause us to further question the credibility and objectivity of certain officials at the FBI. — Trey Gowdy (@TGowdySC) January 23, 2018

He added that the texts also reveal Strzok was only interested in pursuing the Russia investigation if there is "something there," and he had no desire in clearing President Trump of wrongdoing.

"I don't know how much damage they did. It's really not my job to prove that. That's [Inspector General] Michael Horowitz and Jeff Sessions' job to find out much damage these two agents and others did," Gowdy said. "But I care about about the Department of Justice and the FBI, and it breaks my heart that we are having to have this conversation about two agents that only wanted to get the president, they didn't have any interest in clearing him."

Watch more above.

'Schumer Surrender': Watters Says 'Cryin' Chuck Caved' to Trump on Shutdown

FNC's 'Scandalous' Looks Back at Clintons' Alleged Involvement in 'Whitewater'

Chaffetz: 5 Months of Missing Texts Between Ex-Mueller Team Members 'Highly Suspicious'