Trump Makes Impromptu Visit to 'Fox & Friends,' Claims IG Report on Clinton Probe 'Totally Exonerates' Him
On Friday morning, President Donald Trump made a surprise appearance on "Fox & Friends" and spoke about the inspector general's report, James Comey and much more.

The impromptu interview came a day after the release of the scathing report by DOJ Inspector General Michael Horowitz, which found fired FBI Director Comey was insubordinate and criticized his handling of the Hillary Clinton email investigation.

Trump said that the report "totally exonerates" him, and it was a "total disaster" for the FBI, Comey and Comey's "minions" in a Friday morning tweet, writing that he did the American people a great service when he fired Comey in May 2017.

The IG Report is a total disaster for Comey, his minions and sadly, the FBI. Comey will now officially go down as the worst leader, by far, in the history of the FBI. I did a great service to the people in firing him. Good Instincts. Christopher Wray will bring it proudly back! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 15, 2018

Speaking to Steve Doocy on the White House lawn, Trump said the report is a "horror show" and it reveals that the "scum on top" of the Obama-era FBI were plotting against his presidential campaign.

Hannity Calls IG Report a 'Swamp Document,' Rips Inspector for Denying 'Bias'

Gowdy: Stunning IG Report on Handling of Clinton Probe 'A Dark Day for the DOJ'

"I think Comey was the ringleader of this whole den of thieves. It was a den of thieves," Trump said, pointing to fired FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe and FBI officials Peter Strzok and Lisa Page, who exchanged a series of politically-charged, anti-Trump text messages.

IG REPORT BOMBSHELL: Anti-Trump FBI agent Peter Strzok texted his lover Lisa Page "we'll stop" Trump from becoming president pic.twitter.com/lFId8WMD5f — FOX & friends (@foxandfriends) June 15, 2018

"What they did during the election was a disgrace. It's probably never happened in our country before," Trump said. "There was total bias."

Trump also strongly disagreed with Horowitz's conclusion that while mistakes were made, there was no bias in the FBI's handling of the Clinton email investigation.

"The end result was wrong. There was total bias," Trump said.

Watch the extended interview above.

Sen. Kennedy on Strzok's 'We'll Stop' Trump Text: 'In Louisiana, We Call That Bias'

Chaffetz: 'Explosive' IG Report Adds to James Comey's 'Legal Problems'

Corker Fires Another Salvo at Trump: GOP Is 'Cult-Like' in Its Support of POTUS

Trump Jr. on 'Fox & Friends': 'It'd Be Stupid' for POTUS to Testify Before Mueller