Japan Health Policy NOW – Health Insurance System
Employer based health insurance is further divided into three groups. The first group covers employees of large companies through over 1400 plans. If a plan faces financial hardship, it is eligible for a government subsidy. The second group covers public sector employees and is not eligible for any government subsidization. The third group covers employees of small to medium-sized companies and contains only one plan, the National Health Insurance Association. Subsidies from taxes and contributions from large employers are combined with employer and enrollee contributions within this plan.

NHI covers the self-employed, unemployed, and retired persons under 75. These plans are currently administered through municipalities, but administration will be transferred to prefectural offices in 2018. Enrollees contribute to these plans through premiums, but nearly half of benefit expenditures are covered by tax subsidies. Due to the significant increase in retired persons under 75, the rise in part-time workers not covered by employer-based insurance, and the decline in the number of farm, forestry, and fishery workers, this scheme is the most fiscally unstable of the three as the number of enrollees who may not or cannot pay has increased.

Health insurance for persons 75 and older was instituted in 2008 and requires that all people in this age group, even the employed and dependent, enroll. This scheme is administered at the prefectural and municipal levels. This scheme effectively moved the oldest of the older population from NHI to an independent system to increase transparency and accountability surrounding healthcare costs and payments for the growing older population. Enrollees pay a premium, which is deducted from their pensions, that is set based on healthcare expenditures by the prefecture for this population segment during the previous two years. In addition to premium contributions, which cover about 10% of total costs, this scheme is supported by government subsidies and by subsidies received from the two schemes listed above.