Mason Visitors Center--Mason Facts and Figures
Aquatic and Fitness Center

Aquatic and Fitness Center

The 81,580 square-foot, two-pool complex includes a 3,500-square-foot fitness gallery, four classrooms, whirlpool and co-ed sauna with men's and women's shower/locker rooms, and family changing area.







Concert Hall Center for the Arts

The Center for the Arts complex includes the 2,000-seat Concert Hall, two experimental theaters, three dance studios, and music and fine arts studios. Five hundred Concert Hall tickets are available free to students for each performance.

Freedom Aquatic and Fitness Center

The 110,000 square foot complex is located on the Science and Technology Campus as a result of a partnership between George Mason University, Prince William County and the City of Manassas. The center includes a 50-meter 10-lane competition pool, 7,000 square foot leisure pool with a two-story figure-eight waterslide, current channels and whirlpool, weight training room, fitness assessment labs, cardiovascular fitness areas, 2 basketball courts, elevated running/walking track, 3 racquetball courts and daycare facilities for infants and toddlers.

George W. Johnson Center

The Johnson Center has eight acres of floor space and houses an over 145,000-volume book collection, media center, computer labs, bank, bookstore, convenience store, and food services. Specially outfitted spaces provide opportunities for film, dance, meetings, and private study. The center fosters university-wide learning by integrating students' curricular and extracurricular activities and by strengthening relationships between the university's communities.

EagleBank Arena

EagleBank Arena is a 10,000-seat sports and entertainment arena designed for basketball, concerts, and other sports and entertainment events. Hylton Performing Arts Center

The Hylton Performing Arts Center opened on Mason's Science and Technology Campus in the spring of 2010. The 86,000-square-foot center provides a state-of-the-art setting for major touring artists and local performers, and features a reception space, an art gallery and two theaters. The center is named for the Cecil D. and Irene V. Hylton Foundation of Dale City. Recreation and Athletic Complex

The "RAC" features three gymnasiums, two racquetball courts, two squash courts and a two-story fitness gallery spanning more than 15,000 square feet. It also boasts six basketball courts, seven tennis courts, seven volleyball courts, a batting cage, golf and archery nets, fencing lanes, locker rooms and saunas. It also features a 400-meter outdoor track, soccer field, baseball diamond and general athletic fields.