Welcome to ITCCS.ORG and The International Tribunal into Crimes of Church and State
The International Common Law Court of Justice (ICLCJ) – Founded as a lawful Citizens’ Tribunal of Conscience on September 15, 2012 in Brussels

Natural and Customary Law allows for the establishment of popular courts of justice when the existing legal and governmental authorities are subverting the law and justice, or aiding those who do. Common Law arose historically to uphold the liberties of the people against tyrants, whether religious or secular, and accordingly, has universal jurisdiction when convened as a jury court by more than twelve duly sworn men and women.

The International Common Law Court of Justice (ICLCJ) was established as the legal and judicial arm of the International Tribunal into Crimes of Church and state (ITCCS), with the help of legal experts, judges and survivors of church terror and imperial genocide in more than a dozen countries. (www.itccs.org)

The first case in the docket of the ICLCJ commenced on November 6, 2012 and addressed the deliberate genocide of indigenous children in Canada by the Vatican, the Crown of England and other parties. In its final verdict of February 25, 2013, the Court and its fifty eight sworn citizen jurors successfully indicted and prosecuted thirty defendants for perpetrating or concealing this genocide. These defendants included then-Pope Benedict, Joseph Ratzinger, former Cardinal Tarcisio Bertone, Elizabeth Windsor “Queen of England”, and Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper.

After an exhaustive presentation of the evidence of crimes by church and state in Canada, and a refusal by the defendants to respond or refute the evidence, all of the defendants were found guilty of criminal conspiracy and Genocide, and were sentenced in absentia to 25 years in prison and the forfeit of all the wealth and property of their estates and institutions. Citizen arrest warrants were issued, and on August 4, 2013, the Vatican and Crown of England were declared to be transnational criminal bodies under international law, and were lawfully disestablished.

The complete evidence that indicted these defendants and their institutions, along with all of the court documents and warrants, are contained herein:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UvhfXAd08TE – Common Law Court Proceedings – Genocide in Canada (Part One) – 1 hr. 46 mins.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OPKFk_L7y9g – Common Law Court Proceedings – Genocide in Canada (Part Two) – 1 hr. 47 mins.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ormOIlOi4Vc – Final Court Verdict and Sentencing – 8 mins. 30 secs.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RBUd3UXt6fI – Other key testimonies from our Court case against genocide in Canada

The International Common Law Court of Justice is proceeding with other cases during 2014 and beyond.

To contact the Court write to: itccsoffice@gmail.com , attn: Mr. George Dufort, LL.B.