Climate Change and Range Expansion of the Asian Tiger Mosquito (Aedes albopictus) in Northeastern USA: Implications for Public Health Practitioners
Modeling Aedes albopictus current and future range in northeastern USA

Climatic factors likely represent the major constraints on the extent of Ae. albopictus expansion northward [35]. A number of studies have confirmed the inability of diapausing Ae. albopictus eggs to survive extreme cold temperatures in the winter. In laboratory, temperate Ae. albopictus eggs' long-term survival threshold was close to -12°C in North America [19] and −10°C in Europe [22] for up to 24 hr exposure time. These thresholds were below the −5°C January isotherm first used to model Ae. albopictus distribution in North America based on the native temperate Asian localities [20]. The discrepancy is not surprising since Ae. albopictus' niche shifted in the invaded regions making predictions employing the original range less accurate [24]. In our study, mean winter temperature resulted in slightly better model goodness-of fit than minimum coldest month (January) temperature, with which it was highly correlated (Pearson's r = 0.99). Switching mean winter with minimum January temperature displayed null presence probability below −9°C (roughly corresponding to −2°C mean winter temperature), close to the thresholds identified under laboratory conditions. Winter temperature was the most crucial factor in this study accounting for 85% of the model similarly to the previous study of Ae. albopictus populations in New Jersey where winter temperature explained about 99% of the variability in the adult production [21].

Despite its importance, winter temperature might not be sufficient to define the range of Ae. albopictus in its entirety. Under field conditions, the correlation between winter temperature and Ae. albopictus egg survival was not linear, being moderated by the snow cover that insulated the eggs and allowed successful overwintering at much lower temperatures [23]. In our study, snow cover was assumed to be correlated with the amount of January precipitation that mostly falls as snow in northeastern USA. Inclusion of January precipitation in the model improved the geographic goodness-of-fit indicating increased Ae. albopictus presence probability peaking at 70 to 90 mm range and then declining again likely due to extreme cold conditions in the areas with heavy snowfall. January precipitation performed better than winter (i.e. coldest quarter) precipitation to increase the geographic fit of the model to the known Ae. albopictus range, especially in the marginal areas such as New England and southwestern Pennsylvania. One possible explanation for this is that the coldest quarter precipitation might not provide a good snow cover estimate in many parts of northeastern USA, where rain or mixed precipitation may predominate during warmer winter months. In addition to snow cover, another potentially important climatic factor is precipitation variability, with increased drying inducing higher Ae. albopictus mortalities [34]. This factor was demonstrated especially significant in warmer subtropical climates, but less so under more temperate conditions. In agreement with the results of their study, the contribution of variability (i.e. amount of precipitation during the driest and the wettest quarters) in our model was low; nevertheless the overall geographic fit of the model was improved when those two variables were included.

Apart from climatic factors, landscape features also play an important role in mosquito distributions, especially weak fliers with very short dispersal distances such as Ae. albopictus [33]. While elevation was not significant when entered in the model, likely because it was accounted for by other variables, land use was the second most important variable. Specifically, three categories (urban areas, forested areas, and open agricultural areas) showed strong positive or negative associations with Ae. albopictus presence. Urban areas increased the probability of presence, which was in agreement with a previous study demonstrating strong Ae. albopictus affinity to urbanized environments in northeastern USA [21]. Forested areas might be less susceptible to Ae. albopictus invasions, whereas agricultural areas are mostly open crop or pasture fields with little protective cover and lack of container habitats for Ae. albopictus larval production. Urban areas with the surrounding suburban envelopes were, therefore, considered the future “hotspots” of high Ae. albopictus activity if located within the predicted range. It is difficult to make predictions on future changes in urban environments, which were held constant at the 2010 level for the modeling purposes. However, these changes will likely occur within the already existing urban environs, and thus remain largely incorporated in our models.

Two recent global modeling studies included predictions of the current Ae. albopictus range extent in North America. The first by Benedict et al. [3] employed a different algorithm (GARP) using a different dataset of 11 environmental layers at coarser spatial resolution making direct comparison between the models difficult. However, it appears that the current Ae. albopictus suitable habitat in northeastern USA identified by Benedict et al. [3] was overrepresented, being more similar to the range predicted by the middle of this century (i.e. 2050s) in our models. Specifically, most of Connecticut and eastern Massachusetts, as well as the areas along the Great Lakes were classified as highly suitable under the GARP model, but do not provide current presence records to support these predictions. Our current model predicted a much smaller range in New England (coastal southern Connecticut and Massachusetts) where Ae. albopictus has been detected repeatedly over the last few years. Those discrepancies might be due to coarser resolution of the GARP model, lower accuracy of GARP generated models compared to those by Maxent [29], and differences in underlying environmental variables.

The second global modeling study by Medley [24] used Maxent with a similar set of environmental variables, resulting in Ae. albopictus range estimates in northeastern USA closer to our model, albeit at coarser spatial resolution. Similarly to our model, the extent of the current Ae. albopictus range in southwestern Pennsylvania was underestimated, suggesting additional variables not captured by the models as important for delineating suitable Ae. albopictus habitat in that area. It is possible that repeated summer reintroductions from the mid-Atlantic states immediately to the south of this region is mostly responsible for these discrepancies between the predicted established range and the actual range reflecting the leading edge of Ae. albopictus expansion. Similarly to Benedict et al. [3] but different from our model, Medley [24] overestimated the current Ae. albopictus range in New England. One reason for this difference might have been Maxent sensitivity to multicollinearity [30], which was not captured by Medley [24], but specifically addressed in our study by using a more stringent AIC-based selection procedure for the environmental layers inclusion in the model.

Our study differed from both Benedict et al. [3] and Medley [24] in using (a) precise geographic locations where Ae. albopictus was collected as opposed to the county centroids, (b) minimum convex polygons [30] to delineate the areas of Ae. albopictus presence more accurately, (c) information criterion (AIC) based model and variable selection process, and (d) sampling points from the same region to create a model that inherently provides more accurate estimates at a regional level [36]. We then projected the current model into the future climate change scenarios and identified winter temperature as the most crucial factor in the model. Incidentally, warming winters are the most significant outcomes of climate change in northeastern USA, far exceeding other potential changes such as warming summers or increases in winter precipitation [25].

Rising winter temperatures will drive the expansion of Ae. albopictus' suitable range from the current 5% (approximately 36,000 sq. km) to about 16% (107,000 sq. km) of the total northeastern USA area in the next three decades, regardless of the climatic model used. The proportion of people residing in urban areas most susceptible to high Ae. albopictus levels [21] will increase from the current 32% of the total population to just over one-half (about 53%). After the rapid range expansion period in the coming decades, the rate is expected to slow becoming more gradual under both models. The estimates vary from 27% (B2) to 32% (A2) of the total area of northeastern USA in the 2050s, and from 43% (B2) to 49% (A2) by the end of the century. Under both models, most major urban areas of northeastern USA situated in coastal areas (either along the Atlantic or the Great Lakes) will support suitable climate for Ae. albopictus by the middle of this century. Afterwards, the bulk of the range expansion is expected occur into more rural areas. Western Pennsylvania is a good example where a combination of increased winter temperatures and significant snow cover during the coldest part of the year might create climatic conditions suitable for Ae. albopictus establishment. However, the rural environment of this area is unlikely to support significant Ae. albopictus populations. By the end of the century, almost one-half of the northeastern USA with all major urban areas containing over 60% of the total population will be suitable for Ae. albopictus, further exacerbating resources of vector control officials tasked with protection of public health and comfort.