Contact: Jessica Ditto 502-229-0420

FRANKFORT, Ky. (February 11, 2016) – Today, in front of a record crowd at the annual Kentucky Right to Life Rally, Governor Matt Bevin ceremonially signed Senate Bill 4, an historic pro-life bill to ensure informed consent prior to abortions.

“I am humbled to be here as the Governor of Kentucky, where we value the sanctity of life,” said Governor Bevin. “We must continue to be vigilant in our efforts to protect the rights of the unborn child. I’m honored to sign this important pro-life legislation. I sincerely appreciate the determination and persistence shown by our legislators in order to make this a reality. Today marks a great victory for Kentucky values.”

A number of legislators joined the Governor for today’s ceremony, including: Senate President Robert Stivers, Senate Minority Leader Damon Thayer, Senator Julie Raque Adams, Senator Jimmy Higdon, Senator Dan Seum, Senator Joe Bowen, Senator Mike Wilson, Senator Whitney Westerfield, House Minority Leader Jeff Hoover, Rep. Stan Lee, Rep. Jim DeCesare, Rep. Robert Benvenuti, Rep. Joe Fischer, Rep. David Floyd, Rep. Kim King, Rep. Tim Moore, Rep. Russell Webber and Rep. Addia Wuchner.

“The Senate Majority Caucus has been trying to pass pro-life legislation for over a decade,” said President Stivers. “We were proud to finally see this measure make its way through the process, and we appreciate all those in the legislature and Governor Bevin for fighting for the rights of the unborn.”

“This day has been long awaited by many of us who are pro-life and who support pro-life causes,” said Leader Hoover. “I’m extremely proud to have been a part of the effort to deliver to Governor Bevin his very first bill to be signed into law – a bill that will save the lives of unborn children.”

Also participating in the ceremony were: Margie Montgomery, Executive Director of Kentucky Right to Life; Mike Janocik, Deputy Executive Director, Kentucky Right to Life Association; Kent Ostrander, Executive Director, The Family Foundation of Kentucky; Kathy Rutledge, Kentucky Regional Coordinator for “Silent No Moore” and “Operation Outcry”; Jason Hall, Executive Director, Catholic Conference of Kentucky; and former State Senator Katie Stine.

“After all these years, we are delighted that women of Kentucky will finally get the information they need prior to consenting to an abortion,” said Montgomery. “The more women know about abortion, the more likely they are to make life-affirming choices. We are grateful for Governor Bevin’s leadership on this issue, as well as the GOP Senate and House leadership.”