Fired staffer accuses Tammy Baldwin's office of coverup in VA scandal
Sens. Tammy Baldwin listens during a joint hearing by the House Veterans Affairs Committee and the Senate's Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee on March 30 in Tomah. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

A former staffer for U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin has filed an ethics complaint accusing the Madison Democrat of engaging in a political coverup by firing the aide.

Marquette Baylor — former deputy state director for Baldwin and chief of her Milwaukee office — was fired from the $80,800-per-year job in January for her alleged role in the mishandling of a whistle-blower complaint about problems at the troubled Tomah VA Medical Center.

Baylor turned down a severance deal that contained a confidentiality clause.

A spokesman for Baldwin responded late Monday by calling the complaint a "political hit job."

"It's sad that Marquette Baylor has chosen to be used as a pawn by Senator Baldwin's right-wing Republican opponents in what is nothing more than political hit job by a 'go-to Republican firm,'" said John Kraus, communications director for Baldwin.

In a 16-page complaint, Baylor is asking the U.S. Senate Ethics Select Committee to investigate the first-term senator "for making false statements and representations" to cover up the actions by her chief of staff, Bill Murat, and "to protect her political career."

"Had Murat, as the chief of staff, allowed me and other individuals to properly perform our roles, the issues surrounding the Tomah VA Medical Center would have been identified and addressed long ago," Baylor said in the complaint drafted by a Republican law firm out of Kansas City.

"By attempting to place the blame at my feet, Senator Baldwin has concealed the truth, made false statements, and mischaracterized my service as deputy state director."

The complaint accuses Baldwin of acting "unethically" by covering up Murat's "willful misconduct."

In response, Kraus said the senator dumped Baylor for a number of reasons, not just because of the Tomah VA controversy. Among other things, Kraus said, Baylor was rude and acted inappropriately with constituents and staff.

"Senator Baldwin has taken responsibility for mistakes in her office, including Marquette Baylor's and others', and she has taken steps so that these kind of mistakes never happen again," Kraus said. "She has made it clear that Marquette Baylor was terminated because of long-term issues of poor performance on a range of issues."

Calls to Baylor and her attorney, Todd Graves of Kansas City, were not returned. Graves is a former U.S. attorney whose firm has represented the conservative nonprofit Wisconsin Club for Growth in a John Doe investigation and subsequent litigation.

Joe Fadness, head of the state Republican Party, said the complaint made it clear that Baldwin has been withholding the truth for months.

"This complaint is a startling revelation that Baldwin will say and do anything to protect herself and stay in power," Fadness said. "If true, Baldwin must finally answer lingering questions about her role in the coverup and decision to mislead Wisconsin."

Internal review

Tomah whistle-blower Ryan Honl said he tried unsuccessfully to get Baldwin, U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson and U.S. Rep. Ron Kind — a Wisconsin Republican and Democrat, respectively — to intervene.

But Baldwin began calling for a federal investigation only after news reports ran in January showing that as many as three vets died after receiving treatment at Tomah.

A preliminary report by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs found that Tomah patients have a higher likelihood of receiving high doses of narcotics, including opioids, than those at other VA hospitals. The report also found a culture of fear among employees that compromised patient care.

Baldwin's office initially refused to acknowledge having fired Baylor, something the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel first disclosed in late January.

Marc Elias, a high-powered Democratic attorney hired by Baldwin, later released a statement citing a number of factors in Baylor's firing.

Elias' firm later conducted an internal review into how Baldwin's staff handled whistle-blower complaints about overmedication and other problems at the Tomah hospital.

The report found that Baldwin's constituent services team failed to relay constituent concerns to the office's top staff. From there, the report said, her senior aides took too long to formulate an "effective response" to the problems.

In response to the review, Baldwin demoted her state director and docked her chief of staff one month's pay.

Murat, her veteran chief of staff, took a one-time cut of more than $14,000 this year. He earns $169,000 annually.

In addition, Doug Hill lost his job as Baldwin's state director to become her outreach boss. Hill's salary will be sliced from $131,300 annually to $80,800 a year — a cut of more than $50,000.

Baldwin 'has it backwards'

In her complaint to the Senate ethics committee, Baylor said the internal review was "one-sided, incomplete, and misleading." She said she was not interviewed.

"Senator Baldwin's comments to the media imply that my actions were willful or unethical — thereby justifying my termination — and that the actions of Murat and Hill were not," Baylor wrote. "The senator has it backwards."

In the complaint, Baylor is very critical of Baldwin's constituent services operation, saying it fell far short of that run by former Democratic U.S. Sen. Herb Kohl, for whom Baylor worked for more than a decade.

Baldwin's office had, the complaint alleges, an "overall lack of office structure and protocols, unstated and changing job responsibilities and the lack of standard operating procedures and training for the staff."

Despite these problems, Baylor said she and her staff received and responded to complaints about the Tomah hospital.

Baylor said one of her caseworkers first heard of problems at Tomah in March 2014 from an anonymous constituent. That caseworker pursued the matter and let others on Baldwin's staff know about the perceived problems, the complaint says.

Honl contacted Baldwin's office in late September, and the caseworker got in touch with him several weeks later, Baylor said. A reporter for the Center for Investigative Reporting also called the Senate office, but a staffer did not respond.

Baylor said in the complaint that she talked with Honl on Nov. 24 and directed her staff to forward any future emails to her. She then prepared three memos on the Tomah situation over the next month for Baldwin's review and forwarded them to Hill and Murat.

The former aide said she believes Murat may have hand-delivered the third memo to the senator.

Still, nothing happened until the first news stories appeared in early January, Baylor's complaint said. She was then fired on Jan. 22.

No severance deal

Murat offered her a severance deal that would have kept Baylor on the Senate payroll through the end of May and required her not to talk about the issues. Baylor said she objected specifically to the confidentiality clause.

"Murat refused to negotiate the terms of the proposed severance package, and I rejected it," Baylor wrote.

Earlier this year, Elias, Baldwin's attorney, acknowledged that Baylor was offered a severance package, a deal that he said was put together with the U.S. Senate's chief employment lawyer.

The separation agreement, Elias said, was "standard for a Senate employee of her tenure and seniority" and included "standard confidentiality language."

Baldwin said last month that the original severance deal would have paid Baylor the equivalent of 111/2 weeks of pay — a week for every year with the Senate. That would work out to a cash payout of more than $17,000.

But the senator said the ex-staffer countered with an offer seeking four times what she had been offered. Baldwin said she rejected the request.

"There's no way," Baldwin said.