Miguel Martinez of Casper Accused of Child Sex Abuse
A 30-year-old Casper resident accused of sexually abusing a young girl in March entered not guilty pleas to two felony charges Wednesday afternoon in Natrona County District Court.

Miguel Alberto Martinez, who identifies as female and is also known as Michelle, faces one count of first-degree sexual abuse of a child and one count of second-degree sexual abuse of a child. Martinez could face 25-70 years in prison if convicted on both counts.

Martinez remains in custody on $100,000 bond.

Under the statutes cited in charging papers, the first-degree charge alleges Martinez inflicted sexual intrusion on a victim who was 10 years old at the time.

The second-degree charge says Martinez engaged in sexual contact with the same victim by grabbing her breast.

According to court documents, the victim reported being abused on March 23 by a family friend. Martinez was reportedly at the home where the alleged victim lived and asked the victim to come into the bathroom at about 8:30 p.m.

The alleged victim reportedly tried not to cry as she told the officer Martinez touched her "private parts," saying the alleged touching hurt.

Charging papers say the alleged victim's mother described Martinez as a male who dressed and identified as a female. Police say in the affidavit that Martinez was known to use the name "Michelle."

The alleged victim was taken to Wyoming Medical Center for a sexual assault nurse examination.

Evansville police officers went to a home and found Martinez passed out on a couch. Martinez was extremely intoxicated and difficult to awaken, according to the affidavit. Martinez was arrested on a warrant for failure to appear and was taken to the Casper Police Department.

The results of a portable breath test reportedly showed Martinez had a blood-alcohol concentration of .218.

A detective interviewed Martinez and, when the detective steered toward the alleged sexual abuse, Martinez reportedly became "noticeably hostile and defensive," according to the affidavit.

Martinez said they were accused of doing something wrong for "not paying enough attention to the kids." The detective asked what Martinez was accused of doing wrong, and Martinez reportedly said, "I don't know," adding they didn't want to talk about it.

Martinez also told the detective they were being questioned about things they didn't do. Martinez denied touching the victim's breasts and denied sexually abusing any child.

According to court documents, Martinez talked about arriving at the home around 6:30 p.m. and leaving some time later. After leaving, Martinez said they got a text from someone who wanted to talk to him.

Martinez talked about going back to the home where the person who texted Martinez reportedly accused Martinez of touching the alleged victim's chest.

Martinez replied, saying it was a publicity stunt and Martinez wasn't going to deal with it, according to the affidavit.

The detective writes in charging papers that Martinez abruptly ended the interview and exercised his right to remain silent.

A sexual assault kit included physical evidence collected from Martinez, who was arrested on the two sexual abuse charges as well as the outstanding warrant.