Medical Marijuana and Crime: Further Evidence From the Western States
State medical marijuana programs have proliferated in the United States in recent years. Marijuana sales are now estimated in billions of dollars per year with over two million patients, yet it remains unlawful under Federal law, and there is limited and conflicting evidence about potential effects on society. We present new evidence about potential effects on crime by estimating an economic crime model following the general approach developed by Becker. Data from 11 states in the Western United States are used to estimate the model and test hypotheses about potential effects on rates of violent and property crime. Fixed effects methods are applied to control for state-specific factors, with adjustments for first-order autocorrelation and cross-section heteroskedasticity. There is no evidence of negative spillover effects from medical marijuana laws (MMLs) on violent or property crime. Instead, we find significant drops in rates of violent crime associated with state MMLs.

Medical marijuana programs have proliferated among the states in recent years. California passed the first medical marijuana law (MML) at the state level in 1996. Other Western States soon followed, including Washington, Oregon, and Alaska in 1998, Colorado in 2000, and Montana in 2004. More recently, states in other parts of the country have followed, including Michigan (2008), New Jersey (2010), Delaware (2011), Connecticut (2012), Massachusetts (2013), Illinois (2013), New Hampshire (2013), Minnesota (2014), Maryland (2014), and New York (2014) (Marijuana Policy Project, 2013). In addition to the increased pace of adoptions in recent years, MMLs are under consideration in the states of Florida, Iowa, Kentucky, Tennessee, Georgia, Alabama, and Louisiana (Marijuana Policy Project, 2014b). The first medical marijuana programs were in western states and were approved via popular referendum, with support among voters ranging from 54% (Colorado) to 62% (Montana) (Eddy, 2010). In recent years, programs have been approved by state legislatures rather than by a referendum process, for example, in New Jersey, Delaware, Connecticut, and New York (National Conference of State Legislatures, 2014). The number of medical marijuana patients has increased steadily since 1996; recent estimates exceed two million, with marijuana sales to these patients estimated to be in billions of dollars per year (Belville, 2011). A medical marijuana industry emerged following passage of these laws with companies specializing in the manufacture and distribution of marijuana to qualified patients (Healy & Johnson, 2014). Public support for medical marijuana is strong, as evidenced by substantial majorities of voters expressing support in popular opinion polls (Saad, 2014). Two states, Colorado and Washington, recently voted to establish a legal regulated market for marijuana, with sales for adult use beginning in 2014.

These laws were passed initially despite the strong opposition from the leadership of both major political parties and from most law enforcement and criminal justice organizations (Goldberg, 1996). Opposition to significant reforms has been strong among members of Congress and the Federal agencies responsible for enforcing drug laws (U.S. Department of Justice, 2013a). Many public officials opposed these laws, often citing potentially large and negative spillover effects on crime (Powers, 2014; Williams, 2014). There is also concern that MMLs will “send a message” that drug use is not harmful and lead to the possible negative consequences associated with greater use of marijuana including health risks and increases in workplace and highway accidents. Thus, at the federal level, the manufacture, sale, and possession of marijuana remain criminal offenses and can lead to a range of penalties, including fines, probation, incarceration, reduced access to student loans, diminished employment opportunities, intervention of social services, and loss of custody of a child (Secret, 2011; Wegman, 2014).

Economic theory suggests that existing public policies for drug control are worthwhile if they produce greater net benefits compared with leading alternative policies. There is growing skepticism that federal enforcement actions against marijuana are producing benefits commensurate with the costs of criminal justice resources. The “drug war” has produced large and growing economic costs for the public sector, with substantial increases in resources used by drug control and police agencies, the legal and corrections systems, and services for drug education and treatment. A majority of all drug arrests have been for marijuana, and a substantial majority of marijuana arrests have been for simple possession as opposed to manufacture or sale. There is evidence that marijuana-based compounds can be effective treatments for a number of conditions, and support for medical marijuana by prominent medical associations, physicians, and medical researchers within the scientific community has grown significantly (Armentano, 2014).1 Despite substantial public sector resources for drug control activities, comprehensive cost-benefit studies of proposals to relax or reform specific prohibitions of the nation’s drug laws have not been performed;2 such studies would require substantial data to assess the wide range of potential effects on society.3 A growing body of research on drug use patterns and criminal activities has produced evidence relevant to a more comprehensive assessment, but there is not yet a strong consensus regarding the appropriate structure and specification for a model.4

The purpose of this article is to specify and estimate an economic crime model to assess potential effects of MMLs on rates of crime (violent and property). An understanding of potential spillover effects on crime rates is essential to a comprehensive assessment of public policies in this area. The following sections provide some background information on the history and institutional setting, the theory and evidence relevant to drug use, crime and state medical marijuana programs, and the economic crime model and associated estimates. The final section presents our conclusions with respect to research findings, policy, and further research.

Institutional Setting The approval of MMLs in states around the country represents a significant shift in public policy at the state level (National Conference of State Legislatures, 2014). MMLs were approved because of substantial popular support for reform; however, the structure and implementation of state MMLs were clearly influenced by the status of marijuana as a Schedule 1 prohibited substance under federal law. Two developments help to explain the emergence and unusual structure of state medical marijuana programs. First, there was a significant shift in public sector priorities in recent decades to an emphasis on criminal justice approaches and the expanded use of public sector resources to combat illicit drugs.5 Because marijuana is the most widely consumed illicit drug in society, enforcement of marijuana violations has been a high priority for law enforcement and has led to millions of arrests (American Civil Liberties Union, 2013). A second significant trend has been growing levels of public support for both the use of marijuana as a medicine, and calls to decriminalize, legalize, or de-emphasize criminal justice approaches in favor of public health approaches stressing education, treatment, and harm reduction for addressing societal concerns about drugs. Because of high levels of public support, states have adopted MMLs despite potential areas of conflict with federal law and the efforts of the federal government to fight a national drug war. Areas of conflict with federal law are a significant problem with the design and implementation of state MMLs. Courts have ruled that federal law has supremacy over state law, but agents of the state are responsible for enforcing state law and are not under obligation to enforce federal law (Garvey, 2012). Physician licenses to practice medicine and prescribe prescription medications and controlled substances are authorized, monitored, and enforced by federal agencies with significant roles played by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (Sullom, 2014). Because of federal law, states have not been able to authorize marijuana prescriptions through licensed pharmacies (National Conference of State Legislatures, 2014). Therefore, most states have developed alternative systems that require a “physician’s recommendation” for a patient to purchase or grow marijuana. Most state MMLs also restrict use of marijuana to a narrow set of medical conditions, presumably on the basis of evidence from the scientific literature, but there is some variation in medical conditions that may be treated with marijuana (Marijuana Policy Project, 2014a).6 Some risk of arrest remains in MML states because drug investigations can be conducted by federal agents, often in cooperation with local law enforcement as part of a joint task force. These lead to federal charges, plea bargains with federal prosecutors, and trials in federal court (California NORML, 2013). Conflicting views on the legality of MMLs among different levels of government and jurisdictions within individual states have led to numerous political and legal battles in MML states over the rights of individual patients, the legal status of private dispensaries and for-profit sales of marijuana, and the regulatory powers of localities to restrict or prohibit dispensaries within their jurisdictions (Americans for Safe Access, 2013). In recent years, federal officials have communicated mixed signals concerning use of federal resources to enforce marijuana laws in states with approved MMLs. In 2009, for the first time, the incoming administration stated that federal resources would not be used to enforce federal law in the states when activities are in compliance with state law (U.S. Department of Justice, 2009b). In 2011, an alternative policy was released by the Justice Department that appeared to reverse this (U.S. Department of Justice, 2011), and there have been numerous investigations and arrests during the Obama administration for selling marijuana at medical marijuana dispensaries operating in accordance with a state MML (Dickinson, 2012). More recently, there have been signs of greater support for reform among federal officials, with proposed legislation in Congress and policy directives from the Justice Department outlining conditions for federal non-intervention with MMLs (Reilly & Ferner, 2014; U.S. Department of Justice, 2013b). However, some federal risks remain because marijuana is classified as Schedule 1, the most restricted category reserved for substances considered unsafe for consumption even in clinical settings. Patients, growers, and retailers associated with MMLs have been targets of federal investigations that have resulted in arrests, convictions, and incarceration for crimes under federal law, even when operating in accordance with state laws. It is likely that until there is an unambiguous change or clarification in federal law, states and local communities will continue to face legal conflicts related to both differing interpretations of the provisions of state laws and the legal status of participants in the emerging medical marijuana industry.

Drugs and Crime Public officials and criminal justice organizations who oppose MMLs often cite the prospect of increased crime (California Police Chiefs Association [CPCA]; 2009). This perspective is consistent with the premise that drug enforcement is an effective tool for controlling or reducing crime. Research shows a positive statistical correlation between illicit drug use and the commission of crimes; a higher percentage of persons arrested test positive for illicit drugs compared with the general population (U.S. Department of Justice, 2002), and case studies of crime reports have found drugs to be a contributing factor in the commission of many crimes (Goldstein, Brownstein, Ryan, & Belluci, 1997). Law enforcement organizations have raised additional concerns that criminal organizations may learn to infiltrate and profit from MMLs, which may lead to increases in diverted marijuana supplies and therefore greater availability and more crime. Others fear that dispensaries and customers will become attractive, high-value targets for crimes such as robbery and burglary. The alternative perspective is that criminal activities are driven by the systemic nature of underground markets and that the effects of MMLs on crime are likely to be favorable. There are numerous potential links between drugs and crime, and positive correlations between illicit drugs and crime may not reflect causality. For example, some individuals may be predisposed to commit crimes and to take illegal drugs. Individual characteristics associated with increased drug use and increased propensities to commit crimes might include low self-esteem, risk-taking behavior, high discount rates, aggressive tendencies, general disrespect for authority, and unstable or impoverished households. In addition, enforcing drug laws through arrests and supply disruptions make it difficult to identify the true effects of drug use on crime because drug enforcement actions may also influence the amount of crime (Shepard & Blackley, 2010). Effective drug enforcement may disrupt supply and reduce illegal drug market transactions in the short run, but new suppliers will have an incentive to enter the market to meet the demand in the long run. Substantial supply disruptions will lead to higher prices and profits and increase the incentive to enter, resulting in further crime and violence as a means to settle disputes in underground markets (Miron & Zwiebel, 1995). For these reasons, drug law enforcement actions may be associated with more non-drug crime. Evidence to support this hypothesis can be found in Shepard and Blackley (2005, 2010), whose estimates showed that drug arrests are associated with higher rather than lower levels of non-drug crime. A growing body of evidence from prior research provides mixed and inconclusive evidence about the drugs and crime nexus and, more specifically, uncertainty about the effects of marijuana on crime. According to Miron (2004), “the evidence for the causal effect for drug use on crime does not stand up to careful scrutiny,” and “reviews of the literature on drug use and crime have consistently concluded there is little evidence that drug use causes crime” (pp. 14-15). Goldstein et al. (1997) analyzed a sample of drug-related crimes in a major city; although a small percentage of drug-related crime was tied to a pharmacological effect, substantially more “drug-related crime” was tied to systemic effects from underground markets and use of violence to settle disputes. There are some studies suggesting a weak causal link between drug use and property crime but not violent crime. Rasmussen and Benson (1994) provided a comprehensive review of the evidence and concluded that, except for a small subset of drug users, drug use and crime appear to be unrelated. Mast, Benson, and Rasmussen (2000, p. 292) also found that “substantial research literature suggests that there is no reliable association between drug use and major non-drug crimes.” MacCoun, Kilmer, and Reuter (2003, p. 65) concluded that “most drug users are not otherwise criminally active, and the vast majority of drug-using incidents neither cause nor accompany other forms of criminality.” With respect to marijuana, there is conflicting evidence concerning a connection between marijuana use and subsequent criminal activities; observed associations between marijuana use and crime could be due to other variables that influence the propensity to commit crimes and to use illicit drugs, or result from the legal and social environments surrounding prohibited markets (Caulkins, Hawken, Kilmer, & Kleiman, 2012).

MMLs and Crime Potentially, MMLs can reduce involvement by criminal organizations in the underground economy and lead to lower rates of crime and violence. All things equal, potential customers should prefer legal outlets because of a reduced risk of arrest, and there may be superior information for consumers when product labels indicating quality, strength, and consistency are mandated by state regulatory systems that also license and inspect growers and distributors of marijuana. The case of alcohol prohibition may be instructive as crime increased during prohibition and returned to lower levels after it was lifted (Miron, 1999). State licensing, monitoring, and regulatory systems can be designed to safeguard against potential involvement by organized crime. Additional steps have been taken to minimize the potential risk to customers and dispensaries, including lighting and security systems, security guards, and home delivery services. Except for a few anecdotal reports, there is little evidence of any systematic involvement by criminal organizations with state MMLs or that MMLs are associated with increased robberies and burglaries in the surrounding neighborhoods because dispensaries are viewed as high-value targets. Preliminary evidence from recent studies suggests MMLs may be associated with less crime rather than greater crime. Morris, TenEyck, Barnes, and Kovandzic (2014) used U.S. state panel data from 1990 to 2006 to estimate a statistical model of the association between MMLs and rates of violent and property crime. Statistical controls were included for economic conditions, socioeconomic characteristics, and the sizes of police and prison populations, with fixed-effects panel estimation methods used to control for effects not captured by other variables in the model. Findings from the research showed that states with MMLs did not have significantly higher rates of seven types of crime, and the legalization of medical marijuana preceded declines in homicide and assault, suggesting favorable effects on violent crime. Kepple and Freisthler (2012) reached similar conclusions in their case study of medical marijuana dispensaries and criminal activities in Sacramento, California. Because there was no statistical association between the density of medical marijuana dispensaries and crime rates, they concluded that either dispensaries have no association with criminal activity or other factors associated with dispensary operations that provide countervailing effects (e.g., doormen and video cameras) may deter motivated offenders.

The Impact of State Medical Marijuana Programs on Crime: An Empirical Assessment Further evidence about the effects of medical marijuana programs on crime rates can be obtained by estimating an economic crime model derived from the general approach developed by Becker (1968) in which the “rational criminal” makes the decision to commit a crime based on an objective assessment of the expected benefits and costs (e.g., resources used, foregone earnings, and risks of arrest, fines, and incarceration). Crime rates are modeled as a function of economic and demographic conditions, enforcement effectiveness, crime opportunities, and characteristics of local “crime markets.” Criminal justice policies and methods of enforcement influence crime rates because they affect the likelihood of arrest and the severity of punishment as well as the availability of criminal opportunities. In recent years, the model has been adapted to assess the role of drug enforcement in explaining underlying rates of crime, including work by Rasmussen and Benson (1994), Miron (1999), Kuziemko and Levitt (2004), and Shepard and Blackley (2007). The usefulness of the rational choice model can be illustrated by the work of Levitt (1998), who estimated the relationship between enforcement effectiveness and reported crime rates. He found that increases in enforcement effectiveness for one type of crime decreased that crime due to both deterrent effects and incapacitation effects but increased other types of crime that were considered substitutes such as robberies and burglaries. The empirical analysis in this section assesses the impact of established medical marijuana programs on the incidence of both property and violent crime within the context of existing economic models of crime. It tests the hypothesis that such programs are accompanied by significant adverse impacts on overall crime rates within adopting jurisdictions. The model is estimated using the 11 states comprising the Western Census region of the United States over the years 1997 to 2009.7 Up until 2009, of the 11 continental U.S. states that had passed MMLs, seven were in the Western Census region. Only four of the 37 remaining states had passed such laws, and only Michigan’s had reached a number of participants comparable to the five largest participating Western states. Nevada and New Mexico are not categorized as medical marijuana states in the analysis due to very low rates of participation. Based on the early years of medical marijuana activity, there appears to be a more homogeneous set of regional preferences for considering these laws in the West than in the rest of the country. By using this group as the sample, there is less likely to be a problem with identifying region-dependent variables related to attitudes concerning drug use, law enforcement, and the willingness to consider MMLs, the omission of which could bias the estimation results. Table 1 provides the definitions, sample means, and standard deviations of the variables included in the statistical work. The rates of property crime and violent crime are analyzed separately because they often involve different motivations and society has significantly different perceptions regarding their seriousness. Property crimes such as burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft are motivated primarily by the opportunity for economic gain. In the context of drug activity, the criminal may seek income to purchase drugs, to replace declines in income when there is greater anti-drug enforcement pressure (which also raises the price to users), or to obtain income when past arrests have resulted in effective separation from regular labor markets. Because of their more serious nature, more law enforcement assets are directed against violent crime. While increased enforcement against illegal drugs may divert resources away from countering all types of crimes and therefore increase their incidence, assaults and homicides are also likely to be associated with battles for territory and market share that accompany the existence of criminal organizations selling drugs in the underground economy.8 The sample averages are 39.0 reported property crimes per 1,000 residents compared with only 4.2 per 1,000 for violent crimes. Table 1. Data Summary and Sources. View larger version The panel regression models for the 11 Western states (i) from 1997 to 2009 (t) are specified as: Non - Drug Crim e it = α + β 1 MedicalMarijuan a it + β 2 DrugArrest s it + β 3 Enforcemen t it + β 4 Incom e it + β 5 Wage + μ it , where Non-Drug Crime is reported crimes per 1,000 residents for either property or violent crimes. The traditional economic model to assess the impacts of general law enforcement and anti-drug arrests on non-drug crime rates is extended by the inclusion of Medical Marijuana, a binary variable equal to 1 for a state in a year when an MML was in effect, and 0 otherwise. As implied by the arguments emphasizing the increased likelihood of negative crime externalities when programs are implemented, the hypothesis that β 1 > 0 is tested in each model. As discussed above, higher drug arrests rates are expected to be associated with more reported crimes as both buyers and sellers respond to the higher prices and profits accompanying supply disruptions that result from greater anti-drug enforcement. The sample mean is 4.2 drug arrests per 1,000 residents. Arrests per reported crime (enforcement) measure the effectiveness of a state’s efforts against crime in general. On average, 17% of reported crimes resulted in arrests in these states during this time. Higher aggregate arrest rates have been associated with lower crime rates in previous work (e.g., Corman & Mocan, 2000; Resignato, 2000) and are consistent with Levitt’s (1998) deterrent and incapacitation effects.9 The final two variables measure economic conditions that may affect crime rates. States with higher average real incomes are expected to have higher crime rates as the expected payoffs to property crime and some types of violent crime (e.g., robbery, assault and murder) are likely to increase with the incomes of potential victims. Conversely, states with higher average real wages have more well-paying employment opportunities that are indicative of stronger labor markets and raise the cost of engaging in illegal activities. As a result, a negative effect is expected for the average wage. The average real income is just over $51,200 measured in 2009 dollars, while the average real wage is nearly $18,400 in 1982-1984 dollars. The difference in means reflects both the use of different base years in the data when converting from nominal to real values and the inclusion of transfer payments and returns to capital in the income figures. Three issues are addressed in the final specifications of each model. First, the models are estimated with fixed effects to control for state-specific factors not included in the explanatory variables. Exclusion of these effects would lead to biased estimates of the other coefficients. Second, the models include a correction for first-order autocorrelation of the error terms. And third, feasible generalized least squares estimation is used to adjust for cross-section heteroskedasticity.10 The results shown in Table 2 indicate that there is no significant positive relationship between the adoption of laws permitting medical marijuana and rates of property and violent crime. If anything, the estimates indicate that there has been a significant drop in violent crime in states that have adopted medical marijuana. States with MMLs are estimated to have 0.254 fewer violent crimes per thousand residents than states without MMLs, a reduction of 6.1% when assessed at the sample mean. Despite differences in the sample states and years, in the specifications of the crime rates and MML variables, and in the set of control variables included, these findings provide strong confirmation for the results of Morris et al. (2014) who also found no case of a significant positive relationship between MMLs and seven types of violent and property crime and a significant negative relationship for homicide and assault. Table 2. Fixed Effects Regression Results.a View larger version Consistent with previous research, increases in drug arrests led to higher rates of both types of crime. A one standard deviation increase in drug arrests is estimated to increase property crime by 6.9% evaluated at the sample mean of 39.04 property crimes per thousand residents. The analogous figure for violent crime is 3.0%.11 Improvements in aggregate arrest rates were associated with significantly less crime. The standard deviation impacts are estimated to be 6.3% for property crime and 3.2% for violent crime. The effects of the economic variables vary by the type of crime involved. The significantly higher rate of violent crime in states with higher average incomes is consistent with the fact that wealthier areas offer more targets with greater payoffs for crimes such as assaults and robberies. Quantitatively, the impact is smaller than for the other variables, with the one standard deviation effect being 1.5%. In contrast, higher average wages are associated with significantly less property crime, a result that supports the view that better-paying job prospects reduce the incentive for crimes such as burglaries and larcenies. The estimated one standard deviation impact is an 8.8% reduction in the property crime rate.

Conclusion Our estimates are consistent with findings from recent studies that show no evidence of significant, negative spillover effects from MMLs on crime. Other recent studies have also found no evidence of significant negative effects from MMLs on traffic safety, youth drug use patterns, or suicide rates (Anderson, Hansen, & Rees, 2013, 2014; Anderson, Rees, & Saia, 2014). In addition, a recent study published by the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) finds evidence that state MMLs are associated with lower opioid mortality rates (Bachhuber, Saloner, Cunningham, & Barry 2014). Although there remains disagreement in the medical community about the relative benefits and risks of marijuana for treatment of health conditions, the possibility of negative impacts on public safety and drug use is not a supportable argument against medical marijuana. With the absence of negative social impacts and the positive impacts from medical uses of marijuana that have been documented for many patients, MMLs likely produce net benefits for society by providing another option for treatment. However, federal law and potential interventions by the federal government are constraints for states and raise the costs of access to medical marijuana in ways that are unusual and unprecedented in modern health care systems. This, in turn, may reduce the likelihood that states will approve the most efficient medical delivery systems for providing access to medical marijuana. However, the position of federal officials with respect to MMLs may reflect behavior that is consistent with the assumption of public choice models in which government officials, like all individuals, rationally pursue goals that serve their own interests (Schlosser, 1998). Adherents to this approach argue that those benefiting from the status quo are the most organized and vocal group against change (Rasmussen & Benson, 1994). Because there are significant amounts of employment and control over resources associated with the interdiction of drugs and the arrest, prosecution, and incarceration of offenders, public officials have much to lose if prohibition is relaxed.12 With growing public pressure, the federal government may now be giving more serious consideration to significant reforms in the areas of sentencing reform (Apuzzo, 2014) and reduced targeting of medical marijuana dispensaries (Reilly & Ferner, 2014). The final outcome will depend on the relative strengths of competing economic, social, and institutional interests at work in the political process.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Funding

The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.