Cash Me Ousside / Howbow Dah
About

"Cash Me Ousside / How Bow Dah" is a memorable quote and catchphrase uttered by 13-year-old Danielle Bregoli on an episode of The Dr. Phil Show, during which she challenges the show's audience to a fight with the phrase "Catch me outside, how about that?" in a thick accent. Online, the clip has been widely mocked in a series of image macros captioned with various frustrating experiences.

Origin

On September 15th, 2016, The Dr. Phil Show YouTube channel uploaded a clip in which a 13-year-old girl named Danielle appears on the show with her mother, who has turned to Dr. Phil because Danielle is stealing cars. Tired of the audience laughing at her, she cries "Catch me outside, how about that?" The moment, shown in the video below, appears at about the 3:20 mark.





Spread

The clip, and particularly Danielle's "Catch me outside, how about that?", began spreading through the internet in the coming weeks. On October 2nd, 2016, an image of Danielle with "Cash me ousside, howbow dah?" written on it was posted to Memecrunch.





Jokes using the image macro began spreading on Instagram in late 2016 and early 2017, but did not spike in popularity until Facebook meme page Digital Memes began posting the jokes using the image macro as well as other screenshots from the Dr. Phil clip. Their most popular post, published on January 5th, received over 75,000 shares and 14,000 likes and reactions (shown below).





I'm About to Start Swinging

As the "Cash Me Ousside" video spread, another screenshot of the video which finds Danielle saying she's on the verge of fighting someone with the phrase "I'm about to start swinging" began spreading as a reaction image.





It quickly became a popular image to recontextualize. For example, one of the most popular posts of the image was tweeted by @ziamalso, who captioned it "when i go to the park n they have swings." The tweet, shown below, gained over 38,000 retweets and 65,600 likes.





Mandela Effect

On January 25th, 2017, redditor EL_DIABLOW posted a thread to /r/MandelaEffect claiming he clearly recalls seeing Danielle on a Dr. Phil episode in the late 2000s. The thread received 93 comments, many of which were agreeing that they too had remembered seeing the clip much earlier than it aired. Some suggested that the person people were remembering was the Gonna Have a Baby girl from the show Maury. On January 26th, YouTuber AwakeAliveAware posted a video discussing the Cash Me Ousside meme and the Mandela Effect, claiming she too remembered the clip airing long ago (shown below).





However, in a clip posted to the Dr. Phil Facebook page on February 2nd, 2017, a voiceover confirmed that Danielle appeared on the show in September and that she would be appearing on Dr. Phil again the following week.

Airplane Incident

On February 6th, 2017, TMZ reported that Danielle and her mother had been involved in a violent altercation with a third passenger on a Spirit Airlines flight out of the Los Angeles International Airport. The article contained video footage of the incident, showing the three women engaged in a physical fight following a verbal dispute (shown below, left). Spirit Airlines subsequently banned each of them from flying the airline for life. The following day, the Teen Drama Inc YouTube channel uploaded an alternate view of the incident (shown below, right).





Meanwhile, Danielle posted a video describing the fight on Instagram (shown below). The video was up for six hours prior to being removed, but was subsequently mirrored on YouTube.





Also on February 7th, The Daily Dot published a statement from Spirit Airlines regarding the violent altercation:

"Police removed three passengers from Spirit flight 310 during the boarding process at LAX Monday night following an altercation. The customers were refunded and refused service."

Social Media Hack

On the evening of March 7th, 2017, Bregoli's Instagram and Twitter accounts appeared to have been hacked by a group calling itself FACE Security. The group has changed her bio to cryptic Russian text that references The Washington Post's new slogan, Democracy Dies in Darkness. It also promised to "leak" information at noon on March 8th, 2017.





As of 10:15 AM, March 8th, 2017, the 5 most recent posts on her Instagram are images and videos decrying her as "the modern day celebrity" who got famous for being disrespectful to her mother (YouTube embed of the videos shown below).





Complex speculated that digital media artist Josh Goldenberg, aka Glassface, was behind the hack and that "FACE Security" was referencing his persona. Meanwhile, the hack was covered by The Daily Beast, Refinery29, Elite Daily, and more. Some were skeptical of the hack's validity. YouTube personality Whang! uploaded a video in which he declared that he was positive the hack is an attempt at viral marketing.





The hack was in fact an attempt at viral marketing, specifically for the video for the song "Juvy" by Mook Boy which stars Danielle Bregoli.





Glassface admitted to creating the hoax and video and released the following statement to Complex:

The intent of the project was to experiment with a lot of the forces we're seeing in current events today – news cycles dominated by speculation, hacking, politics, culture, and to make it feel like all those things were imploding on each other. The project is an amalgam of memes, cultural and news talking points, culminating in a release on WorldStarHipHop. It's meant to be an all-encompassing experience for the viewer. A lot of people have opinions about Danielle, and this played with that idea – voicing what the general consensus of some people may be. It was interesting to see how polarized peoples' opinions were – some people stood up for her, while others wanted to see something negative happen. Ultimately – this whole project was accomplished with 4 pieces of visual media so I think it was a success. Also we lost a little bit of final quality when it was uploaded to WSHH – wish everyone could see the hi-res.

Fight Video Leak

On March 21st, 2017, WorldStarHipHop user Ghost uploaded a video of a physical altercation between Bregoli's mother, Barbara Ann, and her daughter. In the video, Barbara Ann can be seen pinning Danielle down, calling her a "bitch," and grabbing her by the hair. According to TMZ, the video "captured an incident that occurred 1 to 2 years ago, which would mean Danielle would have been 11 or 12." Danielle claims the video was leaked by a former friend and that it was 'nothing but friendly play fighting.'

Reality TV Show

On March 27th, 2017, TMZ reported that Bregoli signed a deal with a major production company to shoot a reality TV series. While the show has yet to be filmed, Danielle's managers have confirmed interest from numerous production companies regarding a reality show with Danielle and her mother.

Rap Career

On August 30, 2017, Danielle released a rap music video on her YouTube channel for a track titled "These Heaux".(shown below) As of September 17, 2017 it has over 24 million views.





On September 15, 2017 it was reported that Danielle signed a record deal with Atlantic Records.

"Hi Bich"

On September 21st, 2017, Bhad Bhabie released the music video for "Hi Bich / Whachu Know." The post (shown below) received more than 84 million views in about six months.





Within six months, on March 27th, 2018, the song had sold more than 500,000 copies, certifying the album as a gold record. Additionally, the album's success makes Bregoli the youngest female rapper in history to chart on the Billboard's Hot 100.

That day, Bregoli posted a video on her personal Instagram of herself eating cake off her gold record. She captioned the video, "HI BICH just went GOLD n my birthday cake taste fire off da plaque 📀🎂 📀 thanks to all bhad biches n dumbass hatin hoes 😘 #500ksold." The post (shown below) received more than 1.2 million views and 200,000 likes in less than six hours.





A post shared by Bhad Bhabie (@bhadbhabie) on Mar 28, 2018 at 10:25am PDT

Various Examples





Search Interest

External References