Hundreds take to the streets peacefully for May Day in Seattle
People gather at Judkins Park for an immigration and workers' rights march in Seattle on May 1, 2018. (Photo: KOMO News)

SEATTLE -- Hundreds turned out Tuesday afternoon for May Day in Seattle as multiple groups marched through the city for what is known as a day for workers' rights.

The day appeared to be peaceful with only one person arrested before the marches began.

The Seattle Police Department tweeted that a man wearing a mask was arrested for throwing a rock at the Amazon Spheres, 2111 Seventh Ave.

Outside Judkins Park, a crowd gathered about 2:30 p.m. for the March for Immigrant and Workers' Rights.

The marchers then headed to Second Avenue and Spring Street where the event ultimately ended.

A Patriot Prayer rally began at Westlake Park on Tuesday afternoon and headed to Virginia Street near Second Avenue in downtown Seattle before returning back to Westlake.

Some black-clad participants then took the light rail to the University of Washington. Law enforcement accompanied them.

Others were also in the U District, blocking University Avenue with a pop-up block party to protest the construction of the King County youth jail.

Some storefronts in Seattle were boarded-up as business owners took no chances with May Day demonstrations.



The Starbucks Reserve Roastery & Tasting Room on Capitol Hill closed for May Day. The restaurant was right on a major marching route for demonstrators, and none of the workers wanted to tempt potential trouble-makers.



United States Postal Service mail drop off boxes were also locked up for May Day along Fourth Avenue downtown.

In Lacey, police say there was reported damage to a Wells Fargo on 1010 Sleater Kinney Road Southeast.

Front windows at the entrance of the bank were smashed out and graffiti on the outside of the building read, "Happy May Day" and "Money equals death," according to Lacey police.

In Olympia, there were no marches or protests. Instead, there was a May Day celebration Tuesday afternoon.