NFL Football Operations
It’s a great day for football. The field is in pristine condition. Screaming fans pack stadiums around the league and millions more tune in around the country. Like clockwork, the players appear, the national anthem is sung and the game begins — precisely on time.

Before a game even starts, Game Operations staff, league representatives and the highly skilled officiating crew begin enforcing rules designed to create an environment that is fair for both teams, exciting and entertaining for the fans, and protects the players. Each sideline and locker room is set up with the same technology, equipment and provisions to ensure that no team has an unfair competitive advantage.

(AP Photo/Ryan Kang)

After kickoff, fans watch game action — including touchdowns and disputed calls — on high-tech scoreboards. Coaches call in the next play to their quarterbacks or defensive captains as the action unfolds.

Yes, it’s a great day for football. What seems like the beginning of the action is actually the result of hours, weeks and months of careful coordination and preparation by a legion of dedicated professionals who work to preserve America’s favorite sport. The NFL pays meticulous attention to every detail that goes into putting on a professional football game — crafting the rules, training the officials, implementing the technology and more — to make sure that games are fair and entertaining.

The league does this by leading through consensus, but acting decisively when it’s in the best interest of the game.

It starts at the top, with the Executive Committee and the commissioner.

The Executive Committee includes one representative — an owner or top officer — from each of the league’s 32 clubs. Any change in game rules, league policy or club ownership or other modification to the game must be approved by at least three-fourths of the committee. Without consensus, nothing will pass.

As the league’s chief executive, the commissioner has a great deal of influence. But he still must answer to the owners, who by executive committee vote have the power to remove him.

NFL Football Operations strives to create a culture of clarity, consistency and credibility to proactively meet the demands of the game.

To create the consensus to get things done, the commissioner’s office works with more than two dozen committees that comprehensively research and examine possible rule or policy changes before making recommendations.

The Competition Committee, for example, leads the rule-making process, which takes input not only from its Coaches Subcommittee, but also from numerous other sources. And in a reflection of the league’s emphasis on player protection, about a dozen committees and subcommittees, many including outside medical experts, study injury-prevention issues in depth.

When it comes to the system for developing players and playing the game, NFL Football Operations runs the show. Troy Vincent, the NFL’s executive vice president of Football Operations, and his team work to institute a culture of clarity, consistency and credibility to develop the future of the game, to honor its past while preparing for its future and to strengthen the NFL brand for players, coaches, clubs and fans.