Beating the Freshman 15
Lifestyle Changes to Manage Weight

Making a few lifestyle changes can help people manage their weight. Here are some you can try:

Keep an eye on your alcohol consumption. Not only can excess drinking lead to health problems, but beer and alcohol are high in calories and can cause weight gain. (Why do you think it's called a beer belly?)

Smoking is another culprit. Although cigarettes may suppress the appetite, smoking can make exercise and even normal activity such as walking across campus or climbing stairs more difficult — not to mention causing heart and lung problems and increasing your risk of cancer.

Many smokers who quit find they have more energy, so battle the extra pounds by exercising. You can avoid gaining weight and increase your chances of quitting if you do. If you want to stop smoking, you don't have to go it alone. Someone at your student health center can direct you to smoking-cessation programs and give you the tips and support you need to quit.

Get enough exercise. Researchers found that students who exercised at least 3 days a week were more likely to report better physical health, as well as greater happiness, than those who did not exercise. They were also more likely to report using their time productively.

Reaping the benefits of exercise does not have to be as difficult as it might seem. Try to work 30 minutes of moderate exercise into your schedule each day (like walking, jogging, swimming, or working out at the gym) and you'll feel and see the results. For other options, check out biking or hiking trails or sign up for a martial arts class. Attending a class on a regular schedule can motivate some people to stick with their fitness goals.

If you don't like organized forms of exercise, you can work at least 30 minutes of exercise into your daily schedule by walking briskly across campus instead of taking the bus, taking the stairs instead of the elevator, or cycling to class. And take time — even just a few minutes here and there — to move around and stretch when you've been sitting for a long time, such as during study sessions.

Get enough sleep. Recent studies have linked getting enough sleep to maintaining a healthy weight. Sleep is also a great way to manage the stress that can prompt overeating. So make sleep a priority, and try to work in a regular 7 or 8 hours each night.

Here are some ways to make the most of your sleep:

keep a regular sleeping schedule by getting up and going to bed at about the same time every day

don't nap too much

avoid caffeine in the evening

avoid exercising, watching TV, or listening to loud music before bed

Gaining weight during the first year of college is not inevitable. You may have your ups and downs, but a few simple changes to your daily routine can help you fend off excess weight while keeping you physically and mentally healthy.

Reviewed by: Larissa Hirsch, MD

Date reviewed: January 2014