Faces of Marijuana
About

Faces of Marijuana, also known as "Faces of Pot," is a series of images that parody hyperbolic anti-drug PSA posters. The pictures are typically edited to show unrealistic or absurd consequences of smoking marijuana, many of which use a similar format to the Faces of Meth mug shot website and X Isn't Normal, But on Meth it Is parody images.

Origin

While parodies of anti-marijuana propaganda have existed for many years since the beginning of War on Drugs in the 1970s, the earliest known “Faces of Marijuana” instance was uploaded by YouTuber pianoflames on February 15th, 2011, which featured several a slideshow of satirical before-and-after photographs of people that purportedly consumed too much marijuana (shown below). Within the next two years, the video accumulated over 13,000 up votes and 140 comments.





Spread

On May 9th, 2012, the Cheezburger site FAIL Blog published a before-and-after image showing a black man becoming a white man after “2 hits” of marijuana (shown below).





On October 15th, Redditor ReAzem submitted a parody of anti-marijuana PSA poster to the /r/4chan subreddit, which urged readers to avoid injecting marijuana by showing mug shots from the Faces of Meth website (shown below, left). Within three months, the post received over 6,300 up votes and 200 comments. On November 4th, FunnyJunk user onlyfornsfwhaha submitted another parody poster featuring a man who appears to have overdosed on heroin with the caption “Marijuana / What will your mother say when she finds your corpse?” (shown below, right). Within the next three months, the post received over 54,000 views, 1,600 up votes and 260 comments.





On November 29th, Redditor xerim submitted an image to the marijuana enthusiast subreddit /r/trees, featuring a white man turning into a black man after consuming marijuana (shown below, left). On December 13th, the same image was tweeted by the @ConcernedMom420 Twitter account. Within two months, the post received over 1,400 up votes and 45 comments. On January 3rd, 2013, the “Faces of Marijuana” Facebook page was launched, featuring notable examples of parody anti-marijuana images. On the following day, the Colorado news blog Westword published several "Faces of Pot" images, including a photo of a pit bull turning into Stoner Dog (shown below, right).





Notable Examples





Search Interest

External References