Florida sheriffs oppose open-carry legislation
View Caption Hide Caption Teachers practice during a firearm permit class named "Safe to Learn, Safe to Teach" in South Jordan, Utah, Friday, Oct. 16, 2015. (Jeffrey D. Allred/The Deseret News via AP)

The Florida Sheriffs Association is hardly a liberal group. Yet 82 percent of the association’s voting members have just asked their leadership to actively oppose Senate Bill 300, the legislation that would turn Florida into an open-carry state.

The bill as currently drafted is extremely broad, lacking limits on when, how or where firearms could be carried. The bill’s proponents claim that 45 other states already allow open-carry. But that’s not really accurate, said Sheriff’s Association Legislative Committee Chair, Pinellas County Sheriff Bob Gualtieri.

Gualtieri told me in an Oct. 20 phone interview that most open-carry states have strict rules about holstering the weapon, producing the permit on demand, undergoing special training, and even seeking explicit law enforcement authorization for that special right.

Here are excerpts from our discussion:

Q: I understand the association has just taken a vote on whether to support or oppose Senate Bill 300, the open-carry legislation. What has your membership decided?

A: “The Florida Sheriffs Association took a vote of all 67 sheriffs. The votes were tabulated yesterday. (Oct. 19) Eighty-two percent opposed. The breakdown was, 47 sheriffs opposed, 10 supported, 5 abstained, and 5 could not be contacted — they were on vacation or unavailable for some other reason.

So the vote was 82 percent of voting sheriffs. In order for us as an association to oppose, the vote would have to be 60 percent of voting sheriffs.

We opened voting period Friday (Oct. 16) through Monday (Oct. 19) at 1 o’clock. They call in and record their vote.”

Q: Did you find a rural/urban divide in how sheriffs voted? Why are so many sheriffs opposed?

A: “It’s a blind vote, so I couldn’t tell you who cast what vote.

I can tell you that within the association, there are some sheriffs that are opposed to the way it is drafted.

There are some who are opposed to open-carry as a matter of principle.

Some don’t feel that it’s good for Florida.

Some feel the provisions of the bill don’t address their concerns, such as whether an officer can approach someone and require they produce their permit; that it be required to be in a holster; the lack of an additional training requirement.

Q: What are the permit requirements?

A: “The way it is proposed, if you are a concealed-carry permit holder in Florida, you would be authorized to carry openly. There are about 1.5 million permit holders.

Q: Would there be limits on where you could display? For example, a workplace, a daycare center, an elementary school, a night club? The local school board meeting?



A: “In any place. This is another concern. Any place you are allowed to be, you can carry. That’s what it says. Anyplace you are legally allowed to be.

There was an amendment that didn’t pass that would allow private property owners to restrict people, but that is not what passed.

If you are a day care or even if you are McDonald’s, you wouldn’t be able to exclude somebody from putting their gun on the table and sitting there and eating dinner. There’s not even any requirement that it be in a holster. You couldn’t recklessly display it, but that’s not addressed.”

Q: You said it doesn’t allow law enforcement officers to demand to see someone’s permit? What’s the law on that now?

A: “Right now, they have to produce their permit if they are asked. But some language in the bill raises questions about whether a law enforcement officer will be able to do that in the future.

Of course, we feel if somebody is walking down the street openly carrying a firearm, a law enforcement officer should be able to approach them and request the permit that authorizes them to do it.”

Q: And you said there’s no training required on how to safely carry the weapon in the open, the best way to holster it and so on?

A: “There’s nothing addressed in there about weapons-retention training. The training required right now is minimal. Especially if it doesn’t have to be in a holster, you have it in your back pocket, somebody could just walk up and grab it out of your back pocket.”

Q: Some sheriffs have testified in favor of the legislation, right?

A: The only two I know of who publicly expressed support were Sheriff Gordon Smith of Bradford County and Sheriff Wayne Ivey of Brevard County.

Q: So can you discuss why you voted the way you did?

A: “Personally, I voted based upon what I think is the right thing for our county and our state. From talking to citizens in our county, the citizens don’t support it. They wholeheartedly support concealed carry with a permit, because it’s reasonable.”

Q: In the Senate Judiciary Committee hearing, there was testimony that the bill will stop overzealous prosecutions of lawful permit holders who accidentally show a gun. Does that happen very often?



A: “A couple of years ago the legislature addressed this – an inadvertent act doesn’t make you susceptible to criminal charge for open-carry. Every sheriff is willing to talk about tightening that up. If someone is making a legitimate effort to conceal-carry, they shouldn’t be dinged for a little mistake. If it warrants tightening that loophole, we are willing to sit at the table. But you don’t have to go to complete open-carry to fix that.

Q: How do your deputies know the difference between a good guy with a gun and a bad guy with a gun?

A: “That is a concern.

I can tell you that law enforcement agencies don’t even allow their non-uniformed officers to open-carry. That’s the point right there. You can’t tell what somebody’s motives are and what they are not. It’s 3 in the morning, you see somebody walking down the road, you see a guy with two .45s in their waistband, you can’t assume they are a law-abiding citizen with a permit.”

Q: In the Senate hearing on Tuesday, they said several times that 45 other states are already open-carry states. Is that really the case?

A: It’s not an apples-to-apples comparison.

Yes Pennsylvania allows it, but not in the city of Philadelphia. There is a big difference between open carry in the Pocono Mountains and downtown Philadelphia.

In Oklahoma it has to be in a holster.

In New Jersey they don’t issue permits unless the sheriff approves it.

It’s not an accurate comparison.”

Q: But in Florida, cities like West Palm Beach or St. Petersburg are actually prohibited from passing their own gun ordinances, like Philadelphia, right?

A: “Florida passed a pretty drastic law a few years ago prohibiting local opt-out. There are actually fines in the thousands of dollars and removal from office for public officials who do so.

This proposed legislation is significantly different from what is in a lot of the 45 states.

What the sheriffs think matters, and I hope they listen to us. We are concerned about public safety and the best interests of Florida.”