2015 Employer Health Benefits Survey
The 2016 Employer Health Benefits Survey was released September 14, 2016.

This annual survey of employers provides a detailed look at trends in employer-sponsored health coverage including premiums, employee contributions, cost-sharing provisions, and employer opinions. The 2015 survey included almost 2,000 interviews with non-federal public and private firms.

Annual premiums for employer-sponsored family health coverage reached $17,545 this year, up 4 percent from last year, with workers on average paying $4,955 towards the cost of their coverage, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation/Health Research & Education Trust 2015 Employer Health Benefits Survey. The 2015 survey includes information on the use of incentive for employer wellness programs, plan cost-sharing as well as firm offer rate. Survey results are released here in a variety of ways, including a full report with downloadable tables on a variety of topics, summary of findings, and an article published in the journal Health Affairs.

News Release

A news release announcing the publication of the 2015 Employer Health Benefits Survey is available here

Summary of Findings

The Summary of Findings provides an overview of the 2015 survey results and is available under the Summary of Findings tab.

Full Report

The complete Employer Health Benefits Survey Report includes over 200 exhibits and is available under the Report tab. The Report tab contains 14 separate sections. Users can view each section separately or download the section exhibits from the bottom of the respective section page.

Health Affairs

The peer-reviewed journal Health Affairs has published an article with key findings from the 2015 survey: Health Benefits in 2015: Stable Trends in the Employer Market .

Web Briefing

Coming soon: On Tuesday September 22, 2015, the Kaiser Family Foundation and the Health Research & Educational Trust (HRET) held a reporters-only web briefing to release the 2015 Employer Health Benefits Survey.

Interactive Graphic

This graphing tool allows users to look at changes in premiums and worker contributions for covered workers at different types of firms over time: Premiums and Worker Contributions Among Workers Covered by Employer-Sponsored Coverage, 1999-2015.

Key Exhibits – Chartpack

Over twenty overview slides from the 2015 Employer Health Benefits Survey are available as a slideshow PDF.

Additional Resources

Standard errors for selected estimates are available in the Technical Supplement here.

Employer Health Benefits Surveys from 1998-2014 are available here

Researchers may request for a public use dataset by going to Contact Us

Researchers at the Kaiser Family Foundation, NORC at the University of Chicago, and Health Research & Educational Trust designed and analyzed the survey.