Learning Community Program
Scholastic House Of Leaders in support of African American Researchers & Scholars



Vision

UConn ScHOLA²RS House is a scholastic initiative to groom, nurture, and train the next generation of leaders to address grand challenges in society through the promotion of academic success in undergraduate programs at the University of Connecticut and in competitive graduate programs.

Mission

ScHOLA²RS House is a Learning Community designed to support the scholastic efforts of male students who identify as African American/Black through academic and social/emotional support, access to research opportunities, and professional development. The intent of this Learning Community is to increase the retention and persistence of students using educational and social experiences to enhance their academic success at UConn and beyond in graduate and professional school placement. ScHOLA²RS House will encourage involvement with the larger university community to foster peer and mentor relationships and will actively engage students in inclusion efforts at UConn.

Dr. Erik M. Hines, Faculty Director

Dr. Erik Hines is an Assistant Professor in the UConn Neag School of Education Counseling program. His research centers around African American male academic achievement, career development, and college readiness; parental involvement and its impact on academic achievement for students of color; and improving and increasing postsecondary opportunities for first generation, low-income, and students of color (particularly for African American males). Additionally, he is interested in career exploration in the fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) for students of color. His research has appeared in peer-reviewed journals such as The Journal of Counseling and Development, Professional School Counseling, and The High School Journal.

ScHOLA²RS House Black History Month Program

Sunday, February 10, 2019 | 4:00 pm-7:30 pm

Peter J. Werth Residence Tower | 4:00 pm

UConn Alumni Center | 5:00 pm

Storrs Campus

Storrs CT 06269

Directions



The ScHOLA²RS House Living and Learning Community and the African American Alumni Council invite you to enjoy an evening with student scholars and fellow alumni on Sunday, February 10th in commemoration of Black History Month.



The program will begin with an optional tour of Werth Tower which houses eight living and learning communities including ScHOLA2RS House followed by a panel discussion in the Alumni Center. The panel will be comprised of alumni from different eras who will discuss their experiences at UConn as well as solutions to navigating college and life successfully. The program will also include time for students and alumni to network. Light food and beverages will be served. Please register below by February 4, 2019. Questions? Please contact Chris Dias, Director of Constituency Relations, via email or call the Office of Alumni Relations toll-free at (888) 822-5861.

Click here to register.

View Registrant List

To apply to live in ScHOLA²RS House

for the next academic year, follow the appropriate link:

Newly Admitted Students

Current UConn Students



Frequently Asked Questions