Rep. Bill Kramer sentenced to 5 months in jail for groping incident
State Rep. Bill Kramer (R-Waukesha) was sentenced Tuesday to five months in jail. In this photo, he is leaving Waukesha County Intake Court shortly after he was charged with sexual assault. Credit: Scott Ash

SHARE

By of the

State Rep. Bill Kramer (R-Town of Waukesha) was sentenced Tuesday to five months in jail, after pleading no contest last month to reduced charges of two misdemeanor counts of fourth-degree sexual assault.

The jail term is a condition of a three-year probation sentence.

He will begin serving his jail time, with work-release privileges, on Dec. 4.

Reserve Judge Neal Nettesheim also imposed several other conditions on Kramer: He must get a sex offender and alcohol assessment and complete any required treatment.

He may have no contact with his victim. He must maintain absolute sobriety and avoid entering any bars or other establishments whose primary business is serving alcohol. He must pay $216 restitution.

He will not have to register as a sex offender.

Because he was ultimately convicted of a misdemeanor, not a felony, Kramer can serve the remainder of his term in the Assembly.

He did not seek re-election, and will be replaced by Scott Allen, a Realtor who won the seat in this month's general election. He will be sworn in on Jan. 5.

Kramer, 49, was charged March 28 with two felony counts of second-degree sexual assault.

According to the complaint, he shoved a woman into a car, tried to kiss her, touched her indecently and made inappropriate comments to her outside a Republican Party event at a Muskego tavern in 2011.

The charges followed criticism of Kramer for allegedly harassing two other women, one a legislative aide and the other a lobbyist, while at a fundraiser in Washington, D.C., on Feb. 26.

The legislative aide has filed a personnel complaint against Kramer.

Assembly Republicans stripped Kramer of his title as majority leader in March.

In court Tuesday, the victim addressed Kramer, saying she feared she might be raped after she rejected his advances.

"You considered me a friend and I violated that friendship," Kramer told her.

After Kramer's plea last month, his attorney, Eduardo Borda, said Kramer wanted to resolve the case because he is sincerely apologetic.

Borda said the incident was the result of Kramer's alcohol abuse that he began addressing more than 10 months ago.

Borda opposed any jail time, saying Kramer had suffered significant professional consequences.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.