Black Friday (day after Thanksgiving), 1961

I find the following particularly helpful because it not only represents the (so far) earliest sighting of "Black Friday" used with respect to the day after Thanksgiving, but it also underscores that "Black Friday" was commonly used by Philadelphia police officers and not merchants. Moreover, it reveals a concerted, though ultimately failed effort by downtown merchants and a Philadelphia city official to change the name of that post-Thanksgiving shopping day because of consumers' association of "black" with misfortune and disaster. This reinforces the suspicion that sometime well after 1961 some group launched an effort to rehabilitate "Black Friday," an expression that just wouldn't go away, by claiming an association with black ink (i.e., signifying profitability). It's this upbeat (though false) black-ink explanation that has stuck. -- Bonnie [From *Public Relations News*, 18 December 1961, p. 2. This weekly newsletter was published by Denny Griswold of 815 Park Avenue, New York, NY.] Santa has brought Philadelphia stores a present in the form of "one of the biggest shopping weekends in recent history." At the same time, it has again been proven that there is a direct relationship between sales and public relations. For downtown merchants throughout the nation, the biggest shopping days normally are the two following Thanksgiving Day. Resulting traffic jams are an irksome problem to the police and, in Philadelphia, it became customary for officers to refer to the post-Thanksgiving days as Black Friday and Black Saturday. Hardly a stimulus for good business, the problem was discussed by the merchants with their Deputy City Representative, Abe S. Rosen, one of the country's most experienced municipal PR executives. He recommended adoption of a positive approach which would convert Black Friday and Black Saturday to Big Friday and Big Saturday. The media cooperated in spreading the news of the beauty of Christmas-decorated downtown Philadelphia, the popularity of a "family-day outing" to the department stores during the Thanksgiving weekend, the increased parking facilities, and the use of additional police officers for guaranteeing a free flow of traffic ... Rosen reports that business over the weekend was so good that merchants are giving downtown Philadelphia "a starry-eyed new look." ------------------------------------------------------------ The American Dialect Society - http://www.americandialect.org