London Fatwa Council is a non-profit, voluntary organisation, established by Shaykh Mohammad Yazdani Raza (Misbahi) in 2009. The Council offers legal advice and counselling in accordance with Islamic law. It acts as a voice for women silenced by violent, abusive and forced marriages; empowering them to achieve freedom and justice from their oppressive situations.

Furthermore, as a recognised, decision making authority for the Muslim community, the Council offers advice on issues that affect their daily lives. Our advisory panel, made up of prominent Islamic Jurists deal with a wide range of cases undertaken by the Council.

London Fatwa Council is continuing to build on its interfaith work, by fostering and encouraging dialogue and cohesion within the diverse London Borough of Barnet and the wider community. It has fast become a prominent think-tank through its deep collaboration and engagement with all sectors of society, ranging from local businesses, schools and organisations to the Home Office, for which London Fatwa Council is a regular point of contact.

Chairman Shaykh Mohammad Yazdani Raza (Misbahi), London

Shaykh Mohammad Yazdani Raza (Misbahi) is a Hanafi Jurist, who received primary education in the sciences of Islam, under the supervision of his father, the noble Shaykh Mohammad Ismail (Misbahi). Having undergone a solid foundation, the Shaykh was then enrolled at Jamia Al-Karam in Milton Keynes, to study under the tutelage of Shaykh Mohammad Imdad Hussain Pirzada and Shaykh Mohammad Abdul Bari. At Jamia Al-Karam, he received a wealth of sacred and orthodox knowledge. The respected Shaykh continued his studies at one of the most widely recognised and well respected institutions of sacred knowledge in India, Al Jamiatul Ashrafia of Mubarakpur.

The respected Shaykh has also studied at the oldest and most widely recognised Jamia in the Muslim world, Jamiatul Azhar, in Cairo. Whilst in Egypt he also studied at the Alexandria University, in Alexandria. Shaykh has a BA (Hons) in Middle Eastern Studies from The University of Manchester, and studied MA Islamic Studies from the School of Oriental and African Studies, London and later completed the PGDL/CPE in Law, from the Manchester Metropolitan University.

Shaykh Mohammad Yazdani Raza has held the position of Imam at various mosques in the UK. The respected Shaykh had a regular slot on the Islam Channel for a number of years and continues to work strenuously amongst both the Muslim and other faith communities.

The respected Shaykh is involved in various Home Office initiatives, as well as playing an advisory role on topical and pertinent issues, for a number of prominent think-tanks in the UK. He has lectured both in the UK and abroad, including much of Europe, Syria, Egypt, Dubai, Bahrain, Malaysia, India, Sudan, Morocco, and various states in America and South America, amongst others.