Baldwin disciplines top two aides for Tomah VA missteps
U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin speaks at EMILY's List 30th Anniversary Gala at the Washington Hilton on March 3. On Friday, Baldwin released a report that assigned blame to some on her staff for the mishandling of complaints concerning the prescribing of painkillers at the Tomah Veterans Affairs hospital. Credit: Getty

By of the

U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin announced Friday that she has demoted her state director and docked her chief of staff one month's pay for bungling complaints about the troubled Tomah VA Medical Center.

Bill Murat, her veteran chief of staff, will take a one-time cut of more than $14,000 this year. He earns $169,000 annually.

In addition, Doug Hill will lose his job as Baldwin's state director to become her outreach boss. Hill's salary will be sliced from $131,300 annually to $80,800 a year — a cut of more than $50,000.

Earlier, Baldwin fired her deputy state director and bumped another staffer from handling veterans issues for the Wisconsin Democrat. His pay was not reduced.

"Mistakes were made," Baldwin said in a Friday interview, providing her first substantive remarks on the controversy.

"I have taken actions commensurate with the mistakes," she continued. "I want to assure my Wisconsin constituents that we take their concerns seriously."

The disciplinary actions were taken in response to an internal review of her staff's handling of whistle-blower complaints about overmedication and other problems at the Tomah hospital.

Baldwin is paying the Seattle-based law firm Perkins Coie an unspecified sum from her campaign account. Leading the review was Democratic heavy-hitter Marc Elias.

The report found that Baldwin's constituent services team failed to relay constituent concerns to the office's top staff. From there, the report said, her senior aides took too long to formulate an "effective response" to the problems.

But Perkins Coie concluded that there was no coverup by the senator's staff or any attempt to bottle up a report detailing some of the problems.

"The bottom line is this: Senator Baldwin's staff took some important steps to investigate the abuses at Tomah VA, but then missed numerous chances to follow up and press for action," said a five-page summary of the internal review.

Baldwin's aides sat for months on an inspection report that found officials at the Tomah medical center were prescribing high amounts of opiate pain pills to patients, a concern raised repeatedly by a whistle-blower with Baldwin's staff late last year.

Veterans who relied on the facility for care had begun calling it "Candy Land."

For months, whistle-blower Ryan Honl tried unsuccessfully to get Baldwin, U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson and U.S. Rep. Ron Kind — a Wisconsin Republican and Democrat, respectively — to intervene.

Baldwin began calling for a federal investigation only after news reports ran in January showing that as many as three vets died after receiving treatment at Tomah.

A preliminary report by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs said this week that Tomah patients have a higher likelihood of receiving high doses of narcotics, including opioids, than those at other VA hospitals. The report also found a culture of fear among employees that compromised patient care.

In an interview, Baldwin said she has prided herself on the work done by her constituent services team in the past.

But the first-term senator acknowledged that her staff came up short in dealing with the Tomah hospital.

"I accept responsibility," Baldwin said. "My name is on the door."

It's her staff members who are taking the hit, however.

In late January, Baldwin dismissed Marquette Baylor, her former deputy state director for constituent services.

The Perkins Coie report singles out Baylor for her handling of the Tomah matter.

Baldwin's office, for example, first learned of problems at the facility in March 2014, but state staffers failed to let Baldwin know about their work on these complaints when she visited the hospital on July 1.

In addition, Baldwin said Baylor was guilty of other infractions, such as rude and inappropriate communication with other aides.

"Tomah was a piece of it," Baldwin said of the firing.

Baylor has hired attorneys to explore litigation for wrongful termination or sexual discrimination. A source close to her suggested that she is leaning against going to court over her dismissal.

Baldwin offered Baylor a severance deal — including a confidentiality agreement — when firing her, but Baylor rejected the proposal.

The deal would have paid Baylor, who was earning $80,000 a year, the equivalent of 111/2 weeks of pay — a week for every year with the Senate. That would work out to a cash payout of more than $17,000.

Baylor previously worked for former U.S. Sen. Herb Kohl, a Wisconsin Democrat, for a decade.

Baldwin said the proposed agreement, including the secrecy provision, was standard language.

But the senator said the ex-staffer countered with an offer seeking four times what she had been offered. Baldwin said she rejected the request.

"There's no way," Baldwin said.

In addition, Baldwin said Mike Helbick, a staff caseworker, has been bumped from dealing with veterans issues. His duties have been shifted to Sarah Anstaett, a Baldwin staffer in Madison.

According to the internal review, Baldwin's team first learned of problems at the Tomah facility a year ago. Her aides responded by contacting Tomah administrators and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and obtaining a copy of the inspection report.

Baldwin said these staffers focused on the report's conclusion, which found no proof of wrongdoing, instead of following up on its findings about the widespread distribution of opiates at the Tomah facility.

"Accordingly, they did not make it a priority to independently verify the (Office of Inspector General's) representations that the concerns about prescription practices were being addressed," the report says. "In retrospect, this was a mistake."

The report doesn't say why Baldwin decided to keep silent during the biggest controversy of her political career.

Baldwin said on Friday that her office decided not to discuss Baylor's ouster during the three weeks in which she considered the severance deal.

Plus, she said, she wanted to wait until the internal review was completed before responding to what she called "disturbingly partisan attacks."

"I didn't want to speculate," she said.

Interestingly, Baldwin seemed to hold up her off-ice's response to the Tomah controversy with that of Johnson's staff.

A Johnson aide took the complaints from Honl — a former Tomah employee and Gulf War veteran — and turned the information over to three Johnson aides assigned to an oversight subcommittee.

There the issue died.

"Receiving the same contacts from the same whistleblower this past fall, Senator Johnson didn't do anything on this until after I demanded a VA investigation of Tomah in early January," the Democratic senator said of her Republican colleague.

Asked if her staff did a better job on the matter, Baldwin said, "You're the writer."

She declined to comment on fellow Democrat Kind's failure to act on the whistle-blower's complaints.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBiceor on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.