The Finger Your Phone Can't Live Without (It's Not Your Thumb)
The pinky is unquestionably the forgotten finger, often considered a mere accessory in a lineup of more valuable digits. If you had to say goodbye to an appendage, the pinky is an easy sell.

But there's far more to the pinky besides looking refined while sipping tea. In addition to playing a key character in maintaining balance, it's the most important supporting role of the entire digital age. The pinky is the mobile shelf.

See also: Virtual Reality Is Ready to Manipulate Your Memories

Grab your smartphone and do a simple task, like check your email. Like a trusty steed, carrying the weight of your contacts, apps and messages upon its tiny, boney surface, the pinky is most likely propping up the device. I've asked both men and women to participate in my "where's your pinky?" test; nearly always, the results were the same. (Note: You might see your pinky resting on the smartphone's side until you start to navigate through the user interface.)

The pinky hard at work.

When you remove the shelf, you'll immediately notice less stability. It's manageable, of course, but typing speeds decrease and the rest of your fingers work harder to keep a firm grip on the casing. While my pinky doesn't necessarily tire from this — I didn't even realize how hard it was working until recently — one thing is clear: Your mobile use strongly relies on the pinky.

Although most hand studies have been overshadowed by the evolution of opposable thumbs, researchers say the pinky (known in science speak as the fifth digit) played a key role in the use and production of stone tools, such as hammer stones, handaxes and what are called "sharp flakes" for cutting. A 1998 study looked at the muscle movement levels experienced by the upper limb during the production of stone tools. It revealed that the little finger was crucial in the process of securing stone cores (the original bit of rock from which tools were produced), so a grip could be tight and tools could be made accordingly.

The pinky's main job was (and still is) to keep balance and securely hold objects in the hand.

"It was observed that on the non-dominant hand that secured the stone core, the muscles serving the first, second and fifth digits were most heavily used," Alastair J. M. Key, a Palaeolithic archaeologist, biological anthropologist and PhD researcher at Kent University in the U.K., told Mashable.

Often called the first great invention, the handaxe tool was made from stone and held in the hand during use. Image: The British Museum

Just as ancient ancestors secured stone cores, we're doing something similar with our smartphones, using the non-dominant hand to hold the device and the pinky for a sturdy grip and balance.

"The smartphone grip is quite similar to when you hold a small stone core or handaxe, so it's essentially doing the same job," Key said.

According to Key, the smaller the object, the less likely it is for the pinky finger to be used, which is why it rises oh so delicately when drinking tea. A smartphone is just heavy and cumbersome enough that the pinky instinctually supports the bottom of the device. Just as early homo sapiens would have done millions of years ago — if they had Androids.

The pinky is partially responsible for how we view mobile sites today, too, according to UI expert Josh Greenberg, who is also CTO and founder of music streaming service Grooveshark.

“The use of symbols and the three by three grid (the three ubiquitous lines on every mobile site that you see) are indicative of how the pinky and also the thumb have in some ways birthed a design aesthetic," Greenberg said.

Because the clickable area within the mobile design is far more limiting than a typical website, the Grooveshark team worked to create a single column on its HTML 5 iteration instead, which differed from its traditional navigation.

"We realized the user experience required this design because of the pinky and the thumb — and it allowed for much easier scrolling," he said. "We realized long ago that fingers don’t just do the walking; they are driving and dictating innovation too.”

Not only is the pinky influencing innovation today, it's been working hard for us since the beginning of humanity. So it's time, finally, to give credit to where credit's due.