Nike Sustainability
Learn more about NIKE, Inc. contract manufacturing network and countries where we do business

About this site

Virtually all NIKE, Inc. materials and finished products are sourced from, or manufactured by, independent suppliers that also make or provide products for other global companies. That means that NIKE does not own, operate or employ workers at these locations. NIKE also has license agreements that permit unaffiliated parties to manufacture and sell products using NIKE-owned trademarks.

The suppliers featured on this map are those used by NIKE, Inc., licensees or agents to manufacture finished goods, as well as materials suppliers.

The NIKE, Inc. company portfolio includes Nike, Jordan Brand, Hurley and Converse. The data on this site is reflective of, and can be filtered by, Nike (which includes the Jordan Brand), Converse and Hurley.

Contract factories that manufacture finished goods for NIKE, Inc. provide the data, which is then validated when audits are performed during the year. These suppliers are required to adhere to a rigorous set of compliance standards, including NIKE’s Code of Conduct and Code Leadership Standards. This site is updated quarterly.

To learn more about this work, visit sustainability.nike.com.

Key Terms

Workers: The total number of workers is calculated based on the total number of employees at each contract factory. This includes line workers (involved in the production of NIKE products) and all other employees (such as managers, administrative staff, Human Resources employees and maintenance staff).

The average age and percentage of female and migrant workers are calculated based on the percentage of total line workers.

Migrants: For the purposes of this site, migrant workers refer to workers who have migrated from one country to another (foreign migration), as well as people within a country who have moved from one location to another within its borders (internal migration).

Supplier Group: Where applicable, this site lists the supplier group name for the contract factories shown on this map. A supplier group includes a parent entity and all of the subsidiary entities the parent company directly or indirectly owns or controls.