About – Mayweather Promotions
Appropriately based in the entertainment capital of the world, Las Vegas, Mayweather Promotions was established in 2007 by 12-time World Champion and currently undefeated boxing icon, Floyd “Money” Mayweather. Mayweather Promotions seamlessly promotes all forms of live entertainment including sporting events, live musical and theatrical events as well as film and television productions.

The evolution of Mayweather Promotions was one of inevitability as Floyd Mayweather began to garner unprecedented success in the sport, eventually becoming an independent fighter free from the bindings of any promotional or managerial contracts. He was the company’s first client and all of the costs associated with assembling a world-class and competitive operation were funded by the revenues amassed by his own hard work and dedication to succeed within the ring and beyond. Such stout work ethic, in tandem with his bold business savvy, are only a few of the reasons why ESPN, Forbes, and Sports Illustrated have anointed Floyd Mayweather as the highest-paid professional athlete in the world in 2014.

Shortly after its formation in 2007, Mayweathear Promotions began to build a solid foundation for the future by adding boxing’s most elite fighters and trainers. In 2010, the first two fighters were signed. Presently, 20 unmatched and unrivaled fighters across six different weight classes are under contract. Now famously referred to as The Money Team, they include current and future champions Badou Jack, Gervonta Davis, Mickey Bey Jr., Ashley Theophane, Ishe Smith, Chris Pearson, J’Leon Love, Lanell Bellows, Ronald Gavril, Andrew Tabiti, Ladarius Miller, Junior Benjamin, Juan Heraldez, Charvis Holifield, Kevin Newman, Lionell Thompson, Maurice Lee, Sanjarbek Rakhmanov, Alexis Santiago,Tra-Kwon Pettis and Latondria Jones.

While pugilism often smacks of one-on-one competition – and justifiably so – true fighters who reach the rare air of being a world champion are often surrounded by undeniable support staff. Mayweather Promotions boasts a staff of trainers and mentors who are regarded as boxing royalty in their own right. Names the likes of Leonard Ellerbe (CEO), Floyd Mayweather Sr. (Trainer), Roger Mayweather (Trainer), Rafael Garcia (Cutman), and Cornelius “Boza” Edwards (Trainer) bestow decades of boxing wisdom and winning tradition within each fighter.

Outside of the boxing gym, the Mayweather promotional staff has followed the same blueprint for success, evident in the exponential growth of the staff since 2007. Our highly distinguished staff members are committed to our fighters, fans, and business partners. Their allegiance to their craft is the solitary reason why the company continues to expand and hire new talent – tirelessly searching the globe to add the best and the brightest minds that the world has to offer.

With a solid stable of championship fighters, trainers and staff, Mayweather Promotions has blazed its own trail to unprecedented financial success in only eight years of operation. Considered one of the “Big Three” in the promotional boxing industry, Mayweather Promotions has netted in excess of $350 million while generating over $1 billion in Pay-Per-View revenues.

As Mayweather Promotions continues its ascension, there are no plans to take our foot off the gas anytime soon. As President, Floyd Mayweather aims to increase the number of fighters under contract by 10 over the next five years. In 2014 and the years to follow, Mayweather Promotions is poised to break more records, generate more revenue, and chase excellence as it incrementally solidifies itself as the past, present & future of sports & entertainment!