Mike Byers Inc. - Rare Coins
World's Greatest Mint Errors

Mike Byers has been a professional numismatist for forty years. He is one of the largest dealers handling U.S. Gold Coins, Patterns and Rarities certified by PCGS and NGC. He has handled major coin collections and attends every major coin convention. Mike Byers carries an extensive inventory as well as solicits want lists and is always looking to purchase fresh inventory and collections.Mike Byers was a consultant to ANACS for Mint Errors from 2000 to 2006. He is also the Publisher and Editor of Mint Error News Magazine and the Mint Error News Website that was founded in 2003. In 2009, Mike Byers published his first book,, which received the NLG Award for Best World Coin Book and is available on Amazon.com . In 2016, Mike Byers was featured on Fox News in an interview with one of his unique mint errors.Mike Byers is a life member of ANA since 1985, a charter member of NGC and a featured dealer/member of PCGS. He is also a life member of the Central States Numismatic Society, the Florida United Numismatists and a member of ICTA. He is member A71 in the Certified Coin Exchange (CCE) and a member of CDN Exchange (BYRS).Mike Byers was born in the coin business attending coin shows since he was six years old. When he was seventeen, he issued his first coin catalog. He has been a Market-Maker in U.S. Gold Coins and a dealer in major mint errors. In 1987 he offered limited partnerships and rare coin funds. He has written articles for The Coin Dealer Newsletter and has been featured on the front page of Coin World numerous times with his numismatic rarities. Mike Byers is a contributing author on mint errors for CoinLink & CoinWeek. He also assisted with the mint error section of Coin Facts on the PCGS website. You can visit Mike Byers and view his rarities at the ANA, Central States, FUN show and the Long Beach Coin Expo.Mike Byers also deals in fine art including Leroy Neiman original oils as well as works by other renowned artists. He buys and sells oil and acrylics on canvas and board, bronzes, watercolors and mixed media artwork.