These tiny winged human skeletons were found in a London home
Is this a human? A fairy? Something else? (Picture: Alex CF)

Creepy skeletons of winged humans, bodies of mythical creatures and even aliens have been unearthed in a London home.

The ghastly relics were the collection of Thomas Merrylin, an 18th century aristocrat with a taste for the unusual.

They were apparently found sealed in the basement of a London house in 2006, and the macabre findings might just change science as we know it.

Now they’re being kept at the Merrylin Cryptid Museum, a bizarre collection of the artefacts that is almost guaranteed to creep you out.

Will science be forever changed by the ‘discovery’? (Picture: Alex CF)

The curator of the museum, an artist known as Alex CF, claims he has inherited Merrylin’s collection.

MORE: ‘Hitler’s code machine’ found in Essex shed and sold for £10 on eBay

Now, the priceless (literally, you can’t buy them) exhibits are in the hands of a 20-something artist, for reasons which are not immediately clear.

But before you spend all your hard-earned cash on an annual pass, we’ve got some disappointing news.

In a blow to lovers of the supernatural, the museum’s website states that the collection is not open to the public.

You won’t be able to see this friendly chap up close (Picture: Alex CF)

This is Alex CF, the man keeping all of this from us (Picture: Facebook)

On the plus side, there are dozens of photos online for you to check out, if you’re into that kind of thing.

Alex CF claims diaries left behind by Merrylin (he has these too, for some reason) refer to ‘all sorts of advanced ideas that didn’t exist at the time, such as quantum physics and the multiverse theory’.

MORE: Department store evacuated due to ‘ticking bomb’ – that turned out to be faulty security tag

While the story of Merrylin and his collection might be a little hard to believe, there’s no questioning the curator’s effort.

With photos and details about goblins, elves, fairies, dragons and a whole lot more, our only hope is that one day he’ll let us pop along for a visit.