Brussels attacks: Teenager also survived Boston and Paris bombings
Mason Wells (left) was hit by shrapnel from the bombs (Picture: AP)

A teenager who survived the Brussels airport attack was a block away from the Boston Marathon finish line at the time of the bombing and was in Paris on November 13 last year.

Yesterday, at least 14 people died and dozens more were injured in two explosions that went off near to an American Airlines desk at Zaventem Airport just after 7 local time.

Brussels attacks: Ryanair accused of ‘trying to profit’ from Brits stranded in Belgian capital

An explosion was heard at Maalbeek metro station just under an hour later. A Belgian transport officer said that 20 people were killed in the blast.

Mason Wells, 19, was hit by shrapnel when the bombs, which were hidden in suitcases, detonated. He ruptured his Achilles tendon and suffered second- and third-degree burns on his face and hands.

Remarkably, Mason, a Mormon missionary, also survived the Boston Marathon bombing on April 15, 2013, and the Paris attacks last November.

‘This is his third terrorist attack’ (Picture: AP)

‘This is his third terrorist attack,’ his father, Chad, told ABC News.

Advertisement

Advertisement

‘This is the third time that sadly in our society that we have a connection to a bomb blast.’

Brussels attacks: Ukip criticises EU’s open borders after terror attack in Belgium

Mason was a block away from the Boston Marathon finish line, the site of the bombing, when it detonated. He was also in Paris on November 13.

Mason is at a Belgian hospital and is expected to make a full recovery.

A Mormon official told Mason’s parents that ‘despite being on the ground and bleeding he actually had a sense of humour and remained calm through the situation.’

Joseph Empey, 20, was with Mason at the time of the attack and was also injured. He was treated for second-degree burns to his face, hands and head.

MORE: Brussels attacks: Search for British man who may have been on metro

MORE: Brussels attacks: Foreign Office warns against travel to Brussels

MORE: Brussels attacks: X-ray shows three-inch bolt in airport survivor’s chest