Dana White: Floyd Mayweather fight in UFC would go very badly
Gallery Floyd Mayweather def. Conor McGregor in 'The Money Fight': Best photos view 26 images

UFC President Dana White thinks there’s a realistic chance boxing legend Floyd Mayweather could have a UFC fight. His chances of winning, however, are a completely different story.

Over the past several months discussion of unbeaten boxing star Mayweather (50-0 boxing, 0-0 MMA) crossing over the octagon for a fight. He’s teased that he’ll soon beginning training with UFC welterweight champ Tyron Woodley, and even rated his wrestling skills a “seven out of 10.”

The idea of a 41-year-old Mayweather actually stepping in the cage is disregarded by many. That was the same narrative as when talks about Conor McGregor (21-3 MMA, 0-1 boxing) crossing over to the boxing ring to fight Mayweather first arose, though, and that matchup came to fruition in August.

White, who spoke today on “The Jim Rome Show” about the subject, didn’t reveal whether he’s had any concrete negotiations with Mayweather. However, he made it clear to those writing the idea off that he’ll never say never.

“I think yes (he could fight in the UFC),” White told host Jim Rome. “I didn’t think the first fight would happen with Mayweather. All I’d ever see was the stuff that went on with him and (Bob) Arum and how they couldn’t get the (Manny) Pacquiao fight done. Then once I got in and started negotiating with these guys (and) they’re smart guys. They’re easy to deal with, and from what I thought it was going to be, it was much easier. So yeah, I could see this happening.”

Mayweather defeated McGregor by TKO in Round 10 in “The Money Fight” back in August. Since then, McGregor has been attempting to lure Mayweather into a rematch under MMA rules, but even if “Money” did transition sports, he said a rematch is unlikely to be his fight of choice.

Related Conor McGregor opens as big favorite over Floyd Mayweather for potential UFC fight

If Mayweather were to pursue a UFC bout, he said he’d be fighting in the featherweight division, which is no longer McGregor’s weight class. Few would argue Mayweather would pose much of a threat to McGregor in an MMA fight. But even if he took a matchup against an “easier” opponent, White doesn’t think it would be a good outcome.

“Anyone can get caught on any given day,” White said. “But I think (an MMA fight) goes very badly for him.”

For complete coverage of “The Money Fight: Floyd Mayweather vs. Conor McGregor,” check out the MMA Events section of the site.