Is the Large Hadron Collider going to summon the Antichrist next month?
The Large Hadron Collider (Picture CERN)

Better clear out your diary – it sounds like September is going to be a pretty busy month.

Specifically, the Large Hadron Collider is about to ‘unleash hellfire destruction’ on the world, possibly while magnetically summoning a whacking great asteroid to destroy America’s east coast.

Oh, and the Antichrist might well show up, as well as come kind of cosmic stargate to a Hell, according to YouTube conspiracy fan Steve Miller.

So don’t book any holidays on the American east coast, or near CERN in Switzerland, we’d suggest.

There’s not a huge amount of info available on the normal internet about this, but on YouTube, the internet for mad people, there’s PLENTY.

Various self-styled authorities believe that the world is slated to end on either September 15 or September 28 next month – caused either by an asteroid, the Large Hadron Collider, or Jesus, to tie in with the ever-popular Blood Moon Prophecy.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Rumours of impending doom grew so intense in July that NASA stepped in to say there’s definitely no asteroid on the way – so conspiracy theorists now suggest Doomsday might come thanks to the Large Hadron Collider.

The Dark One himself, Lucifer, may even step through and bring ‘catastrophe’ to our world, YouTuber Freedom Fighter 2127 warns.

The reason for this unusual visit from the Lord of Lies?

CERN officially marked the ‘Year of Light,’ earlier this year, and inadvertently fanned the bonfire of internet conspiracy – light equals Lucifer, you see.

YourNewsWire reports, ‘Is CERN the most dangerous thing in the cosmos that could lead to the ultimate destruction of the Earth and the entire universe?’

Spoiler: no it isn’t.

It’s all preposterous rubbish, of course – based on misreading press releases, and misquoting ancient statements from scientists such as Stephen Hawking — but it’s an interesting insight into how conspiracy theories start.

Freedom Fighter 2127 says, ‘ They have officially marked this year as the year of light… which means the year of Lucifer. So we need to understand just how demonic this year is going to be.’

MORE: How to turn your home PC into a UFO detector

MORE: Is this REALLY a cloud? Mysterious UFO pictures from ‘real X-files’ fan conspiracy flames

It’s part of a long tradition of fear of CERN – which believers claim has a logo mirroring the form of the Indian god of destruction, Shiva.

No evidence of Satan has been found (Picture: AFP / Geyyy)

Nigel Watson, author of the UFO Investigations Manual, says, ‘‘CERN is linked with all manner of conspiratorial and apocalyptic fears. Clyde Lewis writing in 2012 on the Ground Zero website notes:

‘Is it just a coincidence that CERN is short for the horned God Cernunnos? Is it also a coincidence that CERN has to go deep underground to do their “god” harnessing experiments? Cernunnos was the god of the underworld.’

Going on to state:

‘The authorities at CERN have done their ritualistic experiments in the underworld and has used unlimited power to turn against the earth. This power has shown that it is causing an increase in earthquake activity and some even claim that it may be the reason for an increase of UFO activity as well.’

Advertisement

Advertisement

‘Now with the CERN experiments starting up again, the fear that they are set on destroying our planet or at least opening portals to other dimensions unleashing terrors of Biblical proportions are being rekindled on the Internet.

‘As far back as the 1970s UFO expert Peter Rogerson observed that UFOs are an essential part of a growing fear of our impending global doom:

‘Thus the UFO is an integral symbol of the growing irrationality with its associated apocalyptophilia of the mid-twentieth century. As the two great monoliths of established religion and scientific positivism are crumbling the vacuum is being filled by horrors from the pages of Tudor history.’

‘As with other perceived horrors of science and technology there is always a belief that they will bring about our ultimate destruction and salvation will only exist for the chosen few. The CERN project rather than Atomic warfare or pollution is now the focus for such fears. Personally I remain unconCERNed.’