Press Release – June 27, 2014
BUSTED: Obama Walks In Shoes Of Former Democrat Campaign Staffer

Minneapolis, Minn. – MNGOP National Committeewoman Janet Biehoffer released the following statement in response to media reports that Rebekah Erler, the St. Anthony woman who met with President Obama yesterday, is actually a former campaign staffer for Sen. Patti Murray (D-WA). The meeting between Erler and Obama is reportedly part of a larger effort to put “human faces on economic policies that he and Democrats are championing.”

“President Obama is so out of touch with reality that he thinks a former Democrat campaign staffer speaks for every Minnesotan,” said MNGOP National Committeewoman Janet Beihoffer. “By using a former political staffer to further his argument, Pres. Obama turned a policy debate into partisan political theater. In Minnesota, we value an honest debate about the facts, not slick, choreographed stunts like this. If this is how the party of Obama, Franken, Nolan and Peterson operate there is no reason for Minnesotans to send them back to Washington.”

Background

Rebekah Erler Is A Former Campaign Staffer For Dem. Sen. Patti Murray. “After Obama chatted with Rebekah Erler, 36, over a cheese-filled ‘Jucy Lucy’ hamburger at the dark-paneled Matt’s Bar in Minneapolis, he drove to a city park where 350 invited participants were waiting. … Erler, whose LinkedIn profile shows she was once a field organizer for Democratic Senator Patty Murray, wrote to Obama earlier this year to express her frustrations about the economy.” (Roberta Rampton, “Obama shares an (atypical) ‘day in life’ of Minnesota woman,” Reuters, June 26, 2014)

Erler Meeting Meant To Put Human Face On Obama Agenda. “Obama’s aides said the visit marks the start of a ‘Day in the Life’ tour in which Obama will visit communities across the country, putting human faces on economic policies that he and Democrats are championing. Obama spent just a short stretch of time with Erler over lunch, not unlike similar stops he’s made on many previous trips outside Washington.” (“Facing headwinds, Obama courts ‘real America’,” Associated Press, June 26, 2014)

###