Beetlejuice 2 Is Ready to Go, Michael Keaton & Winona Ryder Will Return
Beetlejuice 2 is finally ready to shoot. When that will actually happen hasn't been announced. But director Tim Burton has confirmed that the long-anticipated sequel has finally gotten the green light at Warner Bros. and the cast is firmly in place. As he's stated in the past, he will definitely be back in the driver's seat. This is what he had to say in a recent interview with ShowBIzSpy.

"The film is a go and has been approved by the Warner Bros. team, we have talked with the cast members we wanted for the film and they are all on board, this includes both Winona and Michael. We have the script in hand everything is in place all we need to do now is get ready to start filming."

This is certainly good news for fans, who have waited patiently through a dozen stories about the imminent arrival of this sequel that has been 28 years in the making. If the team holds off just a little longer, the movie could get a solid 2018 release date, which would have it arriving on the 30th anniversary of the beloved 1988 classic Beetlejuice, which starred Michael Keaton as the title character alongside Alec Baldwin, Geena Davis, Catherine O'Hara and Winona Ryder. Back in August of last year, it was Winona Ryder who confirmed the sequel was happening, and that she was coming back as Lydia.

"I think I can confirm it. It was very hush-hush top secret ... but then (Tim Burton) was doing some press for 'Big Eyes' and he did an on-camera interview and he said, 'Oh yeah, we're doing it, and Winona's going to be in it.' ... If he said it, I can say it."

While there hasn't been any word from Alec Baldwin or Catherine O'Hara, Geena Davis has said that she is definitely onboard should they ask her to return. At this time, Tim Burton is not sharing any story details, though it appears that the script from screenwriter Seth Grahame-Smith has been turned into the studio. The director's next film is Miss Peregrine's Home for Peculiar Children, which arrives in theaters this fall. He's also directing the live-action Dumbo movie for Disney, which doesn't have a start date or a release date at this time. But it sounds more likely that Dumbo will shoot before Beetlejuice 2. That would certainly line it up for a 30th Anniversary release date, which would make fans very happy! What do you think?