Scott Walker signs chemotherapy drugs bill at Froedtert
SHARE

By of the

Gov. Scott Walker signed legislation Thursday easing costs for cancer patients in critical need of chemotherapy pills — a measure that appeared unlikely to get to him just a month ago.

Jim Logan, 64, of Glendale, who was diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia in 1999, was on hand for the bill signing in a packed mezzanine at the Froedtert and Medical College of Wisconsin Clinical Cancer Center. He praised as "fantastic" the legislation to require more coverage for oral chemotherapy among state-regulated insurers.

"This is going to give people who don't have the economic means the ability to participate in oral therapies," he said. "It's going to make their lives much better. Cancer treatment can be such an expensive economic proposition — and this levels the playing field."

Supporters for five years had tried to pass a measure that would require insurers to cover chemotherapy pills the same as they cover traditional chemotherapy delivered through IVs at hospitals and clinics. Just weeks ago, it appeared that the legislation was set to fail once again.

But on Thursday, Walker told the crowd of about 100 that the bill was a "win all the way around." The GOP governor was flanked by three of the bill's key supporters, Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills), Rep. Pat Strachota (R-West Bend) and Rep. Peter Barca (D-Kenosha).

"This is what you ask for when you send people to Madison. This is what you ask for when you elect people, to set aside partisan differences and ultimately do, in the end, what's just right," Walker said.

James P. Thomas, an oncologist the Medical College of Wisconsin, said the change in state law will give physicians and patients another tool to combat illness.

He said physicians often struggle with how best to explain a cancer diagnosis to a patient.

"But even more difficult is to be in a position to have a good treatment for the patient, and that patient is unable to afford it, and sometimes it's simply because there is this problem with insurance," Thomas said.

In recent weeks, legislative leaders took extreme measures to keep the bill from reaching the floors of the Senate and Assembly, with Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald (R-Juneau) arranging a phantom hearing on the measure to prevent supporters from forcing the proposal to the floor.

Bills can't be pulled to the floor when public hearings are pending, and Fitzgerald readily acknowledged he had no plans to hold the hearing.

After the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported on the ghost hearing and published a tally showing that a large majority of senators, including those among the Republican majority, supported the bill, Fitzgerald brought it to the floor and voted for it himself.

The Senate passed the bill 30-2 on March 18, but the proposal faced a new set of challenges in the Assembly. There, dozens of majority Republicans repeatedly declined to tell the Journal Sentinel where they stood on the bill, but within three days approved it 75-18.

They did so after Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) and other GOP leaders insisted on changes scaling back the proposal to allow insurers to charge patients up to $100 a month for chemotherapy pills.

Those changes sent the bill back to the Senate, which approved it 26-7 on Tuesday. Six of those voting against the measure did so because they saw the Assembly changes as weakening the bill. In addition, Sen. Leah Vukmir (R-Wauwatosa) voted no because of her opposition to putting mandates on insurers.

The $100 cap would be allowed to increase each year at the rate of inflation. People with high-deductible plans would still have to fulfill those large deductibles before the cap would apply.

The new law will take effect in January.

Logan said that could mean a difference between life and death for some patients. Faced with a bone-marrow transplant in his own case, Logan opted instead for a clinical trial using oral drug therapy, which he said has been successful.

"I was given 42 months to live, 15 years ago," he said. "Oral chemo therapy kept me alive."

Patrick Marley and Jason Stein reported for this story in Madison and Lee Bergquist in Milwaukee.

Twitter: twitter.com/patrickdmarley