Feds Issue Travel Advisory for Texas Following Ebola Spread
<National Report>The U.S. Department of State has issued a travel advisory for US citizens considering travel to and from Texas. The advisory was posted early this morning following multiple reports of a Texas town that has been quarantined after a family of five tested positive for the virus.

According to the Department of State website, “U.S. citizens in Texas, and those considering travel to Texas, should evaluate their personal security situation in light of continuing and recently heightened threats from Ebola.” The warning goes on to state, “Travelers should keep informed of local developments by following local press, radio, and television reports prior to their visits.”





“U.S. citizens in Texas should be extremely vigilant with regard to their personal security, particularly in crowded public places such as clubs, hotels, resorts, shopping centers, restaurants, bus stations, and places of worship. U.S. citizens should also remain alert in residential areas, at schools, and at outdoor recreational events. U.S. citizens should use commonsense precautions at all times, to include the following practices: avoid crowded transportation venues; visit only legitimate businesses and tourist areas only during daylight hours; use well-marked taxis and be sure to lock vehicle doors and keep windows up; lock all lodging doors and windows; carry minimal amounts of cash and credit cards; do not wear jewelry which attracts undue attention; know emergency phone numbers; do not resist or antagonize armed criminals; and always be aware of your surroundings. These measures can help ensure your travel to Texas is safe and enjoyable.”

In addition to the advisory, citizens travelling from Texas to other states will undergo additional screenings at various airports across the country. Travelers should expect their temperature to be taken, fingerprinting, blood samples and in rare cases cavity searches. Dan Stevens, a spokesperson with the Department of State, issued a press release stating, “This virus [Ebola] has the potential of causing worldwide damage and it has invaded our borders. We need to consider recent developments as a serious threat. At this point all options are on the table. We have informed the National Guard to be on standby in the event of a quarantine, or the need for a martial law type scenario.”

Screening starts on Saturday at New York’s JFK Airport and will be followed by Washington-Dulles, Newark, Chicago and Atlanta within the next week.

This news follows the death of Thomas Eric Duncan, aka “Patient Zero” at a Dallas hospital earlier today. Duncan was the first person to ever be diagnosed with Ebola on American soil. Soon after Duncan’s death was announced, Michael Monnig, the sheriff responsible for entering Duncan’s home, was also admitted to the hospital with Ebola like symptoms. Hours later, possible infected individual were also reported in Fergus, Tx..

As of press time, no changes have been made with regards to international travel. Those travelling to and from Ebola infected countries can do so at will..