Maryland Middle School Requires Children To Cross Dress For "LGBTQ Appreciation Day" | Jane M. Agni
(St. Leonard, MD) – Parents in the town of St. Leonard, MD were aghast after learning what the staff at Heritage Middle School required children to do for a passing grade. The outrage stems from an event held this past Monday, a day which the school had dubbed “LGBTQ Appreciation Day” instructing children to experience the homosexual lifestyle for a single school day or receive a failing grade.

Students were assigned the different roles throughout LGBTQ culture. Boys were given the task of being masculine homosexuals, feminine homosexuals, cross dressers and a wide variety of other gay archetypes. The young ladies were selected to be lip stick lesbians, or butch lesbians.

The students were partnered with members of the same sex and they were then made to role-played a day in the life of a gay couple. Holding hands, hugging and other innocent displays of affection were both encouraged and rewarded as extra credit by school officials.

This controversial event was the brainchild of school principle Caren Shandel. Caren is a longtime activist for gay rights and also holds the title of first openly transgendered school principle in the Nation. I spoke with Caren about her decision to hold LGBTQ Appreciation Day and she told me the following.









“I won’t rest until there’s an out-of-the-closet homosexual in every family!” Caren Shandel-

For decades the conservative majority has expressed nothing but hatred and disdain towards homosexuals and gay culture. Fortunately, progressive liberal reasoning has gained predominance which has enabled those of us within educational systems to re-educate and replace many of the antiquated ways in which people perceive homosexuals and their allies. The Obama administration has opened up so many doors for us and I look forward to propelling this agenda forward. My goal is to make homosexuality the commonly accepted norm. I won’t rest until there’s an out-of-the-closet homosexual in every family!”

Parents in the area say they’re upset with what went on, claiming they had no prior knowledge of the days events before it took place. Tammy Prescott, a mother of one of the male students who was allegedly required to dress as a female and act submissively to the boy he had been partnered with claims Mrs. Shandel told her child that he would be a “CD (cross dressing) bottom, which is apparently a respected subculture amongst homosexual population. Tammy continued:

“If I had known what kind of deranged event they had been planning I would have taken my child out of that school immediately. I do not believe this activity had a single positive aspect to it, quite the opposite actually. My son has been acting very unusual since that day. He even asked to use my lipstick last week before school. This isn’t right.

It’s not that I’m homophobic. I simply do not think this sort of thing is necessary. How is this supposed to teach a child acceptance? It causes more harm than good…”

The school district has made no comment on the matter but they may be soon forced to do so in front of a judge. Several parents have been in contact with lawyers and are currently taking steps in organizing a class action law suit against the school.

















-->