Kurt Sutter Negotiating Sequel for Sons Of Anarchy
<National Report> As Sons of Anarchy fans are hungover from the series’ finale episode, still reeling from the death of the club king Jackson (Jax) Teller (Charlie Hunnam), critics report that SOA writer and producer Kurt Sutter is in negotiations with FX over a sequel series to the show. While we all know that Sutter has devised a prequel show, featuring the Redwood Original First 9 members, he’s been relatively hushed about a possible Sons sequel, usually denying the possibility of one.

Sons of Anarchy went out in a blaze of glory; with Jax killing a slew of people, his mother Gemma Teller-Morrow (Katey Sagal), and longtime colleague, Wayne Unser (Dayton Callie) included. Before taking his own life, Teller also took the lives of several key characters that would cause trouble for the future of SAMCRO (Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club Redwood Original).

The finale episode left so many questions unanswered. Teller did set up his sons, Abel and Thomas, with the possibility of living a normal life outside of their outlaw town of Charming, but we see Abel twirling the SONS ring that Gemma gave him before she died on his way out of town. We’ve always had the instinct that Abel is his father’s child, and it would be just like Sutter to take that aspect and run with it.





What about the homeless woman? Is she really the symbol of Jesus, or is that just what Sutter wants us to think? Not to mention several other loose ends. Ron Tully (Marilyn Manson) may have killed Juan Carlos Ortiz “Juice” (Theo Rossi), but never had a visit from SAMCRO following. Chucky (Michael Ornstein) was left behind at the Teller-Morrow Garage; what happens to him?

Rumor has it, the sequel series will feature Abel and Thomas as leaders of SAMCRO. Yes, Teller burned the photos, memoirs, scripts, and journals, but that doesn’t remove the MC from their blood. The boys are sure to find their way back to Charming, and reunite with Chibs, Tig, and the rest of the gang, before SAMCRO becomes their charter as well, and we all know Sutter wouldn’t have it any other way.

Chris Anderson, spokesperson for FX Networks, says the storyline for Abel Teller is “complicated”, and deserves a future. He also pointed out that Nero (Jimmy Smits), spent a good portion of the finale promising Wendy (Drea de Matteo) an explanation for Teller’s actions, but never followed through before Teller was dead.

According to Anderson, these facts all open up the opportunity for a sequel series, though FX is unsure of when production would roll out for it. While Sutter is busy with writing for The Bastard Executioner, and also planning out a First 9 prequel, it may be a few years until we see Sons grace our televisions once again.

When asked what Shakespearean play Sons would emulate next time, knowing that this time around was a near perfect replica of Hamlet, Sutter laughed and said “Maybe Romeo and Juliet. It’s all about the fucking fairytale, baby.”. We still aren’t sure if he was joking.

-->