Killer Of "Tejano Queen" Selena, Yolanda Saldivar, To Be Granted Early Release From Prison
Yolanda Saldivar, the woman who murdered beloved Tejano star, Selena Quintanilla-Perez, could be released from prison as early as January 1st, 2015.

The former nurse who later became president of Selena’s budding fan club shot and killed the singer during a argument in a hotel room on March 31st 1995. The murder took place after Saldivar had been confronted over her role in embezzling large sums of money from Selena’s fan club and boutiques.

Saldivar was arrested following an intense standoff with police that lasted several hours. She was convicted of Selena’s murder shortly after being detained and has remained incarcerated ever since. Her sentence has been served primarily in isolation due to death threats from Selena’s loyal fans, spending 23 hours a day for the last 20 years in a 9 by 6 foot cell at the Gatesville prison Mountain View unit. She is permitted to have visitors once a week for two hours at a time.





Saldivar’s original eligibility date for parole was March 30 2025, but due to her failing health and recent legal modifications which allows ailing prisoners to petition for early release, she could be released as soon as January of 2015.

Within the last 4 years Saldivar has been suffering from kidney ailments which require frequent dialysis treatments. Monica Shapiro, who is the current health coordinator for inmates at the Gatesville, prison described her deteriorating condition. “We no longer consider Ms. Saldivar to be a threat to society. Taking into consideration the long term prognosis of this disease being highly unlikely, we would like to assist her in her petition for early release.”

Many Selena fans have already caught wind of Saldivar’s impending release. They didn’t hesitate in sharing their displeasure over the fact that Saldivar may become a free woman once again. Longtime Selena fan, Beatriz Garcia, has already created a petition in an effort to prevent Saldivar from ever being released despite her health issues. “What she did was absolutely unforgivable. Let her rot.”







-->