Casey Anthony Pregnant With Twins
<National Report>Casey Anthony, the woman famously acquitted in 2011 of murdering her daughter Caylee, is confirmed to be pregnant again. This time with twins.

Previous reports on Anthony’s lifestyle in the three years since she was released from prison have described her as being withdrawn, and living like a hermit. Anthony filed for bankruptcy in 2013, claiming to be unemployed and possessing no source of income. She met with agents and publishers in New York last year, hoping to cash in on her notoriety by writing a book but was unable to close a deal. Casey currently appears to live off of a few benefactors who reportedly pay for all of her living expenses. But the days of needing to live off of others may soon be coming to a close for Anthony.

Casey’s New York agent, Jeremy Nieven, confirms that she is indeed four months pregnant with twins, and that she has signed a contract for an initial six episode reality television series that will showcase her pregnancy and subsequently her babies.

“She wants to redeem herself in the eyes of America”, stated Nieven. “Did she make mistakes? Absolutely! But this is the U.S.A., everyone can get a second chance here. And let’s not forget that Casey was found innocent of the charges against her. She was released. She is a free woman now, and this show is going to allow her to make a great life for her new little angels.”

But can people forget Casey Anthony’s actions? Many critics have claimed that Anthony’s acquittal resulted from a flawed prosecution, not from an actual lack of guilt. Can America forget that this woman partied it up at the clubs while hiding the fact that her two-year old daughter decomposed in the woods close to her family home? Can they forget the lies, the evasions and distortions that so easily came from her mouth? Apparently television executives say yes. Her notoriety translates to interest, and interest can translate to ratings.

Casey’s agent refused to disclose the name of the network that had contracted with her for the reality series, saying that a press release was scheduled in September to break the show. Nieven did confirm that the show would be aired on one of the larger cable channels.

Many people have reacted with disgust to the fact that Casey Anthony is pregnant again, and protests and calls for a boycott of the show is almost a certainty. But the real question is whether Americans will watch? Somewhere, someone in television is betting on yes. And Casey Anthony stands to make a lot of money from their bet.

-->