California Implements Statewide Ban On All .45 ACP Ammo
The California Legislature has passed a controversial Assembly Bill that creates a ban on the future sale and ownership of all .45 ACP ammo. The bill states that the ban on the popular ammunition is in effect immediately, however does include a 60 day grace period prior to state law enforcement enforcing the ban.

Though the ban has created a clear divide among the citizens of California, it’s said to be widely supported by political figures across the state. Many politicians and citizens alike feel that that ban is a clear infringement of California citizen’s second amendment rights, however; many feel that the ban is a positive step towards much needed gun control.





Joshua Lancaster, a spokesperson from the office of Governor Jerry Brown, made the following statement to the press, “The time to make clear cut changes surrounding our current gun laws is here. The ban on this unnecessary ammunition is a major step towards a safer society for our children. There are no obvious or justifiable reasons for one to own or use semi-automatic handgun ammunition of that caliber, if 9mm and .40 S&W rounds are sufficient for our police force to protect us with, they are sufficient for any private citizen’s personal protection.

The ban does extend to .45 GAP ammunition; however has an exemption for .45 Colt ammunition, which is used exclusively in revolvers and can often be found at Cowboy – Action games. According to state officials, the .45 Colt ammunition is less of a concern, as statistically far fewer crimes are carried out with the use of revolvers. The bill’s primary objective was to reduce the use of dangerous, high powered, semi-automatic handguns.

California is the first state to ban the .45 ACP ammunition; however several government representatives across the United States have said they will be keeping a close eye on the outcome of the bill. Many representatives from democratic leaning states have indicated they would be willing to follow suit if a clear connection can be made to the reduction of violent crimes. California officials are confident in their ability to show a drastic reduction to violent crimes well before the end of the year and are hopeful the ban will be implemented on a federal level prior to then.











-->