Apple iPhone 5s Fingerprint Database To Be Shared With NSA | Jane M. Agni
(Home Office) – Tech-heads are eager to get their hands on the new Apple iPhone 5S next month and evidently Apple feels the same. This is due to the fact that their latest model comes equipped with fingerprint recognition technology as an added security feature.

Privacy has become a major concern in today’s technologically dominated society. Individuals keeping up with all the latest gadgets also run the risk of becoming exposed to unresolved bugs that could leave the user open to breaches in their personal security.

Apple’s official spokespeople have maintained a vague stance on the potential of sharing their fingerprint database with the NSA. Fortunately, after hours of phone calls I was finally able to speak with an employee that could answer some of my questions.

“Absolutely the databases will be merged. This whole ‘fingerprint scan’ idea originated from someone in our Government. They just didn’t expect to be outed by Snowden, you know.” Said Tim Richardson, District Manager of Apple’s North America Marketing Department. He went on to explain that the NSA and FBI have been compiling a special database for over a year now to use with the new Apple technology. Fingerprints from all over the nation. Cold cases. Fugitives of the law. Missing persons.









The Apple iPhone 5s has back-up power so the device never completely shuts down. Coupled with the phone’s built-in GPS these features will allow police officers to pin-point the criminal so they can be detained quickly and efficiently. Officials expect to apprehend hundreds of suspects within the first months of this initiative.

When asked for a response to individual’s concerns about privacy Mr. Richardson told us:

“Frankly, if a person is foolish enough to allow something as specific and criminally implicit as their fingerprints to be cataloged by faceless corporations and Government officials… Well, you can’t exactly blame us for capitalizing upon it, can you? Personally, I believe this effort will support a greater good. Some of the folks they’re hoping to apprehend are quite dangerous. Besides, it’s not like this is covered in the Constitution.”

Richardson was indeed correct in his latter statement; We looked over the Constitution and couldn’t find a single mention of using fingerprints against a public that willfully submitted them.

While Apple and the NSA may be completely within their rights to use information volunteered by it’s customers, some consumers are soured over the idea.

“I’m old. I’m not good at remembering passwords.” Said one Apple user we spoke with. “I like the idea of easily being able to unlock my Apple device with a fingerprint. But I also shouldn’t have to worry about being tied to a string of murders I committed in the 70’s… That’s not America and that’s not freedom…”

Programmers have been working day and night to have the Apple 5S ready for release in late September. They claim the software is 90% accurate and while there are still some technical issues to iron out, they believe it’s unlikely any mishaps will occur.”











-->