Mall Santa Arrested; The Reason Why Will Shock You
<National Report> FLAGSTAFF, AZ – A Santa-for-hire company faces charges after one of their Santas turned what is normally a joyous experience for all children, into an r-rated show. Darnell Kendrickson, a 42 year old mall Santa, was arrested Black Friday, after he was caught masturbating in front of a large group of children at the Walnut Grove Shopping Mall near Flagstaff, AZ.

Horner’s Santas For Hire, the company that employs Kendrickson, declined to comment when National Report staff inquired about the incident. The company, who seems to have good online reviews, has reportedly never had anything like this happen in their 50+ year business history.

Allegedly, Kendrickson felt at the time of the incident, that he should have been allowed to take a break from duties so he could masturbate in private. When told it was not the time for him to take a break, he reportedly took it upon himself to masturbate in Santa’s chair, in front of hundreds of eager children waiting to meet him.

“Children were screaming, it was awful, just awful,” said Kimberly Robertson, a mom who brought her 2 children to see Santa at the Walnut Grove Mall on Black Friday. “Who does that? I’m appalled. My kids will never come here to visit Santa Claus again.”

Peter James, the mall manager at Walnut Grove, told The National Report that they were not prepared for such a problem. “Never would we have ever thought something like this would happen,” He says. “Our mall prides itself in providing a happy, family-friendly experience for everyone. We will not be using Horner’s Santa Service in the future.”

Police arrested Kendrickson shortly after the incident, and in the days following, the mall has been given a $50,000 fine and may face possible federal charges. It is likely that Horner’s Santas For Hire will receive at least double the amount in a fine, and will also be facing several state and federal charges in connection with Kendrickson’s actions.

Kendrickson certainly had an interesting way of kicking off the Christmas Shopping season. Unfortunately, it appears that he’ll be waiting for the real Santa to come visit him in jail this year. Authorities have stated that nobody has come to post the faux-Santa’s $125,000 bail.

Authorities urge all parents across the nation to call the Safe Santa Hotline at (785)273-0325, to guarantee that your local mall has a Santa that won’t scar your children for life.

-->