Mission of Ukraine to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
The cooperation in the military sphere is carried out in pursuance of the tasks outlined in Annual National Programme for NATO – Ukraine cooperation within the framework of Working plans of NATO – Ukraine Military Committee and Individual Partnership and Cooperation Programme.

The said documents provide for implementation of a wide spectrum of tasks in the short term. Main of which are:

Strengthening of defence and operational capabilities of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the current security conditions;

Obtaining the interoperability of the Armed Forces of Ukraine with NATO’s military units;

Promoting reform and professionalization of Ukrainian army, implementation of the best military standards;

Ensuring the participation of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in NATO-led peacekeeping operations, involvement in NATO Response Force.

Within the framework of military cooperation with NATO, Armed Forces of Ukraine are also involved in a number of Alliance’s projects and initiatives that are aimed at increasing their operational and defence capabilities.

Since 2004, the Armed Forces of Ukraine are taking part in Operational Capability Concept. This concept was created to improve the level of interoperability between the units of partner states that are participating in NATO “Partnership for Peace” program and NATO member-states, to enhance their operational capabilities through the use of leading armies’ standards in training and combat work.

A number of units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine are declared to participate in the project; these units are trained by NATO standards and are appropriately assessed. The above allows such units to participate in NATO-led operations and training exercises, and to get involved in operational duty in multinational military forces of high readiness (led by NATO, EU, and UN).

Since 2008, the Armed Forces of Ukraine are taking part in NATO Air Situational Data Exchange Program. The program was launched in 2001 to cooperate in countering air terrorism.

Participation in the program allows for the exchange of data on air situation in the western and southern regions of Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Turkey, Hungary and Ukraine, and over the Black Sea region. Data exchange is carried out automatically through the contact points of reception and transmission of information in the cities of Lviv and Odesa (Ukraine), Veszprem (Hungary) and Erzurum (Turkey).

In 2012, the Armed Forces of Ukraine joined the Connected Forces Initiative.

The main aim of this initiative is to improve interoperability and increase the ability of NATO’s and partners’ militaries to work together when performing tasks in multinational operations.

Main elements of the Connected Forces Initiative:

Enhanced training of troops and individual training of the personnel with the most effective use of NATO training institutions and centres of excellence;

Increasing the number of military exercises, especially involving NATO Response Force (NRF);

More efficient use of modern technology to facilitate interoperability and integration of required capabilities.

In 2014 the Armed Forces of Ukraine joined the Partnership Interoperability Initiative. The initiative was started to preserve and further develop operational interoperability of NATO member-states and partner countries after the end of NATO-led operation in Afghanistan.

The initiative aims to support the development, diversification and the increase of the list of partner capabilities, which are certified and ready to participate in NATO-led operations and the NRF. Achieving interoperability with NATO partners as part of this initiative is carried out in three dimensions: technical, operational and doctrinal interoperability.