UN Dismisses Michael Brown Case: “We Will Not Be Intervening In The Matter”
<National Report>Parents Lesley McSpadden, and Michael Brown Sr of the late Michael Brown, have taken their plight with the Ferguson PD all the way to the U.N.; A gesture which now appears to have been in vain.

Brown was killed after allegedly reaching for officer Darren Wilson’s pistol during a suspected strong-armed robbery arrest in Ferguson, MO. On Tuesday, the couple met with the United Nation’s Committee Against Torture and asked that they look into what they consider to be a grievous case of police brutality.

The Brown’s are requesting officer Wilson’s immediate arrest and calling for an end to the perceived racial profiling in America.

“We need answers and we need action. And we have to bring it to the U.N. so they can expose it to the rest of the world, what’s going on in small town Ferguson.” said the Brown’s document which can be found here.





The U.N., however, blasted back at the couple after only mere hours of deliberation. In a statement released early this morning, Senior chairmen of the UN’s Committee Against Torture dismissed the couple’s plea entirely.

“The sense of entitlement these people displayed is reprehensible” said chair member, Dr. Amancio Dominguez, in an interview with National Report. “We deal with legitimate and widespread instances of human rights violations, and frankly the issues presented to us here are not even a blip on our radar. It is in our opinion after reviewing all the evidence that the officer in question committed absolutely no wrong doing.”

He continued, “While I feel for the loss endured by these two individuals, I believe they are blinded by grief, and this is simply not the forum which to project those feelings. My colleagues and I went over the surveillance footage, as well as other documents in the case, and we believe that Michael Brown is indeed guilty of the acts of which he is charged.”

Another member of the UN committee told CNN this morning, “We have much more important things to do than involve ourselves in county level legal proceedings. This was an absolute waste of our time. Compared to human rights violations that are prevalent in such 3rd world countries as North Korea and Brazil, America’s plight simply does not compare. While instances of police brutality certainly do exist, we have found that this was no such a case, and we will not be intervening in the matter.”