Eminem Not Dead – Rapper Battles Fake Death Story, Again
LOS ANGELES (LALATE) – Eminem is not dead. Eminem is battling a fake death report today featuring a fictitious hospital. The story, moreover, erroneously claims to have been authored by a reporter from a cable news network. This is, however, not the first time that the rapper has battled fake death reports in the last three years.



Currently, there are roughly a handful of erroneous death reports online striking the rapper. At least one of them originated from Global Associated aka Mediafetcher. In that report, the site erroneously claims that the rapper died “from a waverunner crash in Turks and Caicos.” Fake jet-ski crash stories are not new for Global which has previously used the same to kill off other rappers like Lil Wayne and 50 Cent.

This fake Global report, however, claims a peculiar crash. “Preliminary reports from Turks and Caicos Police officials indicate that the musician struck a concrete boat slip in a marina on Parrot Cay in the Turks and Caicos Islands” claims the fake Global report.

Beside Global, however, another fake report is prompting confusion today. Global Daily erroneously claimed two days ago on July 24 that Eminem died in Los Angeles (and apparently Palo Alto simultaneously). While the article’s title claims the rapper died in “Los Angeles”, the article’s body claims he died inside “Palo Alto Memorial Hospital”. While the geography makes no sense, the hospital’s name is also problematic. There is no such “Palo Alto Memorial Hospital”, located in Palo Alto or Los Angeles.

Today is not the first time that the rapper has battled fake death reports. In August 2009, the rapper battled a fake death story. Months later, on December 25, 2009, a fake car crash report published online featured the musician with a dubious “Route 80” tale from Global.

Eminem is not dead, nor is Wiz Khalifa, Mac Miller, or Waka Flocka.

LALATE ABOUT THIS AUTHOR || Editor in Chief: Maria Stabile | Maria in ten years has propelled LALATE to become a leading news authority in sports, entertainment, and national news, LALATE has been cited in countless international newspapers (including the Wall Street Journal, New York Times and LA Times), international television news broadcasts including ABC News, books including The Iraq War: Origins and Consequences, tv programs including MTV News, and magazines. For over a decade, LALATE has been a proud licensed member of the St Louis, MO Press Club. || TO CONTACT THIS AUTHOR | Email Address: mstabile@lalate.com | Telephone: 314-400-8010 | Follow on Twitter: Twitter.com/LALATE | Biography: http://news.lalate.com/author/maria-stabile/ | LALATE Staff & Physical Address: http://news.lalate.com/staff/