Tom Kenny Not Dead – Voice of SpongeBob Battles Fake Death
LOS ANGELES (LALATE) – Tom Kenny is not dead. Tom Kenny, the voice of “SpongeBob SquarePants”, and current voice of the Ice King on “Adventure Time with Finn and Jake”, is battling a fake death report today. The erroneous report stems from a Twitpic that was dispersed online Sunday. But for Kenny, this is not the first time that someone has wrongly reported that he has died. The culprit today, however, bares a shocking similarity to an attempt to falsely announce Beyonce’s death last year as well.



Kenny is the victim of a fabricated image that claims the actor has died this September 2012. The erroneous Twitpic image distributed online Sunday September 9, 2012 reads “RIP Tom Kenny, the voice of SpongeBob”. It then adds the words “retweet to say thanks for making your childhood happier.” Logs indicate to news that the image was uploaded online roughly twenty-one hours ago, Sunday afternoon. But since then, the image has been retweeted mistakenly nearly seven thousand times. And it’s not stopping.

Tweets obtained by news further reveal that the culprit encouraged others to falsely report Kenny’s death. The tweets read “This Picture Deserves Endless”. But for the beloved actor, this is not the first time that he has battled fake death reports. In 2010, he faced the same such fabricated reports. It remains unclear who was the culprit behind the false reports two years earlier. Moreover, it’s also not apparent if the Twitpic utilized yesterday was dispatched two years ago as well.

Other news reports today dispelling the fake death report indicate that Kenny was the victim of a similar false tale in the last twelve months as well. In fact, a quick perusal of the official SpongeBob SquarePants twitter account and Facebook accounts reveal that it’s business as usual today.

The Twitter SpongeBob account has been tweeting since Sunday as well. Late yesterday, the account joked “There are two “I”s in “motivation.” That’s why people who have it work twice as hard! “. Previously it wrote “I’ll admit, not all of my Krusty Krab menu ideas were a success. I think we can all agree that the ketchup cookie salad was a failure.”

Ironically, within the last half hour, the official Facebook account shared a new image. In it, Patrick reveals he has a new book “How to Open Things, 1st Edition”. It remains unclear who opened this round of erroneous death tales today. But fans of Kenny are furious once they are opening the false Twitpic today.

Today is not the first time a celebrity has battled a fake Twitpic death report. In August 2011, Beyonce suffered false claims of her death fueled by Twitpics and Photoshop. Someone that weekend took a picture of Beyonce, then took a screengrab of a leading news website. With the use of Photoshop, they inserted Beyonce’s picture into the screengrab and added the caption that Beyonce had died. They then tweeted the Twitpic. Fans who saw the picture believed they were looking at a real, current screengrab of the website announcing Beyonce’s death.

Kenny is married to Jill Talley. Talley plays the role of Karen on SpongeBob SquarePants. The two both appeared on The Edge from 1992 to 1993 on FOX. Other fans will recognize her as the voice of Sarah Dubois on The Boondocks. Tom Kenny is not dead, nor is David Guetta or Ryan Seacrest.

LALATE ABOUT THIS AUTHOR || Editor in Chief: Maria Stabile | Maria in ten years has propelled LALATE to become a leading news authority in sports, entertainment, and national news, LALATE has been cited in countless international newspapers (including the Wall Street Journal, New York Times and LA Times), international television news broadcasts including ABC News, books including The Iraq War: Origins and Consequences, tv programs including MTV News, and magazines. For over a decade, LALATE has been a proud licensed member of the St Louis, MO Press Club. || TO CONTACT THIS AUTHOR | Email Address: mstabile@lalate.com | Telephone: 314-400-8010 | Follow on Twitter: Twitter.com/LALATE | Biography: http://news.lalate.com/author/maria-stabile/ | LALATE Staff & Physical Address: http://news.lalate.com/staff/