BREAKING: Trump Wants Congress To Declare War – Against ‘People In The U.S.’
Just when you thought that perhaps Donald Trump had decided to tone down some of his more incendiary positions, here he comes with a bombshell of a revelation about how he would prosecute the “War on Terror.”

On an episode of The O’Reilly Factor that will air tonight, Trump essentially says that he’d like the United States Congress to authorize war against people in the United States who may—or may not—be Islamic terrorists.

This is a war against people who are vicious, violent people that we have no idea who they are, where they come from. We are allowing tens of thousands of them into our country now so on top of wars on foreign land wait ’til you see what happens in the future…It’s probably not going to be pretty. I hope I’m wrong about that, but it’s probably not going to be pretty. It’s not speculation. We’re allowing people into our country. We don’t know who they are, where they come from.

So, in addition to potentially banning Muslims from the country altogether (a proposal Trump has yet to explain the logistics of, let alone account for the Constitutionality of), the presumptive nominee of the Republican Party now openly wonders whether perhaps we should declare pre-emptive war on those Muslims who are already here and who may—or may not—mean us harm.

Because, after all, “we don’t know who they are, where they come from,” though in most cases, it should be noted, we do know exactly who they are and where they came from.

It is unclear how non-Muslim Americans would react to a declaration of war that might include a front right here in the homeland. Some citizens were vehemently opposed to the idea of military operations conducted in the U.S. when they were under the impression that Jade Helm was anything more than a routine training exercise. The prospect of an actual, declared war being waged within our borders may well test the resolve of those who prefer the government to play as small a role as possible in their lives.

It appears that Donald Trump has no intention of acknowledging the distinction between Muslims in general and the violent extremists who pervert Islam. This might lead one to wonder whether Trump’s new “War on Terror” would also target Christian extremists in this country who perpetrate mass casualty events in the name of their God. Congress will certainly want to weigh in on these issues if and when a President Trump makes his request.

Featured image via Getty Images