Family, friends remember Colleen Hufford, who was killed in at attack at Moore workplace
Colleen Hufford’s love of family and the sport of hockey were evident at her funeral Friday.

In the program for her memorial service, she is seen smiling outside in a photograph with her husband, daughter and granddaughter. In the audience at the service, a number of people wore hockey jerseys. A red Oklahoma City Blazers jersey was draped over her casket.

An estimated 450 people gathered Friday afternoon at Southgate Baptist Church for a “celebration of life” service. Attendees included family, friends, neighbors, co-workers and Hufford’s hockey family.

Hufford, 54, was killed Sept. 25 in an attack at Vaughan Foods in Moore, where she worked.

Cars filled the church parking lot and spilled onto a grass area behind the church. The songs “Amazing Grace,” “Mama” and “Fallen Angel” played. People were moved to laughter and tears, said former Blazers Coach Doug Sauter, a friend of Hufford’s who served as a pallbearer.

“It was a beautiful service,” Sauter said.

Hufford was born in Landstuhl, Germany, and her family later moved to Great Falls, Mont., where she was raised. She and her husband, KC, settled in Moore, where their daughter, Kelli, was born. Her greatest joy in life was her family, especially her granddaughter, Riley, her obituary states.

Hufford was an avid hockey fan. She loved cheering the Blazers and later the Oklahoma City Barons. She and her husband seldom missed a game, Sauter said.

The program for Hufford’s service included two Barons logos and a Blazers logo. The Oklahoma City hockey family was well-represented at the service, Sauter said. One former Blazer, Charlie Elezi, flew in from Michigan for the service. Another former player, Marty Standish, served as a pallbearer.

Sauter said the world needs more people like Hufford. She always had a smile, and she was a wonderful, beautiful wife, mother, grandmother and hockey fan, he said.

“Anyone that knew Colleen liked her and loved her,” he said Friday.

Countless people have reached out via social media to offer condolences and messages of support to Hufford’s family. Some asked about Hufford’s favorite color so they could honor her by wearing it on Friday.

A memorial fund set up online to help Hufford’s family with funeral expenses states that Hufford was a “beautiful soul who will be remembered for always having a smile on her face and a kind word to offer.” She would give someone the shirt off her back, unless it was a favorite jersey, the memorial fund page states.

Anyone who would like to contribute can go to Fundme.com and search for “Colleen Hufford Memorial.”

Hufford’s family issued a statement this week thanking people for their support.

“Losing our mom, wife and grandmother has been one of the most difficult challenges any of us have faced in our lives,” the statement said. “For her life to have been taken in such a tragic act of violence adds a depth of grief we are trying to comprehend. We want to thank the wonderful family and friends who have come to our aid during this very difficult time with messages of hope and prayer. We will miss her dearly.”