‘Black brunch’ protesters interrupt diners in NYC, Oakland
In a twist on sit-in-style protests, civil rights activists entered several restaurants in New York City and Oakland, Calif., on Sunday in what organizers billed as “Black Brunch.”



About three dozen people participated in demonstrations in New York, where they momentarily “disrupted” meals at popular midtown eateries, including Lallisse, Maialino and Pershing Square — places protesters identified as predominantly “white spaces.”







#BlackBrunch #NYC is about to begin. Follow for updates as the day continues. — BlackBrunchNYC (@BlackBrunchNYC) January 4, 2015

RT @Zxmurray last time black folks was this black n proud on Park Ave= when the Jeffersons moved in #blackbrunch #NYC pic.twitter.com/5ho0pYHySs — BlackBrunchNYC (@BlackBrunchNYC) January 4, 2015



At each stop, demonstrators read the names of African-Americans killed by police.









#blackbrunchnyc every 28 hours a Black unarmed civilian is murdered by the State. This is why we disrupt. pic.twitter.com/8L8golSUZy — Sharmin Ultra (@sharminultraa) January 4, 2015



“Every 28 hours, a black person in America is killed by the police,” the protesters said. “These are our brothers and sisters. Today and every day, we honor their lives.”









Another restaurant: we interrupt your brunch to honor the names of victims of police brutality. #blackbrunchnyc pic.twitter.com/k1W3YzYgMF — Sharmin Ultra (@sharminultraa) January 4, 2015



There were no immediate reports of arrests, and the protests were said to be largely peaceful — though there were reports of verbal clashes with brunchgoers and waitstaff.









The manager at Resto NYC tried to literally push one of our comrades in order to push us out. We did not move. — jovitasmagnolia (@JovaLynne) January 4, 2015

#blackbrunchnyc at Penelope. Some stood, some grabbed arms and screamed in our faces. We know which side you're on. pic.twitter.com/tA9BTRJCqi — Reuben Telushkin (@telushk) January 4, 2015



Others appeared to show solidarity with the demonstrators.









We're asking brunchgoers to STAND for black life. A good number in the last spot stood or raised their fists. #blackbrunchnyc #BlackBrunch — Reuben Telushkin (@telushk) January 4, 2015

#BlackBrunch protesters entering Oak restaurants 2 read names of dead. Manager of Forge: "I think it's beautiful." pic.twitter.com/1eOTlOcEEP — Lee Romney (@leeromney) January 4, 2015



The brunch demonstrations originated in Oakland late last year during nationwide protests triggered by the police killings of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., and Eric Garner in Staten Island.









We interrupt your brunch time to let you know there is a war on Black lives. We will not stay silent. #BlackBrunchNYC pic.twitter.com/LeDDQeEKGB — Sharmin Ultra (@sharminultraa) January 4, 2015



On Saturday in Berkeley, Calif., demonstrators participated in a “black brunch” protest that wasn’t limited to restaurants.