Thousands of DNA tests are not being performed in Oklahoma
Law enforcement agencies neglected to perform DNA tests on tens of thousands of people convicted of serious misdemeanors, despite a provision in state law for such testing, Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation officials said at a hearing Tuesday.

People convicted of felonies are routinely tested, with their DNA profiles going into a database used by authorities to get leads on serious crimes. Those convicted of 18 categories of serious misdemeanors, including negligent homicide, resisting arrest, and breaking and entering, can be tested, but these tests are usually not done, said Andrea Swiech, OSBI division director.

“It’s very disappointing,” Swiech said after the hearing Tuesday at the state Capitol. “We struggled to get the DNA law expanded to include those misdemeanors, but the numbers are so low. No doubt more crimes could be solved if we had full testing.”

Only 495 people convicted of these misdemeanors statewide had their cheeks swabbed for DNA tests since 2009, when the law was expanded, she said. That’s out of nearly 30,000 people who were convicted of these crimes and were eligible for such testing, according to conviction statistics not including Tulsa and Oklahoma counties.

The state Corrections Department routinely swabs felons to get their DNA when they are processed into prison, and 123,000 samples have been collected this way.

But it’s up to local law enforcement to test those convicted of qualifying misdemeanors, using kits provided by and returned to the OSBI.

Swiech said perhaps law enforcement agencies have a hard time keeping track of which misdemeanors qualify for DNA collection and which don’t.

“Some education needs to be done,” Swiech said. “It’s the responsibility of law enforcement. We’ve offered training in the past. We provide the kits free of charge.”

OSBI testimony

Jimmy Bunn Jr., chief legal counsel of the OSBI, said local law enforcement may not realize this is their responsibility, or the practicalities of doing the test may be difficult for them since those convicted of these misdemeanors often are processed in groups and quickly leave custody after conviction.

“I think it’s a missed opportunity,” Bunn said after the hearing.

Swiech and Bunn testified at a hearing in which various speakers described how DNA tests performed on people arrested for less serious crimes can result in convictions for violent crimes like rape and murder.

Rep. Jerry McPeak, D-Warner, said people convicted of misdemeanors should be tested at the time they are convicted in a secure courtroom.

“I feel like it’s a pretty flimsy excuse that they are getting gone when you got all those people standing there with guns,” he said.

Cleveland County Sheriff Joe Lester communicated with his office during the hearing and said his agency would immediately begin the additional testing.

Rep. Lee Denney, R-Cushing, asked for the interim study hearing after failing in several previous attempts to get the Legislature to pass a law mandating DNA testing after arrest, rather than after conviction, as is now the case.

State lawmakers have defeated such measures out of concerns for individual liberties.

Denney plans to introduce DNA testing legislation again next session.

N.M. woman testifies

In emotional testimony, Jayann Sepich, of Carlsbad, N.M., described the death of her 22-year-old daughter, Katie, who was raped, strangled and set on fire on Aug. 30, 2003, after spending an evening with friends.

She disappeared while walking about six blocks to her home.

Sepich worked to require DNA testing of felony arrestees, and “Katie’s Law” was passed in New Mexico in 2006.

A man was arrested in December of that year after his DNA matched DNA found on Katie Sepich’s body.

He was convicted of her rape and murder, and was sentenced to 69 years in prison without the possibility of parole.

Sepich said that had the law been in force at the time of her daughter’s death, Gabriel Avila could have been caught later that same year when he was arrested on a felony burglary charge. She discussed several other cases in various states where felons who didn’t have to submit DNA samples went on to commit numerous heinous crimes.

“I’m hoping that Oklahoma will join the 28 other states that are using this and finding such tremendous success because this doesn’t take away our freedom; this enhances and ensures our freedom,” she said.

McPeak, one of the most vocal opponents of DNA testing at the time of arrest, said this would violate personal freedom.

However, he said he would support legislation requiring such testing after a judge orders a person to trial.