NewsWerthy is your authority for super-serious, objective journalism — Okay, look, if you’ve made it this far, and you still don’t realize that this is a tongue-in-cheek satire website, then we would like to say “Welcome to the Internet.”

Our motto here at NewsWerthy is “Take. Life. Srsly.” This is what we call Irony.

You see, the political climate in America has changed a lot in the past 10 years or so — especially since November 2016. While truly legitimate news sources are (obviously) critical to informing the masses and preserving this great democracy, we also believe that satire has a very important place in the conversation.

Why is that?









Perhaps most importantly, no matter how bad the politics get, we have to remember to laugh at the craziness from time to time. This doesn’t mean that you don’t have to care, but take a minute to cheer up about it! After all, what is the point of life if we’re going to just run around being pissed off all the time?

However, we believe that satire also has utility in affecting change in a free democracy. This is because, in America, we have the freedom to criticize, mock, ridicule, and flat out troll our public officials and our government. Satire can be viewed as a form of activism and protest. Satire creates conversations about real topics! It brings people together who otherwise wouldn’t have seen eye-to-eye on some things.

For example: We wrote an article about how Kim Jong Un won a bet with Xi Jinping to get Trump to cook him dinner in the White House. On the face of it, this is a ridiculous story. Of course that didn’t happen. Nevertheless, the story started a conversation about how President Trump — the self-proclaimed master of negotiations — is being walked on by the leadership of China and North Korea. THAT is a very real issue.

But … But … You’re spreading #FAKENEWS!!!

Meh, not really.

We hear that one all the time. Nearly every story we write gets replies like, “Fake News!” or “What are your sources?!”

This just fuels our fire. Satire is not fake news. I mean, I guess technically it is, but not in modern parlance. Fake news is really when people are trying to spread a false news story as if it is true. For example, “I had a million and a half people at my inauguration,” or “I know the war in the Middle East better than the generals.”

At NewsWerthy, we make no claim that our stories are true, and we have no intention for people to take them as the truth — No matter how hilarious it is when it happens.

Bottom line: If you’ve been fooled by anything NewsWerthy has written, you really need to reevaluate how you intake information. Fact check everyone. Not just satire websites. Fact check the big dogs too. That problem is yours to solve.