Detroit Man Threatened With Jail For Failing To Pay Support For Child That’s Not His
The state of Michigan has ordered Carnell Alexander (pictured) to pay child support or face jail time, but the irony is that the child in question is not even his, according to ABC News.

SEE ALSO: High School Coach Arrested For Biting Fellow Colleague

Alexander reportedly owes the state some $30,000 in back child support payments. The Detroit resident first learned about his alleged delinquent tally via an officer back in the early ’90s during a routine traffic stop who informed him that there was a warrant out for his arrest.

Even though the officer reportedly told Alexander he was a deadbeat dad, Alexander knew he didn’t have any children.

According to the state, though, Alexander fathered a child back in 1987 and ignored a court order to support the boy whom he had never met. When Alexander eventually found the woman who had been claiming that he had fathered her child, he requested a DNA test to confirm his paternity.

The DNA test proved what Alexander had been claiming all along: he was not the Father of that woman’s child. And while Alexander reportedly discovered that the child’s real father was already involved in the boy’s life, oddly enough, the state did not go after the real Father for support.

When Alexander presented the DNA results to the presiding judge, the deck was still stacked against him. “Case closed. I gotta pay for the baby,” Alexander told ABC News.

But how did Alexander get entangled in a paternity case?

Alexander’s ex had a baby and didn’t know who was the child’s father. She reportedly needed state assistance, so the case worker demanded that she name a Father for the child. Alexander, who only went up to the eighth grade education-wise, decided to help his ex so that she could receive state assistance.

According to the unnamed woman, she did not realize that the state would go after the child’s father for monetary support.

The state of Michigan unfortunately does not have paternity fraud laws that protect men.

Alexander, who had served some prison time for a crime committed as a youth, refuses to pay a single cent for a child he did not father, and states, that instead, he is willing to do the time for his conviction, “I will go to jail if I have to because I am tired of the mishandling of the case.”

For now, however, a presiding judge has decided that Alexander will not be placed behind bars and has put his decades-long case on hold until next month, when his volunteer lawyer can argue the facts in his defense.

Also On News One: