Did the Mossad Blow Up the Malaysian Airlines Jet? Not this time.

UPDATED and CORRECTED: It is now clear that in this case the Mossad did not blow up the plane, even though it did precisely this in the case of Pan Am 103. Instead, the Mossad and its allies faked the ‘crash’ and/or ‘disappearance’ of the Malaysian craft, then laying blame at least initially on various Muslim groups and countries, attempting to associate the disappearance with Iranians traveling on forged or stolen passports.

Therefore, this post has undergone a number of changes and the original focus of identifying the Mossad as saboteur changed to revealing its role in fabricating the event.

Who blew up the Malaysian Airlines aircraft en route from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing? Who was on that jet that would be necessary to assassinate (actually, no one blew up the plane, because this was a fake vanishing of an airplane, a hoax crash or disappearance, unlike a real bombing as occurred on PanAm)? I t was surely destroyed through sabotage.

These are valid questions based upon the media reports indicating that the plane simply vanished. According to the standard reports stolen passports were used by unknown individuals to apparently board the jets. The use of two stolen passports has been confirmed.

If this were really the case, who else is there to suspect other than the Mossad? It is that entity alone which has a history of committing such high crimes through the use of forged identities.

It is their exclusive system, that is these rabid Zionist Jews, who have routinely committed great crimes against humanity. It is they who are responsible for murdering people outright through the means of deception – assisted through the reliance on forged identities.

According to the story line some group of treacherous ones plotted a plot to take down that jet, killing all on-board. The use of the stolen passports is categorical proof of such a plot, and the likely culprit is the Mossad.

Filthy Mossad: it has the history of taking down airplanes and also blowing people up in public transport. It routinely murders people by the dozens, hundreds, and thousands, routinely. Among the most rabid of its treacherous who foment such plots are American Jews. The native Israelis themselves are also exceedingly treacherous and are fully capable of destroying such people, that is the people who might be coincidentally on the public transport vehicles/systems they target.

According to the multiplicity of reports the two passports which were used maliciously were stolen in Thailand. This is the domain of the Mossad. It has already been fully established that Jewish spies operate such a ring in that country. Yet, they do so also in parts of China. So, whether in the case of a hoax or a real case of public terror, if it involves stolen passports the Mossad alone has the history of perpetrating it.

The case of Israeli spy and arch-murderer Zev William Barkan is typical of the plots of the Mossad. It demonstrates how these filthy ones freely commit great treachery in the land, wantonly murdering the innocent to further their wicked aims.

Spy rings involved in identity theft are the domain of the Mossad, especially in China and southeast Asia. It is absolute: only the Mossad is known to routinely steal passports, sometimes by brute force, systematically in Thailand. This cabal of criminals is capable of taking down an airliner, such as a 777, senselessly killing all on board and would do so without the slightest hesitation or remorse.

The filthy mole was so rabid in his hate that he blew up the infrastructure of nearly half the town. It matters not to the Zionists, whether they murder a few dozen or a few hundred, rather, a few thousands and millions. What do they care? They own the systems of power. They will never be brought to justice, because the ‘in’ – justice system is within their hands.

http://www.nknews.org/2013/06/the-odd-tale-of-a-lone-israeli-spy-and-north-korea/

Who was on that airliner that the Mossad wanted dead? Only a bomb could have caused it to simply disappear from radar. A list of the nationalities on-board is published, as follows:

Breakdown of Passengers Aboard Missing Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370

China – 153, including one infant

Malaysia – 38

Indonesia – 12

Australia – seven

France – three

United States – three, including one infant

New Zealand – two

Ukraine – two

Canada – two

Russia – one

Italy – one

Taiwan – one

Netherlands – one

Austria – one

http://www.nydailynews.com/news/world/contact-lost-plane-carrying-239-passengers-beijing-officials-article-1.1714766#ixzz2vPuqPVBq

N ote the loss of two Ukrainian nationals. Who were they? Perhaps more importantly, there were 38 Malaysians lost, most of whom would be Muslims. Even if there was no specific target, though, there was a general target, which is Malaysia, the people of Malaysia, and Malaysian Airlines itself.

NYDN Caption: Family members look at a wedding album of Norliakmar Hamid and Razahan Zamani, passengers on a missing Malaysia Airlines Boeing 777-200 plane, as they anxiously wait for news early Saturday morning in Kuala Lumpur. Malaysia and Vietnam are leading a search for the lost jet. It is now believed, based on new information posted on this site, that all such family members are faking it and are, therefore, cohorts of this Zionist plot.

AHMAD YUSNI/EPA NYDN Caption: Malaysian Airlines CEO Ahmad Jauhari Yahya (center), along with other Malaysian Airlines staff, announce the missing of MH370 Malaysian Airlines aircraft at a press conference Saturday.

It was this country which condemned in an international conference the Zionist entity as a criminal regime. Jewry has sought revenge ever since, and this terrorist attack against the Malaysian nation, and, of course, all other nations of the world is just the kind of revenge that the Zionists consistently perpetrate.

The Zionist regime was decidedly charged with crimes against humanity – war crimes and more – by the Malaysia-led commission:

https://jhaines6.wordpress.com/tag/kuala–lumpur-war-crimes-commission/ ‎ 21 Aug 2013 – Posts about Kuala Lumpur War Crimes Commission written by Jean. …State of Israel Charged for “Crime of Genocide and War Crimes”, Kuala LumpurTribunal … Posted in Financial/economic information, Illuminati/Terrorism/Corruption,… Genocide Convention, Israel, KUALA LUMPUR, Kuala Lumpur War

Therefore, the most likely culprits in this obvious terror attack are rabid extremist Zionist Jews, just like the ones that blew up the WTC, just like those vile ones who blew to smithereens the Madrid trains and the London subways. Our condolences are to all those who have suffered their loss. This was, the relatives and loved ones should know, the result of sabotage, not an actual accident.