BUILD SOARING MEMORIAL
At first, Donald Trump didn’t want to talk about the terrible events that have changed our city’s skyline more than anything the mega-developer has ever erected. But yesterday, we did talk on the phone about what should happen at the site of the World Trade Center.

“Once they get it cleared – and that is going to be a very long process – we will all have a better idea of what can be done on the site,” Trump said. “The current mindset is to put up new towers, and I agree with that.”

But, he said, they shouldn’t be replicas of the downed buildings. “To be blunt, they were not ‘great’ buildings,” he said. “They only became great upon their demise last Tuesday.”

What Trump is thinking of is great, commanding architecture. “What goes up there should be a form of memorial to the dead,” he said. “The buildings need to be a soul-soaring statement of our faith in the future.”

Trump (who is looking at erecting the world’s tallest building in Chicago and who has the world’s highest apartment building across from the United Nations) said he didn’t think people would be afraid to live or work high up after last week’s outrage.

“This is a city largely based on great skyscrapers, and they will always be the essence of New York,” he said. “That won’t change, just as the character of the people who live here will not be altered by this tragedy.”

Sting fling shut down

Even if they hadn’t lost a close friend in the World Trade Center disaster, Sting and his wife, Trudi Styler, wouldn’t have gone ahead with his 50th birthday party celebration in Marrakesh Sept. 28-30. “They are caring people who think about the world,” says an associate. “Of course, it would be inappropriate to have thrown a party.”

But what a party it was supposed to have been. Rock and entertainment royalty – Madonna, Bruce Springstein, Tom Hanks, to name a few – were flying into the exotic Moroccan city for three days of feasting, horseback riding in the desert and impromptu concerts.

Mr. Jackson takes action

The pop world is having as hard a time as everyone else trying to find the right way to cope with and respond to the tragedy. I hear that Michael Jackson is hastily trying to put together today’s equivalent of the “We Are the World” spectacular he helped organize for the fight against famine in Africa more than 20 years ago. Michael is said to believe he can put things together quickly because many of the stars needed for such a concert appeared with him at Madison Square Garden just 10 days ago.

Madonna does her bit

Madonna is helping, too. The proceeds of her L.A. concert (a sellout, packed with VIPs, after being postponed from Tuesday to Saturday night) have been earmarked for the various relief efforts. They say Madonna displayed her patriotism by wearing an Old Glory skirt, but pop stars do things like that. They also say there were a few boos from the audience when she said she wants peace, not war.

Farewell, Freddy

It seems like death is all around us. Dominick Dunne called to tell me his old pal, Freddy de Cordova, passed away at the weekend. He was Johnny Carson’s “Tonight” producer for decades and one of the most powerful and most courted men in the entertainment business. De Cordova, in his mid-80s and in poor health, was only admitted to the movie actors’ home two weeks ago. There’s a huge waiting list for this facility and Freddy’s elegant wife, Janet, had to enlist the help of Edie Wasserman and Ann Douglas to have him admitted.

Long-ago date of infamy

Readers are still calling and writing about my mention of Joe DiMaggio learning about Pearl Harbor during an exhibition baseball game in Chicago. Joe’s friend and foot doctor, Rock Positano, just faxed me to say there’d been a misunderstand-ing. The game Joe told him about was on Dec.7, but, according to Rock, it was in a warm southern state, maybe Florida. “Joe could remember the ‘wave’ of silence that traveled around the stadium upon learning of the attack,” Positano says.