Nugent, Ted (Board Member)
Republican Party (GOP)

In an August 2, 2012 op-ed for the Washington Times, Nugent wrote about proposed reforms in the wake of a mass shooting that occurred at a movie theater in Aurora, Colorado on July 20, 2012. In that shooting, severely mentally ill gunman James Holmes killed 12 people and wounded 58 others. Nugent commented, “According to the kind, caring and considerate left, you have every right to be a crazy druggie and roam the streets with no means of support. Heck, they even help nut-jobs occupy Wall Street and beyond. Surely, the unarmed and helpless will someday bring peace to the world, end world hunger and Rodney King’s dream of everyone getting along will become a reality. No wonder they call it dope. Years ago the left clamored that mental institutions violated the rights of those with mental illnesses. The American Civil Liberties Union even sued on their behalf. The result was the doors of the cuckoo nests were flung open and the patients stumbled out. Now they are everywhere. You can’t visit any city in America without encountering dirty people who are severely mentally impaired roaming the streets. Pushing shopping carts, mumbling to themselves, sleeping under bridges or in parks and basically being a nuisance, they ultimately endanger themselves. Most are not violent, just certifiably crazy by anyone’s standards. The real discussion that needs to occur in America is how we finally throw off the shackles of political correctness, quit worrying about ‘feelings’ and simply restrict the rights of psychotics by making it easier to lock them up for their safety and the safety of others. Advocating additional gun laws and gun-free zones is crazy. Crazy talk like that can get you killed.” Rodney King was an African-American construction worker who was beaten by Los Angeles police officers during a traffic stop in 1991. Four police officers from the LAPD who took part in the incident were later tried. Three of them were acquitted, and the jury failed to reach a verdict regarding the fourth. The acquittals are generally considered to have triggered the 1992 Los Angeles riots, in which 53 people were killed, and over 2,000 injured. During the riots, King appeared on television and asked, "Can we all get along?"