Nomination Facts
241 names were submitted for the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize, 53 of which are organizations. The Nobel Committees in Physics, Chemistry, Physiology or Medicine, Literature and the Prize Committee for Economic Sciences each usually receives 250-300 names every year, but this is the highest number of nominations for the Nobel Peace Prize ever. The names of the nominees cannot be revealed until 50 years later.

Can I nominate someone for the Nobel Prize? Qualifications to nominate candidates vary somewhat among the different Nobel Prize Committees. To find out who meets the criteria for submitting proposals for an award, see information for each Nobel Prize category:



| Physics | Chemistry | Medicine | Literature | Peace | Economics |

Has X been nominated as a candidate for the Nobel Prize? Information about the nominations, investigations, and opinions concerning the award is kept secret for fifty years.

What about the rumours circling around the world about certain people being nominated for the Nobel Prize this year? Well, either it's just a rumour, or someone among the invited nominators has leaked information. Since the nominations are kept secret for 50 years, you'll have to wait until then to find out.

Is it possible to nominate someone for a posthumous Nobel Prize? No, it is not. From 1974, the Statutes of the Nobel Foundation have stipulated that a Prize cannot be awarded posthumously, unless death has occurred after the announcement of the Nobel Prize. This happened in 1996 when William Vickrey died only a few days after the announcement of the Prize in Economics.



Before 1974, the Nobel Prize has only been awarded posthumously twice: to Dag Hammarskjöld (Nobel Peace Prize 1961) and Erik Axel Karlfeldt (Nobel Prize in Literature 1931).

Was Stalin ever nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize? Joseph Stalin, the Secretary General of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (1922-1953), was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1945 and 1948 for his efforts to end World War II.



Jane Addams was nominated 91 times between 1916 and 1931, when she was finally awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. By contrast Emily Green Balch, Fridtjof Nansen and Theodore Roosevelt received the Nobel Peace Prize the first year they were nominated.



Search the Nomination Database for the Nobel Peace Prize, 1901-1955.

Are three nominations enough to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine? Frederick G. Banting and John Macleod were awarded the 1923 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine the first year they were nominated (with three nominations) for their discovery of insulin. By contrast, Robert Koch was nominated 55 times over 4 years before he received the Prize in 1905 for his discoveries concerning tuberculosis.



Search the Nomination Database for the Nobel Prize in Medicine 1901-1951.