State to pay $15,000 in settlement of suit against Vukmir
SHARE Sen. Leah Vukmir

By of the

Madison — Taxpayers are paying $15,000 in attorneys fees and damages and state Sen. Leah Vukmir is turning over documents to a liberal group as part of a settlement over a lawsuit under the state's open records law.

The case deals in part with official records on Vukmir's personal email account. The settlement avoids a showdown over when legislators are immune from open records lawsuits.

The documents stem from Vukmir's involvement with the American Legislative Exchange Council, which works with corporations and conservatives to write model legislation that can be introduced in state legislatures throughout the country. Vukmir serves as ALEC's second vice chairwoman, the third-highest position on the board.

The Madison-based Center for Media and Democracy sued the Wauwatosa Republican in June, contending she had violated the law by not turning over ALEC records.

Brendan Fischer, legal counsel for the center that sued Vukmir, said the state will pay $12,500 in legal fees and $2,500 in damages.

"It's an acknowledgment that she withheld records that she shouldn't have withheld," Fischer said.

Fischer said the center made two requests for documents from Vukmir about a May 2013 ALEC conference in Oklahoma City.

Vukmir gave no documents in response to one request and a limited number to the other, he said.

The two sides agreed to have Vukmir's personal email searched by an independent party in the presence of a staffer from the center. The independent party was able to find a "significant number" of documents using basic search terms such as "ALEC," Fischer said.

An aide to Vukmir had no immediate comment.

In a statement, Vukmir acknowledged that her office had not turned over some emails from her personal Yahoo account and said it would do so now.

"I regret the technical issues we had fulfilling this request, but I have now fulfilled the request and turned over all records. Additionally, I have worked to identify the problems we encountered through this process and have taken action to ensure that this will not be an issue in the future," Vukmir said in a statement.

Fischer said the statement that the records were withheld due to an error was a "hard argument to swallow."

In her statement, Vukmir said, "I look forward to working with (the center) in the future to ensure access to public records."

In September, Vukmir filed a motion in Dane County Circuit Court arguing she was immune from any lawsuit during a two-year legislative session — a claim that, if successful, could have allowed lawmakers to dodge litigation during their entire legislative careers. Vukmir was represented by Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen's Department of Justice.

But then Vukmir and the center filed a joint request with the court to halt the case because they had gone into settlement talks.