4 MARINES SHOT DEAD, 1 COP DOWN in Multiple Terror Attacks on US Military Bases in #Chattanooga, ISIS Tweeted Warning
Two military sites/personnel were attacked today. The shooting attack began on the U.S. Naval Recruiting Center on Lee Highway in Chattanooga, and ended at the U.S. Naval Reserve Center on Amincola Highway this morning.

Four Marines were shot dead, one police officer is “down” (wounded) in connection with the shooting, Chattanooga Mayor Andy Berke told reporters.

An attack on a US soldier is an attack on every American.

This morning an ISIS supporter tweeted this at 10:34 am — the shooting started at 10:45. UPDATE: The tweet appears to be Pacific time – so the tweet was posted after the shooting began.



Tweet hat tip Jim Hoft.

The gunfire went on for 20 minutes. War in the streets. For months, the Islamic State has been exhorting its Muslim followers to target and kill US military personnel. Last October, an Army intelligence bulletin is warned U.S. military personnel to be vigilant after Islamic State militants called on supporters to scour social media for addresses of their family members – and to “show up [at their homes] and slaughter them.”

After the jihad attack on our free speech event in Garland, Texas in May, military bases across the United States were placed on higher alert for domestic terror attacks, in response to a surge in threatening chatter from ISIS and its sympathizers. “It is the highest level of security since the tenth anniversary of September 11,” notes Fox 13 News in Tampa Bay, home of MacDill Air Force Base.

One witness told CNN that she saw a man fire shots at a building that houses military recruiting offices Thursday morning.

JTTF is on scene.

Bill Clinton instituted the ban on armed military personnel. Islamic groups and jihadists are targeting our military people, give them back their weapons.

The Latest: Witness to Chattanooga shooting says she saw ‘rapid fire’ gunshots

Published July 16, 2015, Associated Press CHATTANOOGA, Tenn. – The latest on the Chattanooga shooting (all times local): 1 p.m. A woman who says she witnessed the shooting in Chattanooga says she heard a barrage of gunfire near one of the shooting sites. “It was rapid fire, like pow pow pow pow, so quickly. The next thing I knew there were police cars coming from every direction,” said Marilyn Hutcheson, who works at a Binswanger Glass. Chattanooga Mayor Andy Berke said at a brief news conference that police were pursuing an active shooter and there was an officer down. Hutcheson says she ran inside, where she remains with other employees and a customer. The gunfire continued with occasional bursts she estimated for 20 minutes. “We’re apprehensive,” Hutcheson said. “Not knowing what transpired, if it was a grievance or terroristic related, we just don’t know.”

Pamela Geller's shocking new book, "FATWA: HUNTED IN AMERICA" is now available on Amazon. It's Geller's tell all, her story - and it's every story - it's what happens when you stand for freedom today. Buy it. Now. Here.