Brother of late civil rights activist Medgar Evers endorses Trump
Charles Evers, the brother of slain civil rights icon Medgar Evers, came out Friday in support of Donald Trump for president.

Himself a civil rights activist who in 1969 became the first black mayor in Mississippi, Evers said the GOP front-runner has the business acumen for the job.

“I think he’s the best one right now,” Evers, 93, told The Post. “He’s someone like me: he speaks from the hip. He’s not a politician.”

Evers said the Mississippi economy would benefit from a president who could bring back industries that have fled overseas.

“We need more and more jobs. Unemployment is way up here,” he said. “He’s hired more employees, more people, than anyone I know in the world.”

Evers also tried to dispel notions that the real-estate mogul is a bigot.

“I see nothing to show he is a racist,” Evers said. “I don’t want any party to assume they’ve got all the black vote.”

Evers added, “All of us got a little racism — including me.’’

The former mayor claimed Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton has done little for the black community and her marriage to Bill Clinton would derail her campaign.

“She got another problem trying keep him straight — how’s she gonna try to keep the country straight?” Evers said.

Mississippi will hold its GOP primary Tuesday and the latest poll shows Trump leading there by a wide margin.

Medgar Evers had worked tirelessly in the South against segregation and for voting rights. He was assassinated by a white ­supremacist in 1963.

Medgar Evers College in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, is named in his honor.

The endorsement from Charles Evers comes just days after Trump was criticized for not immediately disavowing former Ku Klux Klan grand wizard David Duke’s endorsement of him.

“I don’t know anything about what you’re even talking about with white supremacy or white supremacists,” Trump said on CNN.

“So I don’t know. I don’t know — did he ­endorse me, or what’s going on? Because I know nothing about David Duke; I know nothing about white supremacists.”

Since those remarks, Trump has denounced Duke repeatedly, calling the former Klan leader “a bad person.”

Across the country, Trump’s campaign rallies have drawn Black Lives Matters protests, including Friday night in New Orleans when he was interrupted by demonstrators several times.