Ivanka Trump weds Jared Kushner
Here are the first photos of power newlyweds Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump.

The real-estate scions tied the knot yesterday at the father of the bride’s golf course in Bedminster, NJ.

The 500 guests included dozens of New York luminaries and power brokers, including Andrew Cuomo, Barbara Walters, Anna Wintour, Rudy Giuliani, Joel Klein and Sheldon Silver, as well as Newark Mayor Cory Booker, Pennsylvania Gov. Ed Rendell and ex-New Jersey Gov. Jim McGreevey.

PHOTOS: IVANKA TRUMP WEDS JARED KUSHNER

Stars from the entertainment world also made the scene, including Food Network chef Sandra Lee, actress Emmy Rossum and her Counting Crows beau Adam Duritz, and country singer Jamey Johnson.

The gorgeous bride, 27, wore a Vera Wang gown inspired by Grace Kelly.

Her bridesmaids were Vanessa Trump — wife of brother Donald Jr. — and half-sister Tiffany Trump.

“She looked stunning,” one guest said.

Yesterday’s beautiful weather was a good omen, the bride said.

“Just finished a gorgeous hike,” she posted on Twitter hours before the nuptials, “The leaves are spectacular and the sun is shining. Everything is simply perfect! I’m getting married today!”

The daughter of Donald and Ivana Trump, Ivanka works for her dad and co-hosts “Celebrity Apprentice.”

She recently started filming the show’s new season, which will not interfere with her honeymoon in Africa.

As if her wedding were not exciting enough, Ivanka this week marveled that her new book, “Trump Card,” has become a best seller.

She has been dating Kushner, 28, the publisher of the New York Observer and son of billionaire real-estate mogul Charles, for more than two years — and converted to Judaism in order to join his family.

The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Haskel Lookstein.

Wednesday, the couple will hold a second reception for twice as many guests at the Puck Building.

Extensive security kept back onlookers at the Trump National Golf Course, but Ivanka has kept her 400,000 followers on Twitter abreast of every detail from her engagement to her rehearsal dinner.

“Truly the happiest day of my life,” she posted of her July 16 engagement.

Though her family is known for its over-the-top spectacles, Ivanka said some events are best kept low-key.

“At a very casual ‘rehearsal’ dinner with friends,” she posted Saturday, “just 5 of my lady friends and me having a casual dinner and getting excited. Perfect!”

Despite their expensive lifestyles, the couple projected a down-to-earth image with a wedding registry featuring inexpensive items such as $7.95 glasses from Crate & Barrel.

They did, however, also register for two $1,350 silver bowls from Tiffany — but, perhaps thinking better of such grandiosity, reduced it to one.

Additional reporting by Carolyn Salazar