FOUR-TIME DEPORTEE ARRESTED FOR MOLESTING 9-YEAR-OLD JULY 13, 2014.
JULY 13, 2014.

FOUR-TIME DEPORTEE ARRESTED FOR MOLESTING 9-YEAR-OLD

Parker County Sheriff’s investigators arrested a known criminal alien, identified as Israel Andrade, 35, early Saturday morning, July 12, 2014, after a woman called 9-1-1 to report her daughter had been sexually fondled by a stranger who broke into her home.

Parker County Sheriff Larry Fowler said deputies responded to the scene in Springtown, where Andrade was reported to have forced his way in to the residence through a bedroom window just before 6 a.m.

The 9-year-old female told deputies she was awakened by a man who was groping her private areas, as she and her siblings were asleep on the couch in the family’s home.

The child reported the suspect motioned for her to follow him back to the bedroom where he entered the home. The victim also reported she did not know the suspect, who spoke with a heavy Spanish accent and gave her instructions in broken English.

The girl ran screaming into her parents’ bedroom while the suspect ran in the opposite direction through the home, exiting through the bedroom window where he initially made entry into the residence.

The child’s parents immediately attempted to contact law enforcement, but noticed their cell phones were missing along with an HP computer. The child’s mother then drove to a nearby convenience store and dialed 9-1-1.

Sheriff’s deputies observed a set of footprints outside the home and traced it to a neighbor’s home, where the suspect had been visiting the prior evening.

During an investigation, Sheriff’s deputies discovered the identity and location of Israel Andrade who was discovered asleep in a relative’s home located about one mile from the victim’s residence. When deputies woke Andrade, they discovered he had been sleeping on top of one of the stolen cell phones.

Andrade’s relatives told Sheriff’s deputies that Andrade arrived to Texas from Mexico about 30 days ago.

Sheriff’s investigators obtained a search warrant for the home of Andrade’s relatives, located in the 100 block of Alta Vista Street, in Springtown, also discovering two pairs of child’s panties wrapped inside a pair of Andrade’s blue jeans along with a pair of tennis shoes containing similar tread pattern matching that of the set of footprints discovered outside the victim’s residence.

The victim’s mother positively identified the child’s panties as being her daughter’s.

Andrade was booked into the Parker County Jail at 11:43 a.m. Saturday and charged with burglary of a habitation with intent to commit another felony, (indecency with a child by sexual contact), a first-degree felony.

Sheriff’s investigators also discovered that according to records from the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), Andrade has been deported from the United States four times, including in July 2003, Feb. 2004, Sept. 2009 and again in Dec. 2010.

Sheriff Fowler said he believes the State of Texas is doing what they can, concerning the current border situation.

“Our border Sheriffs and the Texas Department of Public Safety are doing a phenomenal job with the current laws and available resources,” Fowler said. “Yet, our Federal Government needs to step forward and aid us in enforcing the laws on our southern border. This type of injustice cannot be allowed to pass by for a sixth time.

“How long will we have to tolerate this type of injustice? It is time for American citizens to make a stand and begin petitioning for tighter security at our borders in order to protect our citizens.”

ANDRADE, ISRAEL FAVELLA SR.