Lake Hope State Park
Located in southeastern Ohio, the 2,983-acre Lake Hope State Park is a natural paradise. The entire park lies within the 28,614-acre Zaleski State Forest in the valley of Big Sandy Run. It is a rugged, heavily forested region traversed by steep gorges and narrow ridges with remnants of abandoned mining and iron producing industries. This eye-catching scenery offers many opportunities for photographers, hikers and historians to enjoy.

Thirty-one miles of bridle trail are also located in the Zaleski State Forest . The bridle trails are available to riders with their own mounts.

Eight mountain biking trails traverse the park totaling over 25 miles of trails of steep hills and ravines that offer challenges suited to intermediate and advanced cyclists. Lake Hope’s wooded mountain biking trails are considered one of Ohio’s top single-track mountain biking trails.

Swimming is permitted in designated areas along the 600-foot swimming beach is located near the dam. Facilities include a shelter with a large sun deck and patios overlooking the lake, restrooms, and concessions. Please exercise caution while swimming at the beach.

Several picnic areas with tables and grills are located at many secluded and scenic areas around the park. A shelterhouse is available for reservation online or by calling (866) 644-6727 .

The Lake Hope Lodge offers made-from-scratch food using Ohio products, with a strong emphasis on real pit barbecue. The dining lodge is open to the public year round and is available for holidays and special events.

The 120-acre lake only allows boats with electric motors and can be accessed by one boat ramp. A variety of paddle equipment is available to rent during the boating season including pontoons, canoes, kayaks and stand-up paddleboards.

History

Though the roar of the iron furnaces no longer echoes through the hills of Vinton County, there are many reminders of days gone by at Lake Hope State Park. Situated at the heart of Ohio's Hanging Rock iron region, Lake Hope State Park reflects the rich history of much of southeastern Ohio.

Built in 1853-54, the Hope Furnace processed the iron ore extracted from the region’s sandstone bedrock. The iron resulting from the ore smelting process was used to produce many different items, including ammunition and cannons for the Union Army during the Civil War. Hundreds of men labored, cutting timber, working the furnace and driving teams of oxen hauling iron ore to the furnace. Charcoal fires, needed to fuel the furnace, were tended 24 hours a day. So much wood was required for this process that the surrounding hillsides were almost completely stripped of their timber. At the height of the Hope Furnace’s production, Ohio was one of the nation’s leading producers of iron. As time passed, iron ore was discovered farther west, and Ohio’s reputation as a major iron producer waned. The Hope Furnace shut down in 1874, after only 20 years of operation.

By 1900, nearly all the major furnaces in southern Ohio were shut down. Today, the Hope Furnace chimney and some of the foundation are all that remain of the structure. Near the chimney, one may find pieces of slag, the cast-off residue from the smelting process. These pock-marked, glass-like pieces have now become a part of the forest floor. The forest we now see is one that has grown back where a primeval forest once stood hundreds of years ago.

For a time, coal was an important Vinton County export. Many mines tunneled into the hills and large quantities of coal were transported out utilizing ox-drawn coal cars, and later the railroad. Most of the mines were abandoned early in the 20th century. Lake Hope Forest Park was created in 1937 by the Division of Forestry. The Division of Parks and Recreation and Lake Hope State Park came into existence in 1949 when the Ohio Department of Natural Resources was created.

Natural Features

Lake Hope State Park is truly a nature lover's dream. In the forest-draped hills, the observant visitor can discover the abundant natural resources of this wild and scenic park.

Although most of the forest was cut to fuel the iron smelting industry that once flourished here, the land has recovered and supports a magnificent, second-growth forest. Oak and hickory are the dominant trees while the woodland floor harbors a fascinating assemblage of shrubs and wildflowers. The yellow lady's slipper, one of the rarest and most showy orchids, blooms in secluded hollows in the park. Other spring wildflowers such as blue-eyed mary, bloodroot and wild geranium can be found in abundance.

Deer and wild turkeys are often seen in a number of park locations. Of the many animals inhabiting the park, none is as popular as the beaver. As nature's dam builders, the beavers are found in numbers and can be observed near the quiet inlets of the lake.

The hills of Lake Hope State Park contain coal, iron ore, clay, and building stone. During the Pennsylvanian Period, about 300 million years ago, Ohio was a lowland plain where rivers meandered through vast swamp forests and sea waters periodically flooded the land as elevations changed. The rocks deposited during this time are shales and sandstones with coals, clays, and limestones in thin layers that reflect the unstable conditions under which they were laid down. The clays formed from the old leached soils on which the forests grew. The coals are the remains of trees and plants preserved in the waters of the swamps. As sea levels rose, brackish water killed the trees, and the muckbeds — buried under mud and sand along the shore — were changed by time and pressure to form coal. Sea animals migrated into deeper, more favorable areas. Their shells, mixed with limy mud, make up the thin limestone and flint layers found in the area today. Rivers carried mud and sand from their headwaters in mountains to the east, building deltas and flood plains, which today are the shales and sandstones in the area.

This sequence of events was repeated over and over, giving rise to successive coal beds and marine sediments. At last, great movements of Earth's crust raised the Appalachian Mountains higher, and the sea was drained from Ohio. The rock layers were tilted gently eastward, and a new generation of rivers began to carve valleys and expose the rocks.