S. Carolina Senate Votes To Remove Confederate Flag
April 13, 2000 S. Carolina Senate Votes

To Remove Confederate Flag By DAVID FIRESTONE

TLANTA, April 12 -- In a breakthrough that seems likely to end a long and racially charged debate, the South Carolina Senate voted today to remove the Confederate battle flag from the Capitol dome and place a smaller version in a less prominent site on the Statehouse grounds. Just a few hours earlier, the State House of Representatives passed a bill making South Carolina the last state in the Union to enact a holiday honoring the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The King Day bill passed with no real debate in the House on an 82-to-35 vote. Because the Senate had already passed a similar bill, the measure is now almost certain to be enacted after differences on wording are worked out and Gov. Jim Hodges, a Democrat, signs it. The flag issue has been much more divisive and has convulsed the state's political culture for years, as black and white residents argued over whether the Confederate battle flag is a symbol of slavery and oppression, or of a noble Southern heritage. But the compromise proposal passed today on a 36-to-7 vote, reflecting months of pressure from business and political leaders and an economic boycott of the state by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Many legislators, both black and white, who swore just weeks ago that they would never approve such a compromise changed their minds today, saying they were acting in the best interests of the state. The bill requires one last technical vote by the Senate on Thursday, and will then go to the State House of Representatives in a week or two. David Wilkins, the House speaker and a supporter of the flag, has introduced a similar measure there, and many senators said they were confident it would pass in the House. Although the measure could still unravel, the support for the compromise by hard-line senators on either side of the issue seemed likely to smooth its eventual passage. Governor Hodges today urged the House to approve the bill. Under the compromise, which leaders of both sides acknowledged they found distasteful, the rectangular battle flag would be removed from the dome and from the two legislative chambers. A square version of the flag, which was used by the Army of Northern Virginia in the Civil War, would fly on a 20-foot pole next to a 30-foot monument honoring the Confederate dead that stands in front of the Statehouse. The flag would stand between that building and the monument. Although it would be more prominent to those walking in front of the Statehouse, it would no longer fly in a position of sovereignty, visible through much of Columbia, the state capital. Reflecting a concern that other Confederate monuments might come under attack, the measure also requires that no Confederate or African-American history monuments on public property throughout the state be removed or altered, and no public area named for any historical figure be changed. The compromise proposal has been opposed by the N.A.A.C.P., but in the debate over the bill today most of the black legislative leaders who have opposed the flag said they reluctantly decided it was an acceptable way to end the divisiveness. It may not spell an immediate end to the boycott, but supporters said they hoped the N.A.A.C.P. would eventually come around once they saw that the measure was supported by the black legislative caucus. Six of the seven black senators voted for the measure; one did not vote. "As much as I love the N.A.A.C.P., I love South Carolina even more," said State Senator Darrell Jackson, a black Democrat from Columbia who has led the anti-flag forces. "I'm doing what's best for the state of South Carolina. Because 25 years from now, my sons will be rearing their families in this great state. And maybe they will look back and say, 'Thank God for the men and women who had courage to do the right thing, although it wasn't a popular thing." Similarly, the white leader of the flag proponents, State Senator Glenn F. McConnell of Charleston, said that while he loved seeing the flag atop the Statehouse, he had concluded that moving it was the best thing for South Carolina's future. "We're acting because we all know the reality of where we are," said McConnell, whose vote carries enormous weight among the flag supporters. "Like General Lee when he was confronted with Appomattox and said, 'There's nothing left for me to do than get terms from General Grant.' It is very difficult, extremely difficult for us on our side to vote to move that flag. And it has been equally difficult for our brethren on the other side." The Confederate flag was first placed atop the Statehouse dome in 1962 during the centennial observances of the Civil War, and several speakers during the debate noted that today is the 139th anniversary of the day the war began when South Carolina forces fired on Fort Sumter in Charleston. The presence of the flag, which stayed up in the 1960's as a gesture of defiance to the civil rights movement, had engendered a bitter dispute over the origins of the war, exposing vast differences in the perception of history between blacks and many whites. But eventually, the pressure to move the flag extended well beyond black South Carolinians. Almost every business group and religious organization in the state urged that it come down, both on economic and moral grounds. Mayor Joseph P. Riley of Charleston recently led a widely publicized 120-mile protest march from the seacoast to Columbia. Scores of sports and cultural events, along with many conventions, canceled their plans to come to South Carolina because of the boycott. The seven senators who voted against the plan were all white, and several bitterly accused their colleagues of selling out. State Senator Harvey S. Peeler Jr., a Republican from Gaffney, warned that race relations in the state would worsen if the flag came down. But State Senator John E. Courson, a white Republican from Columbia who keeps the Confederate flag in his office near a bust of Gen. Robert E. Lee, said the soldiers monument was the best place to honor the flag, allowing the state to face a less divisive future.