Prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome: a systematic review of termination rates (1995–2011)
Summary of findings

This systematic review provides the largest qualitative and quantitative summary of Down syndrome termination rates relevant to a contemporary population in the United States. High-quality data from population-based studies in three states indicate that the weighted mean termination rate following a prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome was 67%, with a range of 61%–93%. Data from hospital-based studies in six states plus the District of Columbia suggest that the termination rate was 85%, with a range of 60%–90%. Finally, the mean termination rate among anomaly-based studies was 50% and ranged from 0%–100%. The evidence presented here also suggests that termination rates vary according to maternal age and race and gestational age.

The estimated termination rates following a prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome presented in this review are appreciably lower than the 92% termination rate determined by Mansfield et al.[6] We hypothesize that this difference is the result of lower termination rates in the United States in recent years. The three US studies reviewed by Mansfield et al. were published in the 1980s.[21-23] Evidence in our report from three population-based California studies supports the notion that US termination rates decreased during the 1990s and early 2000s. Other researchers have found international variation in termination rates following prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome. A recent analysis of data from 20 registries in the International Clearinghouse for Birth Defects Surveillance and Research (ICBDSR, 1993–2004) found that Down syndrome termination rates per 10 000 live births were lower in North America than Europe and Australia.[24] Thus, the termination rates presented in this report may be lower because we focused exclusively on US studies, while Mansfield's review was based on earlier studies and the termination rate for Down syndrome was heavily influenced by a single study from the UK.

Of note, the implementation of prenatal screening for Down syndrome has had a disproportionate impact on prenatal diagnosis among younger women, as demonstrated by findings from the England–Wales National Down Syndrome Cytogenetic Register (NDSCR) (1989–2008).[25, 26] Prenatal screening allows for more refined risk stratification among older women, all of whom would be considered at high risk based on age alone. Although prenatal screening has supplanted maternal age as the primary indication for prenatal diagnosis, the overall proportion of pregnancies diagnosed prenatally has remained relatively constant (60%–70% from 1989 through 2008).[25] Historically, younger women at lower age-based risk were not routinely offered invasive diagnostic testing. However, prenatal screening reclassifies a subgroup of these patients as higher risk, and, consequently, the proportion of pregnancies with Down syndrome that are prenatally diagnosed among younger women has increased, from 3% in 1989/1990 to 43% in 2007/2008.[25]

Changes in patient uptake of invasive diagnostic procedures directly affect the denominator used in calculating termination rates. Of note, women who elect to undergo invasive testing are a self-selecting population that may not be representative of all pregnant women. Women who choose to have an amniocentesis differ from women who decline amniocentesis with regard to several factors, including the need for certainty about a pregnancy with Down syndrome, post-screen anxiety level, perception of amniocentesis-associated miscarriage risk, attitudes about pregnancy termination, and religious beliefs.[27] Evidence also suggests that utilization of CVS and amniocentesis has changed over time, with decreases beginning in the early 1990s following the widespread implementation of second trimester maternal serum screening and ultrasonography.[28, 29] A study by Nakata and colleagues (2010)[29] suggests that this trend has reversed in recent years because of several factors: (a) the 2007 American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) Practice Bulletin on screening for fetal chromosomal abnormalities, which recommended that screening and invasive testing be made available to all pregnant women regardless of age, (b) increased access to first trimester screening options, and (c) the 2008 ACOG Practice Bulletin on invasive prenatal testing for aneuploidy, which stated that procedure-related risks were lower than previously suggested.

With these issues in mind, we considered explanations for a decrease in termination rates following a prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome. First, the studies in this review provide evidence of a trend for lower termination rates among younger women. Because prenatal screening has resulted in an increase among younger women who elect to have prenatal diagnosis, this may have acted to decrease the overall termination rate. Second, although raising a child with Down syndrome has notable challenges, medical management has progressed in recent decades and individuals with Down syndrome are living longer and healthier lives.[30-34] In parallel with these medical advances have come additional educational, social, and financial support for families of children with Down syndrome.[35-37] Thus, some women may elect to have a prenatal diagnostic procedure not because they plan to terminate a pregnancy, but because they want to alleviate uncertainty, prepare emotionally, and/or make specific delivery plans.

Of note, none of the studies in this review presented data collected subsequent to the 2007 and 2008 ACOG Practice Bulletins on screening and invasive testing for aneuploidy, and it is unclear what impact, if any, these have had on termination rates. Historically, many women who would not terminate a pregnancy with Down syndrome have decided against invasive testing because of the procedure-related risk of miscarriage. The ACOG finding that these risks are lower than previously stated may help to make prenatal diagnosis a more realistic option for women who desire diagnostic certainty to make emotional and medical preparations. In this context, uptake of prenatal diagnosis would be expected to increase (as demonstrated by Nakata and colleagues (2010)[29] and termination rates would be expected to decrease.

Inaccurate estimation of termination rates may affect other research studies. For example, many economic evaluations of prenatal screening and diagnosis programs that focus on the financial costs of conditions associated with physical and/or intellectual disabilities (e.g. Down syndrome, spina bifida) assume that the condition is severe enough that the vast majority of patients would elect to terminate a pregnancy with the condition. If termination rates are lower in actual practice, a proportion of the financial costs would fail to be averted and the cost-effectiveness of screening programs may be overestimated.

Although this is the largest systematic review of termination rates for Down syndrome in the United States, opportunities for additional epidemiologic studies are evident. All US states collect data on Down syndrome diagnoses via birth defect surveillance programs sponsored by the National Birth Defects Prevention Network. Although leveraging these data would provide additional insight into the broader US population, financial and practical obstacles exist. Although states typically include live births, fetal deaths, and elective terminations of Down syndrome, ascertainment of prenatal diagnoses requires expansion to prenatal diagnostic facilities, cytogenetic laboratories, and genetic counseling facilities, and not all states obtain data from these sources.[38] Many programs also do not include elective terminations prior to 20 weeks' gestation.[39]

Individual providers or hospital systems may consider collecting and analyzing their own data; although not widely generalizable and limited by sample size, findings would be applicable to their distinct patient populations. Whether a population-based or hospital-based approach is used, the ideal study design would follow a longitudinal cohort of women as soon as a pregnancy is identified (e.g. a pregnancy registry). Such an approach would allow for a broad description of screening uptake, diagnostic uptake, and decision-making following prenatal diagnosis and other pregnancy outcomes such as spontaneous miscarriage. Given that few studies reported data on factors that may affect termination rates, future studies should evaluate demographic variability in termination rates as permitted by the data.