A Review of the Physical and Chemical Properties of Human Semen and the Formulation of a Semen Simulant
ABSTRACT: A fluid medium was developed to simulate the salient physical and chemical properties of human semen. The composition of the medium was based upon an extensive review of the literature on constituents of human semen. In choosing the ingredients for this medium, the goal was to emphasize properties that influence interactions of human semen with topical contraceptive, prophylactic, or therapeutic products. Among these properties, pH and buffering capacity, osmolarity, ionic strength, and rheological properties play dominant roles in the physico-chemical processes that govern drug release kinetics and delivery vehicle distribution.

One component of such research is the in vitro testing of formulations with fluids representative of those that will be encountered within the vagina. Our laboratory has been developing and applying in vitro assays that focus on how the deployment and delivery of contraceptive and prophylactic compounds are affected by the properties of the delivery vehicle and its interactions with the surrounding fluids. To develop these assays using standardized materials of sufficient volume, we have found it useful to employ simulants of ambient biological fluids. Our formulation of a vaginal fluid simulant has been described in a previous publication ( Owen and Katz, 1999b ), and our semen simulant (and earlier versions) was presented in a number of studies of contraceptive and microbicidal gels (Owen et al, 2003 , 2004 ; Geonnotti and Katz, 2004 ; Geonnotti et al, 2005a ; Geonnotti et al, 2005b ). Here we describe the formulation of a semen simulant embodying salient physical and chemical components and properties of human semen. This is based on a comprehensive review of the literature, and we present here, as well, an updated summary of the constituents of human semen.

When therapeutic, contraceptive, or prophylactic formulations are applied to the vagina, they encounter a variety of fluids with widely varying physical and chemical properties. These fluids include those that originate in the vagina and those that flow into it (eg, cervical mucus and semen). The fluid actually present at any location within the vagina is a mixture, to a varying extent, of these fluids. The flow, retention, drug delivery kinetics, and bioactivity of vaginal formulations depend upon their interactions with these resident fluids. Work done by our group has determined that the physical and chemical properties of both the delivery vehicle and the surrounding environment are important factors in determining product performance ( Katz et al, 1998 ; Owen et al, 1999a , 2000 , 2001 , 2003 ). Understanding of these interactions can, therefore, aid in the design and development of new and improved formulations.

Materials and Methods

The quantity and composition of human semen have been studied for a variety of reasons (eg, for the diagnosis of conditions such as prostatitis, infertility, and cancer), and the results of these studies were used in the development of our simulant. It is designed to embody salient biochemical and rheological properties of human semen, with particular emphasis on those properties most likely to influence the performance of vaginally applied topical therapeutic, contraceptive, and prophylactic formulations.

Human semen is a mixture of components produced by several different glands. These components are incompletely mixed during ejaculation and, hence, the initial ejaculate is not an entirely homogeneous mixture. The first portion of the ejaculate, about 5% of it, is made up of secretions from the Cowper (bulbourethral) and Littre glands. The second portion derives from the prostate and contributes from 15% to 30% to the ejaculate. There follow small contributions of the ampulla and epididymis and, finally, of the seminal vesicles, which contribute the remainder, and majority, of the ejaculate (Polakoski et al, 1976; Mann and Lutwak-Mann, 1981; Coffey, 1995).

The secretions of the organs contributing to the ejaculate differ in composition, and there has been a longstanding interest in evaluating the composition of semen from a diagnostic point of view (Eliasson, 1982). The prostate is the main source of the acid phosphatase, citric acid, inositol, calcium, zinc, and magnesium found in the ejaculate. The seminal vesicles' contribution is rich in fructose, ascorbic acid, and prostaglandins, while the concentrations of l-carnitine and neutral alpha-glucosidase are indications of epididymal function (WHO Manual, 1999). A small portion of the fructose present originates from ampulla of the ductus deferens.

The data used in formulating our simulant derive from a large number of articles describing the composition of semen and seminal plasma. The choice of composition, pH, viscosity, and buffering capacity of our simulant was complicated by a number of factors that made direct comparisons between studies difficult. The most important difference across the studies was in the choice of donors used. Many studies were performed on patients attending infertility clinics or on patients who were being screened for a variety of pathological conditions. In our work, studies in which the donors were demonstrably infertile or pathological were excluded. Included were studies in which donors were normozoospermic patients at infertility clinics or in which donors were fertile controls in studies involving semen. The number of donors used in each study varied; however, in our study, the data are not weighted by sample size, since in comparing studies, particularly those that used different measurement techniques, a larger sample size does not necessarily imply greater accuracy.

Some studies were performed on whole semen and others on seminal plasma alone. Sperm make up only a small portion of the whole semen, from 1% to 5% of the total volume (Mortimer, 1994). Most studies of the composition of both seminal plasma and whole semen indicate that the presence of sperm does not significantly influence the results; for instance, they make little contribution to the total ionic content of the semen (Bondani et al, 1973). In reviewing previous studies, it was sometimes difficult to determine if whole semen or plasma was used. Whole semen is assumed unless some separation procedure is described. Except where noted, composition data for whole semen and seminal plasma are considered together.

Another factor influencing the results of the various studies reviewed was the method of sample collection and preparation. The most important variable here was usually the length of time since ejaculation. Time after collection is particularly important for pH measurements, since the pH changes as a result of increased CO 2 concentration and lactic acid production. The rheological properties of the semen sample also change with time, as the material first coagulates and then liquefies. This process is accompanied by biochemical changes in composition. If sperm are present in the sample, over time they may influence the measured composition, as a result of binding of plasma components to the sperm and to sperm metabolic activity. Sperm metabolic activity can alter composition due to fructolysis, glycolysis, and the excretion of metabolic wastes. In addition, after ejaculation, some of the sperm cell contents may leak out into the surrounding plasma (Mann and Lutwak-Mann, 1981). Other postejaculatory concerns include proteolysis and the rise of free choline accompanied by the crystallization of insoluble spermine phosphate (Mann and Lutwak-Mann, 1981). Results can even be influenced by the type of sample container used. Studies have shown that high-quality polypropylene is the best material (Balerna et al, 1985) and that glass can contain enough zinc to influence zinc concentration measurements (Colleen et al, 1975).

A few of the articles reviewed measured composition on a per-ejaculate basis, and from a diagnostic point of view, per-ejaculate results may be more useful (Grizard et al, 1985). The overwhelming majority of the articles reviewed, however, measured composition on a per-volume basis, and this is the basis used throughout our study. When possible, per-ejaculate data were used here after conversion to a per-volume measurement.

The techniques used to measure particular semen components or properties sometimes differed from study to study. These different methods will be discussed below as each component and property is reviewed. A detailed description of the various assays used to measure semen composition and properties can be found in Mortimer (1994). Almost all of the property measurements used in this study were performed on semen obtained by masturbation. For interesting comparisons of semen composition measured on samples collected by masturbation vs coitus, see Hotchkiss et al (1938) and Purvis et al (1986).

The semen simulant proposed in this article is intended to model the properties of semen produced by healthy male donors after complete liquefaction of the semen. The proposed semen simulant is designed to incorporate information about chemical composition determined by previous researchers, with an emphasis on modeling the pH and buffering capacity, ions, osmolarity, sugars and protein composition, and viscosity of the material. We now consider each of these in turn.