Election 2016: Clinton Beats Trump in Fairfax County
FAIRFAX COUNTY, VA -- Fairfax County went for Hillary Clinton Tuesday, giving her 63 percent of their vote, with 269,150 votes with 99 percent of the precincts reporting.

As of about 2 p.m. in Fairfax County, the elections office estimated about 300,000 had voted so far at Fairfax County's 243 precincts Tuesday and about 125,000 have voted absentee. The county said they are seeing about a 45 percent turnout (it was unclear if they meant Tuesday or Tuesday plus absentee).

8th Congressional District Race Incumbent Don Beyer faces opposition from Republican Charles Hernick and Independent Julio Gracia

Incumbent Don Beyer faces opposition from Republican Charles Hernick and Independent Julio Gracia 10th Congressional District Race Incumbent Barbara Comstock faces opposition from Democrat LuAnn Bennett

Incumbent Barbara Comstock faces opposition from Democrat LuAnn Bennett Fairfax County Meals Tax Most of the money would go to Fairfax County public schools but critics cite an unfair burden on business owners.

SEE ALSO: Full Presidential Election Results As They Come In

Fairfax County votes for president (242 of 244 precincts, 11:25 p.m.)

Hillary Clinton: 269,150/62.92 percent

Donald J. Trump: 127,886/ 29.9 percent

Gary Johnson: 12,433/2.91 percent

Jill Stein: 3,805/.89 percent

Evan McMullin: 8,452/1.98 percent

Voting

At Green Spring Gardens in the Annandale area of the County, mom Emily Workman, 33, was wheeling her children Miya, 11 months and Toby, 3, down a shady path on her way to go vote at the precinct.

Fairfax County resident Emily Workman pauses as she heads into Green Spring Garden to vote Tuesday.

Workman, who recently moved to Fairfax County from Colorado, said she planned to vote for Hillary Clinton. "National security is my biggest concern, because of [Republican nominee Donald] Trump," she said. "She [Clinton] is for everything I believe in."

Delvin Nathaniel said he wasn't sure if he was voting for Hillary Clinton or Gary Johnson on Tuesday in Fairfax County.

Voter Delvin Nathaniel, 39, said he wasn't sure Tuesday if he was going to vote for Hillary Clinton or Libertarian Gary Johnson. "I don't like that my vote is being held hostage," he said. "I guess in retrospect I would have preferred Joe Biden." He said he hopes to see Obamacare "get shored up, cleaned up."

Tuesday was the first time Sedrik Bailey, 20, was voting in a presidential election. Bailey, a full-time student at Northern Virginia Community College, said he was "doing my best to keep the other candidate [Trump] out."

Fairfax County resident Jack Reinhold hands out GOP literature Tuesday at a Fairfax County precinct.

Jack Reinhold, a resident of nearby Pinecrest, was handing out Trump literature near the precinct entrance Tuesday morning. "I think that Trump will win," he said. And if Clinton wins? "It won't be a good thing but we'll just go day by day. How's she going to enforce the laws she's broken?"

When asked about Trump, Reinhold, a Republican, said even if some Republicans wanted someone else as their nominee, "I don't think we want a closed process."

Fairfax County tweeted out this photo from Greenspring Village, where voter turnout is usually the highest in the county:

Voting today at Greenspring Village retirement community. #ElectionDay pic.twitter.com/AFVIFI6rVE

— Fairfax County (@fairfaxcounty) November 8, 2016

Polls are open until 7 p.m. Tuesday.



Voters are making a pick for president, with Democrat Hillary Clinton and Republican Donald Trump sharing the ballot with Libertarian Gary Johnson, Green Party candidate Jill Stein and independent Evan McMullin. Clinton has led in polls in Virginia throughout the election cycle, but Trump has closed the gap in recent weeks.

Fairfax County schools are closed on Election Day, but students are helping out at the polls.



Security at the polls As far as any sort of security threat, reported last week by CBS News, Virginia Department of Elections Commissioner Edgardo Cortés released the following statement on Election Day security:



"The Department of Elections continues to work with our local, state, and federal partners to ensure the

safety and security of our electoral process, as we have been for months. Our law enforcement partners

report there are no known threats to Election Day in Virginia by foreign terror organizations. However,

we remain extremely vigilant for any potential threats to the upcoming election and are working with

our law enforcement partners to ensure an appropriate response. Virginia voters should be confident that

they will be able to safely cast a ballot on Tuesday and that their votes will be accurately counted."

What's on the ballot? In addition to voting for President, you'll also have a few other items on the ballot this year including a Meals Tax proposal. Here's a look at what you'll be voting on:

Candidates for president and vice president from four political parties and one independent

four political parties and one independent Member of House of Representatives for 8th, 10th and 11th Congressional Districts

Two proposed state constitutional amendments

Meals tax referendum

Three bond referendums : transportation, parks and human services/community development

: transportation, parks and human services/community development And if you live in the Town of Herndon: Mayor and six Town Council members

See your sample ballot here.

Where is your voting place? There are 243 poll locations in the county. Double check your correct poll location before you leave home or work to vote. There have been poll location changes since the last election, according to the county elections office. If you're not sure where you're supposed to go to vote or want to double-check it, visit this page on the State Board of Elections Web site.

What time are the polls open? Polls are open in Virginia from 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. If you are planning to vote on your way home from work, keep in mind you need to be in line at your poll location by 7 p.m. in order to vote – give yourself plenty of travel time, election officials advise. Election officers will be on hand to close the line at 7 p.m. sharp. Election officials advise, if you can, to vote midday, between 11 a.m. and 4 p.m. Otherwise, bring a book or catch up on the news on your smartphone while you're in line. If you have to choose between early morning or close to 7 p.m., election officials say to choose morning.

Bring photo ID There are several forms of acceptable photo ID, according to Fairfax County:

Virginia driver's license

U.S. passport

Military ID

Federal, Virginia or local government-issued photo ID cards

ID issued by a Virginia college or university

Complete list from the Virginia Department of Elections

If you do not have a photo ID, you can get a free photo ID from the Office of Elections. Contact us as soon as possible at 703-222-0776, TTY 711, or email voting@fairfaxcounty.gov

Getting to the polls If you take public transportation, there are two convenient ways to find out how you can get you where you need to go on Election Day, according to Fairfax County:

Trip Planner: Metro's Trip Planner provides instant itineraries for trips on Metrorail, Metrobus, Fairfax Connector and other local bus and rail systems. Schedules provide door-to-door fares and travel times, complete with walking directions and transfers. Transit Service Nearby: Enter a street address, intersection, or landmark name to find bus and rail service within 1 mile of your location.

Still have a question about voting in Fairfax County? If you have questions about voting, call the Office of Elections before Election Day at 703-222-0776 (TTY 711).

Absentee ballots More than 100,000 county residents have already voted absentee before Tuesday. The county had 10,295 absentee voters on Saturday, the last day for in-person absentee voting, and the county is continuing to receive mail-in absentee ballots; the deadline to receive those ballots at the Office of Elections is Election Day, Nov. 8 at 7 p.m.

Absentee ballots are counted on election night beginning at 7 p.m. and are included with the county's results that night. So far in Fairfax County, here's a look at absentee ballots that have been cast, by the numbers:

77,642: In-person ballots (For reference: 2008 in person was 64,658 and 2012 was 57,817)

37, 491: Mail-in ballots received as of Saturday

Total absentee ballots cast so far in Fairfax County: 115,133

The county has 682,990 active registered voters in Fairfax County (turnout is based on active registered voters). In 2012 there were 666,701 active registered voters.

Also read: