DMV Expanding Hours, More Appointments Available for First Time Applicants
The following information was submitted for publication on behalf of the California DMV:



The California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) on Wednesday announced that it is extending office hours and adding appointment opportunities to support the issuance of all original driver licenses, including licenses that will be issued under AB 60 starting on January 2, 2015.



"DMV is committed to providing excellent customer service to all Californians," said DMV Director Jean Shiomoto. "Customers with appointments have much shorter wait times, and now all customers seeking new driver licenses will have extra appointment opportunities."

[Previous on Patch: DMV Lists New Documents Required For Driver License Under AB 60.]

DMV anticipates processing approximately 1.4 million additional driver license applications during the first three years after implementation of AB 60. Some of the additional services DMV will be offering include:

Extended Saturday office hours by appointment for all new driver license applicants at up to 60 DMV field offices across California starting Saturday, January 3, 2015.

Increased number of available appointments in many field offices that will hire additional staff.

New driver license applicants will be able to schedule appointments with the DMV up to 90 days in advance, double the current 45-day window.

Starting December 1, 2014, all first-time driver license applicants must make an appointment to visit their local DMV office. However, four new driver license processing centers will continue to offer walk-in (and appointment) service: Lompoc, Stanton, Granada Hills (all opening November 17, 2014) and San Jose (opening December 1, 2014). Appointments are recommended.

These additional services will be available to all customers seeking an original driver license—meaning the applicant's first license received in California—whether under AB 60 or otherwise.

Customers applying for an original driver license will need to do the following:

Make an appointment to visit a DMV field office up to 90 days in advance (or walk-in or appointment at the temporary driver license processing centers in Lompoc, Stanton, Granada Hills or San Jose)

Study for the driver license exam

Complete a driver license application form (DL 44) available at the DMV office

Provide DMV with either: Social security number and proof of identity and legal presence; or Proof of identity and California residency under AB 60. Last week, DMV posted the list of documents that applicants will need to bring to DMV to obtain a new driver license under AB 60. Details regarding these documents are available on the AB 60 webpage athttp://apps.dmv.ca.gov/ab60/index.html

Pass a vision test, TouchScreen knowledge (written) test, and if applicable, a road sign test

Give a thumb print

Have a picture taken

Schedule a future appointment for the behind-the-wheel driving test

Applicants under 18 applying for an original driver license will also need to submit proof of driver education completion. For further information about obtaining a new driver license, refer to the California Driver

Handbook or visit http://www.dmv.ca.gov/portal/dmv/dmv/dl/driverhandbooks.

It is easy to make an appointment to come into a DMV field office; you can make an appointment online, use the DMV now app, or call 1-800-777-0133. Appointments are available up to 90 days in advance for new driver licenses and 45 days in advance for other services.