MURPHY JOINS POSEY IN REQUESTING AAF VIABILITY REVIEW BY THE GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Today, U.S. Representative Patrick E. Murphy (FL-18) sent a letter of support to the Comptroller General of the United States regarding the request made earlier today by fellow Florida Representative Bill Posey (FL-08) that the Government Accountability Office (GAO) conduct a study to independently review the viability of the proposed All Aboard Florida project. Murphy has been continually warning federal officials about the serious risks AAF poses to the local economy, public safety, and quality of life on the Treasure Coast and Palm Beaches, as well as the serious risk to taxpayers posed by a default by AAF on any federally-backed loan. This letter is further evidence of Murphy's commitment to both opposing this project and rooting out wasteful government spending. (Please find below and attached a copy of the letter).



August 14, 2014



Dear Comptroller General Dodaro,



All Aboard Florida’s (AAF) plan to run 32 additional trains daily through the Palm Beaches and the Treasure Coast of Florida poses significant threats to our community's public safety, economy, and our way of life. Although initially sold as a “private” project, AAF is actually seeking more than a billion dollars in taxpayer-backed loans from the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA). Before the FRA risks public money on this project, it is imperative that AAF’s relevant financial viability be thoroughly reviewed.



I applaud my colleague Congressman Bill Posey for joining the thousands of voices concerned about this financially risky and potentially disruptive project, and I fully support his call for the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to examine AAF’s true cost to taxpayers. A comprehensive evaluation of AAF’s viability is necessary to ensure that our tax dollars are not used as an irresponsible handout to a company that could not be profitable on its own.



I thank you for your office’s efforts to eliminate government waste, and I look forward to working with you to make this request a reality.



Sincerely,



Patrick E. Murphy

MEMBER OF CONGRESS

###