Wildlife rehabilitation

Knitted penguin jumpers

** Please note that we do not require any further penguin jumpers at this time!



Thank you to keen knitters who have donated penguin jumpers from across the globe for rehabilitation in the event of an oil spill, fundraising and education programs. We do not need any further donations at this time. Thank you kindly for your interest in knitting to support the little penguins of Phliip Island! Further information on the program and how penguin jumpers benefit little penguin conservation can be found below. Thank you! **



This is not a fashion statement!

Knitted penguin jumpers play an important role in saving little penguins affected by oil pollution. A patch of oil the size of a thumb nail can kill a little penguin. Oiled penguins often die from exposure and starvation. Oil separates and mats feathers, allowing water to get in which makes a penguin very cold, heavy and less able to successfully hunt for food.



When oiled penguins are admitted to the Wildlife Clinic at Phillip Island Nature Parks, a knitted jumper is placed on the penguins to prevent them from preening and swallowing the toxic oil before they are washed and the oil removed by staff.



438 little penguins were affected by the last major oil spill near Phillip Island in 2001. 96% were successfully saved and rehabilitated at the Wildlife Clinic and released back into the wild.



Read more about the benefits of using penguin jumpers when rehabilitating oiled little penguins here.



Read more about our penguin jumper program, Knits for Nature, here.



NOTE: May 2014. Thank you to all the kind knitters who have contributed to the Knits for Nature program so far, your time and efforts are greatly appreciated. At this time we have enough jumpers and do not require any more. If you would still like to assist the penguins and the Penguin Foundation, you may like to Adopt a Penguin or Donate, further information can be found here.



We are currently working through Knits for Nature donations and will be in touch via post or email (whichever contact details have been provided) with an acknowledgment as soon as possible. We thank you for your patience.

Caring for sick

and injured little penguins

In 2012-13, 582 native animals were admitted to the Wildlife Clinic located at Phillip Island Nature Parks. Of those animals, 141 were little penguins.



The Penguin Foundation raises vital funds for the rescue and care of little penguins found sick or injured. Adopt a penguin today to help. The Penguin Foundation has supported the following wildlife rescue and rehabilitation programs:



The new Wildlife Clinic is capable of caring for up to 1,500 little penguins in the event of an oil spill. Find out more about the effects of oil spills on little penguins in the knitted penguin jumpers section.

Wildlife Rehabilitation Centre



In 2011 the Penguin Foundation contributed $350,000 to the construction of a new Wildlife Clinic. The new Centre is capable of caring for up to 1,500 little penguins in the event of an oil spill and is Victoria's only specialised seabird centre. The Centre also cares for other sick and injured native wildlife such as wallabies, pelicans, albatross and short-tailed shearwaters. All injured and sick animals are rehabilitated with the aim of releasing them back into the wild in a healthy condition. The new Wildlife Clinic contains: Two outdoor pools controlled to mimic ocean temperatures A washing room in the event of an oil spill Separate intensive care and triage room Several large outdoor pens

TOP

Wildlife rescue kits and signage

Phillip Island Nature Parks coordinates a group of dedicated wildlife rescue volunteers. The volunteers attend wildlife rescues to assess the condition of the sick or injured animals and transport them to a vet or the Wildlife Clinic. The Penguin Foundation has funded the purchase of wildlife rescue kits for volunteers containing specialist equipment for use in wildlife rescues. The Penguin Foundation has also funded the purchase of road signage warning motorists to slow down in areas where a rescue is being performed or where there is a likelihood of encountering wildlife.

TOP