MURPHY DEMANDS CONGRESS VOTE ON BILL TO CLOSE TERRORIST GUN LOOPHOLE Joins House Democrats in signing discharge petition to force vote on bill to block suspected terrorists from purchasing dangerous weapons f t # e Washington, December 8, 2015 | (561-253-8433) Today, U.S. Representative Patrick E. Murphy (FL-18) signed his name to the discharge petition to bring the Denying Firearms and Explosives to Dangerous Terrorists Act introduced by Congressman Peter King (R-NY) to the House floor for a vote. Murphy is a cosponsor of this bill that would close the dangerous loophole that allows suspected terrorists on the FBI’s Terrorist Watchlist to legally buy firearms in the United States. Last week, Murphy joined his Democratic colleagues in voting three times to bring this common-sense measure to the House floor, which Republicans unanimously blocked from consideration each time.



"It has been deeply troubling to witness the violence and terrorism in recent weeks, both around the world and right here at home. As a member of the House Intelligence Committee, I have been closely monitoring the rising threat of ISIS to make sure we are doing all we can to eliminate it, as well as the ongoing investigation into the horrific San Bernardino attack and how we can prevent such tragedies in the future," said Murphy. "But what is abundantly clear is that Congress must take immediate action to better protect the American people from gun violence and terrorism. That starts with closing the loophole that lets suspected terrorists walk into a gun shop and buy a dangerous weapon.



"It was beyond disappointing to see partisanship block this common-sense measure from even being debated last week. The American people deserve better and our homeland security requires more," Murphy continued. "I am calling on all my colleagues in the House to sign this discharge petition to immediately bring up this bipartisan bill to keep guns out of the hands of suspected terrorists and safeguard our nation."



According to a report by the Government Accountability Office, since 2004, more than 2,000 suspects on the FBI’s Terrorist Watchlist have successfully purchased weapons in the United States. More than 90 percent of all suspected terrorists who attempted to purchase guns in the last 11 years walked away with the weapon they wanted, with just 190 rejected despite their ominous histories. ### f t # e

Related Files

House Gun Violence Prevention Task Force Overview