COAST GUARD GRANTS MURPHY REQUEST TO HOLD LOCAL MEETINGS ON ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
Following the request made by U.S. Representative Patrick E. Murphy (FL-18) for the U.S. Coast Guard to hold hearings throughout the Treasure Coast and Palm Beaches regarding the maritime impact of the proposed All Aboard Florida (AAF) project, the Coast Guard announced they will be holding two public comment meetings in Florida's 18th District as well as conducting a navigation survey in relation to the Loxahatchee, St. Lucie, and New Rivers. The Congressman has been a vocal opponent of AAF, meeting with the U.S. Secretary of Transportation and the U.S. Coast Guard to voice his opposition and raise the very serious concerns regarding this project across the Treasure Coast and Palm Beaches. In July, Murphy requested the Coast Guard meet with local stakeholders to hear directly from those who would be negatively impacted by this project and its effects on maritime traffic, commerce, and safety. For more information on these public information meetings and how to participate in the Coast Guard's navigation survey, click here.



"With the proposition of 32 additional trains crossing the Loxahatchee and St. Lucie Rivers via draw bridges that are almost a century old, AAF stands to create major problems on the water backing up recreational boats, harming marine businesses, and delaying emergency vehicles by causing frequent closures, which is one of the many reasons why I stand in opposition to this project," said Murphy. "I applaud the Coast Guard's announcement of this public comment period and encourage residents to participate in the navigation survey as well as these important meetings. It is imperative that business owners, boaters, and emergency personnel have their concerns heard so that the Coast Guard may evaluate how best to ensure the continued navigability of our waterways."



Details of Local Coast Guard Hearings on AAF's Maritime Impact:

WHAT: Loxahatchee River Public Information Gathering Meeting

WHEN: Thursday, October 2nd, 7-9 p.m.

WHERE: Embassy Suites

4350 PGA Blvd.

Palm Beach Gardens, FL 33410



WHAT: St. Lucie River Public Information Gathering Meeting

WHEN: Friday, October 3rd, 7-9 p.m.

WHERE: Hutchinson Island Marriott Beach Resort

555 NE Ocean Blvd.

Stuart, FL 34996

###