MURPHY TO SECRETARY FOXX: FRA REPORT CONFIRMS COMMUNITY'S SERIOUS CONCERNS WITH ALL ABOARD FLORIDA
This past Friday, U.S. Representative Patrick E. Murphy (FL-18) spoke directly with U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx following the recent release of the Federal Railroad Administration's (FRA) draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the All Aboard Florida (AAF) rail project to express the concerns both Murphy and the community have with this draft EIS and the project overall. As a follow up to this conversation, today Murphy sent the following letter to the Secretary to formally outline the unaddressed concerns with AAF and the EIS in addition to voicing his continued opposition to AAF and the project's receipt of a federal RRIF loan. Last week, Murphy also called on the FRA to extend the public comment period for the EIS to 90 days to make sure the residents of Florida's 18th District have their voices heard regarding the detrimental impact this project would have on the community. (Please find below and attached a copy of the letter).



September 30, 2014



The Honorable Anthony Foxx

Secretary of Transportation

U.S. Department of Transportation

1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE

Washington, D.C. 20590



Dear Secretary Foxx:



Thank you for speaking with me again regarding my opposition to the proposed All Aboard Florida (AAF) passenger rail service. As we discussed, residents throughout the Palm Beaches and Treasure Coast have serious concerns about the project’s detrimental effects to public safety, quality-of-life, and the local economy. Although Floridians were assured that these concerns would be addressed and dealt with in the Federal Railroad Administration’s (FRA) draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), this 522-page document raised more questions than answers.



As the FRA evaluates AAF’s application for more than $1.5 billion in taxpayer-funded federal loans, it is vital that these concerns are properly factored. This request is among the largest of its kind in history, and due to the risk associated with its size and AAF’s viability, I believe a more thorough analysis of the financial viability of the payment of the loan is required. On top of the risks to the taxpayer, the EIS fails to adequately address a number of the issues we discussed in April, further validating the community’s concerns. For instance, AAF stands to double the amount of time local drawbridges will block marine navigation, costing boaters hundreds of thousands of dollars annually. At certain crossings, it will triple the amount of Grade-F traffic gridlock at peak hours. It will effectively blockade those in need of emergency treatment from their hospitals, under circumstances in which a delay of one minute can mean the difference between life and death.



The EIS clearly lays out these significant problems and many more, but it lacks adequate solutions. To make matters worse, these negative impacts disproportionately affect regions that will reap no benefit from 32 daily passenger trains. Further, upon learning that there is no third-party analysis of the facts in the EIS, I am concerned that the data and mitigation proposed is not thorough. I would strongly urge you to not only extend the comment period to 90 days, but believe there should be an analysis prepared by an independent body not funded or associated with AAF to provide our community with confidence in the process and allow all of our concerns to be heard.



For these reasons, I am opposed to this plan that stands to negatively impact the Treasure Coast-Palm Beach district I am so proud to represent. I appreciate your continued responsiveness and attention to these serious concerns.



Sincerely,



Patrick E. Murphy

MEMBER OF CONGRESS

###