10 Dog Poisons: Plants, Foods, Medicines, and More
Top 10 Dog Poisons

(continued)

Font Size A A A

Top 10 Dog Poisons continued...

Dog poison No. 6: People food. Your canine companion may look so cute as he sits there begging for a bite of your chocolate cake or a chip covered in guacamole, but not giving him what he wants could save his life. Animals have different metabolisms than people. Some foods, such as onions and garlic, as well as beverages that are perfectly safe for people can be dangerous, and sometimes fatal, for dogs.

Chocolate . Though not harmful to people, products contain substances called methylxanthines that can cause vomiting in small doses, and death if ingested in larger quantities. Darker chocolate contains more of these dangerous substances than do white or milk chocolate. The amount of chocolate that could result in death depends on the type of chocolate and the size of the dog. For smaller breeds, just half an ounce of baking chocolate can be fatal, while a larger dog might survive eating 4 ounces to 8 ounces, though 8 ounces would be extremely dagerous. Coffee and caffeine have similarly dangerous chemicals.

. Though not harmful to people, products contain substances called methylxanthines that can cause vomiting in small doses, and death if ingested in larger quantities. Darker chocolate contains more of these dangerous substances than do white or milk chocolate. The amount of chocolate that could result in death depends on the type of chocolate and the size of the dog. For smaller breeds, just half an ounce of baking chocolate can be fatal, while a larger dog might survive eating 4 ounces to 8 ounces, though 8 ounces would be extremely dagerous. Coffee and caffeine have similarly dangerous chemicals. Alcohol . Symptoms of alcohol poisoning in animals are similar to those in people, and may include vomiting, breathing problems, coma and, in severe cases, death.

. Symptoms of alcohol poisoning in animals are similar to those in people, and may include vomiting, breathing problems, coma and, in severe cases, death. Avocado . You might think of them as healthy, but avocadoes have a substance called persin that can act as a dog poison, causing vomiting and diarrhea or worse.

. You might think of them as healthy, but avocadoes have a substance called persin that can act as a dog poison, causing vomiting and diarrhea or worse. Macadamia nuts . Dogs may suffer from a series of symptoms, including weakness, overheating, and vomiting, after consumption of macadamia nuts.

. Dogs may suffer from a series of symptoms, including weakness, overheating, and vomiting, after consumption of macadamia nuts. Grapes and raisins . Experts aren’t sure why, but these fruits can induce kidney failure in dogs. Even a small number may cause problems in some dogs.

. Experts aren’t sure why, but these fruits can induce kidney failure in dogs. Even a small number may cause problems in some dogs. Xylitol. This sweetener is found in many products, including sugar-free gum and candy. It causes a rapid drop in blood sugar, resulting in weakness and seizures. Liver failure also has been reported in some dogs.

Dog poison No. 7: Chocolate. See above.

Dog poison No. 8: Plants. They may be pretty, but plants aren’t necessarily pet friendly. Some of the more toxic plants to dogs include:

Azaleas and rhododendrons . These pretty flowering plants contain toxins that may cause vomiting, diarrhea, coma, and potentially even death.

. These pretty flowering plants contain toxins that may cause vomiting, diarrhea, coma, and potentially even death. Tulips and daffodils . The bulbs of these plants may cause serious stomach problems, convulsions, and increased heart rate.

. The bulbs of these plants may cause serious stomach problems, convulsions, and increased heart rate. Sago palms. Eating just a few seeds may be enough to cause vomiting, seizures, and liver failure.

Dog poison No. 9: Rodenticides, if ingested by dogs, can cause severe problems. The symptoms depend on the nature of the poison, and signs may not start for several days after consumption. In some instances, the dog may have eaten the poisoned rodent, and not been directly exposed to the toxin.

Dog poison No. 10: Lawn and garden products. Products for your lawn and garden may be poisonous to pets that ingest them.