Health: Capri Sun Mold Warning From Local Mom
By Stephanie Stahl

PHILADELPHIA (CBS) — 3 On Your Side with a cautionary tale for parents. Is there a mold problem with a popular fruit juice? Health Reporter Stephanie Stahl has one mom’s exclusive story.

Capri Sun juice boasts it has no artificial colors, flavors or preservatives, and 25 percent less sugar. Instead of chemicals, you might find mold.

Ashley Parks, who lives in Havertown, says a black substance was clogging the straw of a Capri Sun fruit punch her daughter, Emma, was drinking Tuesday. When she cut open the pouch, she saw a glob of something.

“Very gross looking, and then if you turn it, you can see little black particles,” explained Ashley.

Stephanie asked Emma, “what did you think when you saw it?”

Emma replied, “Ew, it was gross.”

The 8-year-old says it didn’t taste funny, and it didn’t make her sick.

Ashley got online and quickly found a litany of complaints about mold in Capri Sun drinks.

“I’m concerned about my daughter’s health, about kids drinking this and if they’re at risk,” said Ashley.

Back in June 2010, Kraft, the maker of Capri Sun, posted a note on Facebook saying because the beverages don’t have preservatives, a hole in the pouch can cause them to spoil.

“Emma’s box was not leaking. There was not a hole it in,” said Ashley.

Ashley says she found out online there can be undetectable holes that allow air inside the pouch. And on the Capri Sun box, there’s a warning that says if the pouch is damaged, fermentation can occur. But there’s no way to know if this is inside until you take a sip.

“I’m very angry,” said Ashley.

3 On Your Side called Kraft about the Park’s discovery. A spokesperson said the mold is similar to common bread mold.

The response also said in part, “… we’re very sorry the family who contacted you had an unpleasant experience with Capri Sun … Unfortunately, among the many, many millions of pouches we sell each year, occasionally a consumer will discover mold in a pouch.”

“They really are not doing anything to fix the problem. They just want to cover their butts,” said Ashley.

We talked to experts from the Poison Control Center at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia about ingesting mold. They say it may be unappetizing and upsetting to the stomach, but it’s usually not medically dangerous.

Ashley said she also called her pediatrician, who wasn’t concerned.