Inside Channing Tatum and Jenna Dewan s Malibu Wedding
Step Up costars Channing Tatum and Jenna Dewan finally got their fairytale wedding when they tied the knot Saturday afternoon in Malibu, a rep for the couple confirms to PEOPLE.

Tatum, 29, and Dewan, 28, were married at a private estate overlooking the ocean. The two – the groom in Giorgio Armani; the bride in a Reem Acra gown – exchanged vows and Neil Lane wedding bands under pepper trees filled with white and blush florals.

Among the 220 guests were Marlon Wayans, maid of honor Emmanuelle Chriqui and bridesmaid Haylie Duff, who attended with her boyfriend, actor Nick Zano.

The wedding, orchestrated by event planner Mindy Weiss, paid tribute to the couple’s love of fairies, and included two flower girls who walked down the aisle wearing wings.

“They’re a really cool couple,” says Neil Lane, who worked closely with the newlyweds in designing their rings. “They complement each other and are playful and sweet. They laugh together and they’re clearly really in love.

The outdoor ceremony was followed by a sit-down reception in a tent, decorated by Mark’s Garden with thousands of roses, hydrangeas and orchids in reds, fuchsia and blush. The couple enjoyed their first dance to Hawaiian artist Israel “Iz” Ka’ano’i Kamakawiwo’ole’s version of “Somewhere over the Rainbow.”

Dewan's wedding-day earrings by Neil Lane Hubery Boesl/DPA/Landov, inset: Courtesy of Neil Lane

The wedding cake by Cake Divas was shaped as a magic castle filled with fairies in several flavors: red velvet, chocolate with chocolate fudge, and white with “funfetti” frosting, a favorite of the newlyweds.

To keep with the wedding theme, guests were given crystals as favors.

Tatum first met Dewan on the set of the 2006 dance movie Step Up and proposed last September in Maui with a Neil Lane engagement ring. “We’re both so happy,” Dewan told PEOPLE at the time. “It’s great.”

Next, the actor will costar in the fall action movie G.I. Joe: The Rise of Cobra opposite Marlon Wayans and Dennis Quaid.

• With reporting by ELIZABETH LEONARD

RELATED ARTICLES:

• 2006: Tough guy Channing is a hunk with a heart

RELATED GAME:

• Learn Channing’s male model past in Hangman!

RELATED GALLERY:

• PEOPLE Covers: Star wedding albums!!

from Huffington Post

WATCH: Emma Watson Talks Wardrobe Malfunction

Paulina Porizkova Describes Getting Fired From Top Model