Pyrethrins
E X T O X N E T

Extension Toxicology Network A Pesticide Information Project of Cooperative Extension Offices of Cornell University, Michigan State University, Oregon State University, and University of California at Davis. Major support and funding was provided by the USDA/Extension Service/National Agricultural Pesticide Impact Assessment Program.

P esticide

I nformation

P rofile Pyrethrins



Publication Date: 3/94

TRADE OR OTHER NAMES

INTRODUCTION

The natural pyrethrins are contact poisons which quickly penetrate the nerve system of the insect. A few minutes after application, the insect cannot move or fly away. But, a "knockdown dose" does not mean a killing dose. The natural pyrethrins are swiftly detoxified by enzymes in the insect. Thus, some pests will recover. To delay the enzyme action so a lethal dose is assured, organophosphates, carbamates, or synergists may be added to the pyrethrins.

Semisynthetic derivatives of the chrysanthemumic acids have been developed as insecticides. These are called pyrethroids and tend to be more effective than natural pyrethrins while they are less toxic to mammals. One common synthetic pyrethroid is allethrin.

In this report, the term "pyrethrins" refers to the natural insecticides derived from chrysanthemum flowers; "pyrethroids" are the synthetic chemicals, and "pyrethrum" is a general name covering both compounds. The EPA classifies pyrethrin-I as a Restricted Use Pesticide (RUP). Restricted Use Pesticides may be purchased and used only by certified applicators.

TOXICOLOGICAL EFFECTS

ACUTE TOXICITY

Pyrethroids can cause two quite different responses at near lethal doses in rats; aggressive sparring and a sensitivity to external stimuli progressing to tremors is the one response and pawing and burrowing behavior, and salivation leading to chronic seizures is the other (8). Human response to these two different types of pyrethroids has not yet been evaluated. Recovery from serious poisoning in mammals is fairly rapid.

Rats and rabbits are not affected by large dermal applications (4, 5). On broken skin, pyrethrum produces irritation and sensitization, which is further aggravated by sun exposure.

CHRONIC TOXICITY

Many of the natural and synthetic compounds can produce skin irritation, itching, pricking sensations and local burning sensations. These symptoms may last for about two days (8).

Reproductive Effects

Teratogenic Effects

Mutagenic Effects

Carcinogenic Effects

Organ Toxicity

Animals fed large doses of pyrethrins may experience liver damage. Rats fed pyrethrin at high levels for two years showed no significant effect on survival, but slight, definite damage to the livers was observed (4). Inhalation of high doses of pyrethrum for 30 minutes each day for 31 days caused slight lung irritation in rats and dogs (5).

Fate in Humans and Animals

ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS

Because pyrethrin-I, pyrethrin-II, and allethrin have multiple sites in their structures that can be readily attacked in biological systems, it is unlikely that they will concentrate in the food chain (2).

ENVIRONMENTAL FATE

Pyrethrins alone provide limited crop protection because they are not stable. As a result, they are often combined with small amounts of antioxidants to prolong their effectiveness. Pyrethrum compounds are broken down in water to nontoxic products.

Pyrethrins are inactivated and decomposed by exposure to light and air. Pyrethrins are also rapidly decomposed by mild acids and alkalis. Stored pyrethrin powders lose about 20% of their potency in one year.

As the pyrethrins are purified, their stability decreases; thus, pure pyrethrin-I and pyrethrin-II are the least stable of the pyrethrins (4). Purified pyrethrins are very expensive and are only available for laboratory uses.

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES AND GUIDELINES

Exposure Guidelines:

NOEL: 10 mg/kg bw/day (rats) (3) ADI: 0.04 mg/kg body weight (humans) (3) PEL: 5 mg/m3 TLV-TWA: 5 mg/m3 STEL: 10 mg/m3

Physical Properties:

CAS #: 8003347 Solubility in water: considered to be insoluble in water. Solubility in solvents: soluble in organic solvents like: alcohol, kerosene, nitromethane, petroleum ether, carbon tetrachloride, and ethylene dichloride. Boiling point: for pyrethrin I: 146-150 degrees C (1); for pyrethrin II: 192-193 degrees C (1) Vapor pressure: about 0 mm/Hg

BASIC MANUFACTURER

REFERENCES

Windholz, M., et al., eds. 1983. The Merck Index. 10th ed. Merck & Co., Inc. Elliot, M; Janes, N.F. Kimmel, E.C.; and Casida, J.E. 1972. Metabolic Fate of Pyrethrin I, Pyrethrin II, and Allethrin Administered Orally to Rats. J. Agr. Food Chem. 20: 300-312. Vettorazzi, G. 1979. International Regulatory Aspects for Pesticide Chemicals. pp.89-90. CRC Press. Hayes, Jr., W.J. 1982. pp. 75-81. Pesticides Studied in Man. Williams & Wilkins. Occupational Health Services, Inc. "Pyrethrum." Material Safety Data Sheet. 1 April 1987. New York: OHS, Inc. Roberts, T.R. and A.N. Wright. 1981. The metabolism of a pyrethroid metabolite, in plants. Pest. Sci. 12:161. Ecobichon, Donald J. 1991. Toxic Effects of Pesticides. In Casarett and Doull's Toxicology, The Basic Science of Poisons, Third Edition. Curtis D. Klaassen, Mary O. Amdur, and John Doull editors. Macmillan Publishing Company, NY. Aldridge, W.N. 1990. An assessment of the Toxicological Properties of Pyrethroids and their Neurotoxicity. Toxicology, Vol 21, Number 2. pp. 89-104.