Family Locator

About Family Locator Locate your family Peace of mind is right at your fingertips. Securely locate your family members' locations from your Verizon Wireless Device or the web. The locate feature provides you with the information you need to stay aware and stay in touch. Provides detailed location information and the address of your family members displayed on an interactive map

Provides you the option to receive turn-by-turn driving directions to your family member’s location using VZ Navigator. You can also get directions via email, text message, or print them from your computer.

Locate Multiple family members at the same time automatically, as soon as you sign in Receive arrival & departure updates A Verizon Wireless Exclusive! Receive updates when your family members leave or arrive at locations that you define such as school, soccer practice or home. Provides detailed updates of your family's movements right to your cell phone

Arrival & departure updates can be sent to multiple recipients via text or email

Monitored locations can be set up with 1/2, 1 or a 2 mile radius Set scheduled updates Choose times you want to verify where a family member is. Receive scheduled updates of your family member's locations. Choose the times you want to know your family member's locations such as at curfew.

Can be used for recurring events (e.g. curfew, end of shift) or one-time events

Flexible scheduling entry (daily, weekly, etc.)

Scheduled alerts can be sent to multiple recipients via phone or email Family Messaging Family Locator helps you stay in touch with your family. With integrated messaging capability, you can easily send text messages or directions to your family members after locating them. Integrated SMS capability

Send to single or multiple Family Locator recipients

Send directions to any family members phone for any destination found using Bing™ local search, or selected on the map.

*Plus data charges

Subject to specific terms of use. Verizon Wireless does not guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any information, including location information. Only available in the National Enhanced Services Rate and Coverage Area. Family Locator and Child Zone should not be used as child management tools and are not a substitute for adult supervision. Unless you subscribe to the V CAST VPak, V CAST Mobile TV Select, or Premium Calling Plans, downloading the Family Locator – Locator application or Family Locator – Locatee application will require approximately 2MB of data. Megabyte charges will be incurred for using the Family Locator – Locatee application after download to the device, and will be incurred for Family Locator – related data usage. Megabytes sent or received will be aggregated each month, rounded up to the next megabyte, and billed at $1.99/MB.