Franklin County Prosecutor's Office
Press Release

DEATH PENALTY INDICTMENT FILED ON WENDELL CALLAHAN FOR TRIPLE MURDERS OF EX-GIRLFRIEND AND HER TWO YOUNG DAUGHTERS

Prosecutor Ron O’Brien announces that the Franklin County Grand Jury has returned a ten count death penalty indictment on Wendell Callahan, age 35, in connection to the January 12, 2016 triple murders of his ex-girlfriend Erveena Hammonds, age 32, and her two young daughters Anaesia Green, age 10, and Breya Hammonds, age 7, that occurred in Hammond’s apartment located at 995 Atlantic Avenue on the north side of Columbus.

The counts in Callahan’s indictment, which make him death penalty eligible, include Aggravated Murder of EH (prior calculation and design), Aggravated Murder of EH (during the commission of Agg Burg), Aggravated Murder of AG and BH (prior calculation and design), Aggravated Murder of AG and BH (during the commission of Agg Burg), and Aggravated Murder of AG and BH (victims under the age of 13). The specifications to these counts that make Callahan eligible for the death penalty include killing two or more people during his course of conduct, committing the homicides during an Aggravated Burglary or while fleeing thereafter, killing person(s) to escape apprehension, and killing children under the age of 13. In total, there are two counts of Aggravated Murder with two specs, one count of Murder, six counts of Aggravated Murder with four specs, and one count of Aggravated Burglary. “There are multiple charges regarding the three victim deaths because there are different methods to commit the crime of murder and the Prosecutor’s Office typically charges all methods”, O’Brien stated.

It is alleged that Callahan broke into the apartment and brutally stabbed all three victims and that Hammond’s current boyfriend arrived at the home to find the bloody crime scene, at which time a fight ensued between the men. Callahan fled the scene and was apprehended shortly thereafter. O’Brien commended the Columbus Fire and Police Departments for their processing of this crime scene and for their apprehension and investigation of Callahan. Arraignment for this death penalty case is set for Friday, March 4th, 2016, at 1:30 pm in courtroom 2B at 345 South High Street.

Posted: 03/01/2016 | Defendant: Wendell L. Callahan

« Back to Search