CITY ROOM; Trump on Abortion, Swearwords and Handshakes
LAS VEGAS - The television in Donald J. Trump's three-bedroom suite is tuned to MSNBC.

As our interview begins, I asked the real estate mogul for a reaction to an attack from the MSNBC host Lawrence O'Donnell. Hours earlier, Mr. O'Donnell had said that NBC was embarrassing itself by allowing Mr. Trump to remain on the air as he challenged President Obama's citizenship.

''Who is Lawrence O'Donnell?'' Mr. Trump asks, slyly, as he turns off MSNBC. ''You can quote me on the record. I don't know Lawrence O'Donnell. Is he on one of the affiliates?''

Such is an hour with Mr. Trump - filled with knowing looks, bizarre digressions, savvy observations and blustery bravado.

What follows are edited excerpts from a conversation on Friday:

On his opposition to abortion: There are certain things that I don't think can ever be negotiated. Let me put it this way: I am pro life, and pro-life people will find out that I will be very loyal to them, just as I am loyal to other people. I would be appointing judges that feel the way I feel.

On his reluctance to shake hands: I still have a thing. It's not a question of touching. Shaking hands is proven to be a bad thing to do for our health. People have colds, they have flu, they have pneumonia, and it comes out scientifically, if you shake people's hand and they have the flu, or a cold, or whatever they have, you then touch yourself, you touch your nose, you catch it. This has come out scientifically. This isn't me. This is just science.

On why he swore, repeatedly, during a Las Vegas speech: I am in Las Vegas. I know the crowd. I actually don't curse much. But you saw the crowd. It was a great crowd and great people. But it was also a crowd that loves that kind of emphasis. It's something I rarely do. But in that crowd, and you saw it. Every time I did it, there was a standing ovation. You have to know your crowd. Now, that crowd loved it. Would I do it in a different location, would I do it in front of a different crowd, even a different crowd in Las Vegas? Uh, no. But sometimes, for emphasis, you can do that. I know exactly what I am doing. It worked out. Every single time I did that, they stood up and started roaring. But you don't do it to a lot of other crowds. Does that make sense?

On why he no longer supports his 1999 plan to tax the richest Americans at 14.25 percent to erase the national debt: That proposal would have paid off our debt, but we had a much different country then, a much richer country. We have a country right now that is a tinder box. And when I say tinder box, I mean a tinder box that could be ready to explode with some wrong moves. Because we have weak - our jobs picture is tenuous. The real number is 18 or 19 percent, not 9 percent.

On whether he would take a salary as president: No, I wouldn't take it.

On the austerity of past presidents, which he finds distasteful: You know, Jimmy Carter would get off the plane carrying his own suits because he thought it was inappropriate for a Marine to carry his suits. So here is the president of the U.S. - do you remember this? Here would be the president of the United States carrying his suits and a bag. I don't think people want to see that from the president of the United States. Maybe I am wrong.

On his use of technology, like iPads: I use it very little. I do have them all. But when I read papers, I read the papers. My kids see me and say, Dad, I can't believe you. They read the computer all day long.

On why he does not answer ''trick'' questions from reporters about the economy, government and foreign policy: I don't answer questions where I am a student in a history class. I had a question asked of me by a very nice writer from Time magazine. He said how many people are in the House? I said, I know the answer, but I am not going to answer. I think it was 435 or something. You know, it varies and all. I said, 'I am not going to be asked questions like that.' Like what people did with Sarah Palin. Whether I know the answer or not is irrelevant. And actually I know that answer, but I am not that answer. I am not a student in a history class - or a current events class.

On why he opposes Representative Paul D. Ryan's deficit reduction plan: I am talking as a deal maker. I am a deal maker. I am a really good deal maker. I make great deals. That is what I do. And, for Congressman Ryan to come out with the first plan, which he did not have to do, where he is talking about major changes to Medicare and Medicaid, the Democrats are licking their chops. They never thought they could be so lucky. Now, I know these Democrats. What have they been doing over the last two weeks? They have been demagoguing the Republicans on Medicare, talking about all the horrors that are going to be caused. These Republicans are going into their districts and people are not even letting them speak. And we have an election to win. So I have a problem with it. I have a problem.

On how he may use his television show, ''The Apprentice,'' to further his political campaign: On May 22, we have our live finale. That will be a two-hour live finale, from either Lincoln Center or at Skirball hall at New York University. They both want it. I think it will be at N.Y.U. Sometime prior to the firing, I may say, that on such and such a date, on such and such a time, probably at Trump Tower, on 56th to 57th street on Fifth Avenue, I will make my decision as to whether I run for president, by the end of the show.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

PHOTO: Donald J. Trump last week in Las Vegas. In an interview, Mr. Trump said he would not take a salary if elected president. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID BECKER/GETTY IMAGES)