The Essential Medicinal Chemistry of Curcumin
Introduction

Artemisia annua, was developed into an effective therapy for Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Some researchers viewed this award as a validation of the general utility of TCMs. Natural products (NPs) form the basis for many widely used drugs. This utility was recently recognized on a larger stage, as the discoverer of artemisinin shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2015 with the discoverers of the anthelmintic avermectin family of NPs. Artemisinin, a NP discovered from a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM),, was developed into an effective therapy formalaria. Some researchers viewed this award as a validation of the general utility of TCMs. (1, 2) In marked contradistinction to this claimed vindication of the role of certain ethnic and traditional medicines (TxMs) in medical practice are recent reports labeling curcumin, a constituent of the spice turmeric and part of the mixture of compounds referred to as curcuminoids, as both a PAINS (pan assay interference compounds) (3) and an IMPS (invalid metabolic panaceas) compound. (4) Additionally, many researchers have described the potential “dark side of curcumin”: (5-9) the drawbacks noted for curcumin include its poor pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) properties, low efficacy in several disease models, and toxic effects under certain testing conditions. (5) These cautionary reports appear to have been swept away in the torrent of papers, reviews, patents, and Web sites touting the use of curcumin (and its primary commercial source, turmeric) as an anticancer agent, (10, 11) a therapeutic for Alzheimer’s disease, (12) a treatment for hangovers, (13, 14) erectile dysfunction, (15, 16) baldness, (17, 18) hirsutism, (19) a fertility-boosting, (20) and contraceptive (21) extract, collectively establishing the properties expected of a panacea. (22, 23)

1; Scientific manuscripts are still published regularly that are based solely on the foundational premise of the reported activity and therapeutic utility of curcumin. In 2015, this plethora of data motivated the compilation of a Curcumin Resource Database (CRDB) that seeks to support the preclinical development of curcuminoids by putting over 1000 analogues and their alleged molecular target (24) at the fingertips of researchers via a Web interface. The CRDB coverage of over 9000 publications and 500 patents demonstrates the magnitude of both the scientific interest and vast amount of dormant information that is awaiting a more global, medicinal chemistry interpretation. It is the goal of this manuscript to primarily review curcumin ( 1 Figure ) and related curcuminoids, which are the species extracted from turmeric, and largely what is sold or tested in clinical trials.

Figure 1. Structural comparison of curcumin and artemisinin. Curcumin has been the focus of heavy research for new drug development. Artemisinin is an FDA approved antimalarial.

2; T 1/2 = 2.5 h; F = 30%)1 suggests that it might be unstable in a biological setting, and in fact, it is: both its in vitro and in vivo stabilities are abysmal (T 1/2 < 5 min; F < 1%) A simple analogy will help us set the stage for this Miniperspective. Artemisinin ( 1 Figure ) has been shown to function like an effective long-range and targeted missile that homes in on heme-loving parasites and destroys them in a spectacular burst of nonselective reactivity. (25) The peroxide-containing structure of artemisinin suggests that it would be unstable in a biological setting. However, its in vivo stability (= 2.5 h;= 30%) (26) provides evidence that it is sufficiently stable, from a pharmacokinetic perspective, to be an effective therapeutic. Curcumin, on the other hand, is more like a missile that has shown excellent promise in early testing (in vitro), even though this testing may have been bedeviled by design problems that led to several misfires. The structure ofsuggests that it might be unstable in a biological setting, and in fact, it is: both its in vitro and in vivo stabilities are abysmal (< 5 min;< 1%) (27, 28) relative to commercial drugs.

1 has never been shown to be conclusively effective in a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial for any indication. To our knowledge, compoundhas never been shown to be conclusively effective in a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial for any indication. (29) Curcumin is best typified, therefore, as a missile that continually blows up on the launch pad, never reaching the atmosphere or its intended target(s). These results have given curcumin the label of pharmacodynamically fierce (hits many targets) yet pharmacokinetically feeble (does not get to its targets). (9) While these failures would normally end further research on its use as a therapeutic, they apparently have not deterred researchers interested in its development. Accordingly, major resources have been expended on research enterprises that involve curcumin as a key study agent. From 1995 to the present, according to the NIH RePORTER database (query of the term “curcumin” in keywords, titles, and abstracts), (30) federal funds exceeding $150 million have been awarded for projects that are linked, directly or indirectly, to the biomedical exploration of curcumin. This result gives an approximate estimate of the order of magnitude of resources (not scientific significance) that are used directly or indirectly for experiments with curcumin and its analogues. Consequently, projects involving, for example, method development work where curcuminoids serve as model compounds are likely included in this estimation. However, this continued interest has resulted in the generation of manuscripts reporting biological studies of curcumin at a rate that far outpaces those published on artemisinin ( Figure 2 ). This suggests that while artemisinin research has matured, curcumin research may have entered the steep section of the hyperbolic black hole of natural products (NPs) (4) where effort rapidly exceeds utility, a common occurrence for IMPS. Furthermore, most NPs that have been successfully developed as drugs were discovered in phenotypic assays showing activity at or near a therapeutically relevant level. This allowed for the rapid development of the parent natural product or relatively straightforward analogue development to achieve a desired therapeutic effect. (6) Such was the story for artemisinin, but careful analysis of the literature leads to a much different conclusion where curcumin is concerned.

Figure 2. Comparison of publication frequency for biological studies of curcumin and artemisinin. The numbers of manuscripts per year were retrieved from SciFinder by searching for the substances curcumin (CAS no. 458-37-7) or artemisinin (CAS no. 63968-64-9) and then filtering by “biological study” and “document type” = journal. (Data accessed May 3, 2016.)

In this Miniperspective, we hope to address these questions regarding curcumin: PAINS, IMPS, or promise? Solid gold or just pyrite? Valuable lead for therapeutic development or still a tough challenge for NP and medicinal chemists? These are important questions, and they cannot be fully addressed even in this platform, as there are greater than 15 000 manuscripts published related to the biological interactions of curcumin, with ∼50 more manuscripts published each week. However, it is our goal to offer guidance and orthogonal perspectives to scientists and reviewers who may not have the time or resources to trek through the forest of curcumin literature. This is especially pertinent as articles relating to curcumin bioactivity appear in such a broad range of journals as to limit the ability of one to evaluate them all, due to both time and subscription limitations. By outlining the essential medicinal chemistry of curcumin, we aspire to improve the significance of science performed in the area of turmeric (and general NP) research and ensure that ever-precious research resources are spent most effectively. First, we will present evidence that curcumin is most probably an invalid lead compound, as can be shown by a critical evaluation of its PAINS and IMPS characteristics. Second, we will critically evaluate the physicochemical and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic properties of curcumin responsible for its behavior in vitro and in vivo and tie these properties to the reported activity of curcumin against a variety of biological targets. Third, we will offer a critical look at a sampling of curcumin/curcuminoids clinical trials to put its therapeutic utility in context. The final section will compile the key points from the three discussion areas and seeks to identify new aspects that could potentially guide future research on this important traditional medicine.