Hug: The practice of impunity can not continue
KYIV (QHA) -

Special OSCE monitoring mission reported that since January 2015, 183 cases of firing near the SMM patrols or in their direction have been recorded in the ATO zone, the Principal Deputy Chief Monitor of the OSCE SMM Alexander Hug said at the briefing in Kyiv on April 24, QHA correspondent reports.

He stressed the inadmissibility of violence both in relation to the mission staff, and in relation to the civilian population, and called on the parties to fulfill the commitments signed in Minsk.

“Since January 15, 2015, the mission has recorded 183 shooting cases in the direction or near our patrols, damage to the mission's technical equipment (UAV, web cameras). Members of the mission have repeatedly been threatened. Observers are constantly under threat, despite the fact that their daily work is aimed at promoting peace and stability in Ukraine. If those who committed this crime think that this is normal, well this is not. This is abnormal and unacceptable," he said.

The Principal Deputy Chief Monitor of the SMM noted that mines and other explosive devices must be removed in the security zone in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

“The practice of impunity can not continue. In the end, the parties must adhere to security obligations not only with respect to our observers, but also the civilian population," Alexander Hug concluded.

Earlier, April 23, at about 10 am the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine reported about the undermining of the car of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission. During the incident, a member of the observation mission, a US citizen, was killed. Another two observers - citizens of the Czech Republic and Germany - were taken to the hospital in the occupied Luhansk with wounds.

In this regard, the Office of the Security Service of UKraine SBU in the Luhansk region opened criminal proceedings under Part 3. of Art. 258 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine (Terrorist act, which caused death of a person).

PHOTO: Internet​

QHA