Take Egg Off Speed Dial
FOLLOWING a detailed recipe forwarded to me by a friend, I waited until 7 p.m., when my free minutes begin. I stood an egg in an egg cup between two short stacks of books. With my new Treo 650 I called my old Samsung cellphone, answering it when it rang. I laid the two phones on the books so their antennas pointed at the egg. Supposedly, this would give me a cooked egg.

But after 90 minutes, with the Treo's fresh battery running low, the egg was still cold. Maybe, I thought, this method uses some sort of telephonic radiation to coagulate protein without heat? I whacked it on the table and watched raw egg ooze out. I poached it later by conventional means.

The recipe I used had been making the rounds on the Internet for the last month. It originally appeared in 2000, in the Wymsey Chronicle: wymsey.co.uk/wymchron/cooking.htm.

The Chronicle, a single-handed creation of a 60-year-old English legal archivist named Charles Ivermee, documents life in the fictional village of Wymsey. The original egg-cooking article, a step-by-step how-to ostensibly written by one Suzzanna Decantworthy, appears in a droll weekend supplement that also features a woodland hunt for wild tofu. Stripped from its whimsical context, though, the recipe, just offbeat enough to be credible, has been widely forwarded by e-mail.

The caprice of the Web snapped up the article only recently, with mentions last month on slashdot.org, boingboing.net and other sites. ''Last year the page could expect around 100 visits per week,'' Mr. Ivermee said. In the week of Feb. 6, when the Slashdot community noticed the recipe and extensively debated its veracity, that number increased to about 132,000 would-be cooks.

Clearly, people are eager to have their technophobias confirmed, but a cellphone's power output is half a watt at most, less than a thousandth of what a typical microwave oven emits.

But those of us who are inclined to cook without a stove are not without recourse. I have independently confirmed the deliciousness of eggs poached in a dishwasher, fried under a hot iron, shirred on a radiator and coddled in a drip coffee maker.