20 Objects Found Stuck In A Rectum In An ER
According to ER doctors, people getting foreign objects stuck in their anus is surprisingly common. The items on this list are weirder than most, however. We’ve brought you these twenty items that have all been found lodged in peoples’ bums. Something tells us that they didn’t really slip and “fall” onto these objects! They actually were experimenting with these objects and shoved them up too far away into the rectum by accident from where these objects were not retrieve-able.

Here is a golden rule that future anal explores need to think of: “If this goes wrong, I need to explain what I was doing. “ Just remember: It doesn’t matter how good your excuse was and that “you fell and it slipped up there,” no one is going to believe it.

So, make sure you have a tight grip, tie a piece of rope or even leave a trail of breadcrumbs, because if you lose it you have some serious explaining to do why there is a Ketchup bottle shoved up your b*m h**e. But, apparently, according to Doctors it’s actually quite common to find things up someone’s anus – so you are not the only sexually experimental guy.

Oh, obviously some of these x-rays may be of women, but we all know they are all men.

1. Keys:

Don’t forget to check your bum if you have already searched high and low for your car keys but can’t find them?

2. Vibrator And Salad Tongs:

It doesn’t take rocket science to crack this case. As if getting a vibrator stuck in his bum wasn’t enough to send this man to the Emergency Room he simply attempted to remove the stuck object by using a pair of salad tongs and the tongs got stuck, too!

3. Live Ammunition:

According to a London World War 2 veteran, he was suffering from terrible hemorrhoids, which he used to reduce with a live artillery shell. One day, he pushed the shell too far into the rectum. The shell became stuck in his rectum, and when he went to the Emergency Room to get it removed, he admitted that the shell was live and could explode at any time. A bomb squad was called to the hospital to assist in the removal of the shell.

4. Peanut Butter Jar:

We wonder how did he out it up there.

5. A Bottle Of Perfume:

A 39-year-old married white male lawyer went to the ER to get a bottle of Impulse Body Spray removed from his anus. This was not the first time he had shoved this object up his arse, but this time it got stuck. After attempting to remove it using a back-scratcher, he eventually had to go to the doctor to have it removed. No news on whether or not his wife got her perfume back.

6. A Ringing Cell Phone:

Another lawyer (what is wrong with lawyers?) from Georgia was reportedly showering with his cell phone, when he slipped and fell, getting the phone lodged firmly up his backside. It was removed surgically.

7. A Pint Glass:

Upside down!

8. A Flashlight:

Probably he was using the flashlight to find his car keys. Because It’s dark in there.

9. A Toy Car:

This incident was not an accident, it was intentional. The late Ryan Dunn of the television show Jackass intentionally inserted a Matchbox car into his rectum just to mess with the ER doctors.

10. Snooker Ball:

You know how it goes: You and a friend are betting a wager on a game of pool/snooker and the next thing you know the loser has to shove a snooker ball up their arse. We cannot help but think: What if this was a Magic 8 Ball? 8 Ball, do I need to shove you up my ass? 8 Ball: “It is decidedly so.”

Pages: 1 2

Some Interesting Articles