Police: Infowars’ Alex Jones Abducted from Texas Starbucks by Shapeshifting Reptilians
AUSTIN, Tx. – Authorities in Texas are asking for the public’s help after longtime Austin resident Alex Jones – founder of the alternative news website Infowars and host of The Alex Jones Radio Show – was abducted outside of a Starbucks coffee shop on West 24th Street in downtown Austin early Friday morning.

Eye witnesses described the abduction as “horrific,” telling Fox 7 Austin that the perpetrators, who appeared to be of reptilian origin, emerged from a nearby sewer grate before quickly taking on the appearance of “faceless” humanoids. “They literally changed their appearance right before my eyes,” Molly Henderson, a Starbucks employee who witnessed the kidnapping, told Fox 7 Austin. “I’ve never seen anything like it in my life.”

Authorities say the shapeshifting reptilians may have used an “advanced form of mind control” to render the forty-three year-old radio host unconscious before hurling his limp body into an awaiting vehicle and speeding off. “At this time we have no information regarding the victim’s whereabouts,” Austin Police Chief Brian Manley told reporters. “We’re asking anyone with information to please come forward.” Chief Manley asked the public to be on the lookout for a black 2017 Ford Transit which authorities believe was used in the abduction.

Crime scene investigators continued to comb the Starbucks parking lot and surrounding area for clues on Friday but authorities say they have little, if any, evidence to go on. “Due to the unique circumstances surrounding this case, it may take some time before we’re able to produce any solid leads,” a spokesperson for the Travis County District Attorney’s Office told Fox 7 Austin.

Alex Jones has long warned of the existential threat to planet earth posed by reptilians, an inter-dimensional alien species believed to have operatives in the highest echelons of government. “From the United Nations, to NATO, all the way to the White House, reptilians have played a role in orchestrating every major event since the Big Bang,” explained Rex Friedman, a former astrophysicist and self-described reptilian expert. “When you have a man like Alex Jones, who is willing to sacrifice his own safety to expose a vast conspiracy such as this, you’re going to attract some unwanted attention,” Friedman told Real News Right Now, later adding, “You have to assume he knew the risks.”