A Jewish man walks into a bank in New York City and asks for...
There's a commandment in the old testament not to lend with interest ("Thou shalt not give him thy money upon interest, nor give him thy victuals for increase.") But that only applies to one's own people ("Unto a foreigner thou mayest lend upon interest; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon interest").

In Christian theology, the First Council of Nicaea in 325 forbade clergy from lending with interest. The Third Council of the Lateran expanded the prohibition to everyone and Pope Clement V made it heresy.

Lending a long time ago was also different from loans today. Back in the day, loans were more like payday loans. They were high-risk, high-reward loans made by private individuals. Since that time, interest rates have dropped a lot, risk is a lot lower, and it's a lot more manageable to lend and borrow responsibly. Likewise, our increased knowledge of economics has shown us that lending with interest for a good borrower can benefit both parties. Like, let's say I get a loan from a bank to start a restaurant. I've been employed as a chef, I have a good business plan, the market is right, etc. The bank lends me money, they get interest and I get a business that makes me money and grows my wealth. Either due to the lack of knowledge or the lack of stability and protection for long-term property, this wasn't really a factor way back when.

Today, the term "usury" has a different meaning. Originally, it was any loan with interest because, in that time, any loan with interest would likely be a huge hardship. Today, the term mostly applies to loans thought of as arduous. People don't find small business loans to be taking advantage of people, but rather giving them the capital they need to create wealth for themselves. Probably somewhere between the middle ages and the industrial revolution the change occurred. Society became progressively more stable, property became easier to carry, and so a loan with interest is easier to accommodate.

So, the Christian prohibition against usury probably still exists today, but what usury is has changed.

Islamic Law also has prohibitions against lending with interest preferring charity and direct investment. The logic behind it being that the lender is only lending money and getting a profit from it. The borrower is putting in time and effort and accepting the risk of loss. That might seem unfair compared to direct investment where the risk of loss is borne by both parties. However, today we often have a situation where lenders and borrowers have choices and, again, loans don't have the same stigma as our society and understanding has changed.